                The Roles of Knowledge in Knowledge Creation

                     Carl Bereiter (chair), University of Toronto, carl.bereiter@utoronto.ca
                            Carol Chan, University of Hong Kong, ckkchan@hku.hk
                Huang-Yao Hong, National Chengchi University, Taiwan, hyong@nccu.edu.tw
                              Jiyeon Lee, University at Albany, edujyl@gmail.com
                     Ahmad Khanlari, University of Toronto, a.khanlari@mail.utoronto.ca
                   Pei-Yi Lin, National Chengchi University, Taiwan, hanapeiyi@gmail.com
                  Ching Sing Chai, Chinese University of Hong Kong, CSChai@cuhk.edu.hk
              Chin-Chung Tsai, National Taiwan Normal University, Taiwan, tsaicc@ntnu.edu.tw
          Marlene Scardamalia (moderator), University of Toronto, marlene.scardamalia@utoronto.ca
                  Seng Chee Tan, Nanyang Technological University, sengchee.tan@nie.edu.sg
                      Yuyao Tong, University of Hong Kong, u3002877@connect.hku.hk
                          Jan van Aalst, University of Hong Kong, vanaalst@hku.hk
                          Jianwei Zhang, University at Albany, jzhang1@albany.edu
                     Yibing Zhang, Nanjing Normal University, China, zhyb304@126.com

         Abstract  Reading    comprehension      research  of  the   1970s   established  that  prior    world
         knowledge is a determiner of the acquisition of new knowledge, mainly by providing schemas
         into which new information may be entered. This should clearly apply to students creating
         knowledge   by building    on  their existing knowledge    and  on  knowledge   gained  from    other
         sources. In addition,   researchers   on Knowledge       Building have    identified other  kinds   of
         knowledge useful in knowledge building, including knowledge of promisingness, knowledge
         about  knowledge   (epistemology),    principled  procedural   knowledge,   and  knowledge      about
         external expectations   (such  as    curriculum  standards  and   tests). This  symposium     brings
         together researchers  who   have  studied   various  roles of  knowledge   in knowledge     building,
         with the goal of at least organizing the distinct views but if possible producing an integrative
         framework for treating knowledge in creative work with ideas.

Introduction
The importance of prior world knowledge in knowledge acquisition was firmly established by research during
the 1970s (Schallert, 1982) and was explained by a theory that posited cognitive structures (schemas) acquired
through  meaningful  learning,  which   provide  frameworks    for  entering new   information   and  integrating  it as
knowledge (Rumelhart, 1980). Since that time a number of constructivist educational approaches have arisen
that seek to go beyond knowledge acquisition to some more active and creative engagement of students with
knowledge  and  ideas.  With  it have   come   suggestions   that prior knowledge    can inhibit    creative work  with
knowledge  and  that a  limited  amount    of  prior knowledge    may   be optimal   (Simonton,  1999,   p.  120).  The
implication is that, beyond some essential knowledge to build on, the rest of creative knowledge work is pure
process. A different view,  however,    is that domain   knowledge     plays an active  and   vital role in  work  with
knowledge and ideas (Weisberg, 1999), but that additional kinds of declarative knowledge become important
when the emphasis shifts from knowledge acquisition to knowledge creation. These include (1) epistemology
(knowledge about knowledge); (2) knowledge about how knowledge is created (e.g., Li & Kettinger, 2006); (3)
knowledge of misconceptions, pitfalls, and promising inquiry paths within a domain; and (4) domain-specific
"principled practical knowledge" (Bereiter, 2014), of which the most fully developed example is TRIZ (Orloff,
2013), a set of heuristics for solving engineering design problems. Finally, in education contexts there is the
knowledge  that teachers need    in  order to  build a community    that has  knowledge   creation   as  its organizing
center.
         This  symposium   brings    together researchers  who    have  investigated the roles  of  different   kinds of
declarative knowledge in the context of Knowledge Building, an educational approach in which collaborative
knowledge  creation  is the goal    and principal activity (Scardamalia    &  Bereiter,  2014).  The   purpose   of   the
symposium   is  to  elaborate    the accounts    of  different kinds    of  knowledge    functioning     in  knowledge
building/knowledge creation and to work toward a coherent framework within which to pursue further research
and development related to this important but relatively undeveloped line of research within the constructivist
conceptual space.
         One way of interpreting the "wide lens" theme of CSCL 2019 is that it calls for taking fuller account of
the processes of human learning that machine learning, even in its most advanced forms, still lacks. Complexity

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                     767                                                     © ISLS
scientist Melanie    Mitchell  has  said   the barrier  AI  has   not yet  surmounted    is  "meaning."    The   most   serious
failings  she cites  reflect inability  of AI  to understand     what  Karl  Popper   called   the  "problem    situation," and
which he saw as essential to the creation and assimilation of new knowledge. Achieving understanding of a
problem situation, however, invariably requires more than the "embodied, enactive, extended, and embedded"
processes that distinguish human learning. It requires substantive knowledge. Knowledge, in its many forms and
contexts, has been a perennial subject of research in the learning sciences. This symposium, nevertheless, can be
claimed   to  have   a  "lens-widening"     effect   with  respect    to its uses  in   knowledge     creation  itself  and  in
constructivist educational approaches. It does this by identifying a variety of kinds of substantive knowledge
that can  actually   be put  to   use in ways     that augment    the remaining    advantages    human    learners  have    over
machines.

Plan of the symposium
The plan of the symposium is to allocate four minutes to introductory comment and six minutes to each of six
presentations. Following this will be a panel discussion, moderated by Marlene Scardamalia, in which authors of
the six presentations will address possibilities of an ontology of types of knowledge involved in knowledge
building/knowledge      creation  and  ways    of taking  fuller  advantage   of them   in  education.   The  moderator     will
determine when to open the discussion to the audience but will allow a minimum of 8 minutes for it.

Building on collective prior knowledge for knowledge building across school
years
Jianwei Zhang and Jiyeon Lee

Building on what the learner already knows is a broadly accepted and practiced principle of learning. While
existing  notions   of prior  knowledge    focus     on existing  knowledge     of individual    learners brought    to a   new
learning context; research on knowledge creation/knowledge building in schools needs to expand this concept to
include   collective prior   knowledge:    knowledge     built and    accumulated   by  the  community       through   its prior
inquiry practices that may be transferred to the current knowledge work. Collective prior knowledge is not as
simple as the sum of what each individual member knows and remembers. Rather, it is an emergent and social
entity that primarily exists in the community's social knowledge space as epistemic artifacts, discourse, and
practices. In real-world knowledge-creating settings, members continually build on their team's prior work--
such  as  conceptual   insights   already  gained,   designs   and tools  created/used   before,    and cases   and  problems
encountered--to     support  their new     creative    endeavors,  transcending    boundaries    of time,  space,  and     tasks.
Research   on  Knowledge     Building    and CSCL      has produced    a  strong  account   of how    students  advance    their
collective   knowledge   through   interactive    discourse (Bereiter,   2002;   Stahl, 2006),   building    on one  another's
ideas generated   in   the  undergoing   inquiry   process.  Extending     such  research,   the notion   of  collective   prior
knowledge     suggests  a  longer-term     view   of knowledge     building   and  transfer: we    need   to investigate    how
students  access  and   tap  into their  community's     previous  knowledge     work   across   school   years for  sustained
knowledge building in the related problem spaces and domain areas. Such long-term build-on is possible with
the support of online platforms in which students' contributions and interactions are automatically archived. The
challenges are to turn the detailed records of online interactions into an accessible/useable knowledge resource
(Zhang, 2009), to enable cross-context fluidity, and to support students' reflective creative efforts to build idea
connections in their individual work and collaborative discourse. Herein we report an exploratory study that
investigated the designs and processes to address these challenges.
          This design-based research was conducted among a group of elementary school students during three
successive school years as they studied in Grade 4, 5 and 6. In their science curriculum, students studied three
interrelated areas: light in Grade 4, climate and environment in Grade 5, and astronomy in Grade 6. The science
inquiry each year was supported with Knowledge Forum. In addition to the regular Knowledge Forum views
(workspaces) where students pursued knowledge building discourse, a "super view" was created in the database
of Grade 5 and 6 in which students revisited the syntheses of ideas from their previous years and posted new
syntheses  of  their current  inquiry.   The   syntheses   were   composed    using   a set  of  scaffolds   to document    the
journey   of thinking   in each   problem   area:  Our   research  topic   and  problem(s),    We   used  to think...  now   we
understand, and We need deeper research. The synthetic knowledge artifacts were used as a boundary-crossing
(Akkerman     &  Bakker,     2011)  support    to  enable   students'    access  and  revisiting   of their  collective    prior
knowledge. Students individually read and built on the syntheses online, some of which were further discussed
at whole class meetings as related to the current inquiry. Multiple sources of data--including online discourse

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                         768                                                       © ISLS
records, classroom videos, student interviews--were analyzed to examine the knowledge building interactions
and idea build-on across school years, drawing a combination of qualitative and quantitative analyses.
         Comprehensive      data  analysis    is  still underway.      Preliminary    findings    identify   several productive
patterns by which students tapped into the ideas generated by their community in the previous school years to
support their new inquiries. These included (a) carrying on prior concepts as the explicit focus of continued
discussion, online and face-to-face, (b) reusing/embedding prior ideas (e.g. reflection of light) to support new
inquiry  and  discourse  to solve   specific   problems      (e.g. how  glacier   melting   affects  climate   change),   and (c)
reflecting on cross-domain connections to understand the whole picture and develop coherent understandings.
As a student posted in the Grade 6 Super View when studying astronomy: "A connection from grade 4 to grade
6  is that you need  light  to  sustain  a    planet. If   a planet   has  a  source  of   light, it probably  will  have  heat.
Without light and heat, our planet would be cold and dark and we would all die. Luckily, our Earth has a source
of light and   heat which   helps   us  maintain     our   lives."   While    the prior knowledge     of  the  community    was
transferred to support the new inquires, some of the prior ideas were also re-examined and refined. For example,
a  student in Grade  6  revisited  a notion    many     students   had  in Grade   5  that  "greenhouse    gases   are bad"   and
clarified that "The Earth does need some greenhouse gases, but ... not too much." In addition to building on
content-specific  ideas  from  the  past,  students     also adapted    their  prior strategies   and practices  of  knowledge
building to support their current inquiry. In light of the findings from this and other studies, we designed a new
online  support--Idea   Thread   Mapper       (Zhang    et  al., 2018)--to    better support   knowledge     interaction  across
school years and communities.

The role of meta-knowledge about discourse in knowledge building
Carol Chan, Yuyao Tong, and Jan van Aalst

The importance of dialogue in learning, thinking and understanding in online environments is well established
in the   CSCL   literature.  Current    efforts   to  promote      classroom      dialogue  and   productive   discourse   have
emphasized    knowledge   construction­in      which    students     elaborate their ideas,   provide  reasons,  query    others'
standpoints   and construct  deeper     understanding      (Mercer    &  Littleton,  2007).    Similarly,  research    on CSCL
discourse has highlighted meaning making, inter-subjectivity and argumentation mediated by technology (Stahl,
Koschmann     & Suthers,  2014).    However,     discourse    as   an epistemic   object   of inquiry  and   a form  of   explicit
knowledge, which students need for creative knowledge work, has received less attention.
         Dialogue   is  pivotal  as  it underpins     all  knowledge    disciplines;    it is central  to  the development     of
scientific and systematic knowledge.      In knowledge building, students engage in discourse similar to that which
occurs in all knowledge disciplines. This discourse generates knowledge advancement; it involves the epistemic
work of turning fragmented ideas into coherent explanations and theories for creative work.                  Current research in
the learning sciences has emphasized discipline-based scientific discourse. We take the position that knowledge-
advancing   discourse  moves    beyond   the   expression    of    what is known     and   assertions of  beliefs. Rather,  it is
progressive   and ever-deepening     with     no-end-goals    for    creative  knowledge    work.    Just as knowledge     about
knowledge (e.g., nature of science) is needed for scientific inquiry, students also need knowledge of discourse
for knowledge creation.     We call this meta-knowledge of discourse as it involves a meta-level of knowledge.
Students'   knowledge    about   how     knowledge       is  created    through    discourse   would      encompass    epistemic
components such as goals, functions, processes and standards/criteria. Central to this paper is that students need
to develop an epistemic understanding of discourse; they need to develop their meta-knowledge of discourse
and deploy this knowledge for productive knowledge building.
         Preliminary findings from a study by Lin and Chan (2018) indicate that 5th graders who hold richer
conceptions of discourse also have deeper scientific understanding. This presentation reports on design-based
studies that investigated the development, characterization and effects of meta-knowledge about discourse in
knowledge building.    Data were drawn from 3 classes of grade 9-10 students, building knowledge about art and
design over 2 school years. We examined how students engaged in collective inquiry supported by their meta-
knowledge of discourse; how meta-knowledge about discourse is manifested; and what effects meta-knowledge
about discourse has on students' knowledge building. First, we created a knowledge-building environment for
developing students' meta-knowledge of discourse. Students' engaged in collective inquiry and discourse about
their ongoing Knowledge Forum discourse.           Three views (discussions) in Knowledge Forum were designed to
support  inquiry  about  (a)  visual    arts, (b) the   nature     of discourse,   and  (c)   collective  knowledge    advance.
Classroom discussions typically focused on idea development; we added a meta-layer of explanation for idea
improvement. Students' prior knowledge about discourse was prompted through their analysis of Knowledge
Forum discourse threads. Students engaged in meta-discourse using their knowledge about discourse to explain
why   and  how   certain Knowledge       Forum    inquiry    is    productive  and   what   needs    further knowledge    work.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                            769                                                      © ISLS
Knowledge about domain inquiry and nature of discourse was intertwined.             Students also generated epistemic
criteria and standards that were inquired into in relation to knowledge-building principles; their meta-knowledge
about discourse was continually refined through collective inquiry. Second, multiple data including Knowledge
Forum  notes,  interviews   and  open-ended    questions    were  examined.    We identified different kinds of meta-
knowledge    about discourse    that  evolved  with  our   design: (a)  epistemic   goals--content-focused     vs. theory
building; (b) epistemic processes--interactive vs. emerging and non-ending processes; (c) epistemic criteria --
creation of standards related to knowledge-building principles appropriated to their inquiry context. Students
also demonstrated meta-strategic knowledge of how they could use their knowledge about principles to reflect
on their  ongoing  inquiry.  Third,     students  reflected  on  their evolving   knowledge  about   discourse    in their
portfolios linking to domain knowledge. Coding showed that meta-knowledge about discourse on Knowledge
Forum  was    associated  with  their portfolio   scores and  domain    knowledge   advances.   Ongoing analyses are
examining the interweaving of domain-specific and meta-knowledge of discourse for sustained growth. This
study suggests the need to scaffold students' explicit knowledge about discourse and meta-level explanations for
productive knowledge-building.

Deepening knowledge of knowledge building
Seng Chee Tan

For more than three decades, researchers working on knowledge building have benefited from the theory and
principles of knowledge building (Scardamalia, 2002; Scardamalia & Bereiter, 2015). In the spirit of knowledge
building and taking a meta-level view, we could apply the rise above principle to knowledge building research
to improve our understanding of knowledge building. One approach is to work within the 12 principles, apply
and study learning design based on these principles of knowledge building with the ultimate goals of improving
practices and gaining deeper understanding of these principles. This is the approach that much of research on
knowledge building has taken. An alternative approach is to look beyond the knowledge building literature for
innovative integration   of  ideas,  which  in essence,  widens   our  resources  for improving   theory  of  knowledge
building.
          Examining beyond the knowledge building literature, we could identify at least two other perspectives
of knowledge    creation:   organizational   knowledge      creation   theory  by Nonaka    and Takeuchi      (1995)  and
expansive learning in cultural-historical activity theory by Engeström (1999). A comparison of these different
perspectives  reveals  differences   in terms  of their  contexts, actors   of knowledge   creation, driving   forces for
knowledge creation, types of outcomes of knowledge creation, and knowledge creation processes (Tan & Tan,
2014).    Paavola, Lipponen,    &   Hakkarainen    (2004),   for instance,  examined  knowledge     building  with   these
perspectives of knowledge creation and identified the critical roles of mediating artifacts in knowledge creation,
leading to the development of principles for trialogical learning. We could extend such effort further to explore
other questions.   For example,   the   interplay of tacit  and  explicit  knowledge  forms  the   core   of organization
knowledge creation theory by Nonaka and Takeuchi, but the roles of implicit knowledge is not well explored in
knowledge building literature. Current research tends to focus on explicit codified knowledge, which also forms
the core of trialogical learning. Bringing the notion of tacit knowledge into knowledge building research triggers
a series of questions: What roles does tacit knowledge play in knowledge building? Can tacit knowledge be
codified and shared? Can we bypass the codification process to share and `build on' tacit knowledge? If so, how
should we  design   learning   environments    to facilitate this process?    The issues of tacit  knowledge     has been
discussed  to some    extent in  the  field of   organization knowledge     creation. Nonaka    and  von  Krogh    (2009)
summarized some of the debates and clarified their positions. In essence, they take the view that not all tacit
knowledge    can   be  codified;  tacit  and   explicit  knowledge     are  on  the same   continuum      and  they  play
complementary     roles. Nonaka     and  von Krogh   acknowledge       the social practice views   (e.g., community     of
practice) of  how  implicit  rules   and knowing    can  be  formed    through  apprenticeship  or  mentoring    within a
community,    but  presented the  challenge    of achieving   the dual  goals  of conserving  existing    social practices
versus achieving innovation and knowledge creation.
          What do all these mean to knowledge building? As a start, they could provide inspiration to expand our
research agenda. First, if we acknowledge that tacit and explicit knowledge co-exist in most learning situations,
besides examining students' knowledge artefacts, we may want to explore other "tacit aspects" of learning in
knowledge building. For example, in many knowledge building studies, field trips or group hands-on activities
were included. Do these personal experiences relate to learning beyond those that can be examined through the
students' knowledge artefacts? How do students feel as they engage in knowledge building and how do teachers
feel as they facilitate the process (emotions in learning)? Do their feelings relate to the cognitive aspects of
learning? Do students develop the identity of a knowledge builder? Second, if tacit knowledge can't be codified

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                       770                                                     © ISLS
totally, how do we design learning environments to facilitate such process? For subjects such as music and
singing, which requires tacit embodied skills (exercising body internal "organs" to produce melodious voice),
how   do we   support  idea improvement?       Would   multimodal   representations     work?  If so, how   do  we    provide
scaffolds in multimodal representations? Third, could knowledge building offer solutions to other perspectives
of knowledge creation? For example, the practice of always seeking for idea improvement and rising above
current  level  of  understanding    from  knowledge     building  could   be a   possible  approach   to  overcoming    the
challenge of "preserving culture and practices" versus innovative work suggested by Nonaka and von Krogh
(2009).

Meta-knowledge to strengthen epistemic agency
Marlene Scardamalia and Ahmad Khanlari

Knowledge Building as an educational approach has always emphasized turning progressively higher levels of
agency   over  to  students in   the conduct   of  knowledge   creation.  This  generally   requires  that  students  take a
higher-level  view  of   their work,   which   can be  facilitated both  by providing    supports  such   as scaffolds   and
information they can discuss and formulate into "meta-knowledge" about their own knowledge building and
about the problem domain in which they are working. In this symposium, Chan, Tong, and van Aalst report
beneficial results from supporting students' development of meta-knowledge about their knowledge-building
discourse. In our laboratory, experiments have shown that children as young as age seven can make productive
use of information about their use of Knowledge Forum "scaffolds" and about the domain vocabulary they are
using and  how    this compares   to   the vocabulary    used by   experts (Resendes,    Scardamalia,  Bereiter,  Chen,    &
Halewood,    2015).  They   can   also  profit  from   identifying  "promising"    ideas   and making     these objects    of
discussion (Chen, Scardamalia, & Bereiter, 2015). Research still in the offing will investigate ways students can
make use of social and semantic network data in enhancing individual contributions to collective efforts (cf. Ma,
Matsuzawa,    Chen,    &  Scardamalia,   2016).   Research  to  be  reported  in   this symposium     deals  with students'
knowledge of misconceptions and the role this meta-knowledge can play in their knowledge building.
         This   research   falls within  the general   area of  "intentional  conceptual    change"   (Sinatra  &  Pintrich,
2003). In a preliminary study we examined student use of scaffolds such as "I need to understand" and "my
problem of understanding" to determine if students expressed uncertainty about ideas and theories they recorded
in Knowledge      Forum.   Analyses    suggest  students  have  untapped    awareness    of misconceptions.     Follow-up
research will engage grade 5-6 students in identifying misconceptions about electricity in records of the online
work of similar students in previous years. They will then carry out knowledge building of their own in this
area, in an  experiment    that  tests the effects of  providing   students with   general  versus  domain-specific    prior
knowledge of common misconceptions. Our hypothesis is that providing students with the kinds of knowledge
about misconceptions normally available only to their teachers will result in students taking an active role in
preventing and remediating scientific misconceptions.

The role of domain-specific principled practical knowledge (PPK) in knowledge
creation
Carl Bereiter

When    attention  shifts from   individual  knowledge    acquisition  to  extended     programs  of  knowledge   creation,
challenges   to creative   thinking    begin to   take the  form   of obstacles,   anomalies,     and unsolved    problems.
Accordingly,    the knowledge    most   needed  for progress   tends  to be   domain-specific  and    practical rather   than
generic or theoretical. This is what Bereiter (2014) has called "principled practical knowledge" or "PPK" and
defined as "explanatorily coherent practical knowledge." PPK is knowledge that, while not itself theoretical,
meets scientific standards of coherence with empirical evidence and explanatory propositions in a domain. PPK
is relevant to societal needs for creativity in two ways. First, many of the most important products of creative
thinking are PPK--generalizable solutions to practical problems. Second, people need PPK that is helpful in
their own creative work, PPK that enables them to go beyond brainstorming and tinkering. That is the role of
PPK sketched here.
         Although    commercial      booklists are  full of books   intended    to help   people  do  better,  little of the
knowledge conveyed is both principled and practical. Especially where creative work is involved, the principled
and the practical seem to occupy different realms. There are, however, a few exceptions. Three examples are:
         (1)  Polya's   (1957)   mathematical     problem   solving   heuristics.   These   heuristics  are  very  general,
involving no particular mathematical knowledge. However, applying them well always requires linking them to

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                       771                                                       © ISLS
mathematical knowledge. Drawing a diagram or picture, for instance, can be helpful or misleading, depending
on how well it reveals the essence of the problem. Polya used as an example solving a problem concerning the
length of a diagonal in a three-dimensional space figure. A diagram could suggest right triangles as the source of
missing values, but it is unlikely that, without some guiding concept, a student would draw a figure suggestive
of this solution    path. A   more    specific heuristic,   useful  in  a  variety  of   spatial and    figural problems,    both
hypothetical and real-life, is look for right triangles. This is a different order of practical knowledge from the
process-oriented heuristics of Polya and much of conventional instruction in creative thinking. Yet it is the kind
of practical knowledge, closely tied to disciplinary knowledge, that can directly aid problem solving.
         (2) Rhetoric. Many works intended to help people writer better convey practical knowledge in the form
of principles,  but  not   "explanatorily    coherent"   ones.  Instead,   their   advice  is  distilled from   experience    and
supported by examples. In contrast, the work of Christensen (1968) provides an example of what PPK in writing
might be. Christensen observed that the sentences of expert writers were distinguished by heavy use of "free
modifiers"--modifying clauses or phrases put outside and usually after the main clause, rather than embedded
in it. This finding led to an explicit rule: If you want to improve readability, avoid long noun clauses and instead
modify   the subject  by   attaching   free  modifiers   at the end.   As  with   Polya's  heuristics,   this  item  of  practical
knowledge requires domain knowledge (in this case, syntactical) if one is to use it effectively.
         (3) TRIZ. There is a substantial and growing body of domain-specific PPK for dealing with obstacles
encountered in engineering design and invention. Called "TRIZ," it is based on a set of 40 "principles," derived
by Altshuller (1984) from analyzing thousands of patents (which are creative almost by definition, being "non-
obvious" solutions to problems). The principles are at about the same level of specificity as Polya's "heuristics."
These,  however,    are refined    into  more  specific  heuristics  adapted     to particular   problem     areas. Two   of  the
principles are "intermediary" and "cheap short-living objects." Orloff (2013, pp. 71-75) showed how these can
be applied   to the  problem       of driving  concrete  pilings   into the   ground   without     damaging     the pilings.  The
"intermediary" principle suggests putting something between the driver and the piling; the "cheap short-living
objects" principle suggests sand. From that point on, straightforward engineering leads to a practical solution.
Homer-Dixon (2006) has gone farther in the TRIZ direction by identifying solution paths capable of generating
the know-how required for tackling civilization-threatening problems. TRIZ-type knowledge would find uses in
education  at   the school    level,   especially  in helping   "maker"     projects  create   new   knowledge.     What   these
examples   suggest  is  that  if useful  PPK   for  knowledge    creation   is  to be  developed     it will be within   specific
domains and will come about through analysis of problems and solutions occurring within those domains.

The role of teachers' design knowledge in promoting creative work with
knowledge and ideas
Huang-Yao Hong, Pei-Yi Lin, Ching Sing Chai, Chin-Chung Tsai, and Yibing Zhang

Design  mode    of  thinking    is the central epistemic    stance  that  the   Knowledge      Building  pedagogy    rests   upon
(Bereiter  &  Scardamalia,    2003).    To  foster  such epistemic   stance    in  teaching    and  learning,  teachers  need  to
themselves adopt such a stance in lesson design and enactment. Teacher education focused on lesson content
and  activities  does   not  normally    meet   this  need.   Instead,  we    propose    that  teacher   education    should  be
conceptualized and operationalized to foster teacher's design fluency, where design knowledge is prioritized
over curriculum     specified    teaching   knowledge,   recognizing      and   extending  idea     promisingness    as  the  key
competence and epistemic/pedagogical framing as the means for responsive Knowledge Building. Building on
our research and experience in helping teachers develop design knowledge over the past 10 years in Taiwan,
Singapore,   and  China,   in   this  presentation, we   will (1)  propose    a conceptual     framework     to foster  teachers'
design knowledge for Knowledge Building, and (2) showcase how design thinking by teachers leads to design
thinking by their students.
          McKenney,     et  al.  (2015)  define   design knowledge      as  "different   kinds   of  knowledge     resources  and
aspects of knowing that enable intelligent and fluent design work by teachers across situations and contexts"
(p.7). There are three essential features outlined in this definition: design knowledge resources, design thinking
as a way     of knowing,     and   design   fluency.  Corresponding      to Chai,   et   al.'s (2018)    idea   of  technological
pedagogical   and   content   knowledge      (TPACK),    we   identify    three  main    types   of  knowledge      resources for
teachers  to engage    in  productive    design   work,  including   the   heuristics    about   the 12  Knowledge      Building
principles (Scardamalia,      2002),   technological   knowledge     about    Knowledge        Forum    tools,  and  the generic
curriculum   knowledge     and     specific subject   matter  knowledge.    We     posit that  whether    teachers   are able  to
responsively    and flexibly    draw   upon   various  types    of knowledge       sources  to   design  Knowledge       Building
activities for students is a key to effective lesson design.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                         772                                                         © ISLS
          Second, design thinking as a way of knowing can be developed using ideas drawn from existing design
schools, such Stanford's D. School. Examples could include (1) empathizing with students' potential for and
difficulty in  Knowledge    Building;  (2)  defining and progressively    solving  emerging  problems     derived  from
student Knowledge      Building;   (3) continually   generating and   tinkering  with   diversified design    ideas; (4)
producing    and  refining  lesson   design as  a  prototype; (5) testing,  reflecting,  and redesigning    for   further
improvement of previous lesson design.
          Third, design fluency can be manifested in the evolutionary process of teachers' design ideas (Hong &
Sullivan, 2009), especially within a teacher community where teachers work together to reflect on their actions
and practices    in  fostering Knowledge    Building.   During  iterative lesson  design,  enactment,     and reflective
consolidation    process,  teachers' design  fluency are embodied     in  the forms  of  design  talk, feedbacks,    and
explanations to support students' Knowledge Building activities during co-design discussion. The development
of design ideas can change over time both in quantity and quality. Quantitatively, we expect that there will be
diversified design ideas proposed and shared within teachers' design community. Qualitatively, we assume that
there will be   progressive rise-above   effort to produce  more  promising    design ideas  emerging     from   teachers
design talks, feedback, reflection, etc. Efficiency of producing diversified ideas and efficacy of improving the
explanatory coherence of design ideas will be two critical dimensions to measure teachers' design fluency. At
the same time, whether teachers are able to bring the three types of knowledge sources mentioned above into a
more  integrated    design knowledge   also  plays an important   role to  assess  their design  fluency  for  fostering
effective Knowledge Building activities.
          Eventually, as outcomes of sustained design activities, we expect teachers to gradually develop what
Hatano and Inagaki (1986) called "adaptive expertise" on one hand and more informed design epistemology on
the other hand. As for students, we expect that teachers' design effort would lead to invention and knowledge
creation by their students (Lahti & Seitamaa-Hakkarainen, 2014).

References
Akkerman,     S. F., &  Bakker,   A.   (2011). Boundary  crossing  and    boundary  objects. Review    of  Educational
          Research, 81 (2), 132-169.
Bereiter, C. (2002). Education and mind in the knowledge age. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Bereiter, C. (2014). Principled practical knowledge: Not a bridge but a ladder. Journal of the Learning Sciences,
          22, 4-17.
Bereiter,  C., &    Scardamalia, M.    (2003). Learning  to work  creatively   with  knowledge.   In   E. D.  Corte,  L.
          Verschaffel, N. Entwistle & J. v. Merrienboer (Eds.), Unravelling basic components and dimensions of
          powerful learning environments (pp. 55-68). Oxford, UK: Elsevier Science
Chai, C. S., Koh, J. H. L., & Teo, Y. H. (2018). Enhancing and modeling teachers' design beliefs and efficacy
          of  technological    pedagogical  content  knowledge    for  21st   century   quality learning.   Journal   of
          Educational Computing Research. https://doi.org/10.1177/0735633117752453.
Chen, B., Scardamalia, M., & Bereiter, C. (2015). Advancing knowledge building discourse through judgments
          of promising ideas. International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 10 (4), 345-
          366.
Engeström, Y. (1999). Innovative learning in work teams: Analyzing cycles of knowledge creation in practice.
          In Y. Engestrom, R. Miettinen, & R. L. Punamaki (Eds.), Perspectives on Activity Theory (pp. 377­
          404).  Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Hatano, G., & Inagaki, K. (1986). Two courses of expertise. In H. Stevenson, H. Azuma & K. Hakuta (Eds.),
          Child development and education in Japan (pp. 262-272). New York: W. H. Freeman and Company.
Hoadley, C. M. & Linn, M. C. (2000). Teaching science through online peer discussions: SpeakEasy in the
          Knowledge Integration Environment. International Journal of Science Education, 22, 839-857.
Hong, H. Y., & Sullivan, F. R. (2009). Towards an idea-centered, principle-based design approach to support
          learning as knowledge creation. Educational Technology Research and Development, 57(5), 613-627.
Lahti, H., & Seitamaa-Hakkarainen, P. (2014). Designing teaching--teaching designing: Teacher's guidance in
          a virtual design studio. Journal of Learning Design, 7(1),10­26.
Lin, F., & Chan, C.K.K. (2018). Promoting elementary students' epistemology of science through computer-
          supported  knowledge    building  discourse   and epistemic  reflection. International  Journal     of Science
          Education, 40 (6), 668-687.
Ma, L., Matsuzawa, Y., Chen, B., & Scardamalia, M. (2016). Community knowledge, collective responsibility:
          The  emergence    of  rotating leadership  in three  knowledge    building  communities.     In Looi,   C. K.,
          Polman, J. L., Cress, U., and Reimann, P. (Eds.). Transforming learning, empowering learners: The

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                     773                                                     © ISLS
        International Conference of the Learning Sciences (ICLS) 2016, Volume 1, pp. 615-622. Singapore:
        International Society of the Learning Sciences.
McKenney,    S., Kali, Y.,  Markauskaite,  L., &  Voogt,  J.  (2015). Teacher design   knowledge  for technology
        enhanced learning: an ecological framework for investigating assets and needs. Instructional science,
        43(2), 181-202.
Mercer, N.   &   Littleton, K. (2007).  Dialogue  and the    development of children's thinking: A sociocultural
        approach. London: Routledge.
Nonaka, I., & Takeuchi, H. (1995). The knowledge creating company: How Japanese companies create the
        dynamics of innovation. New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Nonaka,  I., &   von   Krogh,   G. (2009).  Tacit   knowledge    and  knowledge  conversion:  Controversy   and
        advancement in organizational knowledge creation theory. Organization Science, 20(3), 635-652.
Orloff, M. A. (2013). Inventive thinking through TRIZ: A practical guide. New York, NY: Springer.
Paavola, S., Lipponen, L., & Hakkarainen, K. (2004). Models of innovative knowledge communities and three
        metaphors of learning. Review of Educational Research, 74(4), 557­576.
Resendes, M., Scardamalia, M., Bereiter, C., Chen, B., & Halewood, C. (2015). Group-level formative feedback
        and metadiscourse. International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 10(3), 309­
        336.
Scardamalia, M.   (2002).   Collective cognitive responsibility for the advancement  of knowledge.  In B. Smith
        (Ed.), Liberal education in a knowledge society (pp. 67­98). Chicago: Open Court.
Scardamalia, M., & Bereiter, C.   (2014).  Knowledge building and knowledge creation: Theory, pedagogy, and
        technology.    In K. Sawyer (Ed.), Cambridge handbook of the learning sciences (2nd ed.) (pp. 397-
        417). New York: Cambridge University Press.
Sinatra, G.M., & Pintrich, P.R. (Eds). (2003). Intentional conceptual change. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Simonton, D. K. (1999). Origins of genius: Darwinian perspectives on creativity. New York: Oxford University
        Press.
Stahl, G. (2006). Group cognition: Computer support for building collaborative knowledge. Cambridge, MA:
     MIT Press.
Stahl, G., Koschmann, & Suthers, D.     (2014). Computer-supported collaborative learning. In R.K. Sawyer (Ed.)
        The Cambridge handbook of the learning sciences (pp. 479-500). Cambridge: Cambridge University
        Press.
Tan, S. C., & Tan, Y. H. (2014). Perspectives of knowledge creation and implications for education. In S. C.
        Tan, H. J. So, & J. Yeo (Eds.), Knowledge creation in education (pp. 11-34). Singapore: Springer.
Zhang, J. (2009). Toward a creative social web for learners and teachers. Educational Researcher, 38, 274-279.
Zhang, J., Tao, D., Chen, M-H.    Sun, Y., Judson, D., & Naqvi, S. (2018). Co-organizing the collective journey
     of inquiry with Idea Thread Mapper. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 27, 390-430.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                    774                                                © ISLS
