     Theorizing and Measuring Collective Productive Disciplinary
                                             Engagement

                Britte Haugan Cheng (chair), Menlo Education Research, bcheng@menloedu.org

                         Melissa Gresalfi, Amanda Bell, Corey Brady, Lauren Vogelstein
         melissa.gresalfi@vanderbilt.edu, Amanda.m.bell@vanderbilt.edu, Corey.brady@vanderbilt.edu,
                                       Lauren.vogelstein@vanderbilt.edu
                                             Vanderbilt University

                            Crina Damsa, University of Oslo, crina.damsa@iped.uio.no
                               Tuire Palonen, University of Turku, tuipalo@utu.fi

                            Toni Kempler Rogat, Anne Traynor, Temitope F. Adeoye
                         tkrogat@purdue.edu, atraynor@purdue.edu, adeoye@purdue.edu
                                                 Purdue University

Andrea Gomoll, Cindy E. Hmelo-Silver, Daniel Hickey, Christopher Andrews, Grant Chartrand, Rebecca Itow
         agomoll@indiana.edu, chmelosi@indiana.edu, dthickey@indiana.edu, andrewch@indiana.edu,
                                   gchartra@indiana.edu, rcitow@indiana.edu
                                               Indiana University

                             Patrik Lundh, SRI International, patrik.lundh@sri.com
                        Sten Ludvigsen (discussant), University of Oslo, stenl@iped.uio.no

         Abstract: This symposium aims to explore current research working toward conceptualizing
         and measuring productive disciplinary engagement (PDE) contextualized in diverse learning
         and project contexts. Disciplinary engagement is critical for fostering students' deep, integrated
         understanding   of STEM    content and   disciplinary  practices. However, there    are significant
         challenges   to  reaching  this engagement    quality,  with    CSCL     environments    providing
         opportunities and supports for engagement, but also posing challenges. This symposium aims
         to account for recent developments, as presenters showcase rich range in exploring application
         of PDE in diverse domains, grade bands, and learning contexts. The presentations also showcase
         a range  of  methods to analyze  PDE    as collective, situated,  cross-contextual, dynamic,   and
         generative.

This symposium aims to explore current research working toward conceptualizing and measuring productive
disciplinary engagement (PDE) contextualized in diverse learning and project contexts. This topic is particularly
relevant for computer-supported    collaborative learning  with its  focus on coordinating   efforts to build  shared
knowledge with the use of technology support (Roschelle, 2013). Consistent with the theme of the conference, we
consider the   complex   ecosystems of collaborative learning   that are   embedded within   disciplinary ideas  and
practices. Disciplinary engagement is critical for fostering students' deep, integrated understanding of STEM
content and disciplinary practices. Since the early days of reform-based curricula involving inquiry and problem
solving, we have been aware that "sustaining the doing, supporting the learning" is necessary to reap the benefits
of these challenging learning environments (Blumenfeld et al., 1991). That is, students need to engage in ways
that translate their motivations into  generative learning  with benefits   for a greater likelihood  of  transfer to
subsequent educational and professional contexts. There are significant challenges to reaching this deep-level
engagement,    such  as the necessity to coordinate  joint  activity during  cognitively  demanding     tasks. CSCL
environments provide opportunities and supports for engaging in these kinds of tasks, but can also pose challenges
(Jeong & Hmelo-Silver, 2016).
         We draw from Engle & Conant's (2002) definition of PDE as making collective intellectual progress
related to core ideas and disciplinary practices during authentic tasks. PDE exemplifies developments in the
learning sciences, including a situative view of engagement, as (1) negotiated and constructed in particular activity
systems and (2) comprised of instructional opportunities that support and constrain engagement (Greeno, 2006).

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                   775                                                    © ISLS
This view of engagement significantly extends research which has been grounded in an individual difference
paradigm   and  has  been   conceptualized    as  general sense   making     (e.g.,  Zimmerman,     1990).   Thus,  these
developments advance engagement as embedded within domain-specific and disciplinary contexts, and central to
and inseparable from learning (Gresalfi, et al., 2009). Here, the quality of collective persistence in the face of
challenge, positive affect and interest in the ideas and doing of activity, and interpersonal interactions while
making    meaningful connections    is central   to what  students  come    to  understand;    highlighting   the various
interdependencies of learning processes, a central aim of CSCL research.
          Now 15 years after the introduction of PDE, this symposium aims to present the frontiers of the research
and account for developments, as the presentations examine PDE in a range of CSCL environments. We strive to
build on a literature which has been limited to a focus on definition within single and illustrative cases to broaden
the analytic and empirical landscape. Toward that end, we bring together four research groups showcasing rich
range in  exploring  application of   PDE   in diverse  domains   (science,    mathematics,    engineering,   educational
psychology),  grade  bands  (middle    school through   University) and     learning contexts   (after school  programs,
inquiry and problem solving curricula, online CSCL, as well as across resources and contexts). The presentations
also showcase   a  range of  methods   to  analyze   PDE  as    collective, situated,   cross-contextual,  dynamic,  and
generative. Each   presenter  will  introduce  their  (1) guiding   framework       for theorizing  collective  PDE,   as
contextualized  in particular  tasks,  domains,   instructional settings and    disciplinary   practices; (2)  observable
indicators of disciplinary engagement in the collective; and (3) analytic foci, making explicit the affordances of
rich analysis for understanding collective engagement. As called for in the CSCL 2019 theme, these varied efforts
to foster and study  PDE  have   been  carried   out in contexts  that are  intended    to support  embodied,   enactive,
extended, and/or embedded CSCL. First, Gresalfi and her colleagues investigate the role of design features,
alongside teachers and peers as relational resources, for jointly fostering persistence in the face of challenge for
children in a computer science camp     e  on  ,    am a an     a onen consider the interrelationships of engagement
dimensions for within and between group interactions during software engineering courses. Using social network
analysis alongside qualitative content analysis, they track the change in density and the nature of collaborative
engagement, among dimensions, over time. Next, Rogat and colleagues showcase their theoretical framework
instantiated in a rubric using quality ratings to examine five dimensions of PDE during collaborative group
exchanges,  to  contrast two   case   groups  during  a   common    collaborative    task  across  two    time segments.
Subsequently, Hickey and colleagues extend the PDE design framework to be inclusive of expansive framing, by
which learners engage with conceptual and disciplinary material in terms of their own personal and cultural
orientations within three different undergraduate and graduate online CSCL contexts. Finally, our discussant
addresses how these papers have collectively advanced what we understand about PDE within CSCL contexts.

Same place, new rules: The joint accomplishment of engagement
Melissa Gresalfi, Amanda Bell, Corey Brady, and Lauren Vogelstein

We face a documented shortage of computer scientists. By 2024, 1.1 million jobs are predicted in computing fields
(Lockard & Wolf, 2012), but in 2015, fewer than 17,000 people graduated with computer science-related degrees;
of those, fewer than 3,000 were women. Just 7% of workers in computing in 2014 identified as Black and 7% as
Hispanic (Beckhusen, 2016). Clearly, the challenge we face is not only to encourage more people to engage in
computing,  but also to  ensure  that  the diversity of our   community     is reflected   in the field.  To address this
challenge, many suggest introducing students to Computer Science (CS) well before college. However, bringing
computational thinking (CT) into K-12 contexts comes with its own potential challenges. Without careful attention
to pedagogy and design, we might ultimately teach computational thinking in schools in ways that exacerbate
current trends, contributing to the same K-12 participation gaps in interest and identity that we see in other STEM
related fields. Thus, it is imperative that we look to the lessons learned about designing for equitable participation
in these other fields as we seek to understand how to connect CS to K-12 contexts.
          Research on students' mathematics learning has demonstrated how different designs support different
forms of knowing. These same studies have established that the patterns we associate with who is good at math
and  who  wants to  persist at mathematics     is as much   a   function of  the way    mathematics    is taught  than of
mathematics itself. This is not to say that the field of mathematics has solved the problem of participation--quite
to the contrary (Martin, Gholson, & Leonard, 2010). However, when we look at classrooms that reorganize the
teaching of mathematics so that engaging the discipline is more than remembering facts and answering questions
quickly, we find that very different patterns in interest and engagement emerge (Boaler & Greeno, 2000; Boaler
& Staples, 2008). In contrast, a fast-paced, competitive environment turns off many students from the discipline.
          It would be easy for this very same scenario happening with respect to Computational Thinking as so
much of CT content might reasonably be organized into a set of facts and rules to be taught and practiced.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                     776                                                      © ISLS
However,   CT   also   involves practices  of design (Kafai,   2016)  that  requires the understanding    and principled
adaptation of underlying facts and rules. Teaching students a set of rules that can then be applied is the version of
teaching that is popular (and largely unsuccessful) in math classrooms; teaching students a set of design practices
that create a need for CT concepts is a version of teaching that is being explored, with success, in math classrooms.
        This study seeks to better understand how to support rich engagement with CT through the design of
activities that  leverage  programming     as  a  means  of   enacting  expressive   visual   displays  and effects.  We
conceptualize   engagement    as a  collective act between   person   and  context,  seen as  an  interplay between   the
affordances of a learning environment and whether and how students act on those affordances. In previous work
(Gresalfi, 2015; Gresalfi & Barab, 2011) we distinguished between different forms of agency that primarily focus
on following rules and procedures, from more productive disciplinary engagement (Engle & Conant, 2002), which
we see as involving consequential engagement (considering the implications of disciplinary decisions) and critical
engagement (using those consequences to make decisions about how to best solve problems). In prior work, we
have focused on the role of tasks in supporting student engagement; here we expand that analysis by considering
the role of other students in the broader activity system.
        We focus on eight students from two classrooms who are enrolled in a week-long day camp and who
work both individually and collectively using NetLogo (Wilensky, 1999) to design images and representations of
their own choosing. Specifically, our goal is to explore: 1) How the design of particular activities supports student
engagement with the practices of CT, and in particular, what forms of agency are supported through their design;
and 2) How     others  in the   room become    resources  for  inspiration, influence,  and   assistance  throughout  the
camp.  We focus on four students who mostly sat together throughout the week to understand both individual
trajectories of participation, and how those trajectories connected and supported one another.
        Data for this analysis draw on screen captures of students' work, videotapes of whole class discussions,
and transcripts of interviews conducted at the beginning and end of the camp. Our analysis began by looking for
changes    in student  activity across the week,   and then   focused   on  specific types   of episodes.  We    sought to
understand: 1) the nature of students design work (for example, what seemed to launch an idea? What was the
focus of their attention, such as aesthetics or functionality?); 2) what happened when students encountered a
challenge; and 3) what seemed to sustain their engagement over long periods of time. In examining these episodes,
we  attended   to the  interaction  among  students' ideas,   their use of    the tools and   resources   provided in   the
programming environment, and feedback they received from the environment and from others in the class.
        Findings    from   these  case  analyses  suggest a   coherence    amongst   the  eight  focal students   in  their
persistence in the face of challenge, their willingness to ask and offer assistance to others, and their commitment
to achieving aesthetic and representational goals. These involved a routine back and forth between exploring the
affordances   and possibilities  of the NetLogo    environment,   setting   a representational  or expressive    goal that
connected to personal interest, and then making different modifications to both that ended with a satisfactory final
product. Interviews with students made it clear that they found this kind of activity to be novel, enjoyable, and
validating; they routinely contrasted the practices of the camp with those at school. Students expressed that such
practices transformed their experience of problem solving:       "'Cause usually, for me... if I make a mistake, people
get onto me about it. And when you're kind of coding... ...If you make a mistake, nobody's there to pressure you
about it, honestly. I mean, if you make a mistake, you can go back and fix it, and then you can also have somebody
help you...and that's nice." They also expressed that the camp repositioned their relationships with teachers and
students: "the teachers are really nice to you. I didn't get along with many teachers before and now I do. So, it
helped me get along with teachers better too. I'm not a bad kid."

Forms of collaborative engagement in software engineering education
  ina  am a an         ie  a onen

Whereas teaching and learning activities used to be guided by clearly defined, generally accepted knowledge and
a structured curricula, today, learning entails a dynamic body of knowledge and constant efforts for accessing and
making meaning of resources. In this rather complex landscape, students are expected to participate actively and
engage in various ways with knowledge contents and various resources, with peers and/or knowledgeable others.
Such engagement involves different layers, such as the epistemic (engagement with the knowledge of the domain),
relational (engagement with people ­       ee s, ea  e s, e    e s, e    an    eg   a ive, o    oe     a    am a,
Kumpulainen, 2013). In software engineering, at epistemic level, research emphasizes the need for students to
understand    shifting conceptual   knowledge    and developing     the capacity   to   apply   technical skills fluently,
challenges often addressed by exposing students to authentic projects for creating software products. At social-
relational level, engagement implies taking initiative to connect to resources of both intellectual and digital-

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                      777                                                     © ISLS
material, but also human nature. The learning and collaboration resources provided by the course/program, such
as peer or teachers, is often complemented by expertise held by knowledgeable others or entities outside the course
boundaries, such as (in the case of software engineering) programmers platforms, professional programmers and
even   clients. Finally, at regulative  level, organizing,   self-managing and    sustaining own  or   groups'  learning
activities places a good deal of responsibility on students. Various studies have shown students' strategies but also
challenges to manage collaborative work in general, and advanced co-creation practices especially (Järvelä et al.,
2016). Considering the complexity engagement as a phenomenon, more research is needed to understand the
nature of these processes, in order to generate pedagogical solutions that support and empower students in their
learning.
          The   current  study  aimed  to generate  better understanding   of:    a) whether the characteristics of   the
students'  epistemic    and social  network    are indicative  of engagement      and  b)  what  types  of engagement
characterizes the co-creation process. The expectation was that the social network characteristics are related to the
co-creation process     and the  way   students engage   and   contribute to  it. Conceptually,   this study   builds on
sociocultural perspectives to learning to conceptualize engagement as a process that involves learners' sustained
and situated thought and action in relation to knowledge contents, social relations and digital-material resources.
This process does not take place in a vacuum, but is framed by various aspects of the learning environment (tasks,
resources,  guidance,    etc.), of the social  environments    (interactions, relations),  time-space  affordances    and
constraints, and the capacity of individual/group to assemble these elements (Markauskaite & Goodyear, 2017).
          This study employed a design-based approach in a case context. Participants were twenty-three second-
year media engineering international students (three female and twenty-one male, average age 23.4 years, SD 2.8)
from a university of applied sciences in Finland enrolled in a major in Media Engineering. The Media Design and
Integration course is a second year undergraduate course aiming to support students to understand the design
process of different digital products, emphasizing their full lifecycle; course activities were eight lectures and
eight laboratory meetings. A collaborative task (in groups of three to four) was designed together with the teacher
and required    the groups  to  design a  digital  prototype of a `re-use  library'.  The  task was complemented      by
discussions about    design  methods,   and facilitated through   face-to-face    meetings during lab  sessions, online
collaboration through wiki and a discussion platform, and access to various sources of information and experts.
          Mixed methods, consisting of a combination of qualitative and quantitative methods, were employed for
ensuring (data) triangulation. Seven groups were followed intensively. A pre- and post- networking questionnaire
was applied to gather data on the knowledge and social networking practices of students, inside and outside the
class  community.   Individual   interviews enriched  the  perspective on     the possible individual  networks.   Event
sampling through weekly diaries was used to collect data about students' work and interactions outside laboratory
sessions, while audio-recording of all the group discussions documented the groups actual verbal behaviours. The
drafts and the final version of the shared product, i.e. drawings, sketches, pictures, final prototypes were also
gathered. Social network analysis and qualitative content analysis (see       am a,           eea      ie , in   i     e
characteristics of students' network and the indication of engagement and knowledge co-creation were examined
in depth. The group products were scored using an evaluation instrument developed in collaboration with the
teacher.
          The preliminary findings show a rather low average density of the networks (especially of the knowledge
network) in the pre-test, which indicate that collaborative engagement of epistemic kind was minimal at class
level. The  pooled   two  `superdimensions':    Knowledge    network (Collaboration,     Advice, Epistemic   input)   and
Social network (Emotional support and Informal network) did not show a denser network in the post-test. It is
confirmed by students in interviews that they received most advice and ideas from the teachers, or others, and less
from peers in class; but that under way intensive collaborative engagement at epistemic level (i.e., exchange of
ideas, elaboration and development) occurred within groups. The results concerning social interaction and are not
as radical, although they seem to follow the same trend. By the end of the course, social interaction has moved
from between-group-interaction to inside-group-interaction. The qualitative findings support the finding that a
more intensive epistemic engagement is indicated in the preliminary phase of the collaborative project, when
groups discussed various ideas and alternatives; it diminished towards the end, where division of labour occurred
and the interaction was minimal. At relational and regulative level, higher level of engagement was identified in
some individual students who managed the process of collaboration and the group sticking to the plan, although
not in all groups. One of the reported challenges was the lack of experience with collaborative work and the need
to find strategies on the way. This has led to a lower level of engagement from some group members.
          This study indicates the variety in the way engagement can materialize, but also the challenges that can
occur for students in this regard, even in a rather `common' collaboration task. Further analyses and research is
recommended to identify types of task design and appropriate guidance that can support students to understand
the nature, strategies and benefits of engagement.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                      778                                                    © ISLS
Examining group Productive Disciplinary Engagement
Toni Kempler Rogat, Britte Haugan Cheng, Anne Traynor, Temitope F. Adeoye, Andrea Gomoll, Cindy                    E.
Hmelo-Silver, and Patrik Lundh

This project  extends    Engle    and Conant's     (2002)   conceptualization   of  students'   productive   disciplinary
engagement (PDE) by characterizing the shared, multifaceted, and dynamic nature of engagement in the context
of collaborative groups. Specifically, this project developed a rubric for describing group PDE in STEM contexts,
used to   analyze video  data  and  ultimately,    as part  of  real-time classroom   observation    by researchers     and
practitioners. The purpose of this work is theoretical development (i.e., specifying this extended definition PDE),
as well as methodological development, in order to document patterns of PDE in classroom activities, specifically
those that integrate disciplinary content and practices in instruction.
          This work draws from and extends two bodies of theoretical and empirical work. First, we draw from
engagemen    esea      s emming     om an in   ivi  a    i e en e   a a  igm    a  on e     ai  es engagemen     as m    i
faceted,  reflective of students'  classroom     experience, and   malleable  in   context (Fredricks,  et  al., 2004).  A
multifaceted conceptualization enables a sys ema i       o  se  va ion o    e  imensions o    engagemen       a  make
PDE, with an eventual goal of examining interrelations and patterns of student engagement towards PDE (i.e.,
trajectories). Second, we extend prior conceptualizations of PDE (Engle & Conant, 2002). We extend these two
paradigms by 1) specifying PDE as a dynamic construct, evolving and devolving over time (Skinner & Pitzer,
2012) and 2) integrating situative perspectives of engagement (Hickey, 2003). Here, a situative view understands
engagement as negotiated and constructed in activity systems comprised of instructional opportunities that support
and constrain engagement, given curriculum materials, teacher scaffolds, tasks, and interactions among learners
(Greeno, 2006). Because PDE reflects students' participation within the social contexts of classroom activity, we
extend prior work by providing necessary theoretical specification and methodological approaches to enable a
broader  analytic focus  that encompasses      collaborative groups   over  time.  Moreover,   our  focus  on    social and
disciplinary engagement    facets   extends  extant   frameworks   aligned    with our  focus   on  collaborative  groups
contextualized in STEM content and disciplinary practices. Here, we aimed to illustrate the affordances of this
conceptualization and measurement of collaborative group PDE by examining the changing nature of student
engagement   with    implications for PDE    for two  contrasting  collaborative   groups  contextualized    in  the  same
curriculum, lesson, domain, and disciplinary context.
          Opportunities for and measurement of group PDE are situated in joint collaborative activity. In our work,
PDE is contextualized in collaborative tasks involving modeling, design, and argumentation in middle school
math, science, and engineering. We draw on a rich corpus of video data collected in 4 projects where group work
in these contexts was central to unit goals and what groups came to understand. The range in domain, disciplinary
practices and curricular   features (e.g., technology    tools,  scaffolds) has enriched   our  theoretical  development
efforts. Data presented here were collected as part of The Promoting Reasoning and Conceptual Change in Science
              oe     ,   i    eve o   e   in   i    ase     ni s o en o   age s    en s  s  ien i i  easoning (Chinn et
al., 2008). In PRACCIS, collaborative groups develop, evaluate, and revise explanatory models. The video data
from the project include filmed class sessions covering three curricular units in two classes from each of four
teachers. We present codes of video recordings of two groups collaborating in a lesson occurring later in the
curriculum.
          The developed rubric encompasses five engagement facets using 3-point quality indicators, these include:
Behavioral   engagement    (on-task joint  participation);  social engagement     (responsive,  equitable  coordination),
emotional   engagement     (socio-emotional      climate),  metacognitive   engagement     (shared   content,    task   and
disciplinary regulation), and disciplinary engagement (integrated conceptual and disciplinary contributions on a
larger consequential task), with high-level ratings assumed to promote PDE. The rubric includes a designation of
group structure (i.e., pairs; full group), and task characteristics.
          Using the developed rubric two coders coded 8 video clips (approximately five-minute segments of each
of 2 student groups). Coders achieved inter-coder reliability of 68%, after discussing discrepant codes on 4 clips
and then jointly the remaining 4 clips. Codes of the jointly coded 4 video clips are presented here to illustrate the
rubric's affordances for studying the dynamic nature of engagement and potential for comparing groups. Analysis
of this small set of illustrative codes is visual, based on the presented graphs.
          As can be seen in Figure 1, patterns of engagement remain relatively stable across these two, consecutive
video segments. Group A exhibits high levels of social and emotional engagement, but do not progress beyond
minimal   disciplinary  engagement.   This   pattern  is a  counter-example    to  common   intuition   that more    social
cohesion among groups and positive, emotional engagement, are key contributors to PDE. Similarly, Group B,

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                       779                                                     © ISLS
exhibits a higher form of disciplinary engagement in the second segment, despite the stable and more moderate
nature of the other 4 dimensions of engagement, including, social and emotional engagement.

                     Figure 1. PDE codes of Group A and B across 2 consecutive segments.

         This small, but illustrative data set highlights the ability of the new rubric to capture the temporal nature
of group engagement in STEM practices and, more importantly, to identify patterns of engagement behaviors and
their development. When used to code multiple segments of student collaboration, the rubric developed in this
project has the potential to document rich patterns that can be examined, identifying how PDE evolves or is
disrupted, as a function of group or task characteristics.

Expansive framing for equitable PDE in online CSCL contexts
Daniel Hickey, Christopher Andrews, Grant Chartrand, and Rebecca Itow

As illustrated by this symposium and other prior presentations and publications, Engle's notion of productive
disciplinary engagement   (PDE)   has  been  embraced      by some   in the CSCL    community.   However,  Engle's
subsequent pedagogical framework for supporting PDE known as expansive framing (e.g., Engle, et al., 2012) has
yet to be embraced by the by the CSCL community and has mostly been studied in conventional settings (e.g.,
Engle, et al., 2011). This presentation will summarize examples, tools, and findings from an extended program of
research using expansive framing to support PDE in online CSCL contexts. This work shows that expansive
framing is a relatively straightforward framework for supporting PDE and shows promise for equitably engaging
diverse learners.
         The presentation will first describe a template that has been used to support expansive framing in a range
of collaborative online courses and has been extensively refined over the last decade. This template insistently
frames disciplinary engagement using learner-generated events, places, people, and topics beyond those presented
by course. Building on the work described in Hickey and Rehak (2013), this engagement is initially supported by
a simple routine   whereby   learners publicly rank the    relevance of carefully-curated elements of  disciplinary
knowledge and justify those rankings by drawing on their own professional, personal, and cultural orientations.
This engagement occurs on commentable web-based pages (e.g., wikis or Google Docs) that are public to the
class. These artifacts support collaborative local interaction (Hall & Rubin, 1998) via threaded discussions directly
on those artifacts. Building on Gresalfi et al., (2009), this individual and social engagement are informally assessed
with public reflections on four important aspects of PDE: contextual, collaborative, consequential, and cultural
engagement. These reflections support PDE by (a) summatively assessing prior engagement, (b) proleptically
motivating   that engagement,  and    (c) formatively assessing      disciplinary understanding. This  disciplinary
understanding  is  then  formatively   assessed via  private   self-assessments;   where  appropriate, disciplinary
achievement is eventually summatively measured via discreet tests.
         Examples   and  evidence  from   secondary,  undergraduate,    vocational,  and graduate  courses will be
presented to illustrate three recent extensions of this program of research. The first extension is the addition of
cultural engagement to the aforementioned reflections. This new reflection is intended to encourage learners to
expansively frame their engagement in terms of their own personal and cultural orientations (Gutierrez & Rogoff,
2003). Analyses of prior courses suggested that organizing engagement primarily around professional orientation
fostered inequities by privileging the engagement of more privileged learners from professional backgrounds and
may have discouraged culturally-oriented critiques of disciplinary knowledge and practices. Analyses of several
recent courses    shows that this additional   reflection  fosters productive engagement    in the intersection of
disciplinary knowledge, disciplinary practice, and issues of power and privilege (e.g., Esmonde & Booker, 2017).

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                   780                                                   © ISLS
This engagement, in turn, supports important discussions of equity and justice that many learners might otherwise
find uncomfortable.
          The second extension of this program of research expansively frames collaborative engagement via web-
based   annotations  of  course  readings   using Hypothes.is.   Students in  an  online    undergraduate educational
psychology course communally annotated 24 assigned readings using prompts that were intentionally worded to
support expansive framing. Students' discourse in 460 threaded annotations were coded for enlistment of aspects
of expansive framing (i.e., time, place, topic, participants, and accountability) and the degree to which those
annotations were expansive. This confirmed that nearly every learner routinely enlisted most aspects (particularly
topics and participants; accountability was notably less frequent) and showed that expansiveness of interactions
was significantly correlated (r = .71) with performance on an open-ended exam that required learners to apply
course topics to imagined teaching contexts. Interpretive qualitative analyses yielded evidence that expansively-
framed interactions were indeed productive in that students made numerous connections between disciplinary
knowledge and their nascent disciplinary practices. These connections are indicative of generative learning that
will presumably    transfer readily  to subsequent   educational,  personal, and  professional  contexts.  This study
resulted in promising initial evidence that this straightforward method supported expansive framing in this context,
and resulted in a coding scheme that should be useful for studying expansive framing in many contexts.
          The third extension of this research is a new self-report survey of students' perceptions of their framing
of engagement in both conventional and online courses. Building on Lam and colleagues (2014) and Zheng, et al.
(in review), an initial set of items for each of the aspects of expansive framing were drafted and then refined in
cognitive interviews with two subjects. The resulting set of items will be completed by at least 5,000 students in
both conventional    and  fully online  colleges  as experimental  items  in the Spring  2019  administration   of the
National Survey of Student Engagement (NSSE; Kuh, 2003). This presentation will focus on exploratory and
confirmatory factor analyses of the hypothesized aspects of expansive framing, demographic and institutional
factors in framing,   and correlations  between   aspects   of expansive  framing   and other  dimensions  of student
engagement captured by NSSE.

References
Beckhusen, J. (2016). Occupations in information technology: US Department of Commerce, Economics and
          Statistics Administration, US Census Bureau.
Blumenfeld, P. C., Soloway, E., Marx, R. W., Krajcik, J. S., Guzdial, M., & Palincsar, A. (1991). Motivating
          project-based learning: Sustaining the doing, supporting the learning. Educational Psychologist, 26, 369-
          398.
Boaler, J., & Greeno, J. G. (2000). Identity, agency, and knowing in mathematical worlds. In J. Boaler (Ed.),
          Multiple perspectives on mathematics teaching and learning (pp. 45-82). Stamford, CT: Ablex.
Boaler, J., & Staples, M. (2008). Creating mathematical futures through an equitable teaching approach: The case
          of Railside school. Teachers College Record, 110, 608-645.
Chinn, C. A., Duschl, R. A., & Duncan, R. G., Buckland, L. A., & Pluta, W.P. (2008). A microgenetic classroom
          study   of learning   to reason   scientifically through modeling     and argumentation.   In   ICLS  2008,
          Proceedings of International Society of the Learning Sciences. Raleigh, NC: Lulu.
 am a,                   em     i-layered nature of small-group learning: Productive interactions in object-oriented
          collaboration. International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 9, 247-281.
Engle,  R. A.,  &  Conant,  F.  C.  (2002). Guiding   principles for fostering  productive  disciplinary  engagement:
          Explaining an emerging argument in a community of learners classroom. Cognition and Instruction, 20,
          399-483.
Engle, R. A., Lam, D. P., Meyer, X. S., & Nix, S. E. (2012). How does expansive framing promote transfer?
          Several proposed explanations and a research agenda for investigating them. Educational Psychologist,
          47, 215­231.
Engle, R. A., Nguyen, P. D., & Mendelson, A. (2011). The influence of framing on transfer: Initial evidence from
          a tutoring experiment. Instructional Science, 39, 603­628.
Esmonde,   I., &   Booker,  A.  N.  (Eds.)  (2017).  Power   and  privilege  in the learning  sciences:   Critical and
          sociocultural theories of learning. New York, NY: Routledge.
Greeno, J. G. (2006). Learning in activity. In R. K. Sawyer (Ed.), The Cambridge handbook of the learning
          sciences (pp. 79­96). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Gresalfi, M.   S. (2015). Designing    to Support  Critical  Engagement   with  Statistics. ZDM  - The   International
          Journal on Mathematics Education, 47, 933-946.
Gresalfi, M. S., & Barab, S. A. (2011). Learning for a reason: Supporting forms of engagement by designing tasks
          and orchestrating environments. Theory into practice, 50, 300-310.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                      781                                                  © ISLS
Gresalfi, M., Barab, S., Siyahhan, S., & Christensen, T. (2009). Virtual worlds, conceptual understanding, and
          me: Designing for consequential engagement. On the Horizon, 17, 21-34.
Gresalfi, M.,  Martin,T.,  Hand,   V. &  Greeno,   J.   (2009).Constructing competence:   an analysis of  student
          participation in the activity systems of mathematics classrooms. Educational Studies in Mathematics, 70,

Gutiérrez, K. D., & Rogoff, B. (2003). Cultural ways of learning: Individual traits or repertoires of practice.
          Educational Researcher, 32(5), 19­25.
Hall, R., &  Rubin,  A.  (1998).  There's   five little notches in here: Dilemmas  in teaching  and  learning  the
          conventional  structure of  rate. In J. G.    Greeno  &  S. V. Goldman  (Eds.),   Thinking practices in
          mathematics and science learning (pp. 189­235). New York, NY: Routledge.
Hickey, D. T. (2003). Engaged participation versus marginal nonparticipation: A stridently sociocultural approach
          to achievement motivation. Elementary School Journal, 103,
Hickey, D. T., & Rehak, A. (2013). Wikifolios and participatory assessment for engagement, understanding, and
          achievement in online courses. Journal of Educational Multimedia and Hypermedia, 22, 407-441.
Järvelä, S., Järvenoja, H., Malmberg, J., & Isohätälä, J. (2016). How do types of interaction and phases of self-
          regulated learning set a stage for collaborative engagement? Learning and Instruction, 43, 39-51
Jeong, H., & Hmelo-Silver, C. E. (2016). Seven affordances of CSCL Technology: How can technology support
          collaborative learning. Educational Psychologist, 51, 247-265.
Kafai, Y.   B. (2016).   From  computational      thinking  to  computational participation in K--12   education.
          Communications of the ACM, 59(8), 26-27.
Kuh,  G.  D. (2003).  What  we're  learning  about  student   engagement  from NSSE:  Benchmarks     for effective
          educational practices. Change: The Magazine of Higher Learning, 35(2), 24-32.
Kumpulainen, K. (2014). The legacy of productive disciplinary engagement. International Journal of Educational
          Research, 64, 215­220.
Lam, D. P., Mendelson, A., Meyer, X. S., & Goldwasser, L. (2014). Learning alignment with expansive framing
          as a driver of transfer. In J. L. Polman, E. A. Kyza, D. K. O'Neill, I. Tabak, W. R. Penuel, A. S. Jurow,
          K. O'Connor, T. Lee, & L. D'Amico (Eds.), Proceedings of the International Conference of the Learning
          Sciences (pp. 689-696). Boulder, CO: International Society of the Learning Sciences.
Lockard, C. B., & Wolf, M. (2012). Occupational employment projections to 2020. Monthly Lab. Rev., 135, 84.
Markauskaite, L., Goodyear, P. (2017). Epistemic fluency and professional education: Innovation, knowledgeable
          action and actionable knowledge. Dordrecht: Springer.
Martin, D. B., Gholson, M. L., & Leonard, J. (2010). Mathematics as gatekeeper: Power and privilege in the
          production of knowledge. Journal of Urban Mathematics Education, 3(2), 12-24.
Roschelle, J. (2013). Special issue on CSCL: Discussion. Educational Psychologist, 48, 67-70.
Skinner, E. & Pitzer, J. (2012). Developmental dynamics of student engagement, coping and everyday resilience.
          In S.L. Christenson, A.L. Reschly & C. Wylie (Eds). The Handbook of Research on Student Engagement

Wilensky, U., & Resnick, M. (1999). Thinking in levels: A dynamic systems approach to making sense of the
          world. Journal of Science Education and Technology, 8, 3-19.
Zheng, K., Engle, R. A., & Meyer, X. S. (2012). Student responsiveness to the teachers expansive framing.
          Presented at the annual meeting of the National Association for Research in Science Teaching, 2012,
          Indianapolis.
Zimmerman, B. J. (1990). Self-regulating and academic achievement: An overview. Educational Psychologist,
          25, 3­17.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                     782                                                 © ISLS
