    Understanding CSCL through the lens of research syntheses
                   Freydis Vogel, University of Nottingham, freydis.vogel@nottingham.ac.uk
                           Heisawn Jeong, Hallym University, heisawnj@gmail.com
                  Stian Håklev, École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, stian.haklev@epfl.ch
        Léonore Valentine Guillain, École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, leonore.guillain@epfl.ch
              Nour Ghalia Abassi, École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, nour.abassi@epfl.ch
     Sally Wai-Yan Wan, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, sallywywan@cuhk.edu.hk
                  Sancia Wai-San Wan, The University of Macau, Macau, sanciawan@umac.mo
         Anika Radkowitsch, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München, anika.radkowitsch@psy.lmu.de
                   Freydis Vogel, University of Nottingham, freydis.vogel@nottingham.ac.uk
              Frank Fischer, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München, frank.fischer@psy.lmu.de
                       Cindy E. Hmelo-Silver, Indiana University, chmelosi@indiana.edu
                           Heisawn Jeong, Hallym University, heisawnj@gmail.com
                  Susan Yoon (discussant), University of Pennsylvania, yoonsa@gse.upenn.edu

         Abstract:   Computer-supported    collaborative    learning  (CSCL)  forms   a diverse field   with
         researchers  from  different backgrounds    using  a   variety of  learning theories and  research
         methods to design and analyze CSCL learning environments. The dynamic and active features
         of the field can lead to confusion about its identity and conclusions that can be drawn from the
         outcomes of CSCL research. Syntheses of CSCL research can help to answer questions about
         the prevalent topics and outcomes in the field. There are a number of synthesis methods to
         choose depending on the methods used in the primary studies as well as goals of the synthesis.
         Meta-synthesis is also available to better integrate findings obtained using different research
         methods. This symposium showcases a spectrum of different synthesis methods used in CSCL.
         Benefits and disadvantages of the synthesis methods will be discussed along with the question
         of how different synthesis methods can be used to inform each other.

The  field of computer-supported      collaborative learning    (CSCL)   brings together researchers    from diverse
disciplines (Computer Science, Psychology, Education, Linguistics, etc.) with diverse learning theories. A broad
spectrum of different research methods is used in the field of CSCL depending on considerations such as the
specific research  goals, the maturity  of the  theories,   the complexity   of the  problems  and the  researcher's
epistemological orientation. Thus, CSCL is a dynamic and active research community and a wealth of CSCL
research has been conducted to reveal the mechanisms of successful CSCL (King, 2007; Scardamalia & Bereiter,
1994). In order to achieve a more comprehensive and precise conclusion about CSCL mechanism, structured
research synthesis are needed that integrate the rich amount of primary studies about specific topics in CSCL
However it also became of a source of confusion and disagreement about integrative conclusions that can be
drawn from CSCL research (see also Wise & Schwarz, 2017).. Goals and motivations of the synthesis may dictate
the use of quantitative or qualitative synthesis methods, which, in turn, limit the type and scope of conclusions
that can be drawn from them. These goals might be the generation of innovation, the building of theories, finding
evidence for specific hypotheses, or informing policy and practice in education. However, even when the most
adequate synthesis method might have been selected to integrate primary research done in a specific area of CSCL,
challenges still remain. For instance, deciding for meta-analysis means the exclusion of a part of primary studies.
Qualitative syntheses, in spite its depth and insights, lack the precision of meta-analyses. This means that even
the most adequate synthesis method may lead to biased conclusions about CSCL research.
         This symposium    showcases   a spectrum   of  syntheses  used  in the field of CSCL   which   all  have the
common goal to integrate CSCL research and to contribute to the understanding of the CSCL community and its
research outcomes.   Firstly, three papers will  be  presented   that depict a  bibliometric  analysis, a qualitative
systematic review and a quantitative meta-analysis all conducted in the field of CSCL. Secondly, the fourth paper
will introduce meta-synthesis as a method to integrate quantitative and qualitative research outcomes and a way
to overcome the disadvantages of using only one particular synthesis method.
         More specifically, the first paper by Håklev et al. used bibliometric analysis to get a better understanding
of the CSCL researcher community. In this paper, ICLS and CSCL proceedings are analyzed to uncover and
portray  patterns in co-authorship,  authors' field  of research,  geographical  location and   commitment    to  the
community.    While qualitative analyses are quite common in CSCL research, few qualitative syntheses exist. In
the second    paper,  Wan     and Wan    instead    present a   qualitative  systematic  review   to  uncover   how
phenomenography, a specific qualitative research method, is used in the field of CSCL. This paper presents how

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                   783                                                    © ISLS
a novel qualitative research method is adopted by the field of CSCL, the depth of explanation of qualitative
syntheses, and makes suggestions how phenomenography could be utilized to synthesize CSCL research. The
third paper by Radkowitsch et al. represents the use of quantitative meta-analysis in the field of CSCL. Their
choice of synthesis method was justified by the substantial amount of quantitative experimental studies already
available. More specifically they synthesized experimental studies about the effects of CSCL scripts as a scaffold
to enhance collaborative learning. Their findings provide a strong empirical argument for the effectiveness of
CSCL scripts against the critic ­ raised in the controversial debate within the CSCL field ­ that CSCL scripts may
be too constraining and thus ineffective. In the fourth paper, Hmelo-Silver and Jeong showcase a way to synthesize
qualitative and quantitative primary studies in evaluating the outcomes of STEM CSCL. The study provides one
model of meta-synthesis that takes into account both quantitative and qualitative outcomes. It aims to integrate
CSCL research outcomes both from quantitative and qualitative studies and thus overcome some of the existing
synthesis methods that solely uses either quantitative or qualitative outcomes. Continued efforts are needed to
synthesize CSCL research outcomes across different theoretical and methodological boundaries.. Taken together,
the current symposium will showcase available synthesis techniques and provide a forum to reflect on their
advantages and limitations. It can help us better understand which synthesis method might be adequate for the
different research goals and motivations and how the various syntheses can inform each other and the field in
general.

A bibliographic analysis of our community through the lens of ICLS and CSCL
proceedings
Stian Håklev, Léonore Valentine Guillain, and Nour Ghalia Abassi

The CSCL community has over time developed a shared set of theories and concepts which are constantly being
referenced and built-upon. However, as a community that both draws from multiple disciplines (such as computer
science, psychology, and education), and that interacts with rapidly changing technological affordances, it needs
to constantly reposition and  reframe  itself relative to other communities    and disciplines. CSCL    community
members act as bridges, bringing new ideas, concepts and methods into the CSCL community, by co-authoring
with authors  that  would  not consider    members  of    the CSCL   community,    or  citing research  from  other
communities. One way to better understand the development of our community is through a bibliometric analysis
of conference proceedings.
         Using  bibliometric and  social network  analysis    approaches to analyze   the growth    and structure of
academic disciplines and communities have a long history. Descriptive statistics of authors lets us understand who
contributes to a given conference, which universities and groups they represent, which geographical locations are
represented, and how this changes over time. Co-authorships and citations can be seen as indicators of how well
members of a field are connected (Kienle & Wessner, 2006), and let us detect links and bridges with other
communities (Kärki, 1996). Applying text analytics methods to the article contents can be used to detect semantic
clusters within the community,    but also to track the   appearance  of new   topics of  interest over time (Ding,
Chowdhury, & Foo, 2001).
         Bibliometric signals alone do not tell the whole story. They can be enhanced by other data, such as an
early analysis by Kienle and Wessner (2006) which included both conference proceedings, lists of participants
and  Program  Chairs, as well  as e-mail surveys  and   an  analysis of policy documents   to  understand  how    the
community was developing. They describe a burgeoning international community at an early stage of growth,
with few core members, and conference participation highly dependent on participation in large grants or shifting
institutional policies. Later studies have tended to look at CSCL literature spread over a larger set of journals and
conferences.  For  example,  Jeong,   Hmelo-Silver, and    Yu  (2014)   manually coded    empirical  CSCL    studies
according to research designs, settings, data, and analyses, and identified four distinct theory-method clusters.
Tang, Tsai, and Lin (2014) used co-citation analysis of CSCL literature to automatically extract intellectual sub-
fields, and pivotal papers that served as bridges between sub-fields. Others have used completely different data
sources, such as Sommerhoff, et al. (2015), which analyzed the curricula from 75 learning science programs.
         We propose to narrow our focus to the two bi-annual conferences as the flagship events of our society
­ the research that is published there reflects both what researchers in the community choose to work on, and what
kind of research is selected by the peer-review process. We propose the following Research Questions: a) How
can we describe the CSCL conference authors in terms of fields, geographical location and commitment to the
community, b) How is CSCL as a knowledge field structured in terms of collaboration with local and international
partners from within and outside the community, c) What is the relationship between CSCL and ICLS, the two
conferences that are hosted by the same society?

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                   784                                                   © ISLS
        We have analyzed 446 papers (including full, short, posters, and symposia) from CSCL 2015, ICLS
2016, CSCL 2017, and ICLS 2018. From each paper, we extract authors, use e-mails to determine institutional
affiliation, and parse citations. The five countries with the most author contributions (counting each co-authored
paper separately) are United States, Germany, Canada, Israel and Singapore. The number of US authors had a
large spike in 2018 (2015: 8%, 2016: 20%, 2017: 16%, 2018: 57%). That year, ICLS was co-located with Learning
at Scale, and Artificial Intelligence in Education, and this probably led to a number of people who would not
otherwise have attended the conference submitting papers. Perhaps these other two conferences are traditionally
more US-centric, and this led to the large growth in US contributions. This large growth mainly came from
universities that had not presented during the previous three years' conferences. Analyzing the data from CSCL
in 2019 and ICLS in 2020 will help us understand whether 2018 was an aberration, or the beginning of a trend.
        To investigate the extent to which researchers think of themselves as members of the ISLS, and attend
both conferences (CSCL and ICLS), or primarily identify with one of the two communities, we look at research
groups that have been present at all four conferences (36), or all CSCL/no ICLS (12), or all ICLS/no CSCL (58).
This indicates that there is a large number of research groups that identify with ICLS and not CSCL. In future
work, we will extend the number of years analyzed, and also look at differences in citation patterns and semantic
content between authors that are identified as mainly-ICLS, mainly-CSCL, or both.
        We were able to extract 13,047 unique authors from the citations in the papers analyzed. Of these, 1009
authors have published at one of the four conference proceedings. To understand which external disciplinary
communities that ISLS researchers connect with, we wanted to identify the most commonly cited authors from
outside of the CSCL/ICLS communities. To do this, we excluded all authors that had published at one of the four
conferences, or that had any cited work in CSCL, ICLS, International Journal of CSCL, or Journal of the Learning
Sciences.  We further split this into works written  before 2010,  and after 2010, to get  one list of historical
influences, and another with currently active researchers who are highly cited by CSCL/ICLS researchers, but do
not attend our conferences. The five most highly cited researchers before 2010 was E. Wenger, L. S. Vygotsky,
S. Papert, C. Goodwin and B. Rogoff. The most highly cited authors of publications published after 2010 were C.
Goodwin, J. P. Gee, J. S. Krajcik, B. J. Fishman, and M. Windschitl.
        By continuing to add data from past proceedings, and extending our analysis, we will be able to say more
about the difference research published at CSCL and ICLS, the structure of research group collaborations, the
emergency and popularity of certain topics over time, and the links between the CSCL/ICLS literature and other
fields/conferences, and how that might be changing over time. We might also connect the bibliometric analysis
to other sources, such as the data on Learning Science programs by Sommerhoff et al (2015) ­ how do course
curricula affect future graduates' research topics? Because of the public nature of publications, we will make our
full dataset of parsed metadata available, as well as all the code used to generate our findings. We hope that this
will encourage other groups to extend or question our analysis.

Systematic review about the use of phenomenography in educational
technology studies
Sally Wai-Yan Wan and Sancia Wai-San Wan

There has been a rise in the demands of looking for `appropriate' research methodology to investigate how
educational technology is used so as to search for `better' ways for sustainable development in the field. Some
scholars described the potentials of phenomenography as `opening a new territory' (Bruce, 1999) that explores
the understandings of  a  phenomenon    in  the use of computer-supported    collaborative learning (CSCL)  for
informing educational practice from a second-order perspective, rather than a first-order perspective that cannot
reveal the phenomena   as it is  understood (Rovio-Johansson    & Ingerman,  2016, p. 261).  Phenomenographic
research helps `to bridge the gap between research and practice' that puts an emphasis on collective meaning and
identification of conceptions in an empirical manner (Johnston & Salaz, 2017).
        Phenomenography is `a research method for mapping the qualitatively different ways in which people
experience, conceptualize, perceive, and understand various aspects of, and various phenomena in, the world
around them' (Marton, 1986, p.31). The essential facets of phenomenography include categories of description
(different ways of understanding), structural aspect (combinations of features discerned and focused upon by the
subject), referential aspects (a particular meaning of an object), outcome space (logical relations of categories of
description). Phenomenography is not only a research approach but also serves for the purpose of informing
curriculum and pedagogical design in CSCL practices (Åkerlind, 2012), which potentially offers theoretical and
methodological advantages for explaining difference and change in individuals' conceptions, keeping aware of
such contradictions in understanding of learning experiences, and allowing for opportunities for self-reflection.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                  785                                                 © ISLS
        To  find   out  how  this relatively  novel  method  is  applied  in CSCL     research, in this study we  chose
systematic review for assessing how previous phenomenographic studies in CSCL were conducted. Two research
questions guided the study: (1) How is phenomenography applied in studying CSCL? and (2) What are the key
limitations and possible future development in the use of phenomenography in CSCL studies?

Data collection and analysis
We initially identified the relevant papers from the Social Science Citation Index (SSCI) journals with keyword
search (e.g. phenomenographic study) in the journal websites. We did a quantitative content analysis according
to the origin of study, year of publication, targeted groups, essential facets of phenomenography, data collection
method, research trustworthiness, targeted groups in the study, research questions, objectives of the study, and
limitations of study. We then conducted a qualitative thematic analysis in identifying patterns.

Findings
A total of 32 papers were reviewed and most were conducted in Australia, Taiwan and UK respectively. Most of
them were  found   in   higher  education.  `What'   and  `how'   questions   were commonly      found  in the research
questions, where more focus was on studying students' conceptions, experiences and learning approaches whilst
fewer studies were done to explore that of teachers. The basic facets of phenomenography such as referential and
structural aspects of conceptions and experiences of the use of CSCL pedagogies were addressed. However,
`outcome space' was not presented in nearly half of the reviewed studies. The paper by Limbu and Markauskaite
(2015) demonstrated a good example about the key facets of phenomenography, in which their study revealed the
outcome   space of   the students' conceptions    of  online collaborative   writing  (OCW)     with four  categories of
descriptions (referential aspect), namely (A) Division of work to complete the task; (B) Combination of expertise
to produce a  good     end product;  (C) Fusion   of  ideas  and  insights to  enable  deeper   understanding; and  (D)
Development of new skills and attitudes for collaborative work, whilst dimensions of variations (structural aspect)
involved five aspects: the outcome of OCW, learning from each other, the nature of the OCW process, the intensity
of interaction and the values and commitment of participants. This review explored how the phenomenography
as a research method in primary studies can inform the field of CSCL, where the reviewed papers revealed the
usefulness of phenomenography in understanding of learning and teaching, informing pedagogical design and
helping evaluating the learning outcomes, as well as providing information for teacher professional development.
On  the other  hand,    this review   further led  us to  reflect how  qualitative    syntheses  can  help explore    the
phenomenographic method in studying CSCL. Limitations were commonly identified and addressed in these
studies: (1) Small sample size may restrict understandings of the phenomena; (2) Diversity in study participants'
backgrounds and experiences that could not be captured in the different contexts within the study and could not
be classified into single    categories of descriptions;  and (3)  Ineffective  application of   research  methods  and
techniques affecting the findings of the study.

Our reflection
The systematic review study guides us in future research by filling in research gap by comparing students and
teachers' conceptions and experiences in CSCL and exploring their conceptions and experiences of CSCL in
primary   and secondary      education. Attention   should   be  paid to   the data   analytical procedures    including
trustworthiness and the creation of outcome space. More significantly, there can be possibilities of applying
phenomenography as a tool to synthesize qualitative research in CSCL with reference to structural and referential
aspects of the  past   CSCL   studies so   as to generate a  new  understanding    of  what learning    conceptions and
experiences in the previous CSCL studies and inform future CSCL development. There are still limitations in this
systematic review.     Due   to that  only    SSCI   papers  were  selected    for this  review,   other   papers using
phenomenography were not covered. The study relied on those papers addressing limitations and contributions of
the study for analysis and this thus restricted the deliberations of insights as gained from the papers. This study
depends on the analysis of qualitative aspect of the papers and this may cause the `bias' in the synthesis of the
results of this study.

Good for learning, bad for motivation? A meta-analytic counter-argument on a
widespread position regarding CSCL scripts
Anika Radkowitsch, Freydis Vogel, and Frank Fischer

In collaborative learning, learners often have difficulties to use expedient activities which are expected to induce
cognitive elaboration,   such  as explaining   or negotiating   cognitive  conflicts. CSCL  scripts  were  designed   as

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                     786                                                     © ISLS
scaffold to guide learners through collaborative practices that are beneficial for learning collaboration skills as
well as domain learning by inducing learners to engage in specific collaborative practices repeatedly (Fischer,
Kollar, Stegmann, & Wecker, 2013). To explain why studies about CSCL scripts show heterogeneous results, the
risk of overscripting learners by too coercive guidance undermining learners' self-determination and motivation
is most prominently quoted. In a recently published qualitative approach collecting widespread views of experts
in the field, Wise and Schwarz (2017) conclude with this overscripting explanation. They emphasize that rare
positive effects of CSCL scripts are restricted to learn collaboration skills only at the expense of learners' agency
and   motivation. Other  positive   effects of  CSCL   scripts are  mostly   neglected  while  negative effects   are
emphasized. Interestingly, the very idea of overscripting came from a contribution by Dillenbourg (2002) to Paul
Kirschner's inauguration event at the Open University of the Netherlands. The idea, however plausible it may
have appeared then was not backed up by empirical findings. We argue that a scientific community should develop
strategies of evidence generation and accumulation that go beyond re-stating an opinion for 15 years. It seems to
be  a questionable practice   to base  the knowledge  of a scientific community     on  the aggregation of repeated
opinions. Since   many  experimental   studies  have been  conducted  on    the effect of CSCL  scripts on learning
quantitatively synthesizing the effects by conducting a meta-analysis seems to offer better evidence. In contrast
to narrative reviews and intuitive summaries of widespread opinions, meta-analyses allow to weigh the individual
effects based on their precision giving more weight to the more precise studies. A recent quantitative meta-analysis
about CSCL scripts partially contradict the qualitatively drawn conclusion showing overall positive effects of
CSCL scripts on learning (Vogel, Wecker, Kollar, & Fischer, 2017). However, the widely proposed negative
influence of CSCL scripts on motivation was not analyzed and a great amount of new studies about CSCL scripts
have  been conducted   since  then. Thus,   the research question  of this  study is:  What is the overall effect of
collaborative learning with CSCL scripts compared to collaborative learning without CSCL scripts on domain
learning, collaboration skills, and motivation?

Method
A  comprehensive   literature search   was  conducted on  ERIC  and   ISI Web    of Science  using the search terms
"(scaffold* OR script*) AND (learn* OR know*) AND (collaborat* OR cooperat*) AND (computer* OR CSCL
OR techno*)" resulting in N = 624 articles. The criteria-oriented coding for inclusion (e.g., experimental variation
of the factor CSCL script) led to a final sample of 41 articles reporting 43 studies involving 4,414 participants.
The data for the calculation of effect sizes was extracted. Using the effect size Hedge's g, the standardized mean
difference between groups was calculated. All analyses were based on the random-effects model.

Results and conclusions
The overall effects show that in general collaborative learners who are scaffolded by CSCL scripts outperform
learners who are not scaffolded by CSCL scripts with respect to their domain learning (g = 0.29, p < .01, k = 45)
and their collaboration skills (g = 0.73, p < .01, k = 18). No significant effect on motivation was found (g = 0.07,
p = .57, k = 6). All tests for publication bias were not significant. In line with prior findings, the results show that
the positive effects of CSCL scripts on domain learning and collaboration skills stay robustly constant when
including the outcomes of more recent studies about learning with CSCL scripts. Our results do not support the
criticism that CSCL scripts negatively influence the learners' motivation and hence lead to either no learning or
learning only on the expense of learners' motivation. This indicates that learners might not feel less autonomous
when interacting with CSCL scripts. However, the reduction in autonomy might be compensated through a gain
in the feeling of competence. The small number of primary studies analyzing learners' motivation is a major
concern and, given the persistent criticism of overscripting, future research about CSCL scripts should by default
include the measurement of different dimensions of motivation.
         With respect to the question of the symposium our findings support the position that meta-analyses can
substantially contribute to the accumulation of scientific knowledge. Using meta-analysis as a method was not
only useful to synthesize existing findings, to assess the robustness of effects and to test hypotheses. It also helped
to substantiate a counter-argument     against the summarizing  position    about the  malfunction of  CSCL   scripts
recently published by Wise and Schwarz (2017). According to our meta-analytic integration of primary studies,
there is a positive effect of CSCL scripts on domain learning which is basically ignored by Wise and Schwarz.
Moreover, the meta-analytic integration found no evidence at all for a negative scripting effect on motivation
where Wise and Schwarz concluded that overscripting in this very sense (i.e., scripts reduce motivation) is one of
the main  issues  for CSCL    scripts. The  learning sciences  are a  field of  empirical research (Hoadley,  2018;
Sommerhoff et al., 2018). We are hence convinced that meta-analyses of quantitative or qualitative studies are
useful and needed to disqualify or support widespread opinions.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                    787                                                  © ISLS
Connecting the diversity of CSCL research through meta-synthesis
Cindy E. Hmelo-Silver and Heisawn Jeong

There has been little systematic review of CSCL in STEM that has integrated across qualitative and quantitative
research. Our motivation for this research was in particular to better understand the compound resources that
comprise CSCL (Roschelle, Bakia, Toyama, & Patton, 2011): collaboration, technology, and pedagogies used
(Hmelo-Silver & Jeong, 2016; Kirschner & Erkens, 2013). We wanted to address the questions of 1) How do
different combinations of CSCL technologies, pedagogies, and collaboration modes co-vary in CSCL and 2) For
these different combinations,    is CSCL    effective, broadly construed  and  what   factors support or impede   the
effectiveness of CSCL.  This task requires synthesizing diverse CSCL research outcomes while paying attention
to factors that support and impede different approaches to CSCL.
        Our review uses meta-synthesis as a way to address these questions. Meta-synthesis is a methodology
that uses both qualitative and quantitative studies as sources of data and allows for the integration of research
across qualitative and quantitative studies (Suri & Clark, 2009; Bair, 1999). Our initial rationale was that any
review of   CSCL  would     need to take  into account  the diversity of  methodological approaches     in the CSCL
community (Jeong, Hmelo-Silver, & Yu, 2014) and thus was well suited for this approach. Another key rationale
for choosing this method was that the CSCL community considers a broad range of outcomes from traditional
individual pre-post test measures to artifacts to engaged participation (McKeown, Hmelo-Silver, Jeong, Hartley,
Faulkner, & Emmanuel, 2017). Meta-synthesis is an interpretive approach concerned with understanding and
describing key points and themes across multiple kinds of studies and thus well suited for achieving our goal.
        To guide our systematic review of CSCL literature in STEM domains, we defined CSCL as two or more
people using technology to work together toward a shared learning goal, and used this definition while searching
and screening papers. We searched through two databases, ERIC and Web of Science, in addition to seven key
journals regarded by experts to be major outlets for publishing CSCL research (Jeong et al., 2014). Over 1,500
qualitative and quantitative   papers focusing   on various   education levels published between   2005-2014     were
screened to ensure each paper met the following criteria: (a) STEM education, (b) empirical research. Out of these
papers, 708 papers met our criteria and were then coded for a range of study characteristics; educational level,
collaboration type, pedagogy, and technology (e.g., Jeong et al., 2014).   Earlier synthesis in which we had coded
the study   characteristics of the  dataset in Jeong,  Hmelo-Silver   and Yu   (2014) confirmed  that CSCL     used a
diversity of qualitative and quantitative methods, and thus was ideally suited for this approach.
        We used Latent Class Analysis (LCA) to examine how these three characteristics of CSCL designs
covaried to help address research question 1 and to form a framework for sampling from the large number of
papers to address question 2 (Hagenaars & McCutcheon, 2002). The LCA identified six thematic clusters ranging
in size from 38- 246 papers of which the four largest were interpretable.       Cluster one (n=246), Face-to-Face
Collaborative Inquiry  with    Dynamic   Feedback   (F2FCI),   emphasizes  papers using  face-to-face   collaboration,
inquiry and exploration pedagogies, and dynamic or other tools. Cluster two (n=74), Synchronous Collaboration
(SC), emphasizes papers using synchronous collaboration and communication technologies. Cluster five (n=154),
Asynchronous    Teacher-Structured    Discussion    (ATD),  emphasizes   papers using  asynchronous     collaboration,
discussion or teacher-structured pedagogies, and asynchronous communication technologies. Finally, cluster six
(n=145), Online Generative Inquiry (OGI), emphasizes papers using asynchronous or face-to-face collaboration,
inquiry and exploration or teacher-structured pedagogies, and sharing and co-construction technology. Larger
proportions for a particular code tend to dominate the cluster membership and, therefore, can be used to label and
describe the cluster. There was still variability within clusters, which was used to identify an appropriate number
of papers to for stratified random sampling, with adjustments to match the demographic characteristics and study
designs of the overall cluster. Nonetheless, this synthesis has demonstrated that there are particular combinations
of CSCL that vary based on technologies, pedagogies, and modes of collaboration.
        For the meta-synthesis that focused on research question 2, we first synthesized findings in each cluster
based on the outcomes and overarching theme(s) indicating under what circumstances CSCL may or may not be
effective based on the papers sampled for each cluster. To make this process tractable we first annotated the
articles sampled for each cluster and then proceeded to create outlines that emphasized what was effective, what
was not effective, and any implications. Once we synthesized each cluster, we then looked for themes and patterns
across the clusters and compared outcomes across technology, collaboration, and pedagogy. In particular, we
looked for  indicators of   effectiveness   broadly construed  and  patterns that suggested   particular factors that
supported or impeded effective CSCL.
          Addressing   the  second  research   questions, our results show generally  positive  effects of CSCL   on
content, skills, and affective indicators. These indicators refer to either gains from pre to post intervention or
qualitative demonstrations of improvement on these indicators. The strongest evidence comes from the clusters

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                     788                                                  © ISLS
that use CSCL with inquiry and exploration. These clusters tend to present results that include processes and
outcomes more uniformly and provide more detail on their intervention. Although such outcomes are important,
designers and   researchers need  to focus  more   on the functions that   CSCL  technologies  provide in  learning
environments and how those are appropriated towards instructional goals. Across clusters, results demonstrate
that scaffolding and feedback in different combinations were important for positive learning outcomes (McKeown
et al., 2017). However, feedback that was poorly timed or excessive sometimes impeded learning. In addition,
certain technologies lend   themselves better to   particular communication   channels  and/or pedagogical  goals.
Finally, we found that different learning environments are used for different learners. For example, simulations
were often  used in  face-to-face  inquiry learning environments    with younger  learners whereas  asynchronous
threaded discussions were commonly used with more mature learners.
         Overall, our study helped us understand the workings of CSCL as a compound resource and how different
components may interact with each other. Our approach to research synthesis met the goals of synthesizing
research across qualitative and quantitative research methods, examining how technologies, pedagogies, and
modes of collaboration cluster together. Using cluster analysis helped us to sample systematically from a literature
that was too vast for an exhaustive narrative review. The qualitative and quantitative papers outcomes helped
inform each other. Experimental, quasi-experimental, and pre-post test designs provide useful details about what
was learned but may not represent the full range of what it means to learn, engage, collaborate productively or be
motivated.  Qualitative studies can  help  provide  these alternate lenses that look directly at participation and
collaborative activity. These   different research  designs   and analytic methods  can provide   opportunities   to
triangulate findings as they did in Cluster 1 and highlight factors that might explain the findings (e.g., the kinds
of feedback that are useful). This diversity in research also leads to some of the limitations of meta-synthesis. In
trying to be open to a range of outcomes, we found that different clusters often used different types of research
designs and indicators of effectiveness, making it hard to draw broader conclusions across clusters. Design-based
and other mixed methods research are helpful in bridging this gap as is more research that considers the different
stakeholders in CSCL. For example, there is little research on the role of teachers in CSCL though their role is
clearly important. In addition, future research needs to consider the multiple outcomes that are valued in CSCL
(e.g., knowledge, affective, collaboration skills). Although it is challenging to synthesize across such diverse set
of studies, but continued efforts toward meta-synthesis are needed to understand CSCL in its full complexity.

References
Åkerlind, G. S. (2012). Variation and commonality in phenomenographic research methods. Higher Education
         Research & Development, 31(1), 115-127.
Bair, C. R. (1999, November). Meta-synthesis. Paper presented at Annual meeting of the Association for the Study
         of Higher Education, San Antonio, TX.
Bruce, C. S. (1999). Phenomenography: Opening a new territory for library and information science research. The
         New Review of Information and Library Research, 5(1), 31-48.
Dillenbourg, P. (2002). Over-scripting CSCL: The risks of blending collaborative learning with instructional
         design. P. Kirschner (Ed.), Three worlds of CSCL: Can we support CSCL? (pp. 61-91). Heerlen: Open
         University of the Netherlands
Ding, Y., Chowdhury, G. G., & Foo, S. (2001). Bibliometric cartography of information retrieval research by
         using co-word analysis. Information processing & management, 37(6), 817-842.
Fischer, F., Kollar, I., Stegmann, K., & Wecker, C. (2013). Toward a script theory of guidance in computer-
         supported collaborative learning. Educational Psychologist, 48 (1), 56­66.
Hagenaars, J. A., & McCutcheon, A. L. (2002). Applied latent class analysis. New York: Cambridge University
         Press.
Hoadley, C. (2018). A short history of the learning sciences. In International Handbook of the Learning Sciences
         (pp. 11-23). Taylor and Francis. https://doi.org/10.4324/9781315617572
Jeong, H., & Hmelo-Silver, C. E. (2016). Seven affordances of CSCL Technology: How can technology support
         collaborative learning. Educational Psychologist, 51, 247-265.
Jeong,  H., Hmelo-Silver,   C. E., &  Yu   (2014). An  examination   of  CSCL   methodological   practices and    the
         influence  of  theoretical  frameworks     2005­2009. International    Journal  of   Computer-Supported
         Collaborative Learning, 9(3), 305-334.
Jeong, H., Hmelo-Silver, C. E., & Yu, Y. (2014). An examination of CSCL methodological practices and the
         influence  of  theoretical  frameworks    2005­2009.     International Journal  of   Computer-Supported
         Collaborative Learning, 9(3), 305­334.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                   789                                                  © ISLS
Johnston, N., & Salaz, A. M. (2017). Using phenomenography to bridge the gap between research and practice: a
        meta-analysis of three phenomenographic studies. Information Research, 22(4). Retrieved on November
        15, 2018 from: http://InformationR.net/ir/22-4/rails/rails1614.html.
Kärki, R. (1996). Searching for bridges between disciplines: an author co-citation analysis on the research into
        scholarly communication. Journal of Information Science, 22(5), 323-334.
Kienle, A., &  Wessner,   M. (2006). The   CSCL   community    in its first   decade: development,     continuity,
        connectivity. International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 1(1), 9­33.
King, A. (2007). Scripting collaborative learning processes: A cognitive perspective. In F. Fischer, I. Kollar, H.
        Mandl,  &   J. M. Haake  (Eds.),  Scripting computer-supported       collaborative learning  - cognitive,
        computational, and educational perspectives (pp. 13­37). New York, NY: Springer.
Kirschner, P. A., & Erkens, G. (2013). Toward a framework for CSCL research. Educational Psychologist, 48, 1-
        8.
Limbu, L., & Markauskaite, L. (2015). How do learners experience joint writing: University students' conceptions
        of online collaborative writing tasks and environments. Computers & Education, 82, 393-408.
Marton, F. (1986). Phenomenography: A research approach to investigating different understandings of reality.
        Journal of Thought, 21(3), 28-49.
McKeown, J. M., Hartley, K. A., Faulkner, R. T., Hmelo-Silver, C. E., Jeong, H., & Emmanuel N. (2017). A
        meta-synthesis of CSCL literature in STEM education. In B. K. Smith, M. Borge, E. Mercier, & K. Y.
        Lim. (Eds.) Proceedings CSCL 2017 Volume 1, (pp. 439-486). ISLS.       Philadelphia PA.
Miyake, N. (2007). Computer supported collaborative learning. In R. Andrews & C. Haythornwaite (Eds.), Sage
        Handbook of E-learning Research (pp. 248-266). London UK: Sage.
Roschelle, J., Bakia, M., Toyama, Y., & Patton, C. (2011). Eight issues for learning scientists about education
        and the economy. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 20, 3-49.
Rovio-Johansson, A., & Ingerman, Å. (2016). Continuity and development in the phenomenography and variation
        theory tradition. Scandinavian Journal of Educational Research, 60(3), 257-271.
Scardamalia, M., & Bereiter, C. (1994). Computer Support for Knowledge-Building Communities. The Journal
        of the Learning Sciences, 3(3), 265­283. www.jstor.org/stable/1466822
Sommerhoff, D., Szameitat, A., Vogel, F., Chernikova, O., Loderer, K., & Fischer, F. (2018). What Do We Teach
        When We Teach the Learning Sciences? A Document Analysis of 75 Graduate Programs. Journal of the
        Learning Sciences, 27(2), 319-351.
Sommerhoff, D., Szameitat, A., Vogel, F., Chernikova, O., Loderer, K., & Fischer, F. (2018). What Do We Teach
        When We Teach the Learning Sciences? A Document Analysis of 75 Graduate Programs. Journal of the
        Learning Sciences, 27(2), 319-351.
Suri, H., & Clarke, D. (2009). Advancements in research synthesis methods: From a methodologically inclusive
        perspective. Review of Educational Research, 79, 395-430.
Tang, K.-Y., Tsai, C.-C., & Lin, T.-C. (2014). Contemporary intellectual structure of CSCL research (2006­2013):
        a co-citation network analysis with an education focus. International Journal of Computer-Supported
        Collaborative Learning, 9(3), 335­363.
Vogel, F., Wecker, C., Kollar, I., & Fischer, F. (2017). Socio-cognitive scaffolding with collaboration scripts: a
        meta-analysis. Educational Psychology Review 29(3), 477-511. doi: 10.1007/s10648-016-9361-7
Wise, A. F. & Schwarz, B. B. (2017). Visions of CSCL: eight provocations for the future of the field. International
        Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 12, 423-467.
Wise, A.  F., & Schwarz,  B. B. (2017).   Visions of CSCL:    eight provocations   for the   future of the field.
        International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 12, 423­467. 10.1007/s11412-
        017-9267-5

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                 790                                                  © ISLS
