Designing for Productive Problem Posing in Informal STEM Spaces
                    Katherine Chapman, Vanderbilt University, k.chapman@vanderbilt.edu
                          Lara Jasien, Vanderbilt University, lara.jasien@vanderbilt.edu
               Paul Reimer, AIMS Center for Math and Science Education, preimer@aimsedu.org
                  Lauren Vogelstein, Vanderbilt University, lauren.vogelstein@vanderbilt.edu

         Abstract: This symposium offers a look across several sites of informal STEM learning for
         moments of productive problem-posing. Despite the importance of problem-posing in both
         academic and applied STEM fields, students are rarely offered robust opportunities to define
         their own paths through these domains. When they are, it is often in the context of informal
         spaces--museums or after-school clubs--and is frequently less well-defined. This symposium
         brings together three case studies--one of younger students in guided play and two of slightly
         older youth in object-directed play. By putting these in-depth analyses in conversation with
         one another, we hope to highlight important commonalities in order to distill possible design
         recommendations     for creating  more    opportunities for productive,  and  creative, disciplinary
         engagement.

Overview of the symposium
The focus of this symposium is on the affordances of large-scale, collaborative, object-driven spaces for STEM-
relevant problem-posing. In this symposium we attempt to bring together research on embodied cognition and
the affordances of large-scale designs for disrupting traditional, classroom-based STEM tasks with work on
informal learning environments that highlights the potential of student-defined, interest-driven engagement. We
take as a starting point the idea that different environments make unique contributions to learning, and are best
designed  with an  eye  toward   how   the different pieces of   a learning  ecology  might  complement    each  other
(Knutson & Crowley, 2001; Ito et al., 2013). Thus, informal learning environments are not meant to replace but
instead to enhance and supplement more formal designs. In particular, we address the observation that formal,
standards-driven, compulsory     classrooms  are   well-tuned for  breadth   of conceptual  coverage, but  often  miss
opportunities  to develop   skill-sets and   dispositions  better   approached    through  more   ill-structured  tasks
(Lampert, 1990). At the same time, lack of detail about what it takes to design for these broader goals in ill-
structured tasks often leads museums and other informal environments back to fun and engaging fact-delivery
systems (Griffin, 1994; Olson, 1999).
         In particular, skills-based  K-12  education  tends   to  focus on  familiarizing  students  with prescribed
standards and  codified   strategies  such  as standard   algorithms  (Stigler   &  Hiebert,  1999).  Even   museums
sometimes revert to hands-on ways of delivering established information, such as "Can you guess?" flip charts
and other kinds of simplistic interactive exhibits, often because the work of designing for "minds-on" as well as
"hands-on"  interaction  is so complex     (Allen, 2004). Advanced    participation   in math and  science,  however,
involves not just executing on known problems, but actually posing novel, discipline-relevant problems and
inventing strategies for solving them (Lakatos, 1976; Sinclair, 2004). And while progress is being made on these
fronts in reform efforts like Project-Based Learning (e.g., Boaler, 1997; Boaler & Selling, 2017) and Teaching
Mathematics   for Social  Justice (Gutstein,   2003), naturalistic   studies in  informal  environments can   offer  a
different vantage points for would-be designers.

Contribution of each paper to the broader discussion
Each of the case studies presented in this symposium offers a different perspective on, and context for, looking
at problem-posing in interest-driven environments. From one angle, each paper represents a different case of
students who invent and attempt to solve a novel problem that has potential relevance to STEM learning. Each
environment is of course embedded in a set of cultural expectations, but in most cases participants are either
explicitly encouraged to develop their own problems, or at least free from any negative consequences for doing
something other than what the designer intended. From another angle, each of these circumstances has a strong
set of both material and participatory constraints and affordances--one under the watchful eye of parents (paper
one), one dictated by peer-defined social structures (paper two), and one by adult guidance (paper three)--that
mediate emergent goals and solution paths.
         We have two goals in bringing these papers into conversation with this symposium: 1) to present an
existence proof   that self-directed problem   posing is  not beyond   the  grasp  of even  young  children,  nor is it
confined to a particular kind of setting, and 2) to look across sites with significant variation in an attempt to

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                     791                                                    © ISLS
distill broader design principles than might be warranted by a single small-scale study. To this end, we include
several (possibly idealized) cases where youth (papers one and two) are essentially left alone with an object or
objects and follow emergent goals that are more or less well defined, as well as one with younger children
(paper three) in which facilitation was key. Finally, our goal in bringing these papers together is to highlight
commonalities and differences across these cases in an effort to create humble theory about different kinds of
material and social design choices for productive problem posing.

Discussant
To help facilitate this comparison, we also bring in Lauren Vogelstein, whose work on physical research in a
dance  company,    and   the    affordances  of large-scale    object-mediated   dance    for  developing   mathematical
intuitions and observations (Vogelstein, Brady, & Hall, 2017 & 2019), will offer another unique perspective on
this  work. In particular,   her work  on    ensemble    mathematical   learning has   shown  how    the embodiments     of
people-plus-prop systems, in which the manipulation of large-scale geometric figures necessitates performances
by an ensemble, create a distributed problem posing environment. More specifically, the ensemble necessity of
these set-ups requires full participation to animate ideas, which provides a rich physical substrate (Goodwin,
2017) for participants to manipulate. For example, a quartet of STEM educators choreographing a performance
with a 7' x 7' silver Mylar sheet proposed ideas for coordinated ensemble performances with slight changes to
what had previously been enacted by the ensemble in order to create new movements that made aesthetically
pleasing  manipulations    of   the square   prop.  In   this example,   the ensemble     nature  of  the activity  forced
participants to make their ideas visible through partial enactments as they planned their choreography. Through
this process the choreography became increasingly more complex, eventually surpassing their understandings as
they performed a double reflection over both of the diagonal lines of symmetry of the square prop and were
unable to replicate the choreography. These STEM educators came across an interesting problem through a
process of aesthetically driven physical brainstorming, in which ideas were enacted as an ensemble, and the
proposals to manipulate these actions became new forms of choreography. In her ethnographic work with a
professional dance company, Vogelstein has also begun to articulate a similar process the dancers call "physical
research" in which problems are iteratively posed by a choreographer and refined as dancers propose responses
collectively with their bodies. Thus, she brings a perspective on ensemble learning (Ma & Hall, 2018; Ma 2017)
to complement the other in- and out-of-school perspectives represented in the symposium.

Paper one: Manifesting mathematics: How playful engagement facilitates
emergent problem finding
Lara Jasien

Overview and background
While school mathematics in the U.S. often can be adequately described as learning definitions and practicing
procedures   (Stigler &  Hiebert,    1999),   authentic   engagement    in STEM     requires  creative   problem   finding
(Einstein & Infeld, 1938; Lakatos, 1976). For mathematicians, this kind of problem finding can be the product
of playful exploration (Sinclair, 2004), where mathematicians tacitly ask themselves what is possible and what
is interesting within a particular mathematical system. Yet, for many students, school mathematics feels like all
work and no play (e.g., Boaler & Greeno, 2000; Jacobs, Lanza, Osgood, Eccles, & Wigfield, 2002), and indeed
it is often organized    for such   work-like   experiences   (Jacobs,   Hiebert, Givvin,   Hollingsworth,    Garnier,   &
Wearne,   2006; Litke,   2015).  Yet, the    distinction between   work  and play   is pivotal for   problem  finding and
solving: while work involves an individual structuring their activity to fit the environment (as in school), play
involves the individual structuring the environment to suit their activity (Elkind, 2008). Thus, play environments
provide an ideal context to examine children's informal mathematical problem finding, as play allows children
to exercise  their agency    in ways  that   shape what   is  possible. In this  study, I examine    children's play  at a
mathematical   playground    that   supports  children   to create patterns, designs,   and   representations with  novel
materials at four  different    exhibits, in search of   moments    where   they explore  what    is possible and   pursue
activities in ways that they find interesting.

Theoretical framework
Mathematical    activity in   play  looks    much  different   than mathematical     activity  in  school, as   the tools,
representations, and indeed, the problems look very different. Thus, accounting for mathematical activity in an
empirical study of play requires methods typically not employed in accounts of school learning. This study is
premised  on   the assumption    that studies  of  mathematical    learning  should  account   for whatever   participants

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                        792                                                    © ISLS
consider  relevant  as   they engage  in   their own   meaning-making      processes     (Jordan  &  Henderson,   1995).
Methodologically and theoretically, this means that attention must be paid to human language, actions, and the
representations that they produce, as these are all embodiments of mathematical activity (Hall & Nemirovsky,
2012). Thus, in this study, I examine how (and what kinds of) mathematics emerge through what DeFreitas and
Sinclair  (2014)  call material  entanglements--the      interlacing of   gestures, talk,   emotion, and   tools that co-
constitute mathematical concepts. The products of these material entanglements, and thus of all mathematical
activity, become a "site of agency" (p. 85), as they becomes tools to support future thinking.
          In the kind of play under scrutiny in this study, this means that the patterns, designs, or representations
that players produce carry with them traces of mathematical concepts that were co-constituted through human
interaction with materials. Thus, I analyze how two 12 year old girls engaged with four different mathematical
objects throughout their 36 minute stay at a mathematical playground. By attending to what the girls produced,
their trajectory of attempting to use the materials for their own purposes, and their informal evaluations of their
activity, I am able to make claims about the richness of their engagement in relation to the affordances of the
mathematical playground, including but not limited to the design of the materials and the open participation
structure where two pre-teens can explore together, set their own goals, and compare and evaluate their own
activity.

Case study and preliminary findings
Notably, these two participants are part of a larger data corpus of 345 children between the ages of 4 and 16,
with the majority of participants between 7 and 12 years old (n = 279). Analysis of these children has shown
that the two focal participants' activity is unique in how long they engaged at each exhibit (longer than typical),
but not unique in the nature of the designs they produced in their play. Because their parallel play generated rich
data, and because their engagement with the materials looks quite different from each other and thus represents
a spectrum of engagement at the mathematical playground, they have been selected for a close analysis that
gives rich understanding of the phenomenon (i.e., a revelatory case, Yin, 2003). The final paper will contain
data to   situate the  focal  participants within    the larger corpus    in relation    to  the patterns,  designs,  and
representations they produce at each exhibit.
          By attending to the multimodal engagement of two focal participants, I find that problem finding can
be a generative process that leads to the emergence of mathematical meanings in play, even for children as old
as 12 years of age. This analysis sheds light on the problems that children and adolescents can and do find for
themselves  when    given  opportunities   rich  and  open  enough    to  support   meaningful   engagement,     and  thus
broadens what we can imagine as possible in mathematics education.

Paper two: "Our boat is magic": Emergent social goals break open the black
box
Katherine Chapman

Overview and background
The broader study from which this analysis derives focuses on a week-long sailing camp where students ages
eight to eleven participated across two parallel learning sites: a living museum dedicated to maritime heritage, in
which the students learned to rig and sail small boats in pairs, and an informal science institution, in which
students investigated some of the principles of weather and physics that might help them in their sailing. In the
episode presented here, students played with model boats on a small, manufactured pond. These boats function
precisely  the way   the larger sailboats  that  the youth were  learning   to sail do,   except  that they do   not have
rudders; the only way to steer the boat is by adjusting the sails. Thus, designers conjectured that this would be a
fun, slightly simplified context for exploring "points of sail"--the ideal position for a sail in coordination with
orientation toward the wind.
          Initial curricular design included a discussion of the proper points of sail before introducing the model
boats, but one instructor decided that it might be more meaningful for the students to derive the points of sail
themselves from observing the model boats. In essence, this on-the-fly adjustment was aimed at addressing a
common observation from classroom studies that the "use of direct instruction in the face of a novel toy or
problem   can  limit   exploration and learning"     (Weisberg  et   al., 2013).    This  is in  contrast  with  informal
environments such as informal science institutions or makerspaces where "we see amazing focus, creativity,
persistence, and pride developing in people of all ages as they draw on their understanding and imagination to
develop and pursue an idea and to make something concrete (even if ephemeral) that represents their ideas and
understanding" (Petrich et al., 2013, 51-52).

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                      793                                                     © ISLS
Theoretical framework
Where   cognitive  learning   theories such   as Constructivism   view    learning as "`building    knowledge    structures
irrespective of the circumstances of the learning" (Papert & Harel, 1991), situative theorists consider learning to
be inextricably tied to the circumstances of learning, which include the learner's prior experiences as well as the
tools and other resources of the learning environment (Werscht, 1998). From this perspective, the tools and
materials, but also the goals and participation structures, fundamentally change the nature of what is learned. I
take a situative perspective in this analysis, with particular attention to another important affordance of so-called
"authentic" learning environments--not just the what, but also the why:

           "For instance, whereas a hands-on circuit activity might be employed in a classroom to teach
           about electricity, the circuitry knowledge we observed in the makerspaces was used to make a
           night-light, customize a bike, fix a game controller, and photograph the Earth from space"
           (Sheridan et al., 2014, 528).

In order to provide an account of the depth of the phenomenon, I use principles of Interaction Analysis (Jordan
& Henderson, 1995) to develop small-scale theory largely from video data.

Data collection and analysis
Camp    involved   twenty   youth  who    moved  between    whole-group    engagement    and  frequent   partner work.   In
particular, group discussion was encouraged during the "science" portion of the curriculum, and the sailboats
they   were  learning  to operate  virtually  required  two  sailors.  The  model    boat episode   was  introduced   as a
collaborative group activity, but the students quickly paired themselves off. The activity was also introduced by
the instructors as an opportunity to try to "figure out" how the sail position influences the direction that the boat
sails  in, and  challenged  students   to try to sail their boats all  the way  across   the  pond.  Almost  none  of  the
students appeared to engage in either of these activities at first, however.
           Data collection was designed as pilot data for a broader study. As such, all sampling was based on
convenience.    From   within  the four   focal  students represented   in the corpus,    the present case   was  selected
because the student wearing the camera consistently narrated his own thinking to his partner, almost as he might
have during a think-aloud interview protocol. Review of other focal cases suggests that this student was not
anomalous in general engagement, only more forthcoming in his narration. Still, future research will aim to
confirm    generalizability by comparing      more cases.   The  focal student in  this case--Wally    (a pseudonym)--
chose   to  work   with   one other  student    during the  model    boat  activity. Analysis   is  confined  to  Wally's
contributions, however, since I had not obtained consent for analyzing the other student's participation.

Case study
Wally initially appeared to ignore instructors' suggestions to try to sail the model boat directly across the pond,
or  to make    any systematic  investigation    into  how the   boat moves.   Over   the  course of  fifteen minutes,  he
watched the boat take off from the side of the pond, ran around to retrieve it, and watched it sail off again,
without making any substantial adjustments to sail position. They did adjust the direction the boat was pointed
in when it was released--it appeared that the students thought this might influence the movement of the boat--
but in general they were relatively content to try the same thing again and again. As the activity progressed,
Wally began commenting on this confusion, albeit in a friendly way, saying things like "our boat is magic--it
just turns to the side all the time". This sense that the reasons for the behavior of the boat are an impenetrable
"black  box"--that    the boat  itself is "magic"--would     be   a  troublesome   place  to  leave  the lesson  from  the
perspective of the stated learning goals. At roughly fifteen minutes into their exploration, however, there was
some commotion among the students. It seemed one of the students had declared himself a pirate and started
trying to attack other boats. At this point, Wally began to more concertedly focus on adjusting the sail position
and make observations about the resulting movement of the boat. It seemed that the introduction of piracy--and
the  resulting  goals  to either  counter-attack   or  retreat--provided   an  emergent   urgency,    after which  Wally
attempted a more systematic exploration of the affordances of the model boats.

Findings and next steps
Comparison of this case with the other three focal cases revealed a similar pattern--students began the activity
by simply "messing around" (Ito et al, 2009) with the model boats, ignoring the adults' framing of the activity
for the    most part. It was  only after  the emergent    social goal  of  dealing with   the pirate became   salient that
students made a more concerted effort to systematically test and catalog small changes in their efforts to sail the
model boats.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                       794                                                     © ISLS
        This finding is especially important for two reasons. First, object play has been studied extensively in
young  children, though  it  is frequently assumed    to drop off, and   its educational utility is  less clear for late
elementary and middle school students. This episode suggests that the typical progression--from "what can this
object do?" to "what can I do with it?" (Hutt, 1966)--holds for older youth as well, at least when emergent
goals are present. Furthermore, instructors present during this model boat activity quickly called the episode to a
close once the piracy appeared, since it seemed to them to be getting out of hand (and they did not want the
model boats being damaged by intentional crashes). It was only upon revisiting the data that it became clear that
this emergent    social structure    was  actually facilitating deeper   engagement     with    precisely the   kind of
observations the activity was meant to target in the first place.

Paper three: It's a pizza!: Invented problems and meanings in early childhood
mathematical play
Paul N. Reimer

Overview and background
Enactive and embodied perspectives shed new light on the importance of early childhood play. Vygotsky (1978)
suggested play was derived from imaginative situations wherein rules emerge as children negotiate their actions
based  on situational   constraints. Recent views   of   cognition imply  a   similar  reliance on  objects, materials,
movements, and interactions to assist learners in forming meaningful interpretations of their activity (Núñez,
Edwards,  & Matos,    1999;   Varela,  Thompson,    &  Rosch,   1991). These    perspectives    are uniquely  suited to
provide   explanations   for    meaning-making     in  early  childhood      play,  as  they    have  highlighted    the
interconnectedness  of  these   resources and, drawing    on  biological roots, have   suggested    that  human  bodily
experiences form the basis of conceptual understanding.
        Early childhood educators face challenges when attempting to enact play-based pedagogies. Head Start
programs, in particular, encounter a tension when considering opportunities for children's self-directed play in
light of accountability for children's academic readiness (Walter & Lippard, 2017). To address this challenge,
we are engaged in a multiyear partnership with two Head Start preschool centers to explore opportunities for
informal mathematics learning in various seeded interest areas that encourage mathematical play (Wager, 2013).
These interest areas provide a rich context to study 1) how young children interact with simple, yet carefully-
designed objects, 2) the meanings children develop as they interact with materials and peers in play, and 3) the
various roles adults enact as they seek to participate in play spaces with children. In particular, we are interested
in how children decide what to do with objects and how they use novel ways to generate norms in their play.
This work is held together by a persistent tension between what exists and what is possible: "The combination
of a concrete embodied situation with alienated virtual meaning is the freedom-engendering paradox of play"
(Stewart, Gapenne, & Di Paolo, 2010, p. 77).

Data collection and analysis
For this study, we analyzed preschool children's (n=12) play as they engaged in sessions of self-directed play in
several interest areas within preschool classrooms at two Head Start centers. In particular, we were interested in
how children attended to existing constructions or comments made by adults or peers, how children used these
to develop norms of play, how they embraced ambiguity by giving new meanings to existing creations, and how
their actions arose from the designed objects or ideas they developed while interacting with the objects.

Case study
In one play session, two adults invited children to play. One adult made a star with three red hexagons and
silently moved it into the playspace. The adults played with the blocks, typically creating small designs out of
adjacently placed blocks of different colors and shapes. Children began to play with the blocks by collecting
blocks of the same color. One child decided blocks needed to touch on congruent sides and began to place
blocks side by side. Another picked up blocks and enacted movements with them appropriate for the meaning
he had attached to the objects. For, example, he said "I'm making a PacMan" as he held up a block and moved it
in a chomping manner. After a few moments, he began to negotiate a balancing activity by stacking blocks on
top of each other.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                     795                                                    © ISLS
Figure 1. From left: Dalia joining play and taking the star, but in moving it the star comes apart; Dalia orienting
blocks within a boundary; Dalia coordinating actions with adult; Dalia adding yellow whiskers to make a "kitty-
                                                    cat".

        After two minutes of play, Dalia and another child joined the playspace (Figure 1). Dalia noticed the
star the adult had made. Dalia took the star, but in moving it the star came apart. Through several attempts she
put it back together. Dalia then created another copy of the star, rotating pieces to determine how to form the
star. She then used a similar approach with the yellow blocks, rotating the blocks to tile. The adult asked her,
"What are you making?" Dalia answered, "A pizza." Dalia then completed a tiling with blue blocks and put two
yellow triangles on top of the completed blue block figure. "It's gonna be a kitty-cat," she said.

Findings and next steps
Analysis of this play interaction suggests that Dalia's play was led by both meaning and actions derived from
the objects (e.g., Do these fit together?) and imagined meanings (e.g., "It's a pizza."). Our results suggest that an
adult may enact roles in children's play that support these developing meanings 1) as a co-enactor in play, 2) as
a reflective partner who provides feedback-oriented prompts (e.g., Does that fit?), 3) as a co-participant in action
through coordinated movement (e.g., A "many hands" approach), or 4) as a re-opener of play (e.g., What might
happen if?). We concluded that opportunities for mathematical thinking existed in carefully-designed interest
areas that allowed children to enact playful interpretations of activity based on bodily interactions with objects
and imagined meanings.

References
Allen, S. (2004). Designs for learning: Studying science museum exhibits that do more than entertain. Science
        Education, 88 (Suppl 1), S17-S33
Boaler, J. (1997). Experiencing school mathematics; Teaching styles, sex, and settings. Buckingham, UK: Open
        University Press.
Boaler, J., & Selling, S. K. (2017). Psychological Imprisonment or Intellectual Freedom? A Longitudinal Study
        of   Contrasting School  Mathematics   Approaches    and Their  Impact  on  Adults' Lives.     Journal  for
        Research in Mathematics Education, 48(1), 78-105. doi:10.5951/jresematheduc.48.1.0078
De Freitas, E., & Sinclair, N. (2014). Mathematics and the body: Material entanglements in the classroom. New
        York, NY: Cambridge University Press.
Elkind, D. (2008). The Power of Play: Learning What Comes Naturally. American Journal of Play, 1(1), 1-6.
Goodwin, C. (2017). Co-operative action. Cambridge University Press.
Griffin, J. (1994). Learning to learn in informal settings. Research in Science Education, 24, 121 ­ 128.
Gutstein, E. (2003). Teaching and learning mathematics for social justice in an urban, Latino school. Journal for
        Research in Mathematics Education, 34(1), 37-73. doi:10.2307/30034699
Hall, R.,  & Nemirovsky,    R. (2012). Introduction to  the  special issue: Modalities of body      engagement   in
        mathematical activity and learning. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 21(2), pp. 207-215.
Hutt, C. (1966). Exploration and play in children. In Symposia of the Zoological Society of London (Vol. 18, No.
        1, pp. 61-81).
Ito, M., Baumer, S., Bittanti, M., Cody, R., Stephenson, B. H., Horst, H. A., ... & Perkel, D. (2009). Hanging
        out, messing around, and geeking out: Kids living and learning with new media. MIT press.
Ito, M., Gutiérrez, K., Livingstone, S., Penuel, B., Rhodes, J., Salen, K., Schor, J., Sefton-Green, J. & Watkins,
        S. C. (2013). Connected learning: An agenda for research and design. Irvine, CA: Digital Media and
        Learning Research Hub.
Jacobs, J. E., Lanza,  S., Osgood,  D. W., Eccles,  J. S., & Wigfield,  A.  (2002). Changes  in     children's self
        competence    and  values: Gender  and domain    differences across  grades one through      twelve. Child
        development, 73(2), 509-527.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                  796                                                   © ISLS
Jacobs, J. K., Hiebert, J., Givvin, K. B., Hollingsworth, H., Garnier, H., & Wearne, D. (2006). Does eighth-
         grade mathematics teaching in the United States align with the NCTM Standards? Results from the
         TIMSS 1995 and 1999 video studies. Journal for Research in Mathematics Education, 37(1), 5­32.
         doi:10.2307/30035050
Jordan,  B., &   Henderson,    A. (1995)  Interaction analysis:  Foundations and  practice.  Journal of the  Learning
         Sciences, 4(1), 39-103.
Kirsh, D. (2010). Thinking with the body.
Knutson,    K., Crowley,   K., Russell, J.L.,  &  Steiner, M.A.  (2001). Approaching    art education  as an   ecology:
         Exploring the role of museums. Studies in Art Education: A Journal of Issues and Research, 52(11),
         310-322.
Lakatos, I. (1976). Proofs and refutations: The logic of mathematical discovery. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
         University Press.
Lampert, M. (1990). When the problem is not the question and the solution is not the answer: Mathematical
         knowing and teaching. American Educational Research Journal, 27(1), 29-63.
Litke, E. G. (2015). The state of the gate: A description of instructional practice in algebra in five urban districts
         (Doctoral dissertation). Retrieved from http://nrs.harvard.edu/urn-3:HUL.InstRepos:16461050
Ma, J. Y. (2017). Multi-Party, Whole-Body Interactions in Mathematical Activity. Cognition and Instruction,
         35(2), 141-164.
Ma, J. & Hall, R. (2018). Learning a part together: Ensemble learning and infrastructure in a competitive high
         school marching band. Instructional Science.
Núñez, R. E., Edwards, L. D., & Matos, J. F. (1999). Embodied cognition as grounding for situatedness and
         context in mathematics education. Educational Studies in Mathematics, 39, 45­65.
Olson, J. K. (1999). A qualitative analysis of the field trip experience: A formal trip in an informal setting. In
         National Association for Research in Science Teaching Annual Meeting, Boston.
Papert, S., & Harel, I. (Eds.). (1990). Constructionism. Interactive Learning Environments (Vol. 1, pp. 518­32).
         Westport, CT: Ablex Publishing.
Petrich, M., Wilkinson, K., & Bevan, B. (2013). It looks like fun, but are they learning? In M. Honey & D. E.
         Kanter    (Eds.), Design,  make,  play:  Growing    the next generation of  STEM    innovators   (pp. 50­70).
         Routledge.
Sheridan, K., Halverson, E. R., Litts, B., Brahms, L., Jacobs-Priebe, L., & Owens, T. (2014). Learning in the
         Making: A Comparative Case Study of Three Makerspaces. Harvard Educational Review, 84(4), 505­
         531.
Sinclair, N. (2004). The roles of the aesthetic in mathematical inquiry. Mathematical Thinking and Learning,
         6(3), pp. 261-284.
Stewart, J., Gapenne, O., & Di Paolo, E. A. (Eds.). (2010). Enaction: Toward a new paradigm for cognitive
         science. The MIT Press. https://doi.org/10.7551/mitpress/9780262014601.001.0001
Stigler, J. W.,    & Hiebert,  J. (1999). The   teaching gap:  Best ideas from   the world's  teachers for improving
         education in the classroom. Simon and Schuster.
Varela, F. J., Thompson, E., & Rosch, E. (1991). The embodied mind: Cognitive science and human experience.
         Cambridge: MIT Press. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1468-0149.1965.tb01386.x
Vogelstein, L., Brady, C., & Hall, R. (2017, June). Mathematical Reflections: The Design Potential of Ensemble
         Performance. In Proceedings of the 2017 Conference on Interaction Design and Children (pp. 583-
         588).
Vygotsky,       L.   S.    (1978).   Mind      in   society.   Cambridge,    MA:      Harvard    University     Press.
         https://doi.org/10.2307/3726822
Wager,    A.    A.   (2013).  Practices   that  support  mathematics   learning  in   a  play-based    classroom.  In
         Reconceptualizing        Early   Mathematics       Learning   (pp.   163­181).      Springer     Netherlands.
         https://doi.org/10.1007/978-94-007-6440-8_9
Walter, M. C., & Lippard, C. N. (2017). Head Start teachers across a decade: Beliefs, characteristics, and time
         spent       on      academics.     Early     Childhood       Education      Journal,    45(5),      693­702.
         https://doi.org/10.1007/s10643-016-0804-z
Weisberg, D. S., Hirsh-Pasek, K., & Golinkoff, R. M. (2013). Guided Play: Where Curricular Goals Meet a
         Playful Pedagogy. Mind, Brain, and Education, 7(2), 104­112.
Wertsch, J. V. (1998). Mind As Action. New York: Oxford University Press.
Yin, R. K.(2003).Case Study Research: Design and Methods. London: Sage.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                      797                                                  © ISLS
 Personal Embodiment, Social Enactment: Collaborative Learning
                                     With Body Technology
                  Deborah A. Fields (chair), Utah State University, deborah.fields@usu.edu
                          Victor R. Lee, Utah State University, victor.lee@usu.edu
                         Breanne K. Litts, Utah State University, breanne.litts@usu.edu
                     Chase K. Mortensen, Utah State University, chase.mortensen@usu.edu
            Cynthia Carter Ching (co-chair), University of California, Davis, ccching@ucdavis.edu
                         Joshua A. Danish, Indiana University, jdanish@indiana.edu
                          Megan Humburg, Indiana University, mahumbur@iu.edu
                               Bria Davis, Indiana University, davis217@iu.edu
                                 Xintian Tu, Indiana University, tuxi@iu.edu
                         Debora Lui, University of Pennsylvania, deblui@upenn.edu
                       Mia Shaw, University of Pennsylvania, mshaw12@gse.upenn.edu
                  Gayithri Jayathirtha, University of Pennsylvania, gayithri@gse.upenn.edu
                         Yasmin Kafai, University of Pennsylvania, kafai@upenn.edu
              Lindsay Lindberg, University of California, Los Angeles, lindsay.lindberg@ucla.edu
              Robb Lindgren, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, robblind@illinois.edu
                James Planey, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, planey@illinois.edu
              Jason Morphew, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, jmorphe2@illinois.edu
                       Katie Headrick Taylor, University of Washington, kht126@uw.edu
                           Adam Bell, University of Washington, abell42@uw.edu
                         Erin Riesland, University of Washington, erinsage@uw.edu
                          Maria Hays, University of Washington, mehays@uw.edu
                          Deborah Silvis, University of Washington, dsilvis@uw.edu
                  Ilana Dubovi, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Ilana.dubovi@usu.edu
                 Rogers Hall (Discussant), Vanderbilt University, rogers.hall@vanderbilt.edu
                       Noel Enyedy, Vanderbilt University, noel.d.enyedy@vanderbilt.edu

         Abstract: New technological developments in wearables, motion sensors, health trackers, and
         a host of other devices hold the tentative promise of making embodiment visible, sharable,
         archivable, aggregable, and analyzable   not only   for individuals but also  for groups. In this
         symposium    we bring   together various   projects involving "body    technology"   to promote
         embodied learning in collaborative contexts, where collaboration is a core part of the embodied
         learning. This session explores the theories, designs, epistemologies, research methods, and
         outcomes of different, but related, models by addressing issues such as the affordances of body
         technologies  designed  for individual   versus collaborative  use,  the  relationship  between
         individual insight from embodied experience versus social meaning from shared experience,
         and the role of embodiment in youths' design of body technologies.

Introduction
The notion of "hands-on learning" has been around for more than a century as a pedagogical strategy, employed
from early childhood   through   higher education   and  beyond   (Chickering  &  Gamson,    1987;  Dewey,   1938;
Montessori, 1917). But as they take place in educational environments, these types of activities have historically
been practiced in service of the cognitive goals of thinking, understanding, and problem-solving. It is only fairly
recently that learning researchers have   begun  to view the  body  itself as a  site of learning, examining  how
movement and gesture can not only contribute to cognition, but actually constitute thinking and problem solving
in their own right (Alibali & Nathan, 2012; Hall & Nemirovsky, 2012; Stevens, 2012; Wilson, 2002). Looking
more deeply at the nature of knowledge itself, we find that many kinds of knowledge and basic orienting concepts
are grounded in our individual physical and embodied realities. Mathematical ideas of grouping, boundaries,
figure rotation, and other foundations are based in our sense of being and acting in the physical world (Lakoff &
Nuñez, 2001). Many of our linguistic metaphors for dealing with complex and intangible phenomena are spatial
(e.g., human emotions are "up" or "down") or physical (e.g., a political alliance is "fragile" or "strong"), precisely
because less explanation is required when these metaphors are in use; we seem to "just know" (Lakoff & Johnson,
2008). Yet while our experience of embodiment is inherently personal, it directly informs how we interact and
collaborate socially in communities of learning.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                  798                                                   © ISLS
