         This  symposium     contributes to our understanding   of    the nexus  of    personal embodiments    and
collaborative engagement through designs of and with body technologies. While embodied ways of learning and
understanding are powerful, they can also be somewhat ephemeral--critical in the moment of insight, but fleeting.
Further,  embodiment   is highly personal  and subjective;  communicating     experienced  physical   phenomena is
challenging enough in medical settings when the topic is immediate (Heritage & Robinson, 2006), let alone
metaphorical and situated in a domain like math or science. Now, however, new technological developments in
wearables, motion sensors, health trackers, and a host of other devices hold the tentative promise of making
embodiment visible, sharable, archivable, aggregable, and analyzable for both individuals and groups (Lee, 2015).
In this symposium we bring together various projects involving "body technology" to promote embodied learning
in a collaborative context. Body technologies in our work include GPS, movement-trace games and simulations,
health monitor devices, and wearable/programmable e-textiles. Some of our projects are based on individual
learners with personalized, single-user technologies but who experience their use as a collaborative experience
with peers. Others are individual learners creating collaborative or linked products together. Still others are pairs
or groups of learners engaged in a collaborative experience with a body-sensing technology for multiple users at
once. This session explores the designs, epistemologies, research methods, and outcomes of all these different,
but related, models by addressing the following questions:    1) What are the affordances of body technologies
designed for individual versus collaborative use, and what challenges exist for researchers in trying to design for
personal and social learning when using these tools? 2) What is the relationship between individual insight from
embodied experience versus social meaning from shared experience or enactment? What are the roles of body
technologies  in these phenomena?     3)  What  kinds of    learning in this  research are  more individual,  more
collaborative, both, or neither? How do we know? How do we study learning in these ways? What does learning
mean in these contexts? 4) What are implications for the design of embodied learning, when we consider how
learners can collaborate and construct both personal and social meanings?

Objectives
Together, these contributions aim to provide a single venue for advancing understanding of embodiment with
body technologies in collaborative contexts. The papers included in this session consider ways that embodiment
facilitates collaboration as well as ways   to design intentionally   for collaboration  with   tools that promote
embodiment. The papers consider a number of types of body technologies productively utilized for collaborative
learning, such as personal medical technology used to manage everyday family practices (Lee et al.); mobile
technologies that facilitate nontraditional forms of collaboration (Taylor et al.); and the tool designs that create
opportunities for social dependencies and synergistic gestures (Lindgren et al.). Two papers explicitly consider
the role of embodiment in students' designs of technologies, including collaborative, motion-sensitive electronic
textile designs (Lui et al) and game designs that rely on playtesting (Litts et al.). One paper compares two different
technological/representational systems to understand the "social" affordances of different collaborative embodied
learning environments (Danish et al.). This symposium will provide opportunities to examine similarities and
differences in approaches to body technologies that facilitate collaboration.

Session format
To promote active and productive discussion and future collaborations, the symposium will be conducted as an
interactive demonstration. The chair will begin by introducing the theme of the session, sharing considerations of
theory and design in embodiment and collaboration. Brief (1-minute) teaser introductions followed by posters
and, where possible, body technologies will provide attendees ample opportunities to examine and discuss the
varied designs and approaches of the presenters, and to synthesize with attendees' own expertise in a way that
traditional talks do not allow. The symposium will close with an open discussion period, in which the discussant,
an expert in embodied learning, action and inscription in a variety of educational contexts, will synthesize ideas
around the main themes and areas of interest that emerged during the session and provide questions for the final
discussion between authors and audience.

Data records from children with Type 1 diabetes: Objects for conversation and
family sense-making
Victor R. Lee and Ilana Dubovi

New technologies are making bodily activity more accessible as objects for inspection in designed learning spaces
(see Lee, 2015 for examples). The value of using records of bodily activity as objects of inspection presumably
taps into   embodied understandings  that youth already  have  and   can  be  connected  to disciplinary ideas and

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                   799                                                  © ISLS
practices. Yet beyond   these deliberate  designer-driven   uses, there are also cases where    archives of bodily
experiences produce records for inspection and sense-making that are not directly tied to a priori learning goals
but still lead to consequential learning and collaborative sense-making discourse and interaction. One of those, to
be discussed in this presentation, is the work a family does to manage the health of a child who has been diagnosed
with type 1 diabetes (T1D).
         Living with T1D involves monitoring of blood sugar levels, deliberate decision-making and planning for
diet and exercise, and regular introduction of artificial insulin into the bloodstream. Because it is a chronic illness,
it serves as a disruption in practice and routine that necessitates introduction of quantification practices. It serves
as a context   for expansive  learning   (Engestrom &   Sannino,   2010)  that necessitates the  creation  of new
representational infrastructures by families and caretakers (Hall, Stevens, & Torralba, 2002). The work described
in this presentation is an accounting of how data related to the management of T1D are stored and mobilized for
everyday sensemaking activities by families and youth.
         In this study, data were obtained from 5 families with children under the age of 12 who had type 1
diabetes through meetings and visits ranging from one and three times for each family (Lee, Thurston, & Thurston,
2016). For four of those families, we conducted observations and interviews at the home of those families and
photo-documented artifacts that were used in their diabetes management. One finding was the development of
custom data logs as one form of representational infrastructure that four out of five families used to track blood
sugar levels as measured from glucometers and from continuous glucose monitors (see Figure 1).

Figure 1. A glucometer being used to get a blood sugar reading (left), a continuous glucose monitor (center) and
                                     a homemade data logging system (right).

         For two families that will be discussed, these logs served as important supports and motivators for
discussions  about  the child's   health and what   was   influencing   changes  in  blood  sugar  readings.  This
representational form served as a source for investigating measurement discrepancies and supporting claims. In
one family to be discussed, the two parents had both logged that they had administered the same amount of insulin
for their child on different days, yet they noticed that the resulting blood sugar levels were quite different. This
led them to question how they were dosing and the eventual discovery that they were measuring the meniscus
(i.e., fluid curvature in a measurement vial) of insulin in different ways. In another family, the logs served as a
guide for a parent to select meal options when the other parent, who typically did the family meal planning, was
unavailable. In addition, that family used the data they stored in their handwritten log of digitally obtained data as
justification for certain intuitions that they had about the impact of certain foods on the child's blood sugar levels.
         In both families, the child was reportedly more adept at early numeracy skills. The parents spent a
substantial amount of time teaching their children to recognize numerical readings of their own blood sugar data
and to notice trends such as blood sugar "going down" or "going up", through spontaneous quizzing as part of
monitoring. Through studies like this one, we gain some insight into what families do to retain and respond to
personal data and how disciplinary ideas and practices--such as numeracy, logging, measurement, body systems,
and nutrition--are established and drawn upon for coordinated action as a result of the disruption of disease
diagnosis.

Collaborative design of wearable technologies: How embodied gestures
support computational learning and creativity
Debora Lui, Lindsay Lindberg, Deborah A. Fields, Mia Shaw, Gayithri Jayathirtha, and Yasmin Kafai

While much existing embodiment research focuses on the use of wearable technologies for learning, there is less
work that highlights the role of embodiment within the design of these body-based technologies which incorporate
sensors into clothing   or  other wearable accessories  in  order  to make   them  interactive. Here we   position
embodiment as an essential component within a student-centered, collaborative design process of developing
wearable technology. The distributed nature of cognition (Hutchins, 1995) will be taken up with the perspective
that physical gestures structure thinking and action during meaning making (Goodwin, 2000) as we share instances
of youth   collaboratively designing and  constructing wearable   body  technologies such  as light-up hoodies  or

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                   800                                                 © ISLS
music-playing gloves.  Blending  semiotic   resources, including computational     design and   conversation, with
physical embodiments as tools for sensemaking (Kirsch, 2011), we ask about the role of physical body movement
and collaborative  sensemaking   in supporting    student   understanding of  computational   concepts,  with   the
development of personalized, computational artifacts.
        The study took place during a four-day summer STEM program at a local science museum. Four groups
consisting of 3-4 high school students and 1 adult co-designed interactive musical wearable artifacts using an
Arduino-based Circuit Playground electronic textiles kit and a piece of clothing (e.g., hoodies, gloves). Drawing
upon artifacts, interviews, and video recordings, we developed four case studies of the groups highlighting their
design process.   Through an inductive analysis,   we  developed  coding   themes   based on  how    students used
embodiment to understand computational concepts in the design of their interactive wearable artifact.
        Across all four groups, we found that students' uses of physical gestures were central to the creation of
their musical wearable artifacts and tightly intertwined with their engagement with computational concepts and
one another. Introducing materials like gloves and hoodies (objects intended for functional use and movement)
privileges physical, embodied   participation with  computational strategies  by   both  instructors and students.
Students' gestures could be categorized in three ways. First, students employed gestures to help envision the
design of their wearable artifact. During the brainstorming phase, students acted out different series of possible
`trigger' gestures for teammates (e.g., waving hand) and verbally described different possible resulting actions
("now the lights blink"). Here, the gestures allowed students to simulate abstract computational sequences, to
ideate upon new creative possibilities of computational action and also communicate their ideas to other peers.
Second, students used gestures to solidify their understanding of a computational concept. This included, for
instance, hand movements first demonstrated by the instructor and later taken up by students while programming
a motion sensor to help concretize abstract ideas, such as quantifying space in terms of the three dimensions,
determining conditional logic or system inputs and outputs. Finally, gestures were also utilized to help calibrate
parts of their computational design, particularly programming motion and light sensors, where the degree of
movement determined the threshold values for sensor activation. Collaboratively, students performed motions
that activated sensors repeatedly (whether flipping a hood off their heads or waving their hands) as part of the
process of calibrating their readings and programming these into their artifacts.
        Moving     beyond   the individual,   the embodied   actions above    served  as  tools for  collaborative
sensemaking and provided communicative and ideational support in service of creating a wearable technology.
An understanding of how embodiment can serve these dual roles is especially timely because of the increased
efforts to bring digital fabrication tools into schools (Peppler, Halverson, & Kafai, 2016), where students are not
only users but designers of wearable technologies. We illustrate how privileging intentional physical movements
in service of computational design can support collaborative work during the brainstorming and computational
phases of development, thereby expanding opportunities for physical and cognitive participation, engagement in
computing, and expressive agency.

Collective embodied activity and how different concepts map to social
exploration
Joshua A. Danish, Noel Enyedy, Megan Humburg, Bria Davis, and Xintian Tu

In our work, we have developed a Learning in Embodied Activity Framework (LEAF; Danish et al., under review).
Our goal in doing so is to build upon prior findings about how the body supports individual cognition (Lindgren
& Johnson-Glenberg, 2013) and extend these with a theoretical framework--activity theory (Engeström, 1987)--
which  explicitly addresses the sociocultural  nature  of individual learning and   the unique  characteristics of
collective group activity into a combined framework. Within this framework, we view embodiment as supporting
learning for both individuals and collective groups, and we believe it is important to explore how these two levels
influence each other; individual experiences inform and are informed by collective activity. We are particularly
interested in supporting collective embodied activities where participants coordinate their actions to learn about
complex phenomena.
        We believe collective activities are important because they place the role of social interaction as central
to the embodied modeling process. The opportunity to include multiple participants within embodied activities
also paves the way to supporting whole-class activities in ways that are often elusive for designs that only support
individual students or dyads. For example, our work with the Science through Technology Enhanced Play (STEP)
mixed reality environment has explored how students learn about states of matter (Danish, Enyedy, Saleh, Lee, &
Andrade, 2015) and honeybees (Danish, Humburg, Tu, Davis, & Georgen, 2018). In the case of the states of
matter unit, students took on the role of water particles and embodied their motion relative to each other. The
STEP system tracked students' movement and fed it into a projected simulation so that students could see virtual

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                   801                                                  © ISLS
particles moving as they moved. Importantly, their speed and distance relative to each other produced different
states of matter: being near and stationary produced ice; slightly closer but moving produced water; moving fast
and far apart produced gas. The simulation displayed each state, helping students to engage in inquiry about the
relationship between particle motion and state by moving around and with each other (Danish et al., 2015). In the
bees unit, students behaved as honeybees searching for nectar around the hive, with bee avatars that flew around
a field of flowers in the simulation, mirroring students' movements around the classroom. As the students-as-bees
visited flowers, they discovered whether there was good nectar. Through iterative experimentation, students came
to appreciate that they could most efficiently collect nectar if they coordinated their activity with other bees and
shared the location of good nectar (Danish et al., 2018).
          The goal of the present analysis is to contrast these prior implementations with an eye towards unpacking
how   the different  content areas  afforded different forms  of collective action,  placing  interaction and social
interpretations into distinct but complementary roles within the inquiry process. For example, students in the
particle simulation had to continuously attend to each other's behavior and motion in order to achieve a specific
result. Their every embodied movement influenced their relative position, potentially changing the state of matter
being collectively created and thus making it crucial for them to be continuously aware of their peers. Planning in
this context took on a unique tenor as students had to continuously coordinate their ongoing activity. In contrast,
the honeybees    could   spend extended periods   of time ignoring  their peers. However,    the moments   in which
coordination became necessary were far more salient and crucial. This led to alternative forms of planning, and
very different reflective practices as students had to attend to a few salient interactions with peers rather than
continuous ones. In this paper, we further unpack how these different content topics provide unique opportunities
for connecting the individual and social dimensions of embodied cognition and suggest implications for the design
and analysis of future systems.

SensEscapes: Learning and making public history in mobile collocated
interactions
Katie Headrick Taylor, Adam Bell, Erin Riesland, Maria Hays, and Deborah Silvis

Mobile devices are antithetical to "promoting collaborative interaction in varied contexts" (CSCL Conference
Theme, 2019), or so recent news stories would have us believe (e.g., Bowles, 2018). Those tiny screens inhibit a
shared gaze on activity, distance users from the places they inhabit, and immobilize bodies to statues posed with
heads down, hands gripping edges of a phone. So designing "collocated interaction" or copresent technology use
toward a shared objective, seems like a lost cause.
          It is within this design  space  that we offer  a more   nuanced, perhaps  optimistic, version  of  mobile
collocated interaction for teaching and learning public history in an undergraduate course. While our designed
activity, that we call "SensEscapes," encountered the kinds of obstacles to collaboration mentioned above, we
also saw openings for novel relationships between bodies, local histories, places, and tools. These openings, we
argue, are untenable when seated at a desk, in a classroom, and without a mobile device in hand.
          Our   design of  SensEscapes  is guided  by  theories of embodied  learning  (e.g., Lindgren &   Johnson-
Goldberg, 2013) and learning on the move (e.g., Taylor & Hall, 2013). SensEscapes invited students to engage
their senses  (ie., smell, sight, hearing, touch)  for learning about  the  neighborhood surrounding   their  public
university, and the histories that moved institution and community together and apart over time. Small groups of
approximately five students used a mobile mapping application, Siftr TM, to find locations within a six-block area,
read a short history about each location, then create a geotagged digital artifact at each spot. Siftr allowed for
student groups to encounter past histories and document multi-sensory experiences using (analog and digital)
mobile tools. After visiting and completing tasks at five locations, students returned to the classroom to share
stories and photos mapped to a base layer of the neighborhood.
          In our analysis of video records of student participation during SensEscapes, we found that mobile
collocated interaction took the form of static collaboration. By static collaboration we mean that the typical social
cues of "good" collaboration upon which the learning sciences place high value--gestures, shared eye gaze,
touching and pointing to the same representation--were absent. However, evidence of effective and high levels
of  collaboration   took other forms. While  individuals  kept  their eyes  on their own smartphone    screen, they
verbalized clarifying questions about the task as a bid for assistance from other members of the group. Upon
reaching a location, groups frequently stood in a tight U-shape on the sidewalk, moving only for postural tuning
to help a co-participant or get clarification from a neighbor's screen. With the visual field occupied, it was not
uncommon for students to note fleeting smells or sounds while working on their phones. Students achieved

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                    802                                                  © ISLS
focused interactions (e.g., Goffman, 1963) largely without looking at one another or seeing the same thing at the
same time.
          Our design  of  SensEscapes  intended to  teach  students about their university community   through
embodiment, so our initial analytic lens was ill-equipped to see inertness as a legitimate state of collaborative
learning in place. Using more typical qualities of collaboration from an interaction analysis frame, students'
participation in SensEscapes looked divorced from place and one another because of the mobile devices. Yet, we
knew from students' reflections after the activity that learning and engagement were high. We resituated our
analytic lens to the context; by paying close attention to convergent talk and device use, and postural tuning to
allow for quick glances to a neighbor's screen, it was evident the mobile device set up micro-mobilities (Luff &
Heath, 1998) important for building shared understandings of the place, on the move. Still, our findings also point
toward redesigns in both the mobile application and the overall activity that diminish the time spent in the digital
world and increase time spent with the landscape.

Calibrating personal gestures within a collaborative embodied STEM
simulation
Robb Lindgren, James Planey, and Jason Morphew

Recent research has shown significant learning and engagement gains for single-user embodied simulations where
a participant mobilizes their body to make predictions and structure their reasoning around a science domain such
as planetary astronomy (e.g., Lindgren, Tscholl, Wang, & Johnson, 2016). In particular, our lab has shown benefits
of a gesture recognition system that adapts to a learner's personal gestural representation of simulation functions
(Junokas, Lindgren, Kang, & Morphew, 2018). At the same time, embodied learning simulations are often best
situated within social learning environments such as classrooms and museums where there is an opportunity to
work collectively and construct shared representations (Enyedy, Danish, Delacruz, & Kumar, 2012). Our current
efforts are focused on embedding a scheme for personalized gestures within collaborative simulation tasks such
that a learner keeps their ideas about STEM grounded in their own bodily but must still calibrate their actions with
the simultaneous embodied expressions of other learners.
          The current multiplayer version of our ELASTIC3S simulation tasks require students to collaboratively
problem-solve to explore complex dynamic systems such as the greenhouse effect, predator-prey interactions, and
chemical equilibrium. Within the simulations, each student is able to control the rate of change of a variable which
has an effect on the equilibrium of a system. In order to compare the effect of two simultaneously changing rates,
students work collaboratively to reach and maintain an equilibrium point. We aimed to facilitate collaboration by
providing each student with a portion of the information through the use of a three-screen projection system
(Figure 2 middle and right). Information about the students' individual actions are projected onto the left and right
screen, whereas information about the system threshold and equilibrium is displayed on the center screen (Figure
2 left). For example, within the greenhouse effect simulation pairs of students were asked to reach and maintain
different levels of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere and to explore the effects on the global temperatures, sea
level, and ice cap size. One of the individuals in the dyad controls the rate at which carbon dioxide entered into
the system through increases or decreases in the number of factories, while the other student controls the rate at
which carbon dioxide leaves the system though increases or decreases in the amount of photosynthetic biomass.

  Figure 2. Left: Center sim screen showing change CO2. Middle: Two participants controlling rate with an
     invented gesture. Right: Two participants controlling rate by showing a line slope with their arms.

          Preliminary pilot sessions with the climate  change  simulation  have  demonstrated the  potential to
establish a collaborative environment  that fosters communication   while critically engaging with the   science
content. When presented with the tasks within the simulation, pilot participants have primarily taken one of two
approaches, either initiating a collaborative dialog immediately after the task is presented in an attempt to plan

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                  803                                                 © ISLS
and coordinate their inputs based on their understanding of the system, or immediately beginning to modify their
inputs to the system  separately with individual  observations and struggles   ultimately   initiating a productive
collaborative dialog. Both resulted in participants reaching their goal and reflecting upon their process.
        Personalized  embodied    interactions  can be  a  powerful  approach     to cultivating new,      grounded
understandings of  complex domains,   but   new technologies  should   aspire to  support these  interactions  in a
collaborative context where dependencies are apparent and gestures can be synergistic.

Computing reality through collaborative, embodied debugging: How learners
design and debug mixed reality games
Breanne K. Litts and Chase K. Mortensen

Embodied cognition (Wilson, 2002) suggests that humans often work out their thinking by interaction with the
world through bodily or physical interactions. Mixed reality technologies (Milgrim & Kishino, 1994), which
overlay or integrate digital objects or interactions with the real world, afford unique contexts to examine how
learners engage in embodied cognition. Scholars (e.g., Lindgren & Johnson-Glenberg, 2013) not only recognize
the potentially transformative impact of how these technologies afford embodied learning, but also encourage
research and design considerations for such activities. At present, though, most of these efforts are thinking about
how to design for learners, but we also see the value of thinking about how to equip learners to design with mixed
reality technologies. Thus, in this study, we explore how learners engage in collaborative embodied learning when
designing their own mixed reality location-based games.
        In partnership with a local makerspace, we conducted two afterschool workshops with 19 middle school
aged participants (3 girls, 16 boys, ages 10-13) in a rural city in the Western United States. Over the course of 12
hours (six 2-hour sessions), learners designed mobile, location-based games with mixed reality technology about
local plants and animals. Learners engaged in a design process of research, storyboarding, digital construction,
playtesting and debugging, including several iterations of outdoor collaborative debugging sessions during which
learners playtested each other's games and exchanged feedback. We collected a range of data including in-process
video and audio recordings, design artifacts, photographs, field notes from at least three researchers, and final
reflective interviews with learners. In this paper, we focus our analyses on the outdoor collaborative debugging
sessions across all participants. We constructed cases (Stake, 1995) from each session of outdoor collaborative
debugging and compared across cases (Miles, Huberman, & Saldaña, 2013) to illustrate the ways in which youth
engaged in and embodied designing with location-based mixed reality technologies.
        Findings provide insights for how learners make sense of the mapping of game content and mechanics
onto physical location and place through both experienced and observed embodiment. When playtesting others'
games, learners experienced embodied design by moving around the physical world to collect digital items. For
example, Peter, a 12-year-old Caucasian boy, playtested Doug's, a 12-year-old Caucasian boy, game, entitled
"Wolf Quest", which challenges a player to "catch squirrels, like the lowest-ranking animal... you can use them
to capture higher level class levels of animals" (Interview, 04/05/2017). While playing, Peter exclaimed "I'm
drowning in squirrels!" and explained to Doug that he should change the game's algorithm to reduce the number
of squirrels and make them spawn further from the player, because it was "drowning" the player making it too
easy to level up. When others playtested their games, designers were able to observe how the player embodies
their design. For instance, after a collaborative outdoor debugging session, Gracie, a 10-year-old Hispanic girl,
reflected on observing others who sprinted around to try to play her game: "It's not working very way, it makes
[him] go way waaay over there!... I made it too far" (Audio Recording, 03/16/2017). After debugging the issue,
she explained how she leverageed this mechanic to increase difficulty in her game over time, "For the like three
levels it's gonna be pretty easy, but then the items are gonna be harder to catch: it's gonna be further away from
you, you're gonna have less time" (Interview, 03/30/17). Through observation and feedback, Gracie built an
understanding of how players embody her design and how to leverage the development platform's computational
algorithm to align with her design goals.
        These cases illustrate how learners across the workshop embodied each other's location-based mixed
reality games in collaborative outdoor debugging sessions, and how debriefing with feedback supported designers'
computational  and design understandings.    This not only  highlights how    the collaborative  moments     shifted
learners' designs, but also demonstrates the value of equipping learners as designers of mixed reality technologies,
especially in support of embodied learning.

References
Alibali, M. W., & Nathan, M. J. (2012). Embodiment in mathematics teaching and learning: Evidence from
        learners' and teachers' gestures. Journal of the learning sciences, 21(2), 247-286.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                  804                                                    © ISLS
Bowles, N. (2018, October 26). A dark consensus about screens and kids begins to emerge in Silicon Valley. The
          New   York  Times.Retrieved   from   https://www.nytimes.com/2018/10/26/style/phones-children-silicon-
          valley.html
Chickering, A. W., & Gamson, Z. F. (1987). Seven principles for good practice in undergraduate education. AAHE
          bulletin, 3, 7.
Danish, J. A., Enyedy, N., Saleh, A., Lee, C., & Andrade, A. (2015). Science Through Technology Enhanced
          Play: Designing to Support Reflection Through Play and Embodiment. Paper presented at the Exploring
          the  Material   Conditions of  Learning:    The  Computer   Supported  Collaborative   Learning  (CSCL)
          Conference, Gothenburg, Sweden.
Danish, J. A., Humburg, M., Tu, X., Davis, B., & Georgen, C. (2018). Modeling bees by acting as bees in a mixed
          reality simulation. Paper presented at the Intl Conference of the Learning Sciences, London, England.
Dewey, J. (1938; 2007 ed). Experience and education. Simon and Schuster.
Engeström, Y. (1987). Learning by Expanding: An Activity - Theoretical Approach to Developmental Research.
          Helsinki: Orienta-Konsultit Oy.
Engeström, Y., & Sannino, A. (2010). Studies of expansive learning: Foundations, findings and future challenges.
          Educational Research Review, 5(1), 1-24. doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.edurev.2009.12.002
Enyedy, N., Danish, J. A., Delacruz, G., & Kumar, M. (2012). Learning physics through play in an augmented
          reality environment. International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 7, 347-378.
Goffman, E. (1963). Behavior in Public Spaces. New York: The Free Press.
Goodwin, C. (2000). Action and embodiment within situated human interaction. Journal of pragmatics, 32(10),
          1489-1522.
Hall, R., &    Nemirovsky,   R.  (2012). Introduction   to the special issue: Modalities of body    engagement   in
          mathematical activity and learning. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 21(2), 207-215.
Hall, R., Stevens, R., & Torralba, T. (2002). Disrupting representational infrastructure in conversations across
          disciplines. Mind, Culture, and Activity, 9(3), 179-210.
Heritage,  J., &   Robinson,  J. D. (2006).  The  structure of patients' presenting concerns: physicians'  opening
          questions. Health communication, 19(2), 89-102.
Hutchins, E. (1995). Cognition in the wild. Cambridge, MA, US: The MIT Press.
Junokas,  M.   J., Lindgren, R.,  Kang,  J., & Morphew,    J. W. (2018).  Enhancing  multimodal   learning through
          personalized gesture recognition. Journal of Computer Assisted Learning.
Kirsh, D. (2011). How marking in dance constitutes thinking with the body.
Lakoff, G., & Johnson, M. (2008). Metaphors we live by. University of Chicago Press.
Lakoff, G., & Núñez, R. E. (2000). Where mathematics comes from: How the embodied mind brings mathematics
          into being. Basic Books.
Lee, V. R. (Ed.) (2015). Learning technologies and the body: Integration and implementation in formal and
          informal learning environments. New York, NY: Routledge.
Lee,  V., Thurston,   T., &  Thurston,  C.   (2017). A Comparison  of  Discovered   Regularities in Blood  Glucose
          Readings across Two Data Collection Approaches Used with a Type 1 Diabetic Youth. Methods of
          Information in Medicine, 56(open), e84-e92. doi:10.3414/ME16-02-0047
Lindgren,  R.,  &   Johnson-Glenberg,   M.   (2013).  Emboldened   by  embodiment:  Six  precepts   for research on
          embodied learning and mixed reality. Educational Researcher, 42(8), 445-452.
Lindgren, R., Tscholl, M., & Wang, S., & Johnson, E. (2016). Enhancing learning and engagement through
          embodied interaction within a mixed reality simulation. Computers & Education, 95, 174­187.
Luff, P., & Heath C. (1998). Mobility in Collaboration. In S. Poltrock & J. Grudin (Eds), Proceedings of the 1998
          Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work (pp. 305­314). ACM: Seattle.
Miles, M. B., Huberman, A. M., & Saldaña, J. (2013). Qualitative data analysis: A methods sourcebook. SAGE
          Publications, Incorporated.
Montessori, M. (1917). The Advanced Montessori Method..(Vol. 1). Frederick A. Stokes Company.
Peppler, K., Halverson, E., & Kafai, Y. B. (Eds.). (2016). Makeology: Makerspaces as learning environments
          (Vol. 1). Routledge.
Stake, R. E. (1995). The art of case study research. Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE.
Stevens, R. (2012). The missing bodies of mathematical thinking and learning have been found. Journal of the
          Learning Sciences, 21(2), 337-346.
Taylor, K.H. & Hall, R. (2013). Counter-mapping the neighborhood on bicycles: Mobilizing youth to reimagine
          the city. Technology, Knowledge, & Learning 18(1-2), 65-93.
Wilson, M. (2002). Six views of embodied cognition. Psychonomic bulletin & review, 9(4), 625-636.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                     805                                                 © ISLS
