 The Knowledge Building Network Pilot Project: An Exploration of
       Emergent Designs to Enhance Collective Teacher Efficacy

                     Leanne Ma, OISE/University of Toronto, leanne.ma@mail.utoronto.ca
                Monica Resendes, OISE/University of Toronto, monicaresendes@gmail.com
             Marlene Scardamalia, OISE/University of Toronto, marlene.scardamalia@utoronto.ca
                   Karen Dobbie, Ontario Ministry of Education, karen.dobbie@ontario.ca

        Abstract:  Ontario's  Leading     Student Achievement    Project  aims  to   foster professional
        collaboration  among  principals, vice-principals, and  teachers in order to  build capacity for
        improving student achievement and well-being. During the 2017-2018 school year, a multi-
        level, multi-district KB network was initiated to spread Knowledge Building in elementary
        schools across the province. This study traces the evolution of KB and KF practices in relation
        to changes in teacher efficacy and positive student outcomes. Over the span of a school year,
        teachers co-designed principle-based practices with their students to foster collective discourse,
        idea improvement,   community     norms,  and   meta-cognition/meta-talk   in their  classrooms.
        Results indicate that the initiative was  a success,  with the majority  of educators  reporting
        professional growth through collaboration, as well as willingness to lead their own KB network
        the next year.

Introduction
Teacher efficacy is defined as "teachers' perceptions of their own ability to bring about desired student outcomes"
(Takahashi, 2011). Research   has consistently  demonstrated   a strong  relationship between   teacher    efficacy,
classroom practices, and student  achievement   (e.g., Hattie, 2012; Goddard,   Hoy,  &  Woolfolk    Hoy,   2000).
Teachers with high efficacy set more challenging goals, show greater effort and persistence, and are more willing
to try new teaching approaches (Tschannen-Moran & Woolfolk Hoy, 2001). Studies also indicate that teachers'
individual efficacy is interlinked with collective efficacy (Schunk & DiBenedetto, 2006), where collective teacher
efficacy refers to the collective perception that "teachers in a given school make an educational difference to their
students" (Tschannen-Moran & Barr, 2004). Enabling conditions of collective teacher efficacy include shared
goals (Kurz  &  Knight,  2003), group mastery     experiences  (Goddard,  2001),  and  opportunities for   teacher
leadership (Derrington & Angelle, 2013). Thus, school administrators (i.e., principals and vice-principals) play a
vital role in fostering collective teacher efficacy (Ross & Gray, 2006; Leithwood & Jantzi, 2008). Taken together,
this line of work suggests that teacher efficacy, both at the individual and collective levels, are important for
enhancing teaching practices and student achievement.
        Over the past 13 years, the Ontario Principals' Associations (1), in partnership with the Ministry of
Education, have been fostering professional collaboration among principals, vice-principals, and teachers in order
to build their collective capacity for improving student achievement through the Leading Student Achievement:
Networks for Learning project (LSA). The project is guided by the evolving "LSA Theory of Action" (Leithwood,
2018), which highlights conditions for school success along the rational path (e.g., Knowledge Building), the
emotional path (e.g., collective efficacy), the organizational path (e.g., professional learning communities), and
the family path. As such, one key priority for the LSA project is to create professional learning networks for
Knowledge Building/knowledge creation. This study explores supports for implementing Knowledge Building at
scale by tracing the evolution of classroom practices in relation to changes in teacher efficacy and positive student
outcomes.

The LSA Knowledge Building network pilot project
During the 2017-2018 school year, a pilot project was created for educators to learn, share, co-design, and refine
Knowledge Building practices that supported student learning and well-being. 32 teachers and 8 administrators
from 17 elementary schools across 8 boards were brought together to create a multi-level, multi-district network
to promote the cross-fertilization of ideas and spread of classroom innovations across the province. Each teacher
was committed to implementing Knowledge Building (KB) pedagogy and Knowledge Forum (KF) technology in
at least one subject area, such as math, science, or social studies. Members of the network met five times between
September and May to engage in collaborative design of KB and KF practices. Throughout the year, teachers
were provided with customized capacity-building sessions and on-site KF support as often as needed to help
advance their design work. Data sources for this study include: teachers' KB practices presented at bi-monthly

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                  81                                                    © ISLS
meetings and teachers' responses to end-of-term surveys, including their reflections about the design process and
observations of how their practices impacted their students.

Knowledge Building practices
One of the initial challenges of the pilot project is introducing Knowledge Building (Scardamalia & Bereiter,
2014), which, unlike other pedagogical approaches, adopts a principle-based approach to classroom design. Many
teachers found the conceptual complexity of the 12 KB principles (Scardamlia, 2002) to be less than intuitive and
struggled with translating them into practice. To help scaffold the development of their understanding, teachers
were encouraged  to study the KB  Gallery (Resendes   &   Dobbie,    2017), as  well as multimedia resources on
http://thelearningexchange.ca, including: descriptions of the 12 KB principles, concrete tools and strategies for
getting started in the classroom, video series featuring teacher, student, and parent testimonials, and podcast series
to provoke reflection and classroom planning. The bi-monthly meetings served as opportunities to discuss their
attempts at principle-based classroom design (both successful and failed ones), ask questions and troubleshoot,
receive feedback from peers, and plan for their next iteration.

 a)                         b)                        c)                              d)

              Figure 1. a) KB wall, b) KB scaffolds, c) KB table, and d) Improvable Ideas board.

Figure 1 shows some KB practices invented by Ontario teachers in the companion guide to the KB Gallery,
including: a) KB walls, which visualizes connections in the community knowledge; b) KB scaffolds, which
promotes diverse contributions to the community discourse; c) KB table, which makes student ideas visible to all
members of the community; and d) Improvable Ideas board, which shows design iterations on student ideas. These
practices have the shared goal of bringing student ideas to the center of classroom activities and fostering students'
sense of collective responsibility for knowledge advancement (Scardamalia, 2002). Put differently, these practices
help teachers realize various KB  principles in their classroom,     such   as community  knowledge,  collective
responsibility, Knowledge Building discourse, democratizing knowledge, and improvable ideas. The year-long
challenge for network participants was to adopt these practices into their own classrooms and schools, refine them
through deepening engagement with all 12 KB principles, as well as co-design new KB practices with their
students.

KB network meetings
During the KB network meetings, 3 teachers, 3 teaching teams, and 6 school teams presented their classroom
designs and re-designs. Each presentation highlighted the implementation of KB practices in areas such as math,
science, history, geography, health, and robotics. On average, each classroom design included 4 to 5 practices
(Figure 2). The most commonly used practices were: KB scaffolds (9), KF community (9), KF analytic tools (8),
KB walls (7) and community norms (6).

                        Figure 2. KB practices used by elementary network teachers.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                  82                                                   © ISLS
It can be seen that neither face-to-face practices (e.g., KB walls, KB circles, KB table) nor online practices (e.g.,
KF community, KF analytic tools) alone could account for half of KB practices presented, suggesting that most
teachers adopted a blended approach to their KB practices. In particular, KB scaffolds and community norms
were used in both face-to-face and online contexts, which points to their importance in facilitating the integration
of KF technology with KB practices in the classroom.
         Given the fact that most teachers implemented multiple KB practices at once, the average classroom
design reflected 8 KB principles. The most common KB principles translated into practice were: idea diversity
(12), KB discourse (11), democratizing knowledge (11), improvable ideas (10), and real ideas, authentic problems
(9). Whereas presentations at the beginning of the school year mostly focused on real ideas, idea diversity, and
KB  discourse, presentations  toward    the end of   the school  year focused  more     on community    knowledge,
democratizing knowledge, and improvable ideas. This supports the notion that while it is easy to engage students
in idea generation, it is challenging to engage them in idea improvement (Scardamalia & Bereiter, 2003). One
common practice that teachers consistently used to foster improvable ideas was the integration of KB scaffolds
into day-to-day class discussions.

                          Figure 3. KB principles used by elementary network teachers.

Taken together, it appears that KB discourse, which aims to shift engagement norms of idea generation toward
idea improvement, is a fundamental principle to fostering and sustaining a KB community regardless of students'
grade or subject area.
         It is also interesting to note that the least common KB principle in classroom designs was rise above,
which reinforces the   overarching  challenge   of  seeking  conceptual coherence   among    diverse ideas in  the
community knowledge. Indeed, one math teacher attempted to design for rise above. After studying formulae for
area and perimeter of 2D shapes, students were encouraged to develop theories for how to calculate the surface
area and volume of 3D shapes. The teacher provided students with a real, authentic problem of filling the volume
of a sinkhole to see whether students could create formulae for rectangular prisms and cylinders. Students were
so captivated  with the   problem  that in  addition to  finding the  formula for a cylinder   (including  seeking
authoritative sources to learn about circumference of circles), they were creating formulae to calculate the cost of
materials and labour to fix the hole! For another science teacher, rise above emerged naturally as students were
studying biodiversity  in science  and  climate change   in social studies. After spending   weeks   exploring the
relationships between predators, preys, and invasive species in various ecosystems, as well as discussing how
humans   have an impact   the environment,   students brought  their symmetric  knowledge    advances   together to
develop the rise above theory that humans are an invasive species.
         It can be seen that complex, interdisciplinary problems give rise to rich discussions in the classroom.
Therefore, it comes as no surprise that deeper KB practices (i.e., involving multiple KB principles) are more likely
to occur when  teachers   implement  KB     across multiple subject  areas. Statistical analyses reveal a positive
correlation between the number of subject areas a teacher used for KB and the number of KB principles reflected
in their designs (r = 0.76, p > 0.01), as well as the number of KB practices a teacher used and the number of KB
principles reflected in their designs (r = 0.74, p > 0.01). This appears to confirm the notion that Knowledge
Building requires an enculturation approach to principle-based practice ­ the more opportunities teachers and
students have to engage in sustained, creative work ideas, the deeper they go with KB, eventually unlocking all
12 principles (Scardamalia & Bereiter, 2003; Resendes & Dobbie, 2017).

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                    83                                                  © ISLS
KB network surveys
At the end of the fall and winter terms, teachers reflected on their KB practices and completed surveys (27
responses were collected in fall, 25 responses were collected in winter). Using the KB progressions in the KB
Gallery resource, teachers rated their progress along four dimensions of KB practice: fostering collective discourse
(orange), community norms (yellow), developing ideas (green), and meta-cognition/meta-talk (blue). Figure 4
shows  the proportion of    teachers in early stages (light colours), developing stages (medium  colours),  and
deepening stages (dark colours) for each dimension of practice. In the fall term, the majority of teachers were in
early practice, whereas in the winter term, the majority of teachers were in developing practice. Change scores
reveal a 55%  decrease   in early practices and 68%   increase in developing  practices between the   two terms,
suggesting that teachers were engaged in continual development of their KB practices throughout the year.
         The survey also provided opportunities for teachers to elaborate on their KB practices in open-ended
questions. 20 out of 25 of teachers believed that the key community norm was fostering a sense of safety and
community.   This includes    promoting   a   growth mindset,  openness   to different  perspectives, respectful
communication, celebrating risks, and valuing mistakes. Whereas in the fall term, more teacher-directed practices
were reported to scaffold students into KB practices, in the winter term, many teachers were engaging students in
co-design of KB practices. For example, in the fall, many teachers created posters and cue cards of KB scaffolds
while modelling how to use the them during class discussions. In the winter, they listened for students' use of the
KB scaffolds while encouraging them to design new ones to advance the community discourse and expand the
class's repertoire of KB scaffolds (e.g., "I wonder", "Another way of thinking...", "We should revise this...").
Some teachers were even beginning to recognize curricular connections, suggesting that they were shifting toward
deeper practices. Halfway through winter term, one health teacher realized that implementing KB across the
curriculum would have been less effortful on her part and more rewarding for the students than carving out their
designated weekly KB time. Recall that in the teacher presentations, deeper KB practices involved implementing
KB across multiple subject areas.

                            Figure 4. Teacher self-assessments on KB Progressions.

         Regarding the most common practices used for fostering community discourse, developing ideas, and
meta-cognition/meta-talk, KB scaffolds, KB circles and KB walls were most commonly used in fall, whereas KB
scaffolds, KB circles and KF were most commonly used in winter. Given the considerable overlap in responses
across the four dimensions, it is likely that the all-in-one nature of KF (i.e., KB scaffolds for collective discourse,
endless KB walls for developing ideas, analytic tools for meta-cognition/meta-talk) helped teachers deepen their
KB practices. For example, while teachers were encouraging students to use KB scaffolds across both terms, it
was not until when students were using the KB scaffolds in KF notes that teachers were able to assess student
contributions through the analytic tools. When students were provided with the opportunity to reflect on their
contributions through the analytic tools, both the quality and quantity of student engagement was enhanced.
Students were excited about the analytic tools and would self-initiate their use to regulate their own contributions.
Put differently, the intentional integration of KF into KB practices reflects teachers' growing understanding of the
KB principles and their increasing efficacy in balancing the face-to-face and online affordances for advancing
community knowledge. Below are a few teachers' reflections on the impact of their KB practices on student
learning and well-being:

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                   84                                                 © ISLS
         "Through KB circles students are beginning to build on each other's ideas while discussing our
         emotions and ways that we can regulate our emotions."

         "KF allowed students with anxiety to feel like an important, active member of the community
         by sharing important ideas that others actually read!"

         "Students  are  more   engaged ­   students   have a voice and   want   to share  their  ideas and
         communicate their thinking. The students are gaining new tools for their tool belt... and are
         able to ask questions and reflect on their peers' process as well as their own learning."

         Overall, responses in the end-of-year survey indicate that both teachers and administrators found the
network sessions immensely helpful for: deprivatizing classroom practices; troubleshooting and advancing their
designs; hearing from different school boards, roles, and perspectives; exposing them to new ideas and strategies;
and opening new opportunities for collaboration. Educators at all levels almost unanimously (all except one who
was unsure) expressed interest in continuing participation in the multi-district KB network the following year,
with 20 out of 25 willing to start a smaller KB network in their schools and/or school boards. Below are some
additional insights and reflections from network participants:

         "It is always  great to hear ideas  from other  schools  and boards,  and  different perspectives
         (teacher, admin, students). It is inspiring to learn with educators from other areas. This session
         gave me the opportunity to reflect on my classroom and program and consider how to further
         develop student thinking and deepen practice."

         "Being able to talk to other teachers and having discussions around how to approach some of
         my challenges. Learning new ways to use KB in my classroom. It validates my pedagogy and
         has helped to re-invent myself as an educator."

         "I'd like to continue having teachers, students, and administrators share what is happening
         inside our classrooms and provide time for us to pair up and work together across the regions
         when working on like ideas."

         "Interesting to hear   where  other   schools and  other boards  are in    this journey. Different
         schools/boards are strong in different areas and it is great to share our information to help the
         teaching/learning community as a whole develop and grow together."

It can be seen that teachers were taking ownership of their classroom practices. Furthermore, the network sessions
helped them see their own practices as improvable, and over time, they were assuming collective responsibility
for advancing the design work of their community. In other words, members of the KB network demonstrated
intentional efforts to raise their individual efficacy and collective efficacy. As an outcome of this pilot project, 16
teachers and administrators attended the KB Summer Institute to share their advances and explore possibilities
for the 2018-2019   school year.  This  experience   helped them  reframe  their practices  around  less   commonly
targeted KB principles over the past year, such as community knowledge, pervasive KB, and symmetric knowledge
advancement. They are now linking with international KB communities and building their own networks to
deepen their practices and grow capacity in their classrooms, schools, and boards. In the words of one teacher:

         "My goal is to continue to have my students... participate in this network universally by having
         them   make  effective  contributions during  online discourse (Pervasive   KB)   on the  existing
         global issues that prevail today. It's phenomenal observing what solutions/innovations these
         students come up with that could potentially one day benefit the Public Good!"

Conclusions and implications
Multi-level  networks  and partnerships are    powerful mechanisms    for building  capacity  as  well  as spreading
Knowledge Building within a system (Laferriere, et al., 2010; Chan, 2011). After the success of the KB Tri-Board
Project (Resendes et al., 2016), Knowledge Building has spread across the province to involve more than 11
districts. The purpose of the 2017-2018 KB Network pilot project was to create opportunities and supports for
teacher collaboration and design within and across districts in Ontario. Over the span of one school year, teachers

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                    85                                                    © ISLS
adapted existing KB practices ­ such as KB scaffolds, KB walls, KB circles, KB walls, and KF communities ­
into their classrooms and refined those practices with their students.
       In working toward translating the 12 KB principles into meaningful classroom designs, teachers were
engaged in the conceptual work of shifting the relations between ideas, students, and themselves in the classroom
(Teo, 2014; Toth & Ma, 2018). The more KB principles they integrated into their designs, the deeper they went
with their KB practices, the more engaged their students. At the same time, the bi-monthly network sessions
allowed teachers to deepen their understanding of the KB principles by discussing concrete practices from other
teachers' classrooms and reflecting on the adaptability of their classroom designs. Studies on KB in professional
learning communities indicate that collaborative design helps teachers become more open and proactive toward
their practices (Vokatis & Zhang, 2016), as well as orient towards more innovative practices (Hong, Chai, &
Hung, 2015).
       This study suggests that the LSA KB network pilot project successfully provided enabling conditions for
teachers to engage in collaborative design as means to improve their KB practices. Consistent with past research
in professional development (Hoy, 2000), both direct experiences and vicarious experiences were conducive to
enhancing teacher   efficacy. Recall  that teacher efficacy is key  to  improving  teaching   and   student learning
(Takahashi, 2011) while simultaneously enhancing professional commitment (Ware & Kitsantas, 2007). This
study suggests that Knowledge Building goes beyond fostering teacher efficacy to igniting both teachers' and
students' epistemic agency. While teacher reports indicate that their practices have a positive effect on students'
engagement,  learning, and  well-being,  additional analyses  are underway    to further understand   the effects of
sustained participation in dynamic multi-level, multi-district KB networks on student achievement outcomes.

References
Chan, C. K. (2011). Bridging research and practice: Implementing and sustaining knowledge building in Hong
       Kong classrooms. International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 6(2), 147-186.
Derrington, M.  L., &  Angelle,    P. S. (2013). Teacher   leadership  and collective    efficacy: Connections  and
       links. International Journal of Teacher Leadership, 4(1), n1.
Goddard,  R. D.  (2001).    Collective efficacy: A  neglected   construct  in the  study  of  schools  and   student
       achievement. Journal of Educational Psychology, 93(3), 467.
Goddard, R. D., Hoy, W. K., & Hoy, A. W. (2000). Collective teacher efficacy: Its meaning, measure, and impact
       on student achievement. American Educational Research Journal, 37(2), 479-507.
Hattie, J. (2012). Visible learning for teachers: Maximizing impact on learning. Routledge.
Hong, H. Y., Chai, C. S., & Hung, G. T. (2015). Principle-based guidance to foster adaptive teaching practice. In
       O. Lindwall, P. Hakkinen, T. Koschman, P. Tchounikine, & S. Ludvigsen (Eds.), Proceedings of the 11th
       International   Conference   on   Computer  Supported   Collaborative  Learning   (pp. 47-54).  Gothenburg,
       Sweden: ISLS.
Hoy, A. W. (2000, April). Changes in teacher efficacy during the early years of teaching. Paper presented at the
       AERA Annual Meeting, New Orleans, LA.
Kurz, T. B., & Knight, S. L. (2004). An exploration of the relationship among teacher efficacy, collective teacher
       efficacy, and goal consensus. Learning Environments
       Research, 7(2), 111-128.
Laferrière, T., Montane, M., Gros, B., Alvarez, I., Bernaus, M., Breuleux, A., ... &
Lamon, M. (2010). Partnerships for knowledge building: An emerging model. Canadian Journal of Learning and
       Technology, 36(1).
Leithwood (2018). Leadership Development on a Large Scale: Lessons for Long-Term Success. Corwin.
Leithwood,  K., &   Jantzi, D.  (2008).  Linking   leadership  to student  learning: The   contributions  of  leader
       efficacy. Educational Administration Quarterly, 44(4), 496-528.
Resendes, M.,   Scardamalia,   M., Cordeiro,  M.,  Massey,  L.,   Dobbie, K.,  &  Sirois, L.  (2016).  A  Tri-Level
       Partnership to Support and Spread Knowledge Building in Ontario. In Looi, C. K., Polman, J. L., Cress,
       U., and Reimann, P. (Eds.). Proceedings of the 12th International Conference of the Learning Sciences
       (pp. 1249-1250). Singapore: ISLS.
Resendes, M.  &  Dobbie,    K. (2017).   Knowledge  Building   Gallery:  Teaching    for Deep  Understanding   and
       Community Knowledge Creation. D. Maika, E. Hine, L. Ma, E. Heaver, & L. White (Eds.). Retrieved
       from          https://thelearningexchange.ca/wp-content/uploads/2017/04/Knowledge-Building-Booklet-
       Accessible-1.pdf
Ross, J. A., & Gray, P. (2006). School leadership and student achievement: The mediating effects of teacher
       beliefs. Canadian Journal of Education, 798-822.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                   86                                                    © ISLS
Scardamalia, M. (2002). Collective cognitive responsibility for the advancement of knowledge. In B. Smith, & C.
         Bereiter (Eds.), Liberal education in a knowledge society (pp. 67-98). Berkeley, CA: Distributed by
         Publishers Group West.
Scardamalia, M., & Bereiter, C. (2003). Beyond brainstorming: Sustained creative work with ideas. EDUCATION
         CANADA-TORONTO-, 43(4), 4-8.
Scardamalia, M., & Bereiter, C. (2014). Knowledge building and knowledge creation: Theory, pedagogy, and
         technology. In K. Sawyer (Ed.), Cambridge Handbook of the Learning Sciences (pp. 397-417). New
         York: Cambridge University Press.
Schunk, D. H., & DiBenedetto, M. K. (2016). Self-efficacy theory in education. Handbook of Motivation at
         School, 2, 34-54.
Takahashi, S. (2011). Co-constructing efficacy: A "communities of practice" perspective on teachers' efficacy
         beliefs. Teaching and Teacher Education, 27(4), 732-741.
Teo, C. L. (2014). Conceptual shifts within problem spaces for knowledge-building practice within a teacher
         community. In Knowledge Creation in Education (pp. 205-226). Springer, Singapore.
Toth, P.  & Ma,   L. (2018).  Fostering   student voice  and  epistemic  agency through knowledge    building. In
         Proceedings of the 21st Knowledge Building Summer Institute; Toronto, Canada: Knowledge Building
         International.
Tschannen-Moran, M., & Barr, M. (2004). Fostering student learning: The relationship of collective teacher
         efficacy and student achievement. Leadership and Policy in Schools, 3(3), 189-209.
Tschannen-Moran, M., & Hoy, A. W. (2001). Teacher efficacy: Capturing an elusive construct. Teaching and
         Teacher Education, 17(7), 783-805.
Vokatis, B., & Zhang, J. (2016). The Professional Identity of Three Innovative Teachers Engaging in Sustained
         Knowledge Building Using Technology. Frontline Learning Research, 4(1), 58-77.

Endnotes
(1) l'Association des directions et directions adjointes des écoles franco-ontariennes, Catholic Principals' Council | Ontario,
     and Ontario Principals' Council

Acknowledgments
We are grateful to Knowledge Building educators and consultants, Dr. Rob Iannuzzi, Elaine Hine and Denis
Maika  for their time   and support.   Their creative ideas  and insight have been invaluable to our Knowledge
Building.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                     87                                                 © ISLS
