      StandUp: Engaging Professionals to Coach Design Projects
                      Daniel G. Rees Lewis, Elizabeth M. Gerber, and Matthew W. Easterday
       daniel.rees.lewis@u.northwestern.edu, egerber@northwestern.edu, easterday@northwestern.edu
                                               Northwestern University

          Abstract:    To  investigate    how    we   might   expand     learning  environments      to  include
          professionals to  coach    students  enacting     disciplinary practices,  we    created  StandUp,    a
          socially-shared  regulation    of  learning  (SSRL)   system.   We   implemented      StandUp     in an
          undergraduate   design    program   with  3  student  teams    and 5   volunteer   professionals.    We
          captured 12 online coaching interactions that significantly changed project trajectories. This
          suggests SSRL designs can encourage online coaching that influences project trajectories.

Introduction
Educational researchers have long imagined how learning environments might better connect to disciplinary
practice, such    as engaging    volunteer   professionals   with  disciplinary   expertise  in classrooms     (Brown   &
Campione, 1994). Online systems might connect students and professionals who can only rarely meet face-to-
face. We implement StandUp, a system created to connect student design teams with professional designers who
coach the teams off- and online. Design education uses project-based learning in which students work in teams
to create products or services in response to a problem experienced by real-world stakeholders. Specifically, we
examine if online coaching supports student design project trajectories.
          Prior work   shows  it is unlikely  professionals  and  students   will sustain  online  coaching    interactions
independently   (Rees   Lewis    et al., 2015):   (a) students  do   not communicate     their  thinking    clearly online
(communication barrier), (b) students are not motivated to communicate with professionals because they did not
see communicating      online as immediately     useful  to their project (motivation    barrier), and  consequently    (c)
professionals do not have enough information about team activities and thinking to coach (awareness barrier).
          The design argument for StandUp draws on SSRL (Järvelä & Hadwin, 2013). To encourage online
coaching from professionals we propose SSRL systems (Järvelä & Hadwin, 2013) should include (a) a regular
SSRL  script   in which   students   make   daily and   weekly  project   goals,  report project   progress,   and  surface
obstacles; (b) questions prompts and textboxes to help teams to surface and record goals, progress, and obstacles
on a feed (figure 1a); and (c) automated emails prompting coaches to leave online comments on the feed (Rees
Lewis et  al.,  2017). In  previous   work   we  showed     StandUp  could   increase both   student  communication     to
coaches online, and subsequent online coaching (Rees Lewis et al., 2017). However, research has not explored
whether   these online  coaching    interactions  influenced student   project trajectories. So,   we   ask can  coaching
through online SSRL systems impact student design team project trajectories?

Methods
We implemented StandUp in a 6-week full-time (40hrs/week) extra-curricular (no credit/grades) US university
design program. Each of the 3 teams of 4 undergraduates were paired with 1-2 unpaid design professionals who
coached the team. Professionals had 2 hour face-to-face meetings with the teams a week, and also agreed to
communicate online for 2-hours/week. Teams worked with clients and other stakeholders on improving: access
to healthy food, newly diagnosed diabetics lifestyle adjustments, or refugee transitions. Participants were 12 US
undergraduates, and 5 professionals with between 5-34 years of relevant professional experience.
          We   interviewed  students  and   professionals,  collecting log data   of StandUp    use, and  in-person  field
observations. We conducted 18 semi-structured interviews with students (20-36 minutes) and 6 semi-structured
interviews with   professionals  (20-75     minutes), in which    we asked   questions   about  the  project,  and  use of
StandUp.   We   collected the  log-data   in the  form   of student  and  coach   posts. In  total there were   63  online
coaching comments. We also collected field notes from 30-60 minutes of classroom observations each day.
          To see  if online   coaching   impacted  team   project  trajectories,  we first conducted    inductive   coding
(Miles, Huberman, & Saldaña, 2013) to identify each section in student transcripts to find references of online
coaching informing team trajectories. We defined project trajectories as changes in (a) project goals, (b) ways to
achieve a goals, and (c) teamwork processes (e.g. meetings). Once we found a reference to changes in project
trajectory in student interviews, we would then locate the online coaching comment students referenced, and
checked if the professionals coaching the team also referenced this change. Finally, we would check if there
were any references in the field notes to this change in trajectory. That is, we would only count an instance of a
change in trajectory if we could find evidence in interviews with students, professionals, and in field notes.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                       811                                                     © ISLS
Findings
Our analysis found 12 changes in project trajectories from online coaching comments across the 3 teams. We
found 4 instances of teams changing their goals about what to investigate or build, 5 instances of changing how
to enact a plan for a given goal, and 3 changes in work processes. This is an increase over the previous year in
which teams did not use StandUp, online coaching did not occur, and thus had no impact on project trajectories.
          The following example illustrates a team changing goals in response to an online coaching comment.
The team was working on supporting the transition of newly arrived refugees. The team posted on a Friday
about  learning  about  their client's relationship with    landlords of   refugees, an interview   with  a refugee  case
worker, and an idea about designing "social support networks" for refugees (figure 1a). Two hours later, the
professional posted suggesting carrying out more synthesis of user interviews with refugees (Figure 1b).

             Figure 1a (left). StandUp report from a student design team that elicited online coaching.
                 Figure 1b (right). The online coaching in turn lead to a team changing their goals.

          In an interview the professionals explained that she wrote the comment (figure 1b) because she was
concerned the team was focusing on the wrong user (landlords) and solutions for an unnamed problem (social
support networks), without understanding the needs of their primary user (refugees) ("Nobody paused to say
what  are the deeper   insights   for the  stakeholders [refugees]").   In interviews,  three  students   noted that upon
reading the comment (figure 1b) they shifted to synthesizing existing refugee interviews. Field notes showed on
the four days after the coaching comment the team worked on listing the findings from refugee interviews.
          The other 3 instances of teams changing goals also saw changes in team activity across multiple days.
Other  instances  involved   (1)  another  example  of  conducting    synthesis   to focus  on primary    user  needs, (2)
changing the type of users and goals during user testing, and (3) conducting testing rather than user research.
There were also 5 instances of professionals' comments changing how students enacted their plans to complete
their goals.  There were (1) 2 instances involving changing how to conduct solution testing, (2) 1 instance of
changing  how    to brainstorm,   and  (3) 2 instances  involving   taking  up specific methods     of synthesizing   user
research. Finally, there were three instances of professionals' comments on work processes leading to changes
in teamwork. Theses were (1) regularly timing how long activities took to monitor efficiency, (2) changing their
work patterns, and (3) conducting group reflection meetings to improve teamwork practices.
          This work shows that SSRL tools (Järvelä & Hadwin, 2013) can influence project trajectories; StandUp
supported  professionals'  influence   on  student  practices,  despite barriers  to  volunteer professionals   coaching
teams (Rees Lewis et al., 2015). This work suggests that if we want to encourage online coaching comments
from  volunteer   professional   that supports  students    project trajectories, we  should   use: SSRL    technologies
(Järvelä & Hadwin, 2013) that support students to discuss and summarize their goals, activities, and obstacles
into a written report which is emailed to the professional. This work contributes to our knowledge of how to
engage professionals online to supporting students enacting disciplinary practices (Brown & Campione, 1994).

References
Brown, A. L., & Campione, J. C. (1994). Guided discovery in a community of learners. Boston, MA: MIT.
Järvelä, S., & Hadwin, A. F. (2013). New frontiers: Regulating learning in CSCL. Educational Psychologist,
          48(1), 25-39.
Miles, M.    B., Huberman,    A.  M.,  &   Saldaña, J.  (2013).  Qualitative   data  analysis:  A  methods  sourcebook.
          Thousand Oakes, CA: SAGE Publications
Rees  Lewis,  D.  G., Easterday,   M.  W.,   Harburg,   E., Gerber,  E. M.,  &    Riesbeck, C.  K.  (2018). Overcoming
          barriers between volunteer professionals advising project-based learning teams with regulation tools.
          British Journal of Educational Technology, 49(3), 354-369.
Rees  Lewis,  D.,   Harburg,  E., Gerber,  E., & Easterday,     M.  (2015). Building   support  tools  to connect novice
          designers with professional coaches. In Proceedings of the 2015 ACM Conference on C&C (pp. 43-52).

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                       812                                                    © ISLS
