Scaling Dialogic Peer Feedback via Learning Analytics and Scripts
                            Erkan Er, Universidad de Valladolid, erkan@gsic.uva.es
                       Yannis Dimitriadis, Universidad de Valladolid, yannis@tel.uva.es
                       Dragan Gasevic, Monash University, dragan.gasevic@monash.edu

          Abstract: Dialogic peer feedback is a challenge to design and implement when learning takes
          place at scale. For proper implementation of dialogic feedback among large learning cohorts,
          peers' interactions and learning activities need to be framed and systematized within a solid
          theoretical perspective. This paper presents a theoretical model of dialogic peer feedback,
          consisting of three interconnected phases. This model incorporates learning analytics and scripts
          to support individual and collaborative regulatory processes involved in each phase.

Introduction
Peer review has been a common approach to scale feedback among large learning cohorts. However, the way it
is practiced offers limited potential for learning. Students often receive peers' feedback after they move to a
different  task (Carless, 2006), and the   feedback process  lacks follow-up interactions,  which  are crucial   to
understanding the feedback (Stahl, Koschmann, & Suthers, 2006). In the last years, the dialogic view on feedback
has been favoured (Yang & Carless, 2013). When conceptualized as a dialogic process, peer feedback is conceived
as a collaborative learning activity during which students reflect on the feedback received, construct and negotiate
meaning with peers, and rich to joint conclusions (Filius et al., 2018). Although literature notes significant learning
gains when dialogue is part of feedback process, dialogic peer feedback is a challenge to design and implement
when learning takes place at scale. This paper presents a theoretical model of dialogic peer feedback. This model
identifies regulatory learning   processes that students   should undertake (collectively  and  individually)  and
recognizes the affordances of learning analytics and scripts to support these processes and to create scalable
feedback practices.

Background
Dialogue can elevate the power of feedback (Carless, 2016). However, most feedback practices in the literature
consider instructors' active engagement in dialogue, which is unlikely in large contexts. Initiating and continuing
dialogue with every student and addressing their distinct learning needs is infeasible for instructors who teach
large enrolment classes. One approach to mitigate this issue is to involve peers in dialogic feedback. Indeed, large
learning settings of higher education offer desirable conditions for dialogic peer feedback. Large learning cohorts,
who are considered a barrier to scaling (instructor-centred) dialogic feedback (Nicol & Macfarlane-Dick, 2006),
indeed are the necessary source to leverage for initiating dialogic interactions.
          For dialogic feedback to function effectively among large learning cohorts, peers' interactions and
learning activities need to be framed and systematized within a solid theoretical perspective. The literature is
limited primarily to a very basic conceptualization of dialogic feedback as talking with peers to understand their
feedback. To the best of our knowledge, there are no theoretical models that conceptualizes dialogic peer feedback
in a way that can scale to large learning cohorts in today's higher education context. In the following section, we
present a model of dialogic peer feedback to help formulate scalable feedback practices.

A model of dialogic peer feedback
We present a model of dialogic peer feedback in Figure 1, targeting large scale online or blended learning
environments. Three interconnected phases are suggested in the model. First phase involves negotiation and
coordination of feedback provision, during which peers providing feedback work together to plan and coordinate
their activities. The second phase refers literally to the dialogue component of the dialogic feedback, which has
been the main focus of the literature (Zhu & Carless, 2018). In this phase, based on their shared plan, peers provide
feedback and engage in dialogue with the student to support the uptake of the feedback. The third phase refers to
the translation of the feedback into task progress by the recipient student. In particular, the student engages in the
task based on the plan derived from peer feedback and progress toward the learning goals set.
          Each of these phases involves different levels of regulated learning. The first phase involves the peers'
socially shared regulation of learning (SSRL) to negotiate the feedback activities (Hadwin, Järvelä, & Miller,
2011); the second phase involves co-regulation of learning (CoRL) as peers intend to guide students' regulation
of learning (Hadwin, Oshige, Gress, & Winne, 2010); and, the last phase involves students' self-regulation of
their learning (SRL) (Winne & Hadwin, 1998). Scripting support is integrated to guide students' SSRL (in the

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                    1                                                    © ISLS
first phase) and CoRL (in the second phase) activities and to shape their interactions with each other. Learning
analytics support is integrated to assist students in monitoring and evaluating their individual and collective
progress based on certain standards. Based on their evaluations, students can make adaptations in their task
perceptions, goals, and strategies.

                             SCRIPTING SUPPORT

                       for SSRL                  for CoRL

       Negotiation and coordination            Dialogic interactions for the           Translation of the feedback
           of feedback provision                 uptake of the feedback                    into task progress

                       for SSRL                          for CoRL                         for SRL

                                                    LA SUPPORT

                                               Standards          Monitoring

                                                Adaptation      Evaluation

                                    Figure 1. A model of dialogic peer feedback.

References
Carless, D. (2006). Differing perceptions in the feedback process. Studies in Higher Education, 31(2), 219­233.
Carless, D. (2016). Feedback as dialogue. In M. Peters (Ed.), Encyclopedia ofEducational Philosophy and Theory
       (pp. 1­6). Singapore: Springer. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-287-532-7
Filius, R. M., de Kleijn, R. A. M., Uijl, S. G., Prins, F. J., van Rijen, H. V. M., & Grobbee, D. E. (2018).
       Strengthening dialogic peer feedback aiming for deep learning in SPOCs. Computers & Education, 125,
       86­100. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compedu.2018.06.004
Hadwin, A. F., Järvelä, S., & Miller, M. (2011). Self-Regulated, Co-Regulated, and Socially Shared Regulation
       of Learning. In B. J. Zimmerman & D. H. Schunk (Eds.), Handbook of Self-Regulation of Learning and
       Performance (pp. 65­84). https://doi.org/10.4324/9780203839010.ch5
Hadwin, A. F., Oshige, M., Gress, C. L. Z., & Winne, P. H. (2010). Innovative ways for using gStudy to
       orchestrate and research social aspects of self-regulated learning. Computers in Human Behavior, 26(5),
       794­805. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2007.06.007
Nicol, D., & Macfarlane-Dick, D. (2006). Formative assessment and self- regulated learning: A model and seven
       principles of good feedback practice. Studies in Higher Education, 31(2), 199­218.
Stahl, G., Koschmann,    T., &    Suthers, D. (2006).    Computer-supported     collaborative learning: An    historical
       perspective. In R. K.     Sawyer (Ed.), Cambridge     handbook    of   the learning sciences  (pp.   409­426).
       Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Winne, P. H., & Hadwin, A. F. (1998). Studying as self-regulated learning. In D. J. Hacker, J. Dunlosky, & A. C.
       Graesse (Eds.), Metacognition in educational theory and practice (pp. 277­304). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Yang, M., & Carless, D. (2013). The feedback triangle and the enhancement of dialogic feedback processes.
       Teaching in Higher Education, 18(3), 285­297.
Zhu, Q., & Carless, D. (2018). Dialogue within peer feedback processes: Clarification and negotiation of meaning.
       Higher Education Research & Development, 37(4), 883­897.

Acknowledgements
This research has been fully funded by the European Union's Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme
under the Marie Sklodowska-Curie grant agreement 793317, and partially funded by the European Regional
Development Fund and the National Research Agency of the Spanish Ministry of Science, Innovations and
Universities under   project grants   TIN2017-85179-C3-2-R        and   TIN2014-53199-C3-2-R,     by    the European
Regional Development Fund and the Regional Ministry of Education of Castile and Leon under project grant
VA257P18, by the European Commission under project grant 588438-EPP-1-2017-1-EL-EPPKA2-KA, and.
Access to the data used in this paper was granted by Canvas Network.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                      2                                                    © ISLS
