A Case Study on the Development of Pre-Service Teachers' Design
                                                  Thinking

             Chih Hui Seet, National Cheng Chi University, Taiwan, 105152014@mail2.nccu.tw
              Huang-Yao Hong, National Cheng Chi University, Taiwan, hyhong@nccu.edu.tw,
         Ching Sing Chai, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, CSChai@cuhk.edu.hk

         Abstract: This study aimed to understand the learning effect of design thinking activities of
         college students in an undergraduate class. The results showed that after experiencing the design
         thinking  activities, the participants  successfully  created   their   course   product  (i.e., online
         learning courses in the prototype form) through online discussion, reflection and peer feedback
         under the guidance of knowledge-building pedagogy. It is also found that students had a slightly
         improved   gain   in  terms of  technological    pedagogical    content knowledge     &   technology-
         integrated design knowledge and their design belief of teachers.

Introduction
Design thinking, a praxis model of learning by doing, has recently been recognized as an effective teaching and
learning strategy. In  the present study,   design-thinking   activities under   the guidance  of  knowledge     building
pedagogy was found to facilitate students' design of a course project/product, i.e., an online course in the form of
a prototype (Toshiaki, 2013) and to help them develop creativity in an integrated, cross-disciplinary manner
(Goldman, Estrada, 2016). Not only were the learners able to collaboratively build new knowledge by addressing
a challenging, ill-structured design problem together in the knowledge building community, but they were also
benefited from improving their integration ability that is required as a part of their pre-service teacher preparation
and training program (IDEO, 2017).
     Online learning has been an important part of the K12 landscape in Taiwan, but the field still has some issues
to be further researched. For instant, most of the online learning content in Taiwan are decontextualized; as such,
what is learned online can easily become inert knowledge. To address this issue, teachers can strengthen their
design knowledge and design thinking capacity to guide students to use learning material and content more
authentically and meaningfully to solve some real-life tasks. Previous research has claimed that learning together
as a community, effective use of discussion, group reflection, and peer feedback can greatly help improve learning
outcomes  (Jim, 2010).   By   incorporating  and implementing    these   activities  together into a design    cycle, this
research is trying to examine the effect of design thinking activities, as guided by knowledge building pedagogy,
on students' TPACK and design beliefs.

Method and data
This case study adopted a design research method with two design iterations. The experiment was carried out in
an authentic environment without a specific control group. The participants were 38 teacher-education students
who took a course in a Taiwan's university concerning the use of educational media for education. Students were
randomly divided into 10 groups (each group containing two to five persons). They were then asked to work
collaboratively to develop an online learning course which should at least contain three class time periods, and
should include contextualized learning content for their target users/learners to learn independently online without
teacher aid. In the entire semester, design thinking activities, with the guidance of knowledge building pedagogy,
were adopted  as   the main   instructional activities in the course. There    was   also a mid-term  and    a final-term
presentation for students to test their designed online course as a prototype and to give feedback to one another
so as to improve one another's prototype design. For data analysis, students' online interactions and the process
of their design thinking were analyzed using coding schemes progressively emerged from data (open coding) with
the help of the  software  NVivo     12. Then, a descriptive   statistic was calculated     within each   of the groups.
Moreover, two seven-point Likert-scaled questionnaires (i.e., Technological Pedagogical Content Knowledge,
&Technology-Integrated Design Knowledge and Design Belief of Teacher; both Cronbach alpha >.90) were
employed before and after the course and then a t-test was performed.

Results
The implementation of this research was based on a course that required class students to design an online learning
course in a prototype form. As such, the participants need to work in teams and discuss their design project in an

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                     815                                                      © ISLS
online forum called Knowledge Forum (KF). The KF can auto-record the entire process of all online activities.
To analyze  the  online  logs, firstly, it was  found that the  participants'  action  of   the note-reading   (M=505,
SD=241.15), note-revising (M=133.3, SD=114.37), note-creating (M=39.3, SD=11.91) showed a good design
pattern that supports user-centered learning after repeated modification via within-group revision and between-
group idea-exchange. Secondly, the results concerning the groups' design thinking activities showed progress at
each of the activity stages (see Fig.1, left), including empathy (M=5.06, SD=0.90), define (M=8.53, SD=2.19),
ideate (M=13.13, SD=1.69), prototype (M=13.47, SD=1.19), test (M=9.81, SD=1.72) and feedback (M=10.86,
SD=1.08) stages. After the first design iteration, a screenshot of a mid-term presentation was captured (Fig.1,
mid), and the final design result showed a better and completed final design interface (Fig.1, right). Thirdly,
regarding the two questionnaires, including TPACK & T-IDK (M=-5.60, SD=1.36, t= -13.02) and DBT (M=-
4.30, SD=1.45, t=-9.37) they both showed improvement from pre-test to post-test.

Figure 1. Design thinking process (left); a screenshot of the mid-term report on the interface design presented by
   one group (mid); a few screenshots of the final-term design interface presented by the same group (right).

Discussion and conclusion
With the rapid development of technology, various walks of life have changed their approach to dealing with
issues with digitalization. In particular, the educational field has tried to keep up with the times in supplying
different teaching methods for current digital native learners. Accordingly, for teachers to learn and design new
learning sources before they enter the teaching workplace, they should change their fixed mindset about "learning"
and "knowledge acquisition" by developing a growth mindset that highlights design and knowledge creation. By
engaging students in design thinking activities as guided by knowledge building pedagogy in this course, it was
found that their  TPACK      knowledge   was  enhanced. The   results also   showed   that  they could   come  up    with
interesting design ideas and translate them into actions to improve their final projects--online learning courses.
More  importantly, it is also  clear that  the knowledge   building  environment     employed    in this study allowed
students to generate and advance their ideas that served as an indispensable part of their learning to support their
design thinking.
    In addition,  during students'   design  thinking process,  it was found   that   their discussion,  reflection, and
feedback-giving activities have great influence on the finally designed online product/project. In particular, the
"feedback" activity have helped students to perform better in the "ideate" and "prototype" stages. Moreover, as
students were engaged in actual hands-on learning experience of product design, they were able to actually solve
many  different  practical,  ill-structured, and contextualized    real-life related  problems.   Such   active-inquiry
activities not only give the participants learning opportunities to integrate their design knowledge and TPACK
knowledge  (in   particular, technology-related  TPACK     knowledge),    but  they   also  help them    to adapt    their
traditional teaching views to accepting more diversified ways of thinking about teaching. For further research, we
will try to analyze in-depth the participants' behavior sequence in order to strengthen the evidence.

References
Goldman, S., & Estrada, L. R. C. (2016). A praxis model for design thinking: Catalysing life readiness. In Taking
       Design Thinking to School, 55-68. New York: Routledge.
IDEO (2017). Design thinking for educators. Retrieved from https://designthinkingforeducators.com/
New Zealand Centre for Political Research (2017). Singapore's education system: Some key success factor.
       Retrieved from https://www.nzcpr.com/singaporeseducation-system-some-key-success-factors/
Toshiaki, K. (2013).  Design   thinking    education at universities  and    graduate schools.   Quarterly  Review    on
       Sciences & Technology Trends, 46, 50-63.
Wong, Y. L (2010). Design thinking for the 21st Century. Retrieved from http://singteach.nie.edu.sg/issue31-
       teachered/

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                     816                                                    © ISLS
