    Rural Students' Cultural Assets During Science Argumentation
                         Jingjing Sun, University of Montana, Jingjing.Sun@umontana.edu
                            Brian W. Miller, Towson University, bwmiller@towson.edu
                    Michael Finlay, University of Montana, Michael.Finlay@umconnect.umt.edu

        Abstract: Rural students have lower academic achievement in science. Recent research has
        suggested that contextualizing science instruction in rural life can help rural students learn
        science. This study uses discourse analysis to show how collaborative argumentative science
        discussions    that  give  students    interpretive  authority  can    help  students   access  cultural
        resources.    Early    results  indicate   the  potential    benefits   of   integrating   collaborative
        argumentation in science teaching and learning among rural students.

Objectives
Compared to urban students, students in rural regions of the United States have lagged in terms of achievement
in science. They have lower test scores in science, take less advanced science classes, and enter science careers
at lower rates than students from urban regions (Abrams & Middleton, 2017). This is not surprising given that
rural students experience higher rates of poverty, have less technological resources or opportunities for extra
curricular activities, and have less qualified teachers (National Student Clearinghouse Research Center).
        Much research on rural education has been focused on changes that fix the problems of rural youth
(Harmon, Henderson, & Royster, 2003). This effort is laudable; however, recent research has tried to look at
rural education    through a positive  perspective.    This includes   looking at  the cultural  assets of  rural children
(Barnhardt,   2005).  Aikenhead   (2002)   has theorized    that some  of  the achievement     gap in  science  education
between rural and urban students can be reduced by contextualizing science in the lives of rural children. In
other words, educators can improve science education by taking advantage of the strengths of rural children.
        This    study is trying to extend    this line of research  by  examining    rural children's   discourses during
collaborative science discussions. The authors examined how rural children used their linguistic and cultural
assets to collectively understand science. While rural children are a diverse group, they all have rich linguistic
and  cultural backgrounds    that are  often neglected    by teachers  because  they   do  not mirror   the language   and
context of standard science curricula. This study seeks to serve as a demonstration of how these cultural assets
can be harnessed through an approach to discussion called Collaborative Reasoning (Reznitskaya et al., 2009).
This approach allows students to have interpretive authority and control over the flow of discussion, and enables
them to explore their own prior knowledge beyond the traditional bounds of the standard science curricula.

Perspective(s) or theoretical framework
This  work   is conducted   using  a   sociocultural  framework.   In  this  framework,    cognitive  processes   are  first
developed as discourse between participants. Then, these cognitive processes are internalized as the collective
voice is appropriated by each student to make their own conclusions (Wertch & Bevins, 1992). Reznitskaya et
al. (2009) combined the idea of internalization with schema theory (Anderson & Pearson, 1984) to describe how
broad argumentation skills are developed through the internalization of many small argumentative devices such
as placing the speaker in the position of a character in a story or asking the group to find evidence in the text.

Methods, techniques, or modes of inquiry
The   data was  analyzed   using  discourse  analysis.  The   method    uses a  careful  analysis  of language    with the
understanding that patterns and structures of language communicate social identities and cultural understandings
in addition to factual information.

Data sources, evidence, objects, or materials
The participants are 34 fourth-grade students from three fourth-grade classrooms. They are enrolled in a public
school in  a  rural school  district, with the majority   of them   are Caucasian    students.  The   children met  in six
discussion   groups,  each   group    had  two CR     discussions  on   topics  relating   to counterintuitive    scientific
phenomena     that children of their  age  would   be  faimilar  with. All  of their discussions  were  video  taped   and
transcribed. While there were a total of twelve CR discussions, we included analysis on six discussions about
the story "Deep Water" for this paper. In this story, three boys are fishing on a boat. The boys want to take the
boat into the deep water, but they are unsure about how the depth of the water will change how well the boat
floats. The participants discussed if they thought the children should take the boat into the deep water.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                       817                                                     © ISLS
Early results and/or substantiated conclusions
We found that the cultural experiences of students living in a rural area did in fact help students to understand
the scientific concepts. The argumentative structure allowed the students to explore some interesting topics, and
required minimum teachers' input to direct the students to the underlying scientific concepts illustrated by their
examples. This is demonstrated in the following excerpt:

        Laura:          I think that it would--I think because it would--I think it would've already sunk
                        if it was gonna sink, so...
        Ms. Mason       Why would it have already sunk?
        Laura:          Like, if it has a lot of stuff in it, um, it's probably gonna, um, sink when you
                        put it in the water but since it--it's just, like, all the way out, I bet it's probably
                        just gonna stay 'cause//
        Eric:           //Cause you're not--like I said earlier, you're not adding something every time.
        Mary:           Eric, I challenge your thinking. Technically they are adding, every time they
                        catch a fish they put it in the boat.
        Eric:           But, uh, it said that for a long time they didn't catch any fish, so they only have
                        like three fish and they said they were small fish like they said they were really
                        small fish.
        Justin:         And those are like half a pound.
        Mary            But if they go into the deep end and they do catch their catfish, wouldn't it
                        make the boat sink if it was heavy enough?
        Eric:           Umm, it could, but, I don't--like, boats are made to float, like, boats are made
                        to hold a lot of

        In this excerpt, the teacher only speaks once. The role of the teacher is to encourage the students to use
evidence. She does not try to take interpretive authority back from the students. For this reason, they are able to
follow a line of reasoning that verges from the story. The story considers only the depth of the water. Here the
students are able to use their detailed knowledge of fishing to shift the topic to considering the weight of the
boat and the relationship between weight and floating. A teacher-controlled approach to science teaching would
depend on the teacher to inject these connections into the class. With the Collaborative Reasoning approach in
which students have interpretive authority, the contextualization of science instruction is achieved naturally.

Scientific or scholarly significance of the study or work
The method of engaging rural children in argumentative discussion allows them to take advantage of their local
and unique resources. From a broader perspective, this research is another example of how rural students bring
many strengths and resources to their education. While they face increasing challenges in a globalized society,
teachers can take some encouragement from examples such as the ones in this paper.

References
Abrams, E.,   & Middleton,  M.  (2017).   Towards    multidimensional  approaches  to research on     rural      science
        education. Cultural Studies of Science Education, 12, 167-176.
Aikenhead, G. S. (2002). Whose scientific knowledge? The colonizer and the colonized. In W.-M. Roth & J.
        De sautels (Eds.), Science education as/for sociopolitical action (pp. 39­52). New York: Peter Lang.
Anderson,  R.   C., &  Pearson,  P.  D.   (1984).   A  schema-theoretic  view   of basic   processes     in      reading
        comprehension. In Pearson, P. D. , Barr, R. , Kamil, M. L. , & Mosenthal, P. (Eds.), Handbook of
        reading research (pp. 255­291). New York: Longman.
Barnhardt, R. (2005).  Indigenous   knowledge systems    and   Alaska native ways  of knowing. Anthropology           &
        Education Quarterly, 36, 8­23. doi:10.1525/aeq.2005.36.1.008.
Harmon, H.  L.,  Henderson, S.  A., &    Royster, W.  C. (2003).  A research  agenda  for improving      science    and
        mathematics education in rural schools. Journal of Research in Rural Education, 18, 52­58.
Reznitskaya, A., Kuo, L.-J., Clark, A.-M., Miller, B. W., Jadallah, M., Anderson, R. C., & Nguyen-Jahiel, K.
        (2009).  Collaborative reasoning:  A  dialogic   approach  to group  discussions. Cambridge      Journal      of
        Education, 39(1), 29-48.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                   818                                                        © ISLS
