               Perceptions of Online Professional Development:
                    Do Newer and Experienced Teachers Differ?
                     Denise M. Bressler, University of Pennsylvania, denisebr@upenn.edu
                         Susan Yoon, University of Pennsylvania, yoonsa@upenn.edu
                    Katherine Miller, University of Pennsylvania, kmmiller@gse.upenn.edu
                       Jooeun Shim, University of Pennsylvania, jshim@gse.upenn.edu
                   Daniel Wendel, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, djwendel@mit.edu
                  Ilana Schoenfeld, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, ilanasch@mit.edu
                  Emma Anderson, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, eanderso@mit.edu
                      David Reider, Education Design, INC., david@educationdesign.biz

         Abstract: In this exploratory study, a small number of biology teachers participated in an online
         professional development (PD) course delivered in an asynchronous format. To understand the
         unique perceptions of newer and experienced teachers when delivering PD through an online
         platform, we conducted post-experience interviews, coded the transcripts, and analyzed the
         connections between the codes using epistemic network analysis. Findings revealed significant
         differences in how teachers perceive PD delivery format; experienced teachers had positive
         perceptions of face-to-face PD while newer teachers had positive perceptions of online PD. In
         terms of the online discussion, there were no significant differences; both groups articulated
         positive perceptions.  Implications for  evolving   the design  of  online  PD    approaches are
         discussed.

Introduction
A well-trained teacher is a critical factor in a  child's educational success. When    teachers receive  sustained,
intensive professional development (PD), it can lead to gains in student achievement; unfortunately, most teachers
participate in short-term PD (Darling-Hammond, Chung Wei, Andree, Richardson, & Orphanos, 2009). One
scalable, affordable way to provide sustained, interaction possibilities is through online PD, a method that holds
promise yet has little research-based evidence (National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, & Medicine, 2015).
Since teachers generally prefer face-to-face PD (McConnell, Parker, Eberhardt, Koehler, & Lundeberg, 2013),
online PD may receive mixed reviews. In particular, research has shown that newer teachers and experienced
teachers respond differently to PD (Fox, Muccio, White, & Tian, 2015). In order to assess the extent to which
negative and positive perceptions of high school biology teachers are connected with different aspects of online
PD, we used epistemic network analysis (ENA). ENA enables researchers to understand not only how qualitative
codes are connected but also how those connections vary between different people (Shaffer, 2017). Specifically,
these questions guided the investigation: 1. How do experienced teachers differ from newer teachers in their
perceptions of the  PD delivery format?  2.  How   do  experienced teachers   differ from  newer teachers  in their
perceptions of asynchronous discussion during online PD?

Theoretical considerations
Teachers find interacting with their colleagues extremely useful, yet collaborative PD elements tend to be weak
(Darling-Hammond et al., 2009). Face-to-face collaboration is the preferred method by teachers, but research
shows that when teachers participate in face-to-face PD and online PD they encounter similar social interactions
(McConnell et al., 2013). Recently, researchers confirmed that teachers find participating in an online course to
be an efficient form of PD; teachers believed that the collaborative features and sharing of ideas helped them learn
better (Koukis &   Jimoyiannis, 2018). In   order to take  advantage  of the collaborative  potential of an online
platform, we designed  a  6-week  online  PD   course. To   promote   social interactions, the fully  asynchronous
discussions were seeded with discussion prompts created by facilitators. By fostering socio-cultural learning, we
intended for all teachers to have a high-quality experience, yet the learning patterns of newer teachers may be
different than those of experienced teachers (Vermunt & Endedijk, 2011). The collaborative elements of online
PD may afford newer and experienced biology teachers the necessary support they need to learn, but we need to
better understand the perceived value that they place on different elements of PD by using novel analytical
methods.

Methodology

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                  821                                                   © ISLS
Eight high school biology teachers participated in our online course; seven teachers were female; one was male.
Teaching experience ranged from 0 to 20 years with an average of 8.4 years of experience. Post-interviews were
conducted. The questions were constructed to probe differences in their experiences between face-to-face PD and
online PD, and to probe their perceptions of the asynchronous interactions. Transcriptions were qualitatively
mined. A coding scheme was developed. For each code, utterances were assigned a positive or negative perception
value. To examine connections between the coded data, we used ENA. ENA is a novel method for analyzing
coded data and representing the connections as dynamic network models (Shaffer, 2017). Network models can be
created that reveal a teacher's value structure, in fact, we can create one model that represents the value structures
of multiple teachers. ENA can compare the two summarized network models and determine if they are statistically
different.

Results
The first research question investigated how teacher perceptions of PD delivery format differed between new
teachers (6 years or less) and experienced teachers (10 years or more). The model for NEW teachers (n=5) had
the strongest connection between positive perceptions of online PD and positive perceptions of colleagues. The
model for   EXP  teachers (n=3)  revealed strong connections    to positive perceptions of face-to-face  PD. To
determine statistical difference, we compared the centroids. At the alpha=0.05 level, the t-test (t(4.22)=4.13;
p=.01) revealed a significant difference between NEW teachers (M=-0.74, SD=1.06, N=5) and EXP teachers
(M=1.24, SD=0.14, N=3). NEW teachers reflected a positive perception of online PD--this was intertwined with
a positive perception of their colleagues. EXP teachers had negative perceptions of the online PD and positive
perceptions of face-to-face PD.
         The second research question examined how perceptions of asynchronous discussion differed between
NEW and EXP teachers. The network models for each group were similar. In reviewing the transcripts, we found
that NEW and EXP teachers had similar reflections about the online discussions. An EXP teacher stated that "they
were useful especially when I got confused that I could look and see that there were other people that had the
same questions." Similarly, a NEW teacher said, "I also found reading other people's responses helpful."

Discussion and conclusion
Our findings revealed significant differences in how teachers perceive PD delivery format; experienced teachers
had more positive perceptions of face-to-face PD while newer teachers had more positive perceptions of online
PD. As we scale-up online PD, we need to be mindful of these perceptions. In this study, both new and experienced
teachers had positive perceptions of the discussion prompts. It seems online discussions satisfy the unique learning
needs of both groups; new teachers can acquire the support that they need, while experienced teachers can provide
suggestions.

References
Darling-Hammond, L., Chung Wei, R., Andree, A., Richardson, N., & Orphanos, S. (2009). Professional learning
         in the learning profession: A status report on teacher development in the United States and abroad.
         Dallas, TX: National Staff Development Council.
Fox, R., Muccio, L., White, C., & Tian, J. (2015). Investigating advanced professional learning of early career
         and experienced teachers through program portfolios. European Journal of Teacher Education, 38(2),
         154-179.
Koukis, N., & Jimoyiannis, A. (2018). MOOCs and teacher professional development: A case study on teachers'
         views and perceptions. In M.B. Nunes & P. Isaias (Eds.), Proceedings of the International Conference
         e-Learning 2018 (pp. 19-26), Madrid: Intl Association for Development of the Information Society.
McConnell, T. J., Parker, J. M., Eberhardt, J., Koehler, M. J., & Lundeberg, M. A. (2013). Virtual professional
         learning communities: Teachers' perceptions of virtual versus face-to-face professional development.
         Journal of Science Education and Technology, 22(3), 267-277.
National   Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and  Medicine.    (2015). Science teachers  learning: Enhancing
         opportunities, creating supportive contexts. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press.
Shaffer, D. W. (2017) Quantitative Ethnography. Madison, Wisconsin: Cathcart Press.
Vermunt, J. D., & Endedijk, M. D. (2011). Patterns in teacher learning in different phases of the professional
         career. Learning and Individual Differences, 21(3), 294-302.

Acknowledgements
Authors    acknowledge  support  from a   US National Science    Foundation   Discovery  Research    K-12 grant
(#1721003).

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                   822                                                © ISLS
