   Leveraging the Power of Collaborative Reflection to Promote
                             Learning Through Clinical Practice
         Rupal Jain, Woodrow Wilson Graduate School of Teaching and Learning, jain@woodrow.org
                        Meredith C. Moore, MIT Playful Journey Lab, mcmoore@mit.edu
                             Yoon Jeon Kim, MIT Playful Journal Lab, yjk7@mit.edu

         Abstract: Clinical fieldwork is increasingly central to teacher education programs. This poster
         reports  on   the development  of a  new  teacher   education program,   in which    collaborative
         structures are being incorporated to support teacher candidates' reflection on and learning from
         their clinical experiences. Preliminary findings from the first two iterations of the program
         suggest that collaborative reflection is fostering more connections between theory and practice
         as well as the development of new understandings about problems of practice.

Introduction
For the past decade, there has been a movement to center teacher education on clinical practice (i.e. work in
authentic educational settings; Zeichner, 2010). While teacher candidates are spending more time than ever in K-
12 classrooms, this should not be equated with improved preparation. Reflection in and on clinical experiences is
necessary for teacher   candidates to recognize   competent  practice, self-assess, and figure    out a  path  towards
increased competence (Schön, 1987). However, effective reflective practice is unlikely when teacher candidates
are isolated in their clinical settings, separated from peers, and paired with mentor teachers who have limited time
to engage in reflective discourse. Without the benefit of multiple perspectives, teacher candidates are likely to
rationalize problematic practices rather than reflecting critically (Loughran, 2002). This poster reports on the
development of a clinical program in a new teacher education program, in which collaborative structures are being
designed to foster peer-to-peer reflection, ultimately leading to individual and collaborative learning.

Theory and design of clinical program structures
We view collaborative reflection as a form of knowledge building discourse (Scardamalia & Bereiter, 2014). As
a group discusses a situation, group members offer multiple perspectives, leading to a deeper understanding of
the situation and ultimately the development of new knowledge about how to respond. In the development of our
clinical program, we are intentionally seeking to embed ongoing opportunities for teacher candidates to reflect
collaboratively   with peers  and teacher  educators about   the situations  that they  encounter     in their clinical
experiences. In this poster, we describe the development of two structures that are designed to work synergistically
to promote cycles of collaborative reflection and enactment, as depicted in Figure 1. First, collaborative reflection
begins in the clinical setting through paired clinical placements, in which two teacher candidates are placed in the
same secondary classroom. Clinical partners have daily opportunities to frame their shared experience dialogically
as they seek to make meaning and decide on future actions. Second, several teacher candidates and a teacher
educator  reflect collaboratively outside  of the clinical setting during weekly    clinical debriefs.   These  group
reflective sessions offer the potential for radical reframing of clinical experiences. Ultimately, the clinical debrief
feeds back into clinical practice, as teacher candidates return to the field with collaboratively constructed new
knowledge and plans.

                       Figure 1. Structures for collaborative reflection in the clinical program.

Methodology
We are developing the clinical program through a design-based research approach (Barab & Squire, 2004) that
employs   iterative  cycles  of design, implementation,    and   evaluation. Designed   by    teacher    educators in

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                    823                                                    © ISLS
collaboration  with  veteran teachers  and   teacher candidates, and   informed by  a review    of teacher education
literature, the clinical program is currently in its second iteration. The first iteration involved ten teacher candidates
who attended clinical placements in schools weekly on Tuesdays and in afterschool programs on Wednesdays
from October 2017 through June 2018. Surveys and interviews with teacher candidates were used to understand
how the clinical program was supporting their learning and to identify areas for improvement. Initial findings
were incorporated into the second iteration, which is scheduled to run from September 2018 through June 2019
with 20 teacher candidates. We are collecting data including teacher candidates' written reflections, records from
clinical debrief conversations, interviews, and focus groups to enable evaluation of the collaborative structures
and inform further iterations.

Preliminary findings
Preliminary findings from the first iteration of the clinical program suggest that both structures for collaborative
reflection fostered teacher candidate learning. The paired clinical placement model enhanced teacher candidate
learning in two   main ways.   First, shared knowledge   of  both  the teacher education program    context  and the
secondary classroom fostered teacher candidates' ability to bridge theory and practice as they engaged in activities
including collaborative planning, observations of practice, and feedback conversations. Second, partners were
able to develop a fuller picture of problems that they encountered in their clinical settings through reflective
discussions in which they pooled their observations. Our initial findings suggest that although clinical partners
were able   to learn together, these  novices  needed  more  support   to process their feelings.  To scaffold daily
reflection during the second iteration, we developed a phone-based reflection tool called CatBot (Clinical After
Thought Bot), which sends a reminder to reflect and generates reflection prompts based on a teacher candidate's
self-reported emotions.
         Clinical  debrief also   fostered a deeper  understanding  of  problems  of  practice,  through the use  of
conversational protocols designed for unpacking the context of a problem. While this structure helped teacher
candidates  to see  problems   in new  ways,  some   expressed   a desire for  more  action-oriented  conversations.
Therefore, clinical debrief was redesigned in the second iteration to help the group move from reflection to action.
Debrief conversations now use a protocol based on the innovator's compass (Ben-Ur, 2016), to understand a
problem from the perspective of the person/group at the center of the problem and ultimately design an experiment
that the teacher candidate who brought the problem can try out. We expect that these changes will foster more
effective reflection, and will share results from the second iteration at the poster session.

References
Barab, S., & Squire, K. (2004). Design-based research: Putting a stake in the ground. The Journal of the Learning
         Sciences, 13(1), 1-14.
Ben-Ur, E. (2016). Developing Powerful, Portable Design Thinking: The Innovators' Compass. In S. Goldman,
         & Z. Kabayadondo (Eds.), Taking design thinking to school (pp. 239-247). London, England: Routledge.
Loughran, J. J. (2002). Effective reflective practice: In search of meaning in learning about teaching. Journal of
         Teacher Education, 53(1), 33-43.
Schön, D. A. (1987). Educating the reflective practitioner. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Scardamalia, M., & Bereiter, C. (2014). Knowledge building and knowledge creation: Theory, pedagogy, and
         technology. In K. Sawyer (Ed.), Cambridge handbook of the learning sciences (2nd ed., pp. 397-417).
         New York, NY: Cambridge University Press.
Zeichner, K. (2010). Rethinking the connections between campus courses and field experiences in college-and
         university-based teacher education. Journal of Teacher Education, 61(1-2), 89-99.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                    824                                                   © ISLS
