Development of Girls' Interest and Identities in Computer Sciences
                              Within an CSCL Environment
                   Yu-Hui Chang, Sarah Barksdale, Lana Peterson, and Cassandra Scharber
          chan1173@umn.edu, barks016@umn.edu, pete6118@umn.edu, scharber@umn.edu
                                        University of Minnesota

         Abstract: SciGirls Code   is a two-year   project  (2016-2018) supporting    16 STEM     outreach
         programs in providing elementary/middle school girls with computational thinking (CT) in an
         extended learning environment setting. In this proposal, case analyses of six girls are presented
         to examine their interests in and identities toward computer sciences (CS). Findings reveal
         increased confidence and interest in CS activities, new appreciation for coding, the importance
         of teamwork and girls' understanding of gendered identities in CS careers.

Introduction
SciGirls Code is a project with 16 STEM outreach programs to provide 160+ girls and their educators with
computational thinking  (CT)  and coding   skills within  informal education  spaces.  As  part of the curriculum,
programs completed 3 curricular strands (Mobile Apps, Robotics, E-Textiles) between September 2017 - May
2018. With an emphasis in supportive connections with others, we apply the Connected Learning (CL) model (Ito
et al., 2013) to understand how girls expanded their interest within production-focused CS activities and how they
were empowered in their learning through a gender-equitable, peer-supported environment.

CSCL context
This poster explores   how girls' interests were   affected by  the collaborative   participation of creating with
technology, and how this learning impacts the development of girls' CS identity from two programs (Team Leo
and Team Pictor). Both teams recruited 10 girls, ages 10 to 12. Each strand contained hours of activities that
provided  exposure  to computer   sciences  such   as creating an   app using Thunkable,    building   robots with
Hummingbird kits, and designing e-textiles using Lilypad. Following each strand's activities, girls created a group
project during a `makeathon'.

Method, data sources, and analysis
We conducted a qualitative case study (Merriam, 2009) of six girls from Team Leo and Team Pictor to understand
girls' development of identities and interest in CS activities. Three girls from each team (Nina, Sophie, Emily,
Chloe, Sandy, Karen) were selected for analysis based on the following criteria: participant completed (a) the pre
and post open-ended surveys and (b) three semi-structured interviews reflecting on each strand. Data sources were
(a) the pre/post surveys, (b) interview responses,    and (c) learning  artifacts. Content analysis  and deductive
qualitative analysis (DQA) was conducted using Brennan and Resnick's computational thinking (CT) framework
(e.g., computing concepts, practices, perspectives) and the Connected Learning model (Ito et al., 2013) (e.g.,
interest-powered, peer-supported) as coding schemes to review participants' responses.

Results

Interest and confidence increased yet career aspirations varied
To understand girls' changes over time, we examined Emily and Chloe's development through their reflections
after each CS strand.

Emily (Team Leo)
Emily's CS practices were encouraged by a positive hands-on coding experience using Thunkable. In her first
interview, she showed interest in learning how to code beyond block languages, but hesitated to consider a career
in CS. During her robotic project, in addition to her increased capacity in explaining CT concepts more precisely,
she demonstrated the most growth in computing practices such as debugging and remixing the code to make the
robot work. Although she expressed that working with robots was "challenging and exciting," she showed low
interest in working further with robotics. In her final interview, she showed a strong understanding of CT concepts,
practices, and perspectives by problem-solving her design. Additionally, she demonstrated passion during her e-
textile creation and articulated an identity as a designer by saying, "I'm designing an app. I'm designing this robot
with the mermaid and making her body...I have more impact at being a designer."

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                  825                                                   © ISLS
Chloe (Team Pictor)
Chloe began the program with lower confidence in programming compared to her peers. While she never indicated
that she was considering a CS career, she gained confidence in her abilities by expressing an interest in doing
more CS activities. She had difficulty explaining concepts precisely and used phrases like, "put the sensor thing
in (robot)...and then we tested it." She demonstrated an increased confidence in CS when she assisted others to
code in another class. Chloe's original motivation was to make an app to take home to work on, but her CS
interests shifted to robotics in her final interview. She identified as a coder because of the capacity to "actually
make stuff" with a clear direction, such as continuing to collect materials to build a robot.

Teamwork and gendered identities impacted perspectives
Based on participants' responses from surveys and interviews, we identified two sub-groups amongst the six girls.
3 girls (Karen, Emily, Sandy), who we will refer to as group A, consistently demonstrated interest in doing more
CS as well as able to see it as a career. In contrast, 3 girls (Nina, Sophie, and Chloe), who we will refer as group
B, gained confidence and interest in doing more CS activities but did not develop a career interest in computing.

Group A: Teamwork and gender identities
Two similarities among group A's learning trajectories were: (1) the recognition of the value of teamwork and (2)
the awareness of gender identities. All of them mention the importance of "agreement" during teamwork. Karen
recalled group decisions and incorporating all voices in the design process as integral to her robotics project.
Emily also shared a story of how finding common ground created a productive environment. Sandy connected the
value of teamwork in SciGirls to her future career: "When I'm older and I get a job..., there's teamwork in
working...you'll work together to do whatever you can." Strong gender identities in CS (e.g., the importance to
get women involved in coding) were also revealed during their interview. Overall, group A situated females
learning code as empowering and as a route for women to positively impact the world around them.

Group B: Transferring coding experiences into more CS activities
Group B shared a strong desire to apply the skills and knowledge gained from their SciGirls coding experiences
into designing robots. Sophie expressed computation as a medium of creation and reusing and remixing as part of
the process. Both Sophie and Nina identified themselves as designers and were inclined to do more robot creation
at home. Nina reflected that her new skills in coding allowed her to create hands-on designs using the computer.
Similarly, Chloe identified herself as a coder, but showed a strong interest in developing more ideas for robotics.

Discussion
Since girls valued coding and its processes as a medium of creation, this appreciation influenced each girl to
develop a personal  identity as a coder  or as a      designer. In addition to encouraging    girls' interest through
experiences with coding, we found that those who developed a CS career interest appreciated teamwork and
demonstrated awareness of the role of gender in CS identities. A new perspective on cognition considers not only
an individual body, but also  recognizes the role     and influence  of interactions, elements, and   aspects  within
environments (Newen, Bruin & Gallagher, 2018). Future work will examine how the environment and its resulting
impact on learners' autonomy, sociality, and personal identity.

References
Brennan, K., & Resnick, M. (2012). Using artifact-based interviews to study the development of computational
        thinking in interactive media design. Paper presented at the annual American Educational Research
        Association meeting, Vancouver, BC, Canada.
Ito, M., Gutierrez, K., Livingstone, S., Penuel, B., Rhodes, J., Salen, K., Schor, J., Sefton-Green, J., Watkins, S.C.
        (2013). Connected learning: An agenda for research and design. Irvine, CA: Digital Media and Learning
        Research Hub.
Merriam, S. B. (2009). Qualitative research: A guide to design and implementation. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-
        Bass.
Newen,  A.,   De Bruin,  L.,  &   Gallagher,  S.      (Eds.). (2018). The   Oxford    handbook   of   4E  cognition.
        Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.

Acknowledgments
This research is based upon work supported by the National Science Foundation under Grant No. 1543209.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                     826                                                   © ISLS
