Using Participatory Design to Facilitate In-service Teacher Learning
                                    of Computational Thinking
                  Shamya Karumbaiah, University of Pennsylvania, Shamya@gse.upenn.edu
                      Sugat Dabholkar, Northwestern University, sugat@u.northwestern.edu

                            Jooeun Shim, Susan Yoon, Betty Chandy, and Andy Ye
        jshim@gse.upenn.edu, yoonsa@upenn.edu, chandyb@gse.upenn.edu, yeandy@seas.upenn.edu
                                             University of Pennsylvania

        Abstract: Teaching computational thinking (CT) in K-12 curricula requires supporting teachers
        in developing relevant knowledge and skills. In this paper, we present a participatory design
        approach for in-service teachers' professional development which takes a distributed expertise
        stance in engaging teachers as co-designers of their learning. Our qualitative analysis revealed
        that teachers valued the learning community that emerged, their evolved perceptions regarding
        integrating CT in subject matter, and their transformative agency in reimagining teaching CT.

Introduction
Integration  of Computational     Thinking  (CT)   practices is changing   the nature  of many   disciplines and   is
increasingly making its way into K12 education (Weintrop et al., 2016). For the purposes of this paper, we define
CT as  thinking  pertaining to  the  use of modern   computational   tools and practices  in the context of  various
disciplines. Integrating CT  in   a subject matter as opposed   to a separate  course  or in extra- or co-curricular
programs, has the benefits in 1) providing meaningful contexts to learn CT; 2) making complex concepts in the
subject matter more accessible to students; and 3) reaching a wider audience, mainly women and minorities
(Weintrop et al., 2016). Most existing professional development (PD) programs use a one-size-fits-all content as
it is not feasible to differentiate the PDs on all diverse teacher context and background (Jacob & McGovern, 2015).
They do not support teachers to develop ownership and agency over the newly introduced curricular material
(Voogt et al., 2015).
        In this exploratory paper, we present the initial evidence of the potential impact of using a participatory
design approach to facilitate PD for in-service teachers' learning of CT. By "participatory," we mean that the
facilitators (CT experts) and teachers are all participants in this learning community with a shared goal of co-
constructing the ideas to integrate CT in teachers' current practices in their local context. First, we explicitly take
a distributed expertise stance in which all participants (teachers and facilitators) bring in distinct expertise and
value (Kyza   &  Nicolaidou, 2017).    In-service  teachers  bring the expertise of their pedagogical   content   and
classroom context through experience. The facilitators, with their technological expertise in CT, contribute to
advance teachers' technological content knowledge to explicitly support students' learning in CT. Second, we
support teachers  in  developing    transformative agency   to break from  the current forms  of  CT   activities and
reimagine CT practices that are appropriately designed for their classrooms (Severance et al., 2016). Compared
to past work in participatory co-design, the collective object of our design efforts shifts from the creation of tools
to teacher learning of the technological content. Third, our PD design has explicit efforts to foster researcher-
practitioner collaboration (Gomez et al., 2018). While facilitators who are also the researchers in an effective CT
PD would bring in ideas that are theory-driven, teachers would contribute with their pragmatic views about
adapting those in their practice.
        Our research question in this paper is: In what ways has the participatory design supported teachers'
learning in integrating CT practices in their subject matter?

Methods
EXACT is an intensive 30-week, continuing credit teacher CT PD program offered by the school of education in
the University of Pennsylvania. At the time of this paper submission, the program was at its 25th week. From open
advertisement, we recruited six teachers (four female and two male) who teach grades three through eleven from
four northeast and two southern United States schools and have, on an average, twenty-one years of teaching
experience. They teach a range subject matter including physical science, biology, chemistry, and technology and
come from a diverse set of schools ranging from 99% ethnic/racial minority to almost entirely white. School-level
percentage of low-income students ranges from 7% to 100%.
        45-minute semi-structured teacher interviews were conducted on the 18th week that probed their opinions
on their experience participating in the program so far. Since this is the first research on using a participatory
approach to a formal teacher PD in CT, we wanted our analysis to be qualitatively rich and grounded in the data.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                    827                                                  © ISLS
An extensive analysis of all the data sources is forthcoming.

Results and discussion
At the heart of participatory design is the community of all participants (facilitators and teachers) with a distributed
expertise, actively working towards a shared goal in an authentic setting. Our analysis revealed that teachers
viewed learning together with other participants as an important aspect of their experience. They expressed a sense
of belonging - as Emily (pseudonym) says, "We are on the same boat; we are learners, we have similar challenges."
We identified three key design features of the program that the teachers thought promoted the community building.
First, weekly video-based synchronous sessions provided a platform for teachers and facilitators to participate in
a real-time co-construction of CT technological knowledge that was the most relevant to teacher needs. Second,
self-paced exploration of the technological content outside the synchronous session was strengthened by the non-
synchronous discussions on an online forum. Third, facilitators' active efforts for inclusion of teachers as co-
designers of the curricular materials as well as their learning experiences created a genuine co-design experience
for all the participants.
         Throughout the course, there was a shift in teachers' perceptions about the relevance and utility of CT in
their practice and on their students' learning of CT. As Blanca puts it, "[We] tend to overlook the use of data to
problem solve in subject areas other than math or science. Made me more aware as an educator to this use." We
identified three subcategories in this. First, teachers had increased belief in their ability to use CT within their
existing curricula. Second,     teachers' participation in the program    as co-designers and their constructivists
explorations of the CT content with the hands-on technological material such as CT assignments, in-class coding,
and data project resulted in a shift in their perception of their students. Third, since some of the teachers were
teaching their regular classes while taking this course, this parallel enactment provided them with an opportunity
to experiment their newly learned ideas in their classes.
         Integration of CT in their classroom requires teachers to reimagine their role in terms of their own agency
in changing the classroom activities that involve incorporation of new CT practices. This quote from Linda's
interview provides a great example of how we saw teachers thinking of their transformative agency. "We do so
many things in a school district. This course made me step back and think. What is the end goal? What should my
students need to learn?...What is in the curriculum? Is there a path they can take?" Our analysis revealed that they
were taking agency in shaping their own learning in this program. We identified several instances of teachers
making explicit connections between these new CT practices and their prior knowledge, and identifying ways to
advance their knowledge to change their classroom practice.
         In conclusion, the participatory design approach helped us build a community of CT learners with a
distributed expertise and a shared goal of supporting teachers' learning in integrating CT practices in their subject
matter. It supported teachers' evolving perceptions on classroom integration of CT and led teachers to develop
transformative agency in advancing their prior CT practices with a vision to reimagine new forms of teaching CT
in their local context. Research on effective CT PD practices particularly for in-service teachers is limited. Given
the need for large-scale integration of CT in K12 curricula, there is an immediate need for this. From the analysis
of this researcher-practitioner collaboration, we contribute towards building a framework for effective in-service
teacher CT PD. We believe that to produce enhanced CT knowledge and practice, a CT PD needs to involve the
collective participation   of the teachers  in co-designing   opportunities  for them  to develop an in-depth  CT
technological knowledge. This program was intensive and had a small number of participants. To scale up such
programs by appropriately modifying the design features will require further research.

Reference
Gomez,   K., Kyza,   E.   A.,   & Mancevice,   N.  (2018).  Participatory Design   and the  Learning Sciences. In
           International Handbook of the Learning Sciences (pp. 401-409). Routledge.
Kyza, E. A., & Nicolaidou, I. (2017). Co-designing reform-based online inquiry learning environments as a
           situated approach to teachers' professional development. CoDesign, 13(4), 261-286.
Jacob, A., &   McGovern,    K.  (2015).   The Mirage:   Confronting  the Hard  Truth about Our Quest  for  Teacher
           Development. TNTP.
Severance, S., Penuel, W. R., Sumner, T., & Leary, H. (2016). Organizing for teacher agency in curricular co-
           design. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 25(4), 531-564.
Voogt, J., Laferrière, T., Breuleux, A., Itow, R. C., Hickey, D. T., & McKenney, S. (2015). Collaborative design
           as a form of professional development. Instructional science, 43(2), 259-282.
Weintrop,  D., Beheshti,    E., Horn, M.,   Orton, K.,  Jona,  K., Trouille, L., & Wilensky,  U.  (2016). Defining
           computational thinking for mathematics and science classrooms. Journal of Science Education and
           Technology, 25(1), 127-147.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                     828                                                 © ISLS
