A Review of the Evolving Definition of Orchestration: Implications
                                       for Research and Design
            LuEttaMae Lawrence, University of Illinois Urbana­Champaign, llawrnc2@illinois.edu
                Emma Mercier, University of Illinois Urbana­Champaign, mercier@illinois.edu

          Abstract: The term orchestration describes how teachers manage learning in the classroom.
          However,    interpretations  of the term   have influenced   the  application  of the definition in
          research.  In this paper,   we  discuss  a review  of  orchestration   technology and   analyze  the
          definitions   of orchestration  with   respect  to the   research  conducted   and  the  design  of
          orchestration    tools to  support  teachers. We   then  discuss  implications  for the  design  of
          orchestration tools.

Introduction
The term orchestration has been used in various ways over the past few decades to describe how teachers manage
learning in the classroom and how technology can support them in doing so (Dillenbourg, Prieto, & Olsen, 2018).
However, there is considerable variability in how the term is defined and conveyed in research (Prieto, Dlab,
Gutiérrez, Abdulwahed, & Balid, 2011). The term orchestration has been adopted by the Learning Sciences
community, specifically Computer Supported Collaborative Learning (Dillenbourg, Jarvela, & Fischer, 2009) and
emphasized as a "grand research challenge" (p. 3) in the field of Technology Enhanced Learning (Gillet, Scott,
& Sutherland, 2009). Since this work, the definition of orchestration has become subject to criticism, and, the
way it has been framed, we believe      has influenced how researchers conduct studies in these areas.
          Another   area   that  has shaped  the research in   the field of  the Learning   Sciences was   the call  for
interdisciplinary work with Human Computer Interaction (HCI) (Rick, Horn, & Martinez-Maldonado, 2013).
While collaborations between the Learning Sciences and HCI have become more common, a significant gap in
the Learning Sciences is the lack of interdisciplinary reliance on design experts. Design has become a term that is
overused and often undefined in research. In this review of the orchestration literature we specifically analyze
how design is discussed and portrayed in the literature.
          The issues  of   conflicting definitions pose  an  important   question: how   have different  definitions of
orchestration influenced the research conducted on teacher supportive orchestration tools? We are especially
interested in studying the influence of those conflicting definitions on how researchers approach and evaluate the
design of orchestration tools. To address this question, we compiled empirical articles that describe orchestration
tools for  teachers,  identified  what  citations the   authors assumed   to define orchestration,   and  analyzed   the
definition's implications on their research especially bearing in mind the design of the tool. This paper specifically
addresses the design

Methods
We conducted a search on the ERIC database for articles with orchestration in the title (N = 25 articles) or abstract
(N = 99 articles) from 2009 to 2018. Of the 124 found articles, 101 articles were excluded by analyzing the titles
and abstracts for relevancy, i.e. they were either not a research study, not from an education context, involved
online learning (e.g., MOOCs, social media topics), did not include some form of technology to support teachers,
were dissertations or thesis papers, or were conducted before 2009. The remaining 23 articles were coded for their
definition of orchestration     based on  the research  they cited, the  focus of  their research questions, methods,
participants, setting, and the authors' descriptions of the teachers' experience. Due to the scope of this poster
paper, we only discuss analysis from the definition of orchestration and the focus of the research questions.

Results
Of the 23 articles coded, 17 articles referenced at least one of five different papers written by Dillenbourg and
colleagues to define orchestration (Dillenbourg, 2013; Dillenbourg et al., 2011, 2009; Dillenbourg & Jermann,
2010; Fischer & Dillenbourg, 2006). Three articles referenced Trouche (2004), four articles referenced Prieto et
al. (2011), and two articles referenced Roschelle, Dimitriadis, & Hoppe (2013). Eight remaining articles were
only referenced once. Regarding research questions, across all articles, the majority of questions focused on the
teachers (15 articles) and students (10 articles). Five articles asked questions related to the design of the technology
and six articles asked questions regarding methods to assess orchestration tools.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                      829                                                   © ISLS
Discussion
Of all the definitions identified in this body of literature, there is no trend in definition use across years, other than
the majority use of Dillenbourg and colleagues' citations to describe orchestration. However, it seems there is
some consensus in the use of Dillenbourg's definitions of orchestration as it is applied across all categories of
research  questions, methods,  and  study contexts. While   all of the  articles that used Dillenbourg  to define
orchestration are positioned around the same general definition, the sequence of these papers is something to
grapple with when considering the implications on the researchers that cited them.
         Of the 23 articles in this review, only five articles addressed questions about design. There are a vast
number of questions that can be asked about the design of orchestration in terms of representation, inclusion,
interaction, implementation, process, equity, and more. Questions within design need to be addressed to help the
field build more impactful tools, learn about their uses in the classroom, and understand more about design
assessment. Of these five articles, only one explicitly addressed issues of the process to design the orchestration
tool. While we understand that authors can be implicitly study the design of orchestration tools we hope to see
this more prominently discussed in future papers.

Implications
The process to build and assess the use of orchestration technology from a design perspective is something that
needs more consideration in the orchestration research. A recent review indicated that outcomes of orchestration
technology are typically user perceptions or learning outcomes (Bodily et al., 2018). User perceptions are a
valuable step in the design process, but researchers claim usability evaluations are not enough to assess a design
(Rick et al., 2013). This research and the present review indicate a need for more rigorous methods to evaluate
the design of a tool in the context it is built for, as well as through the goals of the design and the desired learning
parameters.

References
Bodily, R., Kay, J., Aleven, V., Jivet, I., Davis, D., Xhakaj, F., & Verbert, K. (2018). Open learner models and
    learning analytics dashboards. Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Learning Analytics and
    Knowledge - LAK '18, 41­50. https://doi.org/10.1145/3170358.3170409
Dillenbourg, P. (2013). Design for classroom orchestration. Computers and Education, 69, 485­492.
Dillenbourg, P., Jarvela, S., & Fischer, F. (2009). The evolution of tesearch on computer-supported collaborative
    learning. In N. Balacheff, T. de Jong, S. Barnes, S. Ludvigsen, & A. Lazonder (Eds.), Technology-Enhanced
    Learning: Principles and Products (pp. 26­42). Springer. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4020-9827-7
Dillenbourg, P.,  &  Jermann,  P. (2010). Technology  for   classroom  orchestration.  New  Science  of Learning:
    Cognition, Computers and Collaboration in Education, (February), 525­552. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-
    1-4419-5716-0
Dillenbourg, P., Prieto, L. P., & Olsen, J. K. (2018). Classroom orchestration. In International Handbook of the
    Learning Sciences (pp. 180­190).
Dillenbourg, P., Zufferey, G., Alavi, H., Jermann, P., Do-lenh, S., & Bonnard, Q. (2011). Classroom orchestration:
    The third circle of usability - Why is paper highly usable in classrooms? CSCL 2011 Proceeding, I(January),
    510­517.
Gillet, D., Scott, P., &   Sutherland, R. (2009).  STELLAR      European  Research    Network  of  Excellence  in
    Technology Enhanced Learning. In Intl Conference on Engineering Education & Research (pp. 1­8).
Prieto, L. P., Dlab, M. H., Gutiérrez, I., Abdulwahed, M., & Balid, W. (2011). Orchestrating technology enhanced
    learning: A literature review and a conceptual framework. International Journal of Technology Enhanced
    Learning, 3(6).
Rick, J., Horn, M., & Martinez-Maldonado, R. (2013). Human-computer interaction and the learning sciences. In
    International Society of the Learning Sciences (Vol. 2, pp. 451­455).
Roschelle,  J., Dimitriadis, Y.,  & Hoppe,  U. (2013).  Classroom     orchestration:  Synthesis. Computers   and
    Education, 69, 523­526. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compedu.2013.04.010
Trouche,  L. (2004).   The complex  process of converting    tools into mathematical    instruments: The  case of
    calculators. International Journal of Computers for Mathematical Learning, 9, 281­307.

Acknowledgements
This material is based upon work supported by the National Science Foundation under Grant No. 1628976. Any
opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the author(s) and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Science Foundation.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                   830                                                 © ISLS
