            Conceptualizing and Analyzing the Instructor-Student
                                                Collaboration

                             Fan Ouyang, Zhejiang University, fanouyang@zju.edu.cn

         Abstract:     This  concept   paper  conceptualizes    the    instructor-student collaboration    as   a
         continuum, ranging from a lower level of aggregates of individual participation, to a higher
         level  of turn-taking process   through   which   participants   form  mutual    interactions, develop
         sustained communications, and take joint actions to achieve a shared goal. This paper then
         proposes an analytical framework including participation frequency, turn-taking discourse, and
         participant   perception  dimensions,  to   analyze   instructor-student  collaboration  in  authentic
         teaching and learning practices.

Introduction
Collaboration is a coordinated, joint activity among people to achieve a shared goal (Roschelle & Teasley, 1995).
In education, collaboration provides an opportunity for learners, instructors and other stakeholders to together
create knowledge objects, design materially embodied prototypes, or embody ideas in progressively advanced
discussions. Current educational practices foster a more equal, symmetrical relationship between instructors and
students, through which they together contribute to varied aspects of education, including learning and inquiry,
subject-based research, scholarship of teaching and learning, and curriculum design and development (Healey,
Flint, & Harrington, 2014).

A conceptualization of instructor-student collaboration
Although similar concepts, e.g., student-faculty partnership (Cook-Sather, 2014) have been discussed, there is no
one explicit definition of instructor-student collaboration in current literature. In this concept paper, I argue that
the instructor-student collaboration is a complex phenomenon, that takes varied forms and occurs at different
levels. The instructor-student    collaboration can    be viewed    as a  continuum,  ranging   from    a lower   level of
aggregates of individual participation, to a higher level of turn-taking process through which participants form
mutual   interactions, develop    sustained  communications,     and   take  joint actions  to  achieve   a  shared   goal
(Dillenbourg, 1999; Goodyear, Jones, & Thomson, 2014; Jeong, Cress, Moskaliuk, & Kimmerle, 2017).
         First, an effective collaboration    cannot take  place without    active participations from    instructors and
students. For example, to build a community of inquiry, the instructor designs collaborative inquiry, facilitates or
directs students' learning and inquiry, and fosters socially supported environments; students actively engage in
collaborative learning inquiry activities and learning environment building processes (e.g., Garrison, Anderson,
&  Archer,  2000).  Participants'  active,  participatory  behavior    is a prerequisite  for developing     collaborative
meaning-making in a community of inquiry. Overall, no collaboration can take place with a low-level participation;
in other words, active participations build working conditions for a more synergistic collaboration (Zhao, Sullivan,
& Mellenius, 2014).
         However, mere participations from instructors and students do not always lead to effective collaborations;
in a higher-level, synergistic collaboration, the instructor and students must take turns to contribute to teaching
and learning   behaviors  or discourses.   Through   these turn-taking    behaviors  or  discourses,  the  instructor and
students form   mutual   interactions, develop   sustained   communications,     and  take  joint actions    to complete
collective tasks or achieve shared goals. For example, during science inquiry, students and their teacher, working
as equal  partners,  took   turns to construct  meanings     (e.g., Tabak    &  Baumgartner,    2004).    In pedagogical
development,    students provided    their  instructor with  information    about   learning  experiences    with  newly
introduced pedagogical approach; and the instructor made pedagogical changes accordingly (Nel, 2017). During
these turn-taking behaviors, a more equal, symmetrical partnership was built between the instructor and students
and a higher level, synergistic form of instructor-student collaboration took place. Overall, in a higher-level,
synergistic collaboration, responsibilities are largely shared between the instructor and students, and turn-taking
behaviors are carried out by instructors and students.
         More   importantly,   a  lower-level,  participatory   form   of   and  a  higher-level, synergistic     form  of
collaboration are not mutually exclusive; rather, they build on each other and shift over time, serving a purpose to
advance design, learning and instruction. Active participation is a prerequisite for an advanced, synergistic form
of collaboration; grounded upon active participations, a synergistic collaboration is more likely to take place
during  turn-taking    discourses (Zhao    et al., 2014).   Considering     its optimal   form,   the   instructor-student

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                      831                                                      © ISLS
collaboration is a shared, negotiated work between students and their instructor to construct design, learning, and
instruction together (Cook-Sather, 2014; Crawford, Horsley, Hagyard, & Derricot, 2015; Healey et al., 2014).

A proposed analytical framework of instructor-student collaboration
Due to the complexity of instructor-student collaboration, it is not easy to empirically investigate different forms
of  instructor-student  collaborations   in  real settings    (Jeong  & Hmelo-Silver,     2016).    Grounded  upon   the
abovementioned conceptualization, I propose an analytical framework, including participation frequency, turn-
taking discourse, and participant perception dimensions, to analyze instructor-student collaboration in authentic
teaching  and  learning  practices. Here    I take the   investigation  of  the   instructor-student  collaboration in   a
community of inquiry as an example (Ouyang et al., under review).        A community of inquiry (CoI) encompasses
three dimensions    (cognitive, teaching  and  social)  and   12   categories (four categories  under  each  dimension)
(Garrison et al., 2000). First, to analyze participation frequency, quantitative content analysis can be used to code
and count participants' cognitive, teaching, and social participations according to the CoI framework. Particularly,
to better reflect the symmetric partner structure between the instructor and students, the CoI framework should be
used in a less dualistic fashion; that is, all dimensions and categories should be applied to both the instructor and
students. Second,   qualitative discourse   analysis   can be  used  to analyze   how    cognitive, teaching and  social
contributions moved back and forth between the instructor and students in order to build collaboration. Third,
participant perception about their collaboration during teaching and learning can support or disconfirm results
from  the previous   two  analysis  methods.    Together,     this proposed   analytical framework     demonstrates  the
instructor-student collaboration from quantitative, qualitative, and perceived perspectives namely participation
frequency, turn-taking discourse, and participant perception. Overall, this paper advances theory and analysis of
the instructor-student  collaboration. It is  critical for researchers  to further  strengthen  the   alignment between
theoretical or conceptual grounding with actual collaboration practices during design, learning, and instruction.

References
Cook-Sather, A. (2014). Multiplying perspectives and improving practice: what can happen when undergraduate
          students collaborate with college faculty to explore teaching and learning. Instructional Science, 42(1),
          31-46.
Crawford, K., Horsley, R., Hagyard, A., & Derricot, D. (2015). Pedagogies of partnership: What works? York:
          HE Academy.
Dillenbourg, P. (1999). What do you mean by "collaborative learning"? In P. Dillenbourg (Ed.), Collaborative
          learning: Cognitive and computational approaches (Vol. 1) (pp. 1-15). Oxford, UK: Elsevier.
Healey, M., Flint, A., & Harrington, K. (2014). Engagement through partnership: Students as partners in learning
          and teaching in higher education. York: Higher Education Academy.
Garrison, D. R., Anderson, T., & Archer, W. (2000). Critical inquiry in a text-based environment: Computer
          conferencing in higher education. The Internet and Higher Education, 2(2), 87-105.
Goodyear,  P.,   Jones, C., &   Thomson,    K.  (2014).    Computer-supported     collaborative learning:  instructional
          approaches, group processes and educational designs. In J. M. Spector, M. D. Merrill, J. Elen & M. J.
          Bishop (Eds.), Handbook of research on educational communications and technology (pp. 439-451).
          Springer.
Jeong, H., Cress,   U., Moskaliuk,   J.,  &   Kimmerle,    J. (2017).  Joint  interactions in  large  online knowledge
          communities:   The    A3C  framework.     International    Journal   of Computer-Supported     Collaborative
          Learning, 12, 133-151.
Jeong, H., & Hmelo-Silver, C. E. (2016). Seven affordances of computer-supported collaborative learning: How
          to support collaborative learning? How can technologies help? Educational Psychologist, 51, 247-265.
 e,                  en s as    o a o a o s in     ea ing meaning       ea ning e    e ien es in    e  no og  en  an   e
          classrooms: An engaged scholarship approach. British Jrnl of Educational Technology, 48(5), 1131-1142.
Ouyang et al. (under review). Did the instructor and students build collaboration during online asynchronous
          discussions? Computers & Education.
Roschelle, J. & Teasley S. D. (1995). The construction of shared knowledge in collaborative problem solving. In
          C. E. O'Malley (Ed), Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning (pp. 69-197). Berlin: Springer-Verlag.
Tabak, I., & Baumgartner, E. (2004). The teacher as partner: Exploring participant structures, symmetry, and
          identity work in scaffolding. Cognition and Instruction, 22(4), 393-429.
Zhao, H., Sullivan, K. P., & Mellenius, I. (2014). Participation, interaction and social presence: An exploratory
          study of collaboration in online peer review groups. British Journal of Educational Technology, 45(5),
          807-819.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                      832                                                    © ISLS
