Conflicts and Collaboration: A Study of Upper Elementary Students
                          Solving Computer Science Problems
                         Jennifer Tsan, North Carolina State University, jtsan@ncsu.edu
                     Jessica Vandenberg, North Carolina State University, jvanden2@ncsu.edu
                          Xiaoting Fu, North Carolina State University, xfu7@ncsu.edu
                        Jamieka Wilkinson, University of Florida, wilkinsonj2013@ufl.edu
                     Danielle Boulden, North Carolina State University, dmboulde@ncsu.edu
                         Kristy Elizabeth Boyer, University of Florida, keboyer@ufl.edu
                         Collin Lynch, North Carolina State University, cflynch@ncsu.edu
                          Eric Wiebe, North Carolina State University, wiebe@ncsu.edu

         Abstract: Collaborative learning holds great value for young learners. However, these learners
         often encounter conflicts that may arise based on the learning task itself or on external factors.
         Little is known about the nature and evolution of conflicts that occur when elementary learners
         work together. To investigate this phenomenon, we analyzed videos of six pairs of students
         completing a programming activity. We identified four stages of conflict: initiation, escalation,
         de-escalation, and conclusion. Our analysis showed that the conflicts typically began around
         disagreements   about   code, who  should    have   control   of the keyboard   and  mouse,   and  other
         interpersonal events. Also, we found that some pairs of students resolved their conflicts      through
         self-explanation  and   listening while   others   did  not   take advantage    of those  constructive
         strategies. This research  reveals   some    ways   in  which    conflicts evolve  between  elementary
         learners, and how we may be able to support them in conflict resolution while solving problems.

Introduction
Collaborative learning is a complex process that involves co-constructing knowledge and maintaining shared ideas
(Roscelle & Teasley, 1995, p. 70). Within computer science (CS), pair programming is a widely used collaborative
learning paradigm    in which   two learners     work on   one  computer,   taking   turns  with the control. The  learner
controlling the computer is the driver and the other, the navigator, plans ahead and looks for mistakes. Many
empirical studies have shown the benefits of pair programming for college-aged learners, including the promotion
of desirable practices such as pre-planning (Porter & Simon, 2013). In light of these benefits, pair programming
has recently been used when supporting younger CS learners. However, emerging observations suggest that young
learners need additional support to benefit from this collaborative paradigm (Shah, Lewis, & Caires, 2014). Since
most research on CSCL with young learners has focused on non-CS topics (e.g., Olsen, Rummel, & Aleven.,
2017), collaborative programming with young learners is an emerging area of research.
         We have recently begun to implement pair programming with students at the 4th and 5th grade level. Our
observations of multiple elementary CS classrooms led us to believe that conflicts between the students are unlike
those we  had observed    in our  extensive studies   of   older CS  students   (Rodríguez,   Price, & Boyer,   2017) and
studying conflicts is a crucial open area for    research. Therefore,  we investigated the   following research question:
How   do conflicts arise and evolve when   elementary      learners engage    in pair programming?     We   analyzed  pair
programming   dialogue   of  elementary    students   and  categorized    video  excerpts  of the  students into stages  of
conflict based on previous work (Jeong, 2008; Rubin, Pruitt, & Kim, 1994), which may not all be present in each
conflict: initiation, escalation, de-escalation, and  conclusion.   In addition,    some conflicts had a resolution.  Our
findings highlight the importance of better understanding how elementary students collaborate while learning CS.

Study context and participants
We collected data from a pair programming study conducted at two U.S. elementary schools. A total of 40 4th and
5th grade students   (typically 8 to 11 years old) participated and    provided parental consent and student     assent, 20
in each school. We collected webcam video and screen capture data from each pair of students over             a period of 5
weeks. The curriculum    was designed   by  the   authors  and   covered  CS  topics  appropriate  for 4th  and  5th grade
students using a block-based programming language where users write code by dragging, dropping, and connecting
programming blocks.

Results and discussion
Every conflict episode had a clear start and a conclusion but not all of them moved through a full cycle              of
escalation, de-escalation, or resolution. We identified 38 total conflict episodes (simply `conflicts' for short)

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                       833                                                      © ISLS
from six programming videos in our analysis, with an average of 6.4 conflicts per 45-minute video. We found
that the majority of conflicts between the students (71%) went unresolved. Additionally, many pairs engaged in
more escalation than de-escalations. This suggests that the increase of intensity in their conflicts were due in
part to the learners having difficulty working through their problems. The descriptive statistics of the conflicts in
each pair are displayed in Table 1.

Table 1: Information about each pair, including descriptive statistics of the conflicts

  Evans        1          7            18s | 6s |    40s               57%              43%             29%
               2          8            18s | 8s |    39s               63%              63%             0%
               3          5            53s | 8s |  3m 4s               40%              40%             40%
 Adams         4          4            17s | 4s |    39s               75%              50%             0%
               5          9            35s | 9s | 1m 32s               89%              89%             44%
               6          5            12s | 8s |    22s               20%              20%             60%

         While   analyzing  the conflicts, we  noticed that  they  were often   triggered by one  of three  issues:
disagreements about changes in the code, disputes over who should drive, and non-CS problems (e.g. camera
position, personality/social disagreements). As the conflicts unfolded, the disagreements sometimes evolved into
verbal arguments and physical incidents over control of the equipment, or with each other.
         Young   learners  do not   naturally have   collaborative strategies (Gillies  & Ashman,  1996).  This  is
illustrated by four pairs of learners who argued with each other frequently and often repeated suggestions but did
not offer justifications or explanations. In our data, we found cases in which students were focused on the task at
hand but encountered difficulty resolving their conflicts. In both cases, the navigator gave a suggestion which was
rejected or ignored by the driver and the conflict escalated but did not get resolved. In the cases where pairs
appeared to successfully resolve their conflicts, the navigators were engaged and contributed to the process.
Through the use of collaborative dialogue strategies such as self-explanation the students resolved their conflicts.
This is consistent with prior research that suggested that groups of young learners who accept suggestions or enter
into discussions about them collaborate more successfully than those that reject suggestions (Barron, 2003).

Conclusion
While collaboration has been shown to be beneficial in many situations, including CS learning, supporting
younger learners in collaborative CS learning brings new challenges that we must be cognizant of, including the
students' level of socio-emotional development. The results described in this paper illustrated three patterns of
collaborative behavior: conflicts arising as a result of distractions, conflicts arising due to a lack of collaborative
strategies, and conflicts being resolved using collaborative strategies, including listening and self-explanation.
Since a lack of resolution may indicate a lack of positive change in the learners' relationships, researchers should
develop  interventions to   support learners  in  resolving conflicts and  developing    overall healthier working
relationships. Our video analysis points to the need for careful design and study of collaborative scaffolding for
students of this age. Future work should continue to investigate aspects of collaboration in CS, including conflicts
and how to teach collaboration skills to elementary students. This work can support future research on the design
of adaptive support mechanisms to mitigate conflicts between younger learners during collaborative problem-
solving, or to prevent them before they arise.

References
Barron, B. (2003). When Smart Groups Fail. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 12(3), 307-359
Gillies, R. M., & Ashman, A. F. (1996). Teaching Collaborative Skills to Primary School Children in Classroom-
         Based Work Groups. Learning and Instruction, 6(3), 187-200.
Jeong, H. W. (2008). Understanding Conflict and Conflict Analysis. Sage.
Olsen, J. K., Rummel, N., & Aleven, V. (2017). Learning Alone or Together? A Combination can be Best!.
         Proceedings of the 12th Intl Conference on Computer Supported Collaborative Learning, 95-102.
Porter, L., &  Simon,  B.  (2013).  Retaining  Nearly One-Third    More Majors   with   a Trio of Instructional Best
         Practices in CS1. Proceedings of the 44th SIGCSE, 165-170.
Rodríguez,  F. J., Price, K.  M.,  & Boyer,   K.  E. (2017). Expressing  and   addressing  Uncertainty: A   study of
         collaborative Problem-solving dialogues. Proceedings of the 12th International Conference on Computer
         Supported Collaborative Learning, 207-214.
Rubin, J. Z., Pruitt, D. G., & Kim, S. H. (1994). Social conflict: Escalation, stalemate, and settlement. Mcgraw-
         Hill Book Company.
Shah, N., Lewis, C., & Caires, R. (2014). Analyzing Equity in Collaborative Learning Situations: A Comparative
         Case Study in Elementary Computer Science. Proceedings of the 10th ICLS, 495-502.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                    834                                                   © ISLS
