    Social Media and Personal Histories: Practices, Identities, and
                    Algorithms in the Age of Digital Nostalgia
                    Sarah K. Burriss, Vanderbilt University, sarah.burriss@vanderbilt.edu

        Abstract: Many of today's young adults have Facebook histories reaching back to their middle
        school years.   These users are often prompted to engage with their past content through features
        that capitalize on  "digital  nostalgia,"  like Facebook's  On   This  Day (now   Memories).    The
        present study investigates how young adults interact with this content, its effects on personal
        memories   and   identities, and the perceived   role of non-human     factors (like algorithms) in
        mediating these interactions.

        Keywords: Social media, identity, literacies

Key areas of discussion
This poster presents the initial findings from a qualitative study examining the way young adults (18-24) engage
with and think about their interactions with past social media content, particularly on Facebook. Poster-based
conversations will focus on discussion around two questions: (1) What patterns of practices do participants engage
in, and how do those relate to processes of remembering/personal memory and constructing identities? (2) How
do users theorize about the ways that non-human factors are involved in these processes (if at all), and what are
the consequences of these theories?

Issues addressed
Social media has become an important mediator of identity processes as young people are "growing up" with
these tools (Lincoln & Robards, 2017; Robards, 2014). For some young adults, these platforms store years of
content, sometimes stretching back to their middle school days.
        Features of social media tools, including non-human actors like algorithms, play a key role in identity
processes. One way that users engage with algorithms is by being re-presented with content they had posted
previously. Tools  like Facebook's   On   This Day,  now   part of an   expanded Memories     feature, and apps  like
Timehop use algorithms to sift through past content and re-present users with "memories." To further understand
the role of these features in the lives of young adults, we address three research questions:
    x   How do young adults (18-24) engage with their past social media content?
    x   How do young adults relate their Facebook content to their life stories, and (how) does past content play
        a role in shaping the way they think about their past, present, and future identities?
    x   How do young adults describe and understand the role of algorithms in relation to their social media
        content, and past content in particular?

Theoretical framework
The current  study draws  on work     in New   Literacies (Leu  et al., 2017), sociocultural  conceptions   of social
practices, tools, life stories, and identities (e.g., Holland, et al., 1998), and work on the role of algorithms in
mediating human behavior. This study approaches social media use as a key "new literacy" (Leu et al., 2017); the
internet has changed what it means to be literate, and social media use is a type of new literacy that requires
complex critical skills. We approach identity as fluid and intertwined with social media practices, drawing on
Holland et al.'s (1998) conceptualization of identity as part of a self in practice, which is ever-changing and
socially constructed as people act in figured worlds. We also draw on Jones (2017) to think about how people
understand algorithms as agent, authority, adversary, communicative resource, audience, and oracle.

Methods
Two researchers conducted semi-structured interviews with 14 undergraduate and graduate students (4 male, 10
female; 12 White, 2 Indian-American) from U.S. universities, ages 18-24, with several years of Facebook history.
The interviews followed   a two-part     interview protocol,  with an   audio-recorded  portion, where   participants
described their current and past uses of social media, and a video-recorded portion, where participants showed
researchers their Facebook feeds and timelines. The interviews were then transcribed and coded in NVivo in three
stages (open, axial, and selective) according to grounded theory (Strauss & Corbin, 1990).

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                    835                                                   © ISLS
Findings
Participants   sometimes   intentionally  sought  out   their past  content,   and
sometimes were presented with it upon opening Facebook. Regardless of how
they came to view their past content, participants' active engagement with the
content served an important function in the practice of negotiating past, present,
and future identities. For example, several participants reckoned with feeling,
looking,  or  acting  different than  their past (e.g., younger   teen)  selves  as
presented  in  their past content, and   they would decide    to share,  delete, or
disregard this content. This practice of curating or editing Facebook content
served as a potent site of identity mediation, as participants considered deeply
the stories they wanted to tell about themselves--to themselves and/or others--
via Facebook. Participants also made critical assessments of their life stories
as seen on Facebook, as well as on other platforms, and indicated that their life
story is not captured in one place. Participants frequently made comparisons of
past and present selves, and their own life to friends' lives. They reflected on
changing friendships, personal growth, the felt passage of time, changes in life
trajectory, and changed physical appearance.
          Participants generated many theories about how Facebook algorithms
operated to present them with content, similar to Jones' (2017) "folk beliefs"
about algorithms. Some of these theories included: "relevancy" based on others
in your   network    engaging   with the content, number    of   likes, amount   of
engagement with a friend, or randomly. Participants also expressed concern
about (the rise in) accurately targeted ads and irrelevant content in some types
of "memories" and on their feeds. Participant language suggested connections
to Jones' six metaphors for algorithms, particularly as they ascribed them a
great deal of authority and agency, and sometimes saw them as magical and/or
unknowable (Jones' "oracle").

Conclusions and implications                                                               Figure 1. Aaron, one of our
Telling a life story in the figured world of social networking, similar to Holland        case studies, shows a five-year
et al.'s (1998) exploration of stories in Alcoholics Anonymous, draws upon a                     "friendversary" post.
system  of semiotic   resources, other people,   memories,  and  institutional  rules.
Introducing the element of the Facebook platform, years of easily accessible historical content, and the algorithms
that propel them (in often opaque ways) calls for special consideration of technology in young peoples' identity
practices. As users generate, respond to, and curate their own social media life stories, understanding how people
relate to this content  will  be crucial to   understanding   personal  histories, and  critical engagement with the
technology that mediates these relationships is a new literacy meriting further investigation.

References
Holland, D., Lachicotte, W., Skinner, D., & Cain, C. (1998). Identity and agency in cultural worlds. Cambridge,
          MA: Harvard University Press.
Jones, R. H. (2017, July). The text is reading you: Teaching language in the age of the algorithm. Paper presented
          at the 18th World Congress of Applied Linguistics, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.
Leu, D., Kinzer, C., Coiro, J., Castek, J., & Henry, L. (2017). New literacies: A dual-level theory of the changing
          nature of literacy, instruction, and assessment. Journal of Education, 197(2), 1150­1181.
Lincoln, S., & Robards, B. (2017). Editing the project of the self: Sustained facebook use and growing up online.
          Journal of Youth Studies, 20(4), 518­531.
Robards, B. (2014). Mediating experiences of "growing up" on Facebook's Timeline: Privacy, ephemerality and
          the reflexive project of self. In A. Bennett & B. Robards (Eds.), Mediated youth cultures (pp. 26-57).
          London: Palgrave Macmillan.
Strauss, A.L. & Corbin, J. (1990). Basics of qualitative research: Grounded theory procedures and techniques.
          Newbury Park, CA: Sage.

Acknowledgments
Thank you to my advisor and mentor Kevin Leander, who was instrumental in this work.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                     836                                                    © ISLS
