          Initial Knowledge and the Intensity of Online Discussion
                                  Miikka Turkkila, Henri Lommi, and Ismo Koponen,
                miikka.turkkila@helsinki.fi, henri.lommi@helsinki.fi, ismo.koponen@helsinki.fi
                                                University of Helsinki

         Abstract: The effect of pre-service physics teachers' prior knowledge of the subject on their
         roles and intensity in the online discussions is studied. Network analysis of initial knowledge
         and   social  network    analysis of  discussion  reveal   that   both have   characteristic  structural
         features  which  are   typical  for  each student.  These   features,   however,  are   not  correlated.
         Results show conclusively that structure and extension of student's initial knowledge cannot
         explain activity and role in online discussions.

Introduction
This explorative study asks if students' background knowledge affects the structure of online discussions they
conduct. Consequently, we introduce here methods to monitor and analyze the structure of content knowledge
and structure of online dialogue, to correlate the structural features of both. Motivation of our research is to find
the best practices for blended university course. Structure of online dialogue has been extensively discussed in
many research reports addressing computer supported collaborative learning (CSCL) but dialogical structure has
not been related to students' background knowledge. While several studies show that more active groups also
achieve better learning outcomes (e.g. Schellens & Valcke, 2005; Järvelä, Malmberg & Koivuniemi, 2016), it is
still an open question if background knowledge affects the dialogical activity. On the other hand, it has been
shown  that argumentation    in   CSCL    environment   might   not increase  domain-specific    knowledge    (Wecker   &
Fischer, 2014).   Therefore,   it could   be  possible  that motivated     students are more    active  and have   higher
knowledge before and after online discussions.

Method
Data for this study was collected from a history of physics course for pre-service physics teachers. Students
(n=10) made associative semantic chains with 12 individual concepts and four associations for each six time
periods that constituted a time span of about 350 years of history of science from 1572 to 1928. In addition,
short explanations of associations were requested. These exercises were done to help them contextualize and
temporalize  historical knowledge     for  face-to-face discussion  before   studying   article which  was  connected   to
themes relevant for the period under exploration. After reading the article, students conducted asynchronous
online discussions. The discussion was pre-structured by guiding questions about the topic of the article.
         The structure of students' initial knowledge was analyzed in form of networks, which were generated
from students' pairwise term and word association chains for each student individually and for each period. In
addition, one aggregated networks containing all pairwise associations were constructed for each period, and
one network also covering all periods. On average aggregated networks consisted of 260 nodes and 330 links.
Each  students'   contribution for   the aggregated   networks   were  evaluated    using Jaccard  similarity coefficient
calculated on basis of the Degree and Katz centrality; the higher the similarity of a given student's network to
the aggregated network, the higher the student's contribution to the overall body of knowledge.
         All   in all, there were    24  online discussions   with  total  of   984 messages    with  average of   41  per
discussion. The   discussions  were   reduced   to networks   consisting   messages  as   nodes  and  edges representing
responses i.e. who     answered   to whom.    Social  network   analysis   (SNA)  was   then used  to  detect patterns  in
discussions, in form of triadic census. More specifically the number of nine functional roles based on triadic
patterns as presented by McDonnel et.al (2014) were computed for each student in each discussion. The average
for each role  in the  episodes   were   also calculated. Intensity as   a number   of  each of  the  nine roles  for each
student was represented as a diverging heatmap around the average to detect which students and on which roles
were represented more than the averages.
         Now    we  have  the  measures    which   allow  us  to correlate   the structural  measure    (Katz similarity)
characterizing  the    content  of   students'  initial knowledge    with    the  structural    measure (role    intensity)
characterizing  the participation    in  discussions. The    Correlations  analysis  is based   on   Kendall-tau  ranking
correlation as well as on Pearson correlation.

Results

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                       837                                                     © ISLS
The similarity of students' network to aggregated network are shown in Figures 1a and 1b. Figure 1a shows that
both the Degree and Katz centrality indicates equal similarities, ranging from 27% similarity to 45% similarity.
Figure 1b   shows  the Katz  similarities for each student   per  timeperiod and how    the similarity to   aggregated
network accumulates when periods are accumulated. One of the ten heatmaps representing roles in discussions
are shown as an example in figure 1c.

 Figure 1. Correlation of similarities (a), similarity for each student (b) and one heatmap (c) as example, where
                 blues and red represent roles which are below or over the average, respectively.

Heatmaps were used to deduce each student's participation on discussions and to resolve the roles the student
took in discussions. Discussion patterns stay somewhat constant across all the discussions. Of the ten students
who completed the course, only half participated for each of the discussions. One (A) of the five had all the
roles clearly under the average and the rest four had mainly over.     The other five students who participated to
only some discussion had roles mainly under the average, but with some also over. Additionally, student A had
highest similarity for aggregated network and high similarities overall, but the student had lowest roles in the
discussions. Student E has rather small similarities after third period, but the student also didn't participate in the
later discussions. Other students did not have any type of correlation between discussion activity or patterns and
similarities. The correlation analysis reveals total absence of any statistically significant correlations between
the role intensities and initial knowledge. The plausible hypothesis that intensity or role in discussion could be
determined by the initial knowledge is thus untenable. Reasons for distinct roles the different students have in
discussions must be sought then elsewhere than from structure and extend of initial knowledge.

Discussion
Results show that variation in similarities seems rather insignificant between students across all periods. This
seems to indicate that the roles, and the quality, of the discussions are not affected by the prior understanding of
the context. This constancy implies some student related factor which determines the role, although on basis of
results presented here it is not likely to be the initial knowledge of the student. Small similarities with missing
discussion for student E is probably explainable with lack of participation with the exercises that might arise
from motivation or scheduling problems. Student A's high similarity and low role intensity could be explained
by assuming that who knows don't really need collaboration and therefore the participation is superficial and
shallow; student who knows, don't really benefit from discussions and does not invest effort in it. Interestingly,
though,  in   feedback all students expressed    satisfaction  on  online discussions and   evaluated      them mainly
positively and valuable. On basis of this explorative study we conclude that student's initial knowledge is not a
likely factor deciding the participation in discussions. A next question we need to answer is that if the final
knowledge is affected by participation on discussions and whether changes between initial and final knowledge
states can be correlated with discussion intensity and roles within it. The present study demonstrates that for
such a correlative and more extensive study we now have suitable tools and methods.

References
Järvelä, S.,  Malmberg,  J., &  Koivuniemi,    M.  (2016). Recognizing    socially shared   regula-ion by     using the
         temporal equences of online chat and logs in cscl. Learning and Instruction, 42, 1-11.
    onne    ,       ,    ave o  ,         ,    me  ,         ,  anne  a,   , &     a  ,                       o i -role-
         fingerprints: The   building-blocks   of  motifs, clustering-coefficients   and    transitivities in   directed
         networks. PLoS ONE, 9(12).
Schellens, T., & Valcke, M. (2005). Collaborative learning in asynchronous discussion groups: What about the
         impact on cognitive p o essing       om   e s in      man  e avio                  ­975, 21 , 957­975.
Wecker, C., & Fischer, F. (2014). Where is the evidence? A meta-analysis on the role of argumentation for the
         acquisition  of domain-specific    knowledge in   computer-supported    collaborative learning.    Computers
         and Education, 75, 218­228.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                    838                                                     © ISLS
