              An Innovative Social-Cognitive Engagement Network
                                             Representation

                             Fan Ouyang, Zhejiang University, fanouyang@zju.edu.cn
                           Yu-Hui Chang, University of Minnesota, chan1173@umn.edu

          Abstract: Collaborative learning stresses an intertwined relationship between social interaction
          and cognitive engagement. To support collaboration, emerging social network representations
          strive to    demonstrate  not only  social   interactional relations, but also   cognitive-related
          information. In this poster, we proposed an innovative social-cognitive network representation
          to track learners' social interactions and cognitive engagements, in order to better understand
          the relationships between them.

Introduction and literature review
Grounded upon socio-cognitive constructivism theories (Liu & Matthews, 2005), collaborative learning stresses
an intertwined    relationship  between   social  interaction  and   cognitive  engagement.    To    support   learners'
collaboration,   e.g., building knowledge-based     epistemic  objects  and  materially-embodied     prototypes,   it is
beneficial to  provide   learners  with both social  (e.g., who  interacted with  whom)    and cognitive    (e.g., what
information is exchanged) information.
          Social network    analysis (SNA)   is a research   method   and  visualization  approach   in the  computer-
supported  collaborative   learning  (CSCL)  field  to examine   relations  between learners,  characteristics  of    the
relations, and   temporality of interactions during  collaboration   (Cohen, Manion,  &    Morrison,    2013). In  SNA
representation, a social network is represented in graphics with entities as nodes, and the connections between
two entities as ties. A node is any entity in CSCL: human (e.g., instructors, students, groups) and non-human (e.g.,
epistemic objects, materially-embodied prototypes). A tie is the link between two entities in a network, which has
its own weights and directions.
          Recently, emerging innovative SNA visualizations strive to demonstrate not only social interactional
relation,  but also cognitive-related   information. Literature  review   revealed  three  main  approaches.    Taking
epistemic concepts or ideas as network entities, the first approach visualizes the relations between cognitive
entities through network representations (e.g., Shaffer, Collier, & Ruis, 2016). This approach can be used to
demonstrate co-occurrence of concepts, keywords, or ideas within given texts. The second approach demonstrates
the relations between learners and cognitive-related entities, such as who contributes to what concepts, keywords,
or ideas (e.g., Oshima, Oshima, & Matsuzawa, 2012). Third, both social information (e.g., peer interaction) and
cognitive information (e.g., discussion topics) in a network graph to aid students' collaborative argumentation
(e.g., Dado & Bodemer, 2018). Therefore, it is beneficial to demonstrate both social and cognitive information in
order to facilitate collaboration by using SNA visualization tools or representations. Therefore, it is beneficial to
demonstrate both social and cognitive information in order to facilitate collaboration by using SNA visualization
tools or   representations.  In this poster, we   proposed   and applied    an  innovative social-cognitive    network
representation to show learners' social and cognitive engagement.

Research methodology
This proposed social-cognitive engagement network representation demonstrated both social interactions (e.g.,
participatory role, network position, interaction frequency) and cognitive engagements (e.g., knowledge inquiry,
knowledge construction). We defined six social participatory roles to capture interaction patterns, i.e., leader,
starter, influencer, mediator, regular, and peripheral, in terms of the levels of participation (reflected by outdegree
and outcloseness), influence (reflected by indegree and incloseness) and mediation (reflected by betweenness)
(Marcos-García, Martínez-Monés, & Dimitriadis, 2015). We defined six cognitive engagement levels including
superficial-,  medium-   and  deep-level  "knowledge    inquiry" (individual    cognitive  inquiry), and  superficial-,
medium- and deep-level "knowledge construction" (group knowledge advancement) (see Ouyang & Chang, 2018
for more details). In the social-cognitive network, node size represents a student's knowledge inquiry score in the
individual  level;  edge  width   between  two   students   represents knowledge    construction  score   during   peer
interactions in the group level; node color represents a student's social participatory role. We empirically applied
this network representation to show students' social and cognitive engagement in three online discussions from a
graduate-level online course.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                    839                                                     © ISLS
Visual representation results
The social-cognitive networks revealed students' social participatory roles, cognitive engagement levels and the
relationship between them. (see Figure 1). First, active students (e.g., leader R) consistently played active roles
throughout   discussions and  had   medium/high  cognitive   engagement. Inactive  students  (e.g., peripheral     P)
demonstrated inactive roles and had low/medium cognitive engagement. Second, some leader students made no
contribution to knowledge inquiry within initial comments (e.g., R and C in discussion 3), while a couple of
peripheral students made high-level knowledge inquiry (e.g., T in discussion 3). Third, there were very few
mediator students, serving as bridges between sub-groups; they made medium level contributions to knowledge
inquiry and knowledge construction (see Figure 1).

             Discussion 1                          Discussion 2                         Discussion 3
                                      Figure 1. Social-cognitive networks.
      Note. Green - leader, yellow - influencer, ivory - starter, coral - mediator, purple - regular, and blue -
                                                  peripheral.

Practical implications
To support learners' collaboration, e.g., building knowledge-based epistemic objects and materially-embodied
prototypes,  collaborative learning tools or representations  should strive to provide both social  and cognitive
information. The lack of cognitive-related information may impede learner agency development. For example,
some peripheral students did post deep-level knowledge inquiry but did not get enough peer responses to further
build up  knowledge  construction.  When   these students were  only  provided  with low-level social  interaction
information, their motivation for taking actions on further social-cognitive engagement may be discouraged. If
students were provided with both social and cognitive information, they would develop a better self-awareness of
their learning processes, which is a first step toward further knowledge construction in the groups. Therefore, it is
necessary to provide students with social- and cognitive-related information through social-cognitive engagement
network representations.

References
Cohen, L., Manion, L., & Morrison, K. (2013). Research methods in education. New York, NY: Routledge.
Dado, M & Bodemer, D. (2018). Social and cognitive group awareness to aid argumentation about socially acute
         questions on social media. In J., Kay, and R. Luckin (Eds.) Rethinking Learning in the Digital Age:
         Making the Learning Sciences Count, 13th International Conference of the Learning Sciences (ICLS)
         2018, Volume 1. (pp. 456-463). London, UK: International Society of the Learning Sciences.
Liu,  C. H., &  Matthews,   R. (2005).    Vygotsky's Philosophy:  Constructivism   and  its criticisms examined.
         International Education Journal, 6(3), 386-399.
Marcos-García, J. A., Martínez-Monés, A., & Dimitriadis, Y. (2015). DESPRO: A method based on roles to
         provide collaboration analysis support adapted to the participants in CSCL situations. Computers &
         Education, 82, 335-353.
Oshima, J., Oshima, R., & Matsuzawa, Y. (2012). Knowledge Building Discourse Explorer: a social network
         analysis     application   for knowledge    building discourse. Educational   technology   research     and
         development, 60(5), 903-921.
Ouyang, F. & Chang, Y. H. (2018). The relationship between social participatory role and cognitive engagement
         level in online discussions. British Journal of Educational Technology. [online version].
Shaffer, D. W., Collier, W., & Ruis, A. R. (2016). A tutorial on epistemic network analysis: Analyzing the
         structure of connections in cognitive, social, and interaction data. Journal of Learning Analytics, 3(3), 9-
         45.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                  840                                                  © ISLS
