                                Reinforce Context Awareness in
                     Augmented Reality-based Learning Design
     Yun Wen, National Institute of Education, Nanyang Technological University, yun.wen@nie.edu.sg
Chee-kit Looi, National Institute of Education, Nanyang Technological University, cheekit.looi@nie.edu.sg

        Abstract: This paper provides a systematic review of Augmented Reality (AR) in education,
        by   focusing   on   exploring   how   and why  AR    technology    can be  used to   promote    learning
        effectively.  Through      discussing  the learning   theories  and  pedagogies   adopted     in existing
        empirical studies, this study underlines the necessity of context-aware design in the use of AR.
        On    that basis,    we  put  forward     two  suggestions  for  future   educational   AR    design   in
        collaborative settings.

Introduction
The major distinction between traditional instructional design and constructivism is that the former focused on
designing   instruction that   has predictable   outcomes,    while the  latter focuses  on   learning   environment  and
experience design (Jonassen, 1994). The use of Augmented Reality (AR) in education can be considered as one
of the natural  evolutions   because   it combines    virtual and  real objects  in a  real setting,  that provides a bi-
directional interactive learning environment. A large and growing body of literature has reported affordances
and effectiveness of the use of AR in different scenarios and a series of studies has demonstrated that cognitive
and affective effects of AR on learning (e.g., Liu, 2009; Yoon et al., 2017). However, after analysing 32 studies
published in 6 indexed journals between 2003 and 2013, Bacca et al., (2014) pointed out that the major learning
effectiveness was   reported    by focusing    on  learning  gains  in terms of  pre-and    post-test results  or learning
motivations. Instead of merely providing novel and interesting approaches to convey information, the real value
of AR-based learning should be uncovered through investigating how and why AR should be used to promote
learning effectively. To find out these how and why questions, we conducted a systematic review study, paying
attention to those studies in which theoretical foundations of learning and AR-based learning processes were
discussed. The review concentrates on these two questions: (1) what are the learning theories that are used to
inform the design and to predict learning effectiveness in an AR environment; and (2) what pedagogies are
integrated with AR to improve learning in existing empirical studies?

Review methods
We selected scientific articles on the educational uses of AR, published in journals that indexed in the SSCI
database. We used two well-known online research databases related to education and technology (ERIC and
ACM Digital Library), searching with the query string: ("AR" OR "mixed reality") AND (education), and then
obtained a total of 356 journal papers. We eliminated studies that did not involve a concrete intervention (e.g.,
technical development papers or literature reviews) and the papers from similar authors discussing the same
application in similar settings and excluded the studies that only provided users' perceptions towards the system
use without   a discussion   about    learning effect. In this  process, we  also   added   8 more    relevant papers via
scanning references cited in the previously selected papers. As a result, 57 papers were identified as eligible
articles for further analysis.

Findings and suggestions
The results  showed     that of the   57  papers  that we   identified  and analayzed,   only  11 provided     an  explicit
theoretical framework.   These theories and frameworks, and the referenced studies were presented below. These
references studies were further categoried into context-independent and context-aware design.                 Taking into
account the education levels and the subject contents, the main fields of studies in which AR are applied to were
classified into seven categories (see Table 1).
        Findings from this review showed that those context-independent AR applications focused more on
conveying content information in an alternative approach but paid less attention to the pedagogical design. The
context-aware   AR   applications,    however,    underlying  the  learning  theories,  such  as  situated  learning  and
distributed cognition,   tended    to have   more   holistic  learning  environment    designs   by   integrating  diverse
pedagogical approaches and strategies. Moreover, the majority of the context-aware AR applications worked on
taking use of AR to increase collaboration and knowledge transfer in the different scenarios, beyond multimodal
or multimedia content presentations.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                       841                                                     © ISLS
Table 1: The pedagogical approaches or strategies used

      Fields         No.     Context-independent                                Context-aware
Kindergarten           3                              Dramatic play (Han et al., 2015)
K12_Math               6
K12_Science            23  Game-based learning        Digital storytelling (Laine et al., 2016)
                           (Lu & Liu, 2015)           Inquiry-based learning (Bressler & Bodzin, 2013; Chiang et al.,
                                                      2014; Kamarainen et al., 2016)
                                                      Game-based learning (Hwang et al., 2016; Squire & Klopfer, 2007)
                                                      Collaborative problem-based learning (Tolentino et al., 2009; Liu
                                                      et al., 2009)
K12_Language           5   Game-based learning        Digital storytelling (Sugimoto, 2011)
learning & other           (Tobar-Muñoz et al., 2017) Inquiry-based learning (e.g., Chang et al., 2013)
social studies                                        Game-based learning (Dunleavy et al., 2009)
                                                      Task-based collaborative learning (Liu, 2009)
University             12                             Historical reasoning through inquiry (Harley et al., 2016);
                                                      Experiential learning (Yin et al., 2013)
Workplace              5                              Peer assessment (Chao et al., 2016)
Special education      1
      Total            57              33                                               24

     The   findings  suggest   further studies of AR    applications   in   teaching and   learning  are  needed   to   study
context-aware learning designs. Two concrete suggestions are pinpointed and summarized. They are:
x    Foregrounding design of human-context interactions: It has been noted that AR not only provides each
     individual with a new interactive approach to realize human and computer interaction but also integrates
     human-computer-context      interactions.  Hence,    in addition   to  providing   rich content    via 3D   models    or
     environments, future studies should pay more attention to enhancing the interactions between learners and
     the contextual information through pedagogical content design. The link between virtual information and
     authentic   environments   should  be  emphasized.   As   Klopfer  and   Squire  (2007)    pointed  out in  their  early
     study, successful AR applications require learners to solve complex problems in which they have to use a
     combination    of real collected  evidence  and   virtual information.   One    mechanism    for   achieving  this is to
     design context-aware applications on mobile devices. Meanwhile, the integration of pedagogical designs
     (such as    collaborative problem  solving   or  task-based    inquiry learning) with   AR   also  can  help  to  create
     authentic learning contexts where participants need to solve problems or complete tasks together.
x    Designing immersive learning experience to achieve collaborative distributed cognition: One of the
     most significant affordances of AR is providing an immersive hybrid learning environment that combines
     virtual   and physical  objects.  Nevertheless,  the purpose    of using  AR    in education    is not to replicate   or
     replace real-world interactions with highly immersive environments. As Lindgren and Johnson-Glenberg
     (2013) stated that AR environments may be particularly well aligned with collaborative activity as social
     interactions  typically   involve the  physical  interplay  between    participants,  and   the structure  of AR    can
     facilitate and enhance these interactions. AR designers can focus on the use of AR to enable learners to
     build up common ground for shared understanding.

References
Bacca, J., Baldiris, S., Fabregat, R., Graf, S., & Kinshuk. (2014). Augmented reality trends in education: A
      Systematic review of research and applications. Educational Technology & Society, 17(4), 133-149.
Jonassen, D. H. (1994). Toward a Constructivist Design Model. Educational Technology, 34-37.
Lindgren,    R., &  Johnson-Glenberg,     M.   (2013). Emboldened       by  embodiment     six  precepts  for  research    on
      embodied learning and mixed reality. Educational researcher, 42(8), 445-452.
Liu, T.  Y.    (2009). A   context-aware   ubiquitous  learning     environment for   language    listening  and  speaking.
      Journal of Computer Assisted Learning, 25(6), 515­527.
Squire, K. D., & Jan, M. (2007). Mad city mystery: Developing scientific argumentation skills with a place-
      based augmented reality game on handheld computers. Journal of Science Education and Technology,
      16(1), 5­29.
Yoon, S., Anderson, E., Lin, J., & Elinich, K. (2017). How augmented reality enables conceptual understanding
      of challenging science content. Educational Technology and Society, 20(1), 156­168.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                       842                                                       © ISLS
