                                     Citizen Science in Schools:
   Supporting Implementation of Innovative Learning Environments
            Using Design-Centric Research-Practice Partnerships
                          Maya Benichou, University of Haifa, benichoumaya@gmail.com
                             Osnat Atias, University of Haifa, osnat_atias@yahoo.com
                              Ornit Sagy, University of Haifa, ornit_sagy@yahoo.com
                            Yael Kali, University of Haifa, yael.kali@edtech.haifa.ac.il
                    Ayelet Baram-Tsabari, Israel Institute of Technology, ayelet@technion.ac.il

          Abstract: Citizen Science can be used in schools to enhance science learning, bringing people
          from  distinct  cultural communities       to a  joint endeavor.   This   research   examines   how    this
          unique setting can be turned into a mutually-beneficial learning ecology. To do so, a Design-
          Centric Research-Practice    Partnership      (DC-RPP)     approach    was   applied  in   an elementary
          school, while    examining    what    mechanisms       of  intervention   can    serve   to   support  the
          development of the learning ecology.

Introduction
Citizen  Science  (CS)   projects, in which    non-scientists    (citizens) take part  in  various   stages  of the  scientific
process (Shirk et al., 2012), aim for advancement of science, along with other goals such as outreach, public
engagement and policy-making. Engaging in CS may promote different aspects of scientific literacy (Bonney,
Phillips, Enck,   Shirk,  & Trautmann,     2015)  as    participants take   part in authentic  inquiry.   Thus,  CS   has  the
potential to become a unique learning environment for school-based science education (National Academies of
Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine, 2018).
          CS-based  learning    environments    bring    together   multiple  forms    and levels    of expertise,   including
students, scientists,  school  educational     staff and   educational  researchers.    This   joint  endeavor   can  provide
context for potential learning for each of the participants. Such an environment can be perceived as a learning
ecology (Barron, 2006), as illustrated in Figure 1a. Nonetheless, fostering mutual learning in such a diverse
setting,  comprised   of  distinct cultural communities,     can   be challenging     (Penuel,  Allen,   Coburn,   &  Farrell,
2015). We believe that Design-Centric Research-Practice Partnerships (DC-RPPs: Kali, Eylon, McKenney, &
Kidron,   2018) can    address  this challenge.   DC-RPPs     are   long-term    partnerships  that   aim to  co-design    and
implement innovative solutions to practical challenges in schools in a mutually beneficial way. Two theoretical
lenses  can serve   in establishing   productive     DC-RPPs:    (1) Boundary     Crossing   - a   sociocultural theory    that
describes how boundaries can facilitate learning between communities (Akkerman & Bakker, 2011; Akkerman
&   Bruining,  2016)   and  (2) Organizational       Learning    ­ a theory   that  concerns   with   becoming     a  learning
organization (Senge, 1990), as detailed in Figure 1b. We contend that using mechanisms of intervention based
on these theories can promote learning in a CS-based learning ecology. Hence, this research aims to explore: (1)
What type of learning outcomes can be achieved in such a unique ecology for each of the participants, and (2)
What mechanisms of intervention can serve to support its development, particularly in relation to the interaction
between the school educational staff and educational researchers.
a)                                             b)

   Figure 1. A CS-based learning ecology in school, and mechanisms of intervention to foster its development.

Intervention and methods
A CS-based learning ecology was established in an elementary school around a CS project that aims to collect
the public's  observations   of jellyfish.  The   ecology    included   students   from  the   4th and   5th grades,   marine
ecologists, school    educational   staff, and  educational      researchers  (present  authors).    A  3-year   intervention
program   was  designed   based    on mechanisms        of intervention detailed    in Figure  1b.   Here   we  report  initial
findings  from  the first two  years  of   the intervention.  Data   was    collected  from  20  students   (out of   60), two
scientists, nine educational practitioners (the principal and eight teachers), and three educational researchers. At

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                         843                                                       © ISLS
the end of each year, interviews and focus groups were conducted with the research participants. Students and
teachers  each   filled  their  own    questionnaire     regarding    learning     experiences.   In  addition,   ongoing
correspondence   between   participants,  reflections and    researchers' journals   were  used   as data sources.       Initial
content analysis was conducted to address both research questions using our theoretical frameworks.

Preliminary results
Regarding types of learning outcomes in the CS-based ecology, findings show that some progress was made for
all participants, but learning was more prominent for particular groups. Examples are highlighted in Table 1.
Table 1: Examples of types of learning outcomes in the CS-based learning ecology examined in this research

 Participant Group      Examples for Types of Learning         Sample Quote
                        Outcomes (Initial Findings)
 School Educational     Expansion of assumptions about         "I realized that scientific research is feasible also for
 Staff                  learning and teaching                  elementary school kids, not just for MA students."
 Educational            Adoption of new attitudes and          "It was a great learning experience, an unexpected path
 Researchers            practices to meet school's needs       with recalculations as needed...."
 Students               Realizing how science works            "I used to think these things aren't getting verified."
 Scientists             Insights on communicating science      "To pass on a message to younger children, we are
                        to children                            missing an understanding of how they see things."
         To reveal the mechanisms of intervention that supported learning, we focus on the DC-RPP between
the educational researchers and school educational staff. Findings show commonalities as well as differences in
how  various  functionaries  perceived    which mechanisms       contributed    to learning. An   example  of  a  repeated
mechanism is the added value of a "broker" role (individuals that bridge between communities), consistent with
Akkerman and Bruining's conceptualization (2016). An example of a differing one is the perceived contribution
of on-going communication. While the teachers gave little attention to this mechanism, the researchers felt that
lack of  communication     impaired   the partnership.    In addition,  we   observed   an   interesting development        of
mechanisms along the course of the partnership. For example, using confrontation as a direct mechanism to
promote learning, was feasible only towards the middle of the second year, probably thanks to maturation in the
relationships between the communities. In addition, we observed how maturation in the relationships between
the  communities    allowed the  employment     of  different    mechanisms     along  the   course  of  intervention.     For
example, utilizing confrontation between the researchers and school principal to promote learning, was feasible
only towards the middle of the second year.

Conclusions
The  described  research   demonstrates   how   DC-RPP       can be   highly instrumental    in   successfully promoting
mutually-beneficial learning ecologies of CS in schools.

References
Akkerman,    S. F.,  &  Bakker, A.   (2011).   Boundary      crossing and boundary     objects.   Review  of Educational
         Research, 81(2), 132-169.
Akkerman, S. F., & Bruining, T. (2016). Multi-level boundary crossing in a professional development school
         partnership. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 25(2), 240-284.
Barron,  B.  (2006).  Interest and   self-sustained   learning   as   catalysts of  development:     A   learning ecology
         perspective. Human Development, 49(4), 193­224.
Bonney, R., Phillips, T. B., Enck, J., Shirk, J. L., & Trautmann, N. (2015). Citizen science and youth education.
         National Research Council Committee on Out-of-School Time STEM. Washington, DC.
Kali Y., Eylon BS., McKenney S., Kidron A. (2018) Design-centric research-practice partnerships: Three key
         lenses  for building  productive     bridges between    theory   and   practice.  In:  Spector  M.,   Lockee       B.,
         Childress M. (Eds.) Learning, Design, and Technology. Location: Springer.
National  Academies     of Sciences,   Engineering,      and Medicine.    2018.    Learning  Through     Citizen  Science:
         Enhancing Opportunities by Design. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press.
Penuel, W. R., Allen, A. R., Coburn, C. E., & Farrell, C. (2015). Conceptualizing research­practice partnerships
         as joint work at boundaries. Journal of Education for Students Placed at Risk, 20(1-2), 182-197.
Senge, P. (1990). The Fifth Discipline: The Art and Practice of the Learning Organization. NY: Doubleday.
Shirk, J. L., Ballard, H. L., Wilderman, C. C., Phillips, ... Bonney, R. (2012). Public participation in scientific
         research: a framework for deliberate design. Ecology and Society, 17(2), 29.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                      844                                                           © ISLS
