      Designing for ESM-Mediated Collaborative Science Learning
                      Sugat Dabholkar, Northwestern University, sugat@u.northwestern.edu
                           Uri Wilensky, Northwestern University, uri@northwestern.edu

         Abstract:   Emergent    Systems   Microworlds   (ESM)   are learning   environments   that  combine
         agent-based approach of modeling complex emergent phenomena and constructionist design
         principles. In an ESM-based curriculum implementation, students worked in groups to explore
         and investigate computer-based ESMs. They shared their findings and participated in teacher-
         guided reflections to collaboratively construct scientific knowledge. We present an analysis of
         a shift in students' perceptions regarding their agency, as passive recipients or active creators
         of knowledge, in a science classroom.

Introduction
The  goal  of  science education    should  not be   limited to `knowing   about   science', rather  it should include
`learning to use science practices and tools to make sense of the world' (Schwarz, Passmore & Reiser, 2017). In
order to   support  such learning   in classrooms,   researchers and  educators    are increasingly   designing newer
technology-enhanced    collaborative   learning  environments    and curricula  that   are authentic  to contemporary
scientific inquiry   practices  and  provide   epistemic  and   conceptual  scaffolds   for  learning   those practices
(Quintana   et al., 2009).   We  contribute to  this work of  designing   for computer-based    collaborative  science
learning by combining two powerful design approaches in learning sciences: agent-based modeling of complex
systems and constructionism (Wilensky & Resnick, 1999; Jacobson & Wilensky, 2006). We call this design
approach Emergent Systems Microworlds (ESM) (Dabholkar, Anton & Wilensky, 2018). In this article, we first
describe design of an ESM and a pedagogical practice of using ESM-based curricula in a classroom setting. We
then  present  an   analysis of student pre- and   post- interviews  regarding   their perceptions   about learning  of
science and process of constructing knowledge using scientific inquiry practices. Our research question is as
follows: How do students' perceptions of their agency in the process of scientific knowledge construction get
transformed after their participation in an ESM-based curriculum?

ESM-mediated learning of genetics and evolution
ESMs   are  agent-based  models    of  emergent  systems  that  are  designed   as microworlds   to  support  students'
learning through explorations and investigations of those models. Agent-based modeling of emergent Systems is
one of the central design features of an ESM. This approach allows students to observe behaviors of agents, and
reason about emergent patterns at the system level by reducing cognitive and perceptual limitations (Goldstone
& Wilensky, 2008). Learners manipulate objects and execute specific operations instantiated in a microworld.
Such manipulations would result in observable changes in the microworld. As learners observe those changes,
they receive feedback through representations linked with the objects about their behaviors and changes in the
system. Learners use this feedback to induce or discover properties and functioning of the system as a whole.
         In an  ESM-based      curriculum,  students  explore and   learn about  scientific  phenomena   using  ESMs.
Students actively construct knowledge in a computational microworld using scientific inquiry practices similar
to those scientists use to construct knowledge about the real world. The GenEvo curriculum incorporates a series
of computational    models   designed  using NetLogo     (Dabholkar  and  Wilensky,    2016). In this   curriculum, the
emergent properties of biological systems include, genetic regulation, carrying capacity, genetic drift and natural
selection. Students work in small groups of two or three. Their explorations are scaffolded by guiding them to
focus on specific aspects of agent behaviors such as resource availability or DNA-proteins interactions. Students
explore a model and identify its aspect that they find interesting to investigate. They are asked to state it as a
research question and state their preliminary answer as a testable hypothesis. Then they design and conduct
computational   experiments     in the  ESM    learning  environment  to   test their  hypotheses   and   present their
investigations. Their findings collectively build towards ideas about the emergent properties in the context of
genetic regulation and evolution.

Methods
The data used in this paper are from an ESM-based biology course conducted in a residential summer camp in a
western city in India where students from all over India participated. In this fourth iteration of the course, 12
students of age 11 to 14 participated of whom 5 were females and 7 were males. All the students were of Asian
Indian origin. In addition to field notes and video recording, we conducted pre- and post- tests, and pre- and

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                     845                                                    © ISLS
post- interviews about students' ideas regarding science learning and what scientists do.

Results
For the  analysis   in this paper,  we   focus on  pre-  and    post-  interview questions    that were   about  students'
perceptions  regarding  learning   of science,  especially  from  the    perspective of understanding     their agency   in
knowledge    construction,  and practices  that  scientists follow    to construct  knowledge.     We identified  shift  in
students' perceptions about their own agency after their participation in the ESM-based curriculum (Figure 1).

               Figure 1. Students' perceptions about learning of science and practices of scientists.

         Students described learning in a traditional classroom setting as a teacher directed process and they did
not see active agency in learning and knowledge construction (Figure 1a). However, after participating in the
ESM-mediated learning experience, all the students talked about actively constructing knowledge. The students
specifically talked about   process   of science  that they   engaged    in when   they discussed   their learning in   the
course. It is important to note that none of the students even mentioned about process of science when they
talked about their science classroom learning prior to the course, as a response to the same question prompt.
More number of students talked about learning in this course being enjoyable and fun. Students perceptions of
who scientists are and what they do also showed notable shift (Figure 1b). In the post interviews, more students
spoke about the scientific process of knowledge construction than mentioning scientists as people with extra-
ordinary abilities. They    talked about  experimentation,     testing  hypotheses,  repetitions to validate    results and
community aspects of knowledge creation being important parts of practices of scientists.
         This analysis demonstrates how ESM-mediated learning in the GenEvo course transformed students'
perceptions about their agency in knowledge construction in the context of a science classroom and changed
their understanding of practices of scientists as well.

References
Berland, L. K., Schwarz, C. V., Krist, C., Kenyon, L., Lo, A. S., & Reiser, B. J. (2016). Epistemologies in
         practice: Making scientific practices meaningful for students. Journal of Research in Science Teaching,
         53(7), 1082-1112.
Dabholkar, S., Anton, G., & Wilensky, U. (2018). GenEvo - An emergent systems microworld for model-based
         scientific inquiry in the context of genetics and evolution. Proceedings of the International Conference
         for the Learning Sciences (ICLS 2018).
Dabholkar,     S.       &     Wilensky,        U.      (2016).       GenEvo        Systems       Biology     curriculum.
         http://ccl.northwestern.edu/curriculum/genevo/.       Center   for Connected   Learning   and  Computer-Based
         Modeling, Northwestern University, Evanston, IL.
Jacobson, M. J., & Wilensky, U. (2006). Complex systems in education: Scientific and educational importance
         and implications for the learning sciences. The Journal of the learning sciences, 15(1), 11-34.
Quintana, C., Reiser, B. J., Davis, E. A., Krajcik, J., Fretz, E., Duncan, R. G., ... & Soloway, E. (2004). A
         scaffolding   design framework    for  software    to support   science inquiry.  The   journal  of the  learning
         sciences, 13(3), 337-386.
Schwarz, C. V., Passmore, C., & Reiser, B. J. (2017). Helping students make sense of the world using next
         generation science and engineering practices. NSTA Press.
Wilensky,  U., &    Reisman,  K.   (2006). Thinking    like a  wolf,  a  sheep, or a firefly: Learning    biology through
         constructing   and  testing  computational    theories--an     embodied   modeling   approach.   Cognition     and
         instruction, 24(2), 171-209.
Wilensky, U., & Resnick, M. (1999). Thinking in levels: A dynamic systems approach to making sense of the
         world. Journal of Science Education and technology, 8(1), 3-19.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                       846                                                     © ISLS
