    Contribution to the Integration of MOOC in a Hybrid-Learning
                           Project in the Moroccan University
Bouchaib Riyami, Institut supérieur du Génie Appliqué (IGA), Casablanca, Maroc, bouchaib.riyami@iga.ac.ma
         Khalifa Mansouri, SSDIA, Université Hassan 2, Casablanca, Maroc, khmansouri@hotmail.com
                Fanck Poirier, Lab-STICC, UBS, Vannes, France, franck.poirier@univ-ubs.fr

         Abstract:  This model relies mainly on the use of Massive Open Online Courses (MOOC).
         Several general questions have been raised around the MOOC, especially in relation to the
         reliability of online education and its ability to find a place on a par with traditional education.
         We have tried, through field studies, to answer key questions such as: Is higher education in
         Morocco able to produce more interesting results by adopting this new means of training?

Introduction
Moroccan higher education is based mainly on direct face-to-face contact between students and teachers. As
present, it has become possible to replace this medium of transmission of knowledge with a new pedagogical tool
based on  ICT  (Information  and Communication       Technologies).  The   latter is not   based solely on    a simple
reproduction of what is traditionally found in higher education, but with a new vision that highlights the positive
aspects of virtual communities that allow for the emulation of experiences and knowledge. Our contribution is an
attempt to advance a new model of the integration of a hybrid pedagogy based on real attendance and distance
learning in relation to courses delivered at the Moroccan university.

Significance and relevance of the topic
For a long time, the different entities of the educational triangle of Moroccan higher education, the teacher, the
learner and the knowledge,   have benefited  very    marginally  from the  ICT.   But   with the  advent of     training
management platforms such as Moodle (Modular Object-Oriented Dynamic Learning Environment), e-learning
platforms such as MOOC (Cisel, M., Bruillard, E. 2012) and the emergence of new mobile devices such as
smartphones and tablets, training in the Moroccan university has changed a lot and in depth.
         Currently, the Moroccan state has undertaken several investment projects for the modernization of its
higher education system (Ouazzani Touhami, A., Benjelloun, N., Aami, M. and Haddou, A. 2014), as in the case
of the Digital Morocco 2013 project, the ICT integration project in education, the LAWHATI project and the
project INJAZ, (Alj, O. and Benjelloun, N. 2016), etc. Equally, the Moroccan universities have taken the initiative
of setting up MOOC platforms for the benefit of learners, such as UH2C (MH2C MOOCs), UCAM (UC@Mooc),
UIZ (MOOC UIZ) and UM5R (UM5MOOC).               This initiative, if followed by distance learning, can help to
minimize  the problem  of massification  within universities,   to improve  the   level of learners as  well    as their
motivation and involvement in the use of ICT information and communication.
         In this paper, we propose a hybrid-learning model in the Moroccan university education system. This
project studied the different needs and expectations of learners and teachers, based on real experimental facts
(Riyami, B., Mansouri, K. and Poirier, F. 2019) with the objective of testing the degree of motivation, satisfaction,
involvement and appropriation of this new pedagogical approach. It tries to consolidate the initiatives of the
Moroccan universities by a better exploitation of the MOOC in higher education and to generalize this new
pedagogical approach for all the university learners.

Content
The pedagogical   approach proposed  is  in the form   of a  hybridization between    face-to-face  and the   distance
learning (Nissen, E.  2006). Among   its main   objectives   are the  diversification   of pedagogical  content,    the
development of new skills and the possibility of providing learners with the benefits of face-to-face classroom
work and of free and flexible work at a distance. This approach brings together the tools and resources most
adapted to modern pedagogical dimensions.     A first part of the training is composed of face-to-face modules
(direct exchanges, lectures, documents and discussions). A second part is taught remotely in a synchronous way
through virtual classes and MOOC as external resources (De Poël, V., François, J., Lecomte, and Béatrice. 2013).
A third part is done at a distance and asynchronously through the institution's own e-Learning systems as internal
resources (Riyami, B., Mansouri,  K. and    Poirier,  F. 2017). Our  experiments     have  shown  that the following
conspiracies have to be respected in order to ensure the success of the hybrid-learning (see Figure 1):

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                    847                                                    © ISLS
                            Figure 1. Questions of the success of the hybrid-learning.

   x     Effective and strong engagement of learners and teachers,
   x     Work on the prerequisites of the learners before starting the subject to be taught through the MOOC,
   x     Encouraging frequent Peer exchanges,
   x     Foster collaborative work between learners (Riyami, B., Mansouri, K. and Poirier, F. 2019),
   x     Effective supervision and guidance of learners,
   x     Good motivation of learners (Foon Hew, K., Sum Cheung, W. 2014),
   x     A provision of the necessary infrastructure to facilitate access to MOOC.

Conclusion
In conclusion, we can confirm that our approach can satisfy most of the objectives targeted by the Moroccan
higher education system:
   x     The struggle against the problem of the large number of student during the first years of university,
   x     The continuous updating of educational content,
   x     The decrease in the failure of university students,
   x     Facilitation of exchanges between peers and between learners and teachers.

References
Alj, O. and Benjelloun, N. (2016). Etude comparative de quelques recherches sur l'intégration des TIC dans
         l'enseignement des disciplines scientifiques au sein du programme GENIE marocain. Association EPI.
Cisel, M.,  Bruillard, E. 2012.  Chronique   des  MOOC.      Sciences et Technologies  de l´Information et de   la
         Communication      pour   l'Éducation    et  la     Formation,    Vol.  19,    2012,  http://sticef.univ-
         lemans.fr/num/vol2012/13r-cisel/sticef_2012_cisel_13r.htm
De Poël, V., François, J., Lecomte, Béatrice. 2013.  MOOC, RÉVOLUTION ? BUSINESS ? OPPORTUNITÉ ?
         , Documents    pédagogiques,  Sciences   sociales   &  comportementales,  psychologie   : Education    &
         enseignement, jui-2013, http://hdl.handle.net/2268/154729.
Foon Hew, K., Sum Cheung, W. (2014). Students' and instructors' use of massive open online courses (MOOCs):
         Motivations and challenges. Educational Research Review, 12 (2014) pp.45­58, www.elsevier.com/
         locate/EDUREV
Nissen, E. (2006). Scénarios de communication en ligne dans des formations hybrides» Le Français dans le
         monde. Recherches et applications, Paris : Français dans le monde, 2006, Les échanges en ligne dans
         l'apprentissage  et  la  formation,  pp.   44-58.    «  edutice-00124819>   »,   https://edutice.archives-
         ouvertes.fr/edutice-00124819.
Ouazzani Touhami, A., Benjelloun, N., Aami, M. and Haddou, A. (2014). Impact of using Java Software of
         Geometrical Optics JSGO on the construction success of the virtual image among the first year university
         students. IOSR Journal Of Research & Method in education IOSR-JRME, Volume 4, Issue 3 Ver II, pp.
         16-24

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                   848                                                 © ISLS
