 From Face-to-Face to Online: Considerations for a Social Capital
    Design to Scale Science Teacher Access to High-Quality PD
         Susan A. Yoon, Graduate School of Education, University of Pennsylvania, yoonsa@upenn.edu
    Katherine Miller, Graduate School of Education, University of Pennsylvania, kmmiller@gse.upenn.edu
         Jooeun Shim, Graduate School of Education, University of Pennsylvania, jshim@gse.upenn.edu
                   Daniel Wendel, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, djwendel@mit.edu
                   Ilana Schoenfeld, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, ilanasch@mit.edu
                  Emma Anderson, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, eanderso@mit.edu
                            David Reider, Education Design, david@educationdesign.biz

         Abstract: This research investigates an approach to improving science teacher's access to high-
         quality PD. Working with a small number of teachers, this exploratory study details how we
         combined social capital mechanisms with essential teacher learning and PD requirements to
         overcome existing challenges in the delivery of a PD course in a fully online asynchronous
         platform. Findings reveal comparably high satisfaction and usability of course materials as
         compared to previous face-to-face PD. Teachers also articulated positive experiences from the
         intentional social capital course design in the areas of tie quality, depth of interaction, and access
         to expertise. However, the development of trust among teachers was harder to construct.

Introduction and theoretical considerations
This work was built on known characteristics of high-quality face-to-face PD for science teachers that included,
teacher's hands-on training, aligning with teaching contexts, exposure to scientific practices, and working with
teachers as   collaborators   Findings from our previous   studies  (e.g., Yoon et  al., 2017) revealed   high  teacher
satisfaction, high curricular utility, and increased student participation and learning outcomes. Strategic efforts to
build teacher's social capital in addition to building teacher's human capital also improved their teaching.                   We
were encouraged to consider how to scale to reach more teachers. Merritt (2016) noted that among the highest
concerns articulated by teachers for improving practice is the need for more and flexible time. Peltola et al. (2017)
highlight a dearth of access to professional peers. This report and others suggest that online PD has the potential
to supplement local, in-person experiences. In this research, we investigated the application of an online social
capital design asking: To what extent can a fully asynchronous PD course constructed through a social capital
design deliver high-quality PD? There is already research that can inform us on strategies for building networked
teacher communities such as making practice public (Lieberman & Mace, 2010), multiple options for knowledge
sharing, the development of trust, and highlighting member expertise (Booth, 2012). This can also be collectively
described as development of teacher social capital (e.g., Yoon & Baker-Doyle, 2018). As opposed to teachers'
human capital which is a focus on developing knowledge and skills within an individual, a focus on social capital
develops teaching capacities that can be acquired through direct and indirect relationships in social networks.
Coburn and Russell (2008) offer a useful categorization of social capital characteristics that include: tie quality,
trust, depth of interaction, and access to expertise.

Methodology
This work was funded to examine the ability to scale high-quality PD on a MOOC platform. However, in this
proof-of-concept study, we worked with a small number of teachers to examine the impact of design choices that
frame participation through social capital and teacher learning that could eventually support PD at larger scales.
Our task   in the online  PD    delivery mode was     to replicate the high  levels of   satisfaction, confidence,             and
engagement with the StarLogo Nova modeling curricula. We developed six weekly online modules that mirrored
the topics that were investigated in the face-to-face PD. With respect to designing for the characteristics of high-
quality PD and teacher learning through building social capital online, Table 1 outlines details of the first category
of design choices. The other three categories will be presented in the poster.

Table 1: Considerations for social capital plus PD and teacher learning that led to design choices

    Social      PD and Teacher                              Design Choice for Online Delivery
   Capital         Learning
  Category       Characteristics
 Tie Quality    Buildingrelationships· Online profiles to share professional and personal information, e.g., Write a post thatdescribes your background (e.g., how long you have taught, unique skills or knowledge

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                     849                                                     © ISLS
                                  that might interest your classmates). After you have responded, use the forum to connect
                                  to a couple of other course participants by clicking "reply" to comment on their posts.
              Peer-to-peer        · Seeding norms of support, e.g., In the Discussion Forum, briefly discuss how one
              support             example impacted your thinking about systems. After you have responded, read a couple
                                  of other posts and click the heart icon for any that resonate with you.

We worked with eight teachers from different geographic locations around the northeastern part of the U.S. Of
the eight teachers, seven were female and one was male. Teaching experience ranged from 0 to 20 years with an
average of 8.4 years of experience. We collected two data sources: PD satisfaction surveys and teacher post-
course experience interviews.  The                 survey        probed    experiences         with      the  course     resources      in terms of course
satisfaction. Results from two previous implementations of the face-to-face PD were also used for comparison.
Individual post-course interviews were conducted with teachers to gather information about their participation.

Results and discussion
Findings from the usability survey showed that the online teachers on average rated all 18 Likert-scale items
between 4.5 and 5, which indicated very positive PD experiences. These scores were comparable to scores from
previous face-to-face PD. The teacher interview analysis showed 26 comments related to the category of Tie
Quality; 17 related to the category of Trust; 16 related to the category of Depth of Interaction; and 22 related to
the category of Access to Expertise. The figure below shows the breakdown in terms of positive and negative
comments in each category.

                                Teacher's Views of Online PD Participation in
                                                          Social Capital Categories
                           25
                           20                                                                               22
                           15     18
                           10                                                         15
                            5                                               1186                  1                    0
                            0
                                         Tie Quality Tie Quality   Trust     Trust   Depth of   Depth of   Access to Access to
                                          Positive  Negative     Positive  Negative InteractionInteraction Expertise  Expertise
                                                                                      Positive  Negative   Positive   Negative

These findings provide encouragement that through a social capital and teacher learning framework, we may be
able to offer high quality PD in a fully asynchronous online mode.

References
Booth, S. E. (2012). Cultivating knowledge sharing and trust in online communities for educators. Journal
        of Educational Computing Research, 47(1), 1-31.
Coburn, C. E., & Russell, J. L. (2008). District policy and teachers' social networks. Educational Evaluation and
        Policy Analysis, 30(3), 203­235.
Lieberman, A., & Mace, D. P. (2010). Making practice public: Teacher learning in the 21st Century. Journal of
        Teacher Education, 61(1-2), 77-88.
Merritt, E. G. (2016). Time for teacher learning, planning critical for school reform: Students aren't the only ones
        who need more time to learn; teachers also need more and better time for learning and for planning. Phi
        Delta Kappan, 98(4), 31.
Peltola, P., Haynes, E., Clymer, L., McMillan, A., & Williams, H. (2017). Opportunities for teacher professional
        development in Oklahoma rural and nonrural schools (REL 2017­273). Washington, DC: U.S.
Yoon, S., Anderson, E., Koehler-Yom, Evans, C., Park, M., J., Sheldon, J., Schoenfeld, I., Wendel, D., Scheintaub,
        H., & Klopfer,  E.  (2017).                Teaching       about     complex      systems           is no     simple     matter: Building  effective
        professional development for computer-supported complex systems instruction. Instructional Science,
        45(1), 99­121.
Yoon, S.A., & Baker-Doyle, K. (Eds.) (2018). Networked by design: Interventions for teachers to develop social
        capital. New York, NY: Routledge Press.

Acknowledgments
This work was funded by a US National Science Foundation Discovery Research K-12 grant (#1721003).

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                                         850                                                                    © ISLS
