           Epistemic Frames of Idea Evaluation in Collaboration
                                 Shono Ikeda, Jun Oshima and Ritsuko Oshima
           ikeda.shono.17@shizuoka.ac.jp, joshima@inf.shizuoka.ac.jp, roshima@inf.shizuoka.ac.jp
                                             Shizuoka University

         Abstract: Idea promisingness is a key to the creative work. Although studies have shown its
         importance, they have not yet dug into multiple meanings of promisingness. In this study, we
         approached the    problem  by examining   the  criteria of idea evaluation. Epistemic  network
         analysis by successful and unsuccessful groups revealed that students in the successful groups
         held their epistemic frames of idea evaluation by taking the balance between being challenging
         and pragmatic.

Background and research purpose
In the knowledge age, workers are expected to engage in continuously creating new ideas through collaboration
with others. Such competence is not innate but should be developed in the context of learning. Chen, Scardamalia,
and Bereiter (2015)   examined   the extent to    which elementary   school  students could appropriately judge
promisingness of their ideas to facilitate knowledge-building. Their analyses indicated that their students held
their primitive sense of promisingness and could develop their competence to judge promisingness of their ideas
through well-designed exercise. Chen (2017) further explored the relationship among students' competence to
judge their idea promisingness, conceptual understanding of their study topic, and their epistemic beliefs. Through
his design-based research in a sixth-grade classroom, Chen found that students succeeded in improving their
understanding and judging promisingness through their repeated practices. Along with the development of their
competence to judge promisingness, conceptual understanding and epistemic beliefs also improved throughout
practice. Although the promisingness of ideas has been found a key to the collective knowledge advancement,
studies so far have not    dug into  the criteria of idea   evaluation. When  students evaluate their ideas, the
promisingness may have multiple meanings. Blair and Mumford (2007), for instance, asked undergraduates to
evaluate ideas, and found that students highly evaluated ideas based on the criteria such as (1) whether the ideas
are easy to understand, (2) whether they provide short-term benefits to many, and (3) whether they are consistent
with prevailing social norms. Their undergraduate students disregard risky, time consuming, and original ideas.
Original and risky ideas, however, were conditionally preferred. When evaluation criteria were not especially
stringent and time pressure was high, the undergraduates selected the risky and original ideas. What studies like
Blair and Mumford suggest is that people use multiple criteria to evaluate their ideas depending on conditions. In
future studies, therefore, we have to examine what criteria of idea evaluation including the promisingness are used
by learners in learning environments and their individual or group differences for considering further support for
learners to engage in the knowledge creation practices.
         The purpose of this study was to propose a new framework of analysis of learners' idea evaluation and
examine group differences in their epistemic frames of idea evaluation during project-based learning. For doing
so, we used Epistemic Network Analysis (ENA) as a tool for describing epistemic frames held by successful and
unsuccessful groups. ENA is an algorithm that identifies and calculates connections among elements in coded
data and visualizes them in dynamic network models that illustrate their structure and strength over time (Shaffer,
2017). With ENA, researchers can qualitatively and quantitatively examine cultural practices that participants
engage through their discourse.

Method

Subject groups
We selected four groups (two successful groups and two unsuccessful groups) in a project-based learning course
on creating new happiness indicators for first-year university students. Seventy students took the course for their
requirement and worked in groups on their proposal of new happiness indicators with the use of open source data
available on the internet. Based on their final grades, two successful and two unsuccessful groups were selected
for our analysis of their epistemic frames of idea evaluation. The two successful groups were comprised of four
students each, and the unsuccessful groups were comprised of three and four students.

Collected data and coding

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                   851                                                 © ISLS
The course continued in fifteen weeks. Students' discussion in their groups was audio-recorded and the recordings
in week 9­11 for the target groups were used for the analysis. We selected the recordings in the weeks as they
were a period when students were mainly engaged in generating their new ideas. Every discourse exchange was
coded on ELAN (https://tla.mpi.nl/tools/tla-tools/elan/) with using twelve attributes of idea evaluation by Blair
and Mumford (2007).

  Figure 1. Temporal changes in epistemic frames of idea evaluation by successful and unsuccessful groups.

Results and discussion
Based on the co-occurrence of attributes within units of discourse exchanges, the target groups' epistemic frames
of their idea evaluation were visualized across the three weeks (Figure 1). Comparison between the successful
and unsuccessful groups revealed commonalities and differences. First, both types of groups mainly discussed
their ideas from the perspective of complete description (i.e., how their ideas about new happiness indicators
should be described). They paid much attention to which evidence and data should be used for claiming the
effectiveness and importance of their ideas. Second, although both types of groups shared the primary component
in their epistemic frames, they were critically different in that different attributes were strongly connected with
the complete description. In the successful groups, they were more likely to consider aspects of the risk and
originality of their own ideas in later weeks in comparison with the unsuccessful groups that stayed at easiness to
understand and implement. Thus, the successful groups engaged in an examination of the risks and originality of
their ideas at some points of their generating ideas. How promising their ideas were crucial for both groups, but
their meanings  of the promisingness was    not the same.    For successful groups, the promisingness meant
challenging enough as well as reasonable to understand and implement. The balance between the two dimensions
of idea evaluation might be the key for us to support every group of students to be engaged in their creative work
with ideas.

References
Blair, S. C. and Mumford, D. M. (2007). Errors in idea evaluation: Preference for the unoriginal? The Journal of
         Creative Behavior, 41(3), 197­222.
Chen, B. (2017). Fostering scientific understanding and epistemic beliefs through judgments of promisingness.
         Educational Technology Research and Development, 65, 255­277.
Chen, B., Scardamalia, M., and Bereiter, C. (2015). Advancing knowledge-building discourse through judgments
         of promising ideas. International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 10, 345­366.
Shaffer, D. W. (2017). Quantitative ethnography. Madison, WI: Cathcart Press.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by JSPS KAKENHI Grant Number 15K01024, 15H02916, and 16H0187.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                  852                                                 © ISLS
