 Collaborative Knowledge Construction Mediated by Technology

                  Afaf A. Baabdullah, The Pennsylvania State University, afb5304@psu.edu

         Abstract: Collaborative knowledge construction is a complex process and entails many forms
         of communicative and social interactions. This preliminary, qualitative case study attempts to
         understand collaborative knowledge construction processes when learners share both physical
         and virtual environments to create digital structures. The results show four techniques in which
         the participants engage to advance the digital creations. This study provides educators with
         insight of how to capitalize on opportunities to use technology and support collaboration.

         Keywords: knowledge construction, collaboration, informal environments

Introduction
Collaboration has been strongly emphasized as a means of helping students in educational school systems to thrive
in an era of technological acceleration. Virtual environments provide unique opportunities for participation in and
practice with collaborating in the creation of artifacts, solutions, and play (Gee, 2007). In considering creative
knowledge   work, it is essential that students have experience in building   knowledge to serve    two purposes:
practical purposes and conceptual understanding (Scardamalia & Bereiter, 2014). Doing this, of course, results in
heightened challenges for educational institutions integrating such technology into classrooms. Students in school
use technology at the request of teachers to participate in a structured, supervised, directed and often perform
given tasks individually. Contrarily, young people at home have developed habits and expectations of how to
utilize technologies to participate in unstructured, non-supervised, and collaborative ways to pursue interests
(Clark et al., 2009). If educators are to capitalize on opportunities to use technology to support collaboration in
classrooms, there is a need for a more nuanced understanding of natural collaborative interactions and knowledge
construction like those that take place in home environments. Three-dimensional virtual learning environments
(e.g., Minecraft) offer rich tools and features that support collaboration and facilitate group tasks in a way that
leads to rich and effective collaborative learning. To study collaborative knowledge construction, we need to
consider the context in which group activity occurs. Collaborative knowledge construction takes place when team
members contribute to the accretion of shared understanding through seeking and integrating information, which
leads to the transformation of the shared representation within the specific context (Suthers, 2006). Hence, this
study aims  to explore  how   elementary school  students   incorporate ways of knowing and  acting    to advance
knowledge construction as they use iPads to engage in collaborative digital production within Minecraft's virtual
environment, while at the same time sharing a physical environment.

Methods
I conducted the study in the home of two siblings who usually invite friends over to play together. The participants
engaged with Minecraft in two phases. In the free play phase, the participants engaged in planning, designing, and
constructing the digital structures without being asked to meet specific requirements. The semi-structured play
phase included ill-structured design scenarios that I had created with specific requirements to satisfy. The study
lasted for nine weeks, from April to June 2018. The collected data is from three groups of elementary school
students (third-, fourth-, and fifth-graders) who are siblings or friends. A variety of data sources were collected:
weekly video sessions of Minecraft group digital constructions (a total of 24 sessions), produced artifacts, and
individual interviews. For the purposes of this paper, I draw on data collected from one group (two male fifth-
graders). The members in the selected group have the strongest friend relationship and more Minecraft experience
among the other groups. To analyze the collected data, I used the analytical framework that was developed by
Borge et al. (2015) as a basis to assess the quality of online collaborative discourses. Because the framework
focuses on the dialogical aspect of social interaction, I expanded the framework to include other interactions like
gestures, body movements, and interaction with the iPad. The group video-recording sessions were coded and
analyzed at the micro   level using interaction analysis. Two  coders   coded 20%  of the  total data.  Inter-rater
reliability was Kappa= 0.80 (p<0.001). Upon reaching good level of agreement, I coded the rest of the data.

Findings
The data analysis identified four techniques that the participants employed to advance the digital structures.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                   853                                                 © ISLS
Utilizing the screen's presentation with talk responses
Six primary forms of talk response emerged from the interactions: joint idea-building, questioning, justification,
task management, reflection and judgment, and claiming. These techniques made for a remarkable contribution
in constructing group knowledge. One example is when the participants expanded the original idea of their project,
the mall, to include a beach next to it. The participants advanced their ideas and moved from the focus on the mall
to the focus on the area surrounding the mall and how the mall should provide and serve as a supplemental
organization for the people who visit the beach area. The generation of this thoughtful new understanding was as
a result of joint idea-building and understanding and iterative judgment.

Presenting meaning through embodied knowledge and gestures
In addition to verbal speech, gestural and body conceptualizations were essential tools for the group in displaying
tacit knowledge and explaining the abstract concept. These types of expressions support the construction of shared
meaning between individuals, facilitate the comprehension of abstract concepts, and bridge the gap between
individual knowledge and group cognition.

Switching the screen between public and private spaces
The participants often shared their iPad screens with each other to share content, seek help, obtain confirmation,
or request clarification. The  participants' frequent  transitions between private and public spaces   reveal four
different patterns (see Fig. 1). As the participants made their iPad screens as part of their dialogue and switching
between their public and private spaces, the socially constructed meaning of their ideas was affected.

                 (a)                     (b)                         (c)                     (d)
             Figure 1. Four different patterns of switching iPad screens between group members.

Workspace awareness: The presence of links between physical and virtual locations
The participants frequently employed strategies, including self-awareness and group-awareness, over the course
of the projects to maintain   the presence   of links between their  physical and virtual locations. These critical
strategies help the team members navigate each other's work and provide each other with updated information
about current co-constructed work, which eventually leads the team to achieve the desired objectives.

Conclusion and implications
The study shows how learners engage in multimodal interactions to advance the creation of artifacts. To maximize
the quality of collaboration, students need to know what each other is doing, keep track of the group work, and
recognize what relevant features of the used materials and technology. Educators can play the role of facilitators
who help students possess this required knowledge. Educators also can plan instruction to help students learn and
experience the processes of constructing knowledge. Nevertheless, this study sheds light on the need for models
and best practices that support the engagement in such processes.

References
Borge, M., Ong, Y., & Rosé, C. (2015). Activity design models to support the development of high-quality
        collaborative processes in online settings. CSCL. In O. Lindwall, H. Päivi, K. Timothy, T. Pierre, & L.
        Sten    (Eds.),   The  Computer-Supported      Collaborative   Learning   Conference   2015    Conference
        Proceedings: Volume 1 (427­434). Gothenburg, Sweden: International Sociery of the Learning Sciences
Clark, W., Logan, K., Luckin, R., Mee, A., & Oliver, M. (2009). Beyond web 2.0: Mapping the technology
        landscapes of young learners. Journal of Computer Assisted Learning, 25, 56­69.
Gee, J. (2007). What video games have to teach us about learning and literacy. New York: Palgrave MacMillan.
Scardamalia, M., & Bereiter, C. (2014). Knowledge building and knowledge creation: Theory, pedagogy, and
        technology. In R. K. Sawyer (Ed.), The Cambridge Handbook of Learning Sciences (397­417). New
        York: Cambridge University Press.
Suthers, D. (2006). A qualitative analysis of collaborative knowledge construction through shared representations.
        Research and Practice in Technology Enhanced Learning, 1(2), 1­28.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                    854                                                 © ISLS
