                  Moving Beyond the "Façade of Participation":
      Using Choice-based Design to Enhance Online Discussions
                         Valerie Barbaro, University of Minnesota, barb0094@umn.edu

         Abstract:   A  universal  struggle  in online education   is encouraging     authentic  engagement.
         Nowhere    is this familiar challenge  more  apparent   than the   online discussion   forum,   which
         students often treat as obligatory rather than enriching. This reaction could be due to low self-
         determination within the course design. Using Self-Determination Theory as its basis, this study
         seeks to   address  the  question   of whether   a  choice-based    course   encourages    autonomy,
         competence, and relatedness, and if these result in enhanced engagement in forums.

Introduction
Online course enrollment continues to grow, with over a quarter of U.S. higher education students taking at least
one online  course  (Online  Learning   Consortium,   2016). However,     though   is it  now   generally accepted  that
learning outcomes from online courses equal those of face-to-face (f2f) courses (Means, Bakia, & Murphy, 2014),
one area that still struggles to compete with the f2f environment is the asynchronous online discussion forum.
         While current LMS forums include tools beyond text to help facilitate more human interaction, students
often treat discussion  forum    assignments as  requirements   to check    off a  list, rarely engaging   in sustained,
meaningful conversation (LaPointe & Reisetter, 2008). What results is a formulaic "discussion," where each
student creates an initial response to the instructor's prompt and 1­2 (if any) replies to peers. In this way, forums
can feel more like reporting in than having a real conversation, what Stodel, Thompson, and MacDonald (2006)
term "a façade of participation" (p. 11).
         To encourage more authentic interaction, the forum needs to appeal to students' intrinsic motivation.
Choice and opportunities for self-determination enhance people's sense of agency, which in turn tends to enhance
their intrinsic motivation (Deci & Ryan, 2000). This suggests that if an instructor uses a choice-based model to
encourage student autonomy, competence and relatedness should follow, ideally resulting in forum discussions
that move beyond the façade of participation.

Theoretical frameworks
Students interacting minimally in discussion forums are demonstrating "amotivation," meaning they either do not
post at all, or they post without intent, "just go[ing] through the motions" (Deci & Ryan, 2000, p. 72). These
displays of amotivation   are  a signal that the forum  is  not meeting   the   students'   educational needs, whereas
environments   that appeal  to innate   psychological  needs of  autonomy,    competence,     and relatedness  promote
intrinsic motivation (Deci & Ryan, 2000). This idea forms the basis of Deci and Ryan's (2000) Self-Determination
Theory (SDT). According to SDT, amotivation manifests from one (or more) of four conditions: nonintentional,
nonvaluing,  incompetence,    or lack of  control. Unfortunately,  this captures   all   too many   online discussions:
required forums  (lack  of  control)  a student  does not  care  about  (nonvaluing)     or  cannot adequately  address
(incompetence), resulting in lackluster posts (nonintentional).
         One way to address amotivation is to instill in students a sense of control. If students can choose whether
and how they interact in a discussion forum, this sense of choice could help promote agency. Control alone,
though, will not result in a student's feeling empowered self-determination. All three aspects of SDT--autonomy,
competence, and relatedness--contribute equally to an individual's sense of self-determination, so all elements
must be present. Therefore, the autonomy gained from having choice would need to positively impact competence
and relatedness as well for self-determination to be actualized.
         This design-based research study (Amiel & Reeves, 2008) explores whether using a choice-based course
design will positively impact all three aspects of SDT, leading to the first research question: RQ1: How does a
choice-based course influence students' perceptions of self-determination?
         In addition to students' feeling enhanced autonomy in a choice-based course, it is hypothesized this
approach  will also lead  to higher  levels  of both  cognitive and   social engagement      within discussion  forums,
addressing SDT's competence and relatedness. To gauge these levels, this study employs the Community of
Inquiry  model  (Garrison,   Anderson,   &   Archer,  2000), a  framework    popular     for assessing  online learning
communities.   The  Community     of Inquiry  (CoI)  model   is illustrated by  a  Venn   diagram   that  includes three
domains: teaching presence, social presence, and cognitive presence. This current study focuses on social presence
and cognitive presence from the model. Social presence (SP), which is comprised of affective, interactive, and
cohesive subdivisions, is the ability for individuals to present themselves in a way that allows them to be seen as

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                    857                                                      © ISLS
real people in a virtual environment. Cognitive presence (CP) refers to a progressive scale of demonstrated critical
thinking with four phases: a triggering event, exploration, integration, and resolution. This study will apply the
CoI model's elements of SP and CP to assess students' levels of social and cognitive engagement in a course,
which will be used to address the second research question: RQ2: Is there a relationship between students'
perceptions of self-determination and their levels of social and/or cognitive engagement in the discussion
forums? The researcher hypothesizes that students in a choice-based course will demonstrate higher levels of
perceived self-determination than those in a non-choice-based course (RQ1), and that these students additionally
will demonstrate higher social and cognitive engagement scores (RQ2).

Context and methods
This study is being conducted on two sections of a fully online introductory liberal education course at a large
public university in the Midwestern United States. Each course, housed in Canvas, is capped at 20 undergraduate
students and is available to all programs of study at the university. One section is designed with the choice-based
model, and one is not. The sections are taught by the same instructor but are not concurrent. The first way in
which student autonomy is supported in the experimental course's design is through choice of topics covered. At
the beginning of the semester, students are asked to complete a survey to determine preferred course topics, the
outcome of which is used to determine content covered. The course design also offers choice in assessment.
Students are offered a variety of activities at different point values, allowing them to participate in ways they find
meaningful. For students uncomfortable with options, there is a default method provided.
        To address SDT perceptions of autonomy, competence, and relatedness (RQ1), students will be given an
end-of-course survey based on a modified version of the Basic Psychological Need Satisfaction in General (Deci
& Ryan, 2000; Gagné, 2003). To assess students' levels of competence and relatedness, the CoI model (Garrison,
Anderson, & Archer, 2000) will be used. Students' discussion posts will be qualitatively coded using a quasi-
deductive approach based on the CoI model, with the inclusion of internal breakdowns of low, medium, and high
levels for each subdivision of each presence. These will be used to create two coding sets: one with a score of 1­
12 for the progressive states of cognitive presence (to assess competence), and one for a score of 1­3 for each
subset of social presence (to assess relatedness). See Table 1. A correlational analysis of survey scores and SP
and CP scores then will be conducted, comparing the choice-based course and the control (RQ2).

Table 1: Two sample codes ­ Social Presence (Interactive)

 Score             Characteristics                                         Course example
 Low     Short response that does not elicit        "Great post! I really like what you had to say about rights ethics."
 (1)     further interaction or demonstrate
         comprehension; agrees/disagrees/
         compliments but does not elaborate
 High    Agrees/disagrees with more in-depth       "N--, Your statement regarding the relevance of cultural relativism
 (3)     explanation; adds own opinion with         being extremely relevant, `especially in 2019' intrigues me. I wonder
         support; seeks to engage discussion        if your wording was intentional, meaning that the current year that we
         further with questions, elaboration,       are experiencing has made cultural relativism more important to our
         challenges, etc.                           society than it was in past years. I also wonder what your meaning is
                                                    behind, `society is at different stages depending on where you go in
                                                    the world.' What are these stages? Is one stage a progression of the
                                                    next, or are they all dependent on the society that they refer to?"

Implications
As online courses become      omnipresent,     understanding   how design choices impact  learning is increasingly
imperative. While this study is ongoing, the hope is results will suggest using a choice-based model positively
impacts self-determination, ultimately helping to alleviate the "façade of participation" in discussion forums.

Key references
Deci, E. L., & Ryan, R. M. (2000). Self-Determination Theory and the facilitation of intrinsic motivation, social
        development, and well-being. American Psychologist, 55(1), 68­78.
Gagné, M. (2003). The role of autonomy support and autonomy orientation in prosocial behavior engagement.
        Motivation and Emotion, 27, 199­223.
Garrison, D. R., Anderson, T., & Archer, W. (2000). Critical inquiry in a text-based environment: Computer
        conferencing in higher education. The Internet and Higher Education, 2(2­3), 87­105.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                      858                                                 © ISLS
