      Making the Design of CSCL Analytics Interfaces a Co-design
        Process: The Case of Multimodal Teamwork in Healthcare
 Roberto Martinez-Maldonado, Vanessa Echeverria, Doug Elliott, Carmen Axisa, Tamara Power, and Simon
                                              Buckingham Shum
       roberto.martinez-maldonado@uts.edu.au, vanessa.echeverria@uts.edu.au, doug.elliott@uts.edu.au,
            carmen.axisa@uts.edu.au, tamara.power@uts.edu.au, simon.buckinghamshum@uts.edu.au
                                   University of Technology Sydney, Australia

         Abstract:   Multimodal    Learning Analytics    innovations  offer  exciting   opportunities   for
         Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning (CSCL) practice and research, but they also make
         more evident the need to make the design of analytics tool into a horizontal, co-design process.
         The emergence of new algorithms and sensors can be a major breakthrough in the way CSCL
         research is conducted and automated feedback is provided. However, there still is a lack of
         research  on how   these innovations can be  used  by teachers  and  learners, as most    existing
         systems are restricted to experimental research setups. This poster paper sheds light on the first
         steps that can be made towards making the design of CSCL analytics interfaces a co-design
         process where teachers, learners and other stakeholders become design partners.

Introduction and related work
The emergence of new algorithms and sensors that can track activity in both physical and digital spaces are making
collocated activity visible and available for computational analysis, particularly for open-ended, unrestricted tasks
that are closer to the kinds of activities that learners commonly face in professional placements (Blikstein and
Worsley,  2018).   This can  be a major  breakthrough in  the way  Computer-Supported      Collaborative  Learning
(CSCL) research is conducted and automated feedback is provided. Moreover, there is a recent intention within
the CSCL community to consider the physical and embodied characteristics of learners, the learning environment
and the interactions that occur with and within this environment (as highlighted in the CSCL 2019 conference
theme).  There  is currently  however  a lack of  research  on how   Multimodal     Learning Analytics    (MMLA)
innovations  can support  reflection and decision-making    (Shankar et al., 2018), as  most existing   systems   are
restricted to experimental setups (Ochoa, 2017).

Design challenges for CSCL and Multimodal Learning Analytics
There is a small but growing interest in building a new generation of monitoring, awareness and reflection tools
for f2f learning activities (see review in Rodríguez-Triana et al., 2017). A promising way to achieve this is to
capture behavioural   traces from  co-present activities using sensors  and   logging  capabilities  of educational
interfaces, analyse them,  and  create feedback  mechanisms   to support reflection  and evidence-based     practice
(Blikstein and Worsley, 2018). In contrast to the significant effort that has been invested in automatically mining
digital traces of online group experiences, where logs can be easily captured, much more needs to be done to
invent ways to support f2f collaboration. However, the complexities of embedding yet another type of technology
in authentic CSCL contexts may open a range of critical challenges for successful adoption.
         We have identified, through our empirical work in the area of MMLA, the following challenges that
motivate the need for making the design of effective CSCL interfaces a collaborative, horizontal co-design process
(e.g. including teachers  and learners throughout the design   process, moving   beyond    initial consultation): 1)
representations of multimodal, group data can be inherently complex (Di Mitri et al., 2018) hence the need for
making the mapping from low level data to higher-order constructs explicit and transparent to stakeholders to
facilitate sense-making (Martinez-Maldonado et al., 2019); 2) critical privacy issues may arise in tracking activity
in a collocated setting, compared to fully online group settings, as sensing technologies may unintendingly capture
more behavioural data than needed (Krontiris and Maisonneuve, 2011); 3) CSCL analytics interfaces would show
data of more than one person hence the need for mechanisms to ensure privacy while endorsing visibility and
accountability (Echeverria et al., 2019). Our paper contributes to address these challenges by motivating a five-
step elicitation process to design-for effective use of CSCL visualisation systems with teachers and/or learners.

First steps towards co-designing effective CSCL interfaces
The overarching aim of our particular MMLA research is to provide automated feedback to nursing students
working around patient manikins engaged in clinical simulations. These are commonly run as laboratory sessions
in clinical classrooms equipped with 5-6 basic manikins located on hospital beds which produce indicators of a
patients' health, respond to actions, and can be programmed to deteriorate over time. We have equipped the

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                   859                                                   © ISLS
environment    and learners    with a  number    of sensors  (including microphones,    indoor    localisation badges       and
physiological wristbands) to track different aspects of the activity such as determining who is speaking, where
nurses are in the space, arousal states and actions performed on the manikin. Quickly we realised that for creating
automated feedback mechanisms or interfaces that promote reflection in this particular CSCL setting, a deep
understanding of the area of healthcare simulation was needed and close collaboration with educators, learners,
professional nurses, and other stakeholders was of utmost importance to craft interfaces that could be effectively
used, orchestrated and appropriated by them.
       We propose a five-step elicitation process to co-design for the effective use of CSCL systems. This
articulates questions for diverse stakeholders that cover orchestration aspects and particular learning analytics co-
design constructs into the process steps. Table 1 presents an overview of this process

Table 1: A five-step elicitation process to design for effective use of translucent CSCL systems.
                 Process step                                                    Description
 STEP 1 ­ WHO: Understand the people who            This step includes questions to identify the key stakeholders in the
 are part of the classroom ecology, by              CSCL situation, and the different roles that are actually active during
 describing the different roles/stakeholders.       the (classroom) activity.
 STEP 2 ­ INFLUENCE & POWER: Mapping                This step includes questions about the relationships of power and
 the influence of all roles on                      influence among the stakeholders and roles, including: influence on
 interaction/activity.                              other people, power hierarchy, influence on the learning design and
                                                    influence on the adoption of the MMLA tool.
 STEP 3 ­ QUESTIONING: Define the                   This step includes questions aimed at identifying the classroom
 questions to be answered by the learning           dynamics that can be observed in regular classes and the common
 analytics solution or hypotheses/expectations      questions or hypotheses that can be confirmed or rejected based on
 that can be tested with evidence.                  evidence captured through the learning analytics.
 STEP 4 ­ TRANSLUCENCE: Define the                  This step includes questions about the data needs and mechanisms to
 information different roles require for the        make data representations partly visible (translucent), by considering
 classroom activity.                                limitations on access and privacy issues.
 STEP 5 - DESIGN FOR ORCHESTRATION:                 This step includes questions about what different stakeholders can or
 Translate the required information that lead to    cannot do with the information, interaction aspects and practical
 enhanced classroom orchestration.                  orchestration aspects.

Concluding remarks
The elicitation process to design for effective use of CSCL analytics systems is work in progress. Future work in
this project will provide a template for mapping the outputs of co-design techniques into data representation and
system requirements. Future work will also provide guidelines for other CSCL and learning analytics researchers
for adapting a more detailed version of the elicitation process outlined above into their projects.

References
Blikstein, P., & Worsley, M. (2018). Multimodal learning analytics and assessment of open-ended artifacts. In D.
       Niemi, R. D. Pea, B. Saxberg & R. E. Clark (Eds.), Learning Analytics in Education (pp. 89). Charlotte,
       USA: IAP.
Di Mitri, D., Schneider, J., Specht, M., & Drachsler, H. (2018). From signals to knowledge: A conceptual model
       for multimodal learning analytics. Journal of Computer Assisted Learning, 34(4), 338-349.
Echeverria, V., Martinez-Maldonado, R., & Shum, S. B. (2019). Towards Collaboration Translucence: Giving
       Meaning to Multimodal Group Data. In Proc. of SIGCHI Conf. on Human Factors in Computing Systems
Krontiris, I., & Maisonneuve,       N. (2011).   Participatory sensing: the    tension between    social translucence       and
       privacy Trustworthy Internet (pp. 159-170): Springer.
Martinez-Maldonado, R., Elliot, D., Axisa, C., Power, T., & Shum, S. B. (2019). Teachers' Perceptions on CSCL
       Proxy Visualisations of Multimodal Teamwork Data in Healthcare. In Proc. of International Conference
       on Computer-Supported Collaborative Work (CSCL'19) (pp. submitted).
Ochoa, X. (2017). Multimodal Learning Analytics. In C. Lang, G. Siemens, A. F. Wise & D. Gasevic (Eds.), The
       Handbook of Learning Analytics (pp. 129-141). Alberta, Canada: SOLAR.
Rodríguez-Triana, M. J., Prieto, L. P., Vozniuk, A., Boroujeni, M. S., Schwendimann, B. A., Holzer, A., & Gillet,
       D. (2017). Monitoring, awareness and reflection in blended technology enhanced learning: a systematic
       review. International Journal of Technology Enhanced Learning, 9(2-3), 126-150.
Shankar, S. K., Prieto, L. P., Rodríguez-Triana, M. J., & Ruiz-Calleja, A. (2018). A Review of Multimodal
       Learning        Analytics Architectures.     In Proc. of  IEEE   18th    International   Conference  on  Advanced
       Learning Technologies (ICALT'18) (pp. 212-214).

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                        860                                                      © ISLS
