        Computer-based Problem Solving to Prepare for Adaptive
                                                 Consolidation
                             Antje Boomgaarden, Katharina Loibl, and Timo Leuders
          antje.boomgaarden@ph-freiburg.de, katharina.loibl@ph-freiburg.de, leuders@ph-freiburg.de
                                           University of Education Freiburg

         Abstract: During problem solving prior to instruction, students usually generate erroneous
         solution attempts, which can form the basis for acquiring valid concepts during subsequent
         instruction, if students are prompted to compare correct and incorrect examples. In a previous
         study, these prompts were only beneficial if the incorrect examples resembled students' own
         attempts.  Therefore,  a    computer-based      version  that   would   allow  for  adaptation    of the
         instruction is tested with regard to the similarity of students' products and difficulties.

Introduction
Research  on   productive    failure has   shown     beneficial  effects of problem    solving  prior   to instruction  on
conceptual understanding compared to instructional designs with the reverse order of the learning phases (e.g.,
Kapur, 2010). However, Loibl and Rummel (2014) showed that students engaging in problem solving prior to
instruction outperformed  their counterparts     with    respect to conceptual   knowledge     only when   the  instruction
compared    typical erroneous  student   solutions    to the correct   solution.  Similarly, Loibl  and    Leuders  (2018)
showed that students who were prompted to compare solution attempts performed best at posttest. This effect
was   highest for   students whose    initial solution   attempts   were    similar to  the  incorrect   examples   of the
consolidation phase (Loibl & Leuders, 2019).
         These findings call for adaptively taking students' solution attempts into account in the design of the
instruction phase.   This adaptivity    could    potentially  be  reached     in a  computer-based      system. However,
converting paper-based learning materials in a computer-based system may alter the learning processes and
products: ,,Computational    transposition    is a   process that occurs    during  the design  and     implementation  of
computer learning environments with the potential for significantly transforming the knowledge to be taught by
these means"   (Hoyos,  2016,   p.   139). As    the finding regarding    the importance    of the  fit between  students'
attempts and the instruction was found with paper-based materials, a first step towards an effective adaptive
system requires to focus on the problem solving phase and to validate that the computer-based implementation
allows the same types of products and the same categories of difficulties as the paper-based version.
         We tested this assumption in a collaborative setting for two reasons: First, most research on productive
failure has been implemented in collaborative settings (e.g., Kapur, 2010; Loibl & Rummel, 2014). Second, the
natural verbalization of  ideas and    difficulties  in  a collaborative  setting   allows for in-depth    analyses of the
learning process.

Research question
We  investigate the  question  whether     a collaborative   computer-based      implementation  of the  problem-solving
phase, allows the same types of products and the same categories of difficulties as the paper-based version.

Methods

Participants
28 fifth-graders (i.e., one class) used the computer-based system in pairs. Based on their solution attempts five
pairs were selected to additionally participate in an interview regarding their experiences and difficulties.

Learning material and computer-based system
The learning unit covered comparing fractions. The present study focused on the problem-solving phase only.
All students were asked to decide which team wins a scoring contest where each player attempts to score a goal
once: a team of 5 girls who scored a total of 3 goals or a team of 10 boys who scored a total of 5 goals. It was
clarified that each team member only had one attempt. During the problem-solving phase students worked on a
computer. The computer-based system included a task description and an applet. The applet allowed students to
generate fractions bars with any number of parts. The sizes of the parts had to be selected one by one, thus,
allowing the typical errors of unequal parts. In addition, students could color the parts.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                       863                                                     © ISLS
                                      Figure 1. Possible actions in the applet.

Coding scheme
We analyzed the screen recordings and interview data two-folds. First, we coded whether the seen or reported
difficulties stemmed from the problem-solving task or from the use of the computer. Second, we coded the
incorrect solution attempts based on the coding scheme from Loibl and Leuders (2018).

Procedure
The  study   started with  an   activation of  prior  knowledge     about fractions.  Afterwards, the  experimenter
introduced   the applet and   tried to  eliminate any   difficulties that may   result from  the  unfamiliar use    of
computers. Afterwards the problem-solving phase started with a short verbal introduction of the problem to
ensure that all students understood the cover story and the question to be worked on (i.e., fair comparison on
which group wins). During the problem-solving phase, students worked in pairs on one computer. Students'
utterances and their screens were recorded. Based on the solution attempts, five pairs were selected for in-depth
interviews. These interviews used the stimulated recall technique.

Results
36.99% of the difficulties stemmed from the use of the computer and 63.01% difficulties related to the content
or the task. All incorrect solution attempts could be assigned to one of the categories found with the paper-based
version. Table 1 compares the relative frequency of categories of incorrect solution attempts between the paper-
based version (cf. Tab. 5 in Loibl & Leuders, 2018) and the computer-based system.

Table 1: Differences in frequency of incorrect solution attempts

                                                              Paper-based version         Computer-based system
 Special non-generalizable strategy                           7,53%                       18,92%
 Absolute frequency without notion of relativity              48,39%                      29,73%
 Argumentation with only one component                        27,96%                      16,22%
 Unclear or non-mathematical strategy                         13,98%                      24,32%
 Correct solution                                             2,15%                       10,81%

Discussion
Our  results show  that students  generated   similar products  in  our  computer-based   system as shown   with the
paper-based version by Loibl and Leuders (2018). Thus, a future adaptive system can build on previous results
and prompt comparisons between correct and incorrect examples by selecting the examples based on students'
own attempts. However, our results also show that students encountered additional difficulties that stemmed
from the  system.  While   this finding is not surprising,    given that this version was  a low-integrated  pilot, it
highlights the need to refine the system substantially to allow for a more smooth application.

References
Hoyos, V. (2016). Distance technologies and the teaching and learning of mathematics in theeEra of MOOC. In:
         M. Niess, S. Driskell, & K. Hollebrands (Eds.), Handbook of research on transforming mathematics
         teacher education in the digital age (pp. 137­164). USA: IGI Global.
Kapur, M. (2010). A further study of productive failure in mathematical problem solving: Unpacking the design
         components. Instructional Science, 39(4), 561-579.
Loibl, K., & Leuders, T. (2018). Errors during exploration and consolidation ­ The effectiveness of productive
         failure as sequentially guided discovery learning. Journal für Mathematik-Didaktik, 39(1), 69-96.
Loibl, K.  &  Leuders,  T. (2019).  How    to make    failure productive: Fostering   learning from errors   through
         elaboration prompts. Manuscript submitted for publication.
Loibl, K., &  Rummel,     N. (2014).   Knowing  what   you    don't know  makes   failure productive. Learning   and
         Instruction, 34, 74-85.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                    864                                                   © ISLS
