     The Relationship Between Young Students' Attitudes Toward
 Collaboration and Team Satisfaction in a STEAM-based Program

                  Tuba Ketenci, Georgia Institute of Technology, tuba.ketenci@isye.gatech.edu
                      Betul Erkan, Florida Atlantic University, ozgur.betul@hotmail.com

        Abstract:   Project   teams have   gained  popularity recently  as  many  companies increase   the
        amount of work they require project teams to complete (Robbins & Judge, 2009). In order
        to address  this need  in the workforce,    the educational  institutions have incorporated   more
        project team based learning into their curriculum (Parmelee & Hudes, 2012). Students, on the
        other hand, have shown a lack of interest towards team projects, are not always satisfied with
        their teamwork, and experience challenges in the process of collaborative work (Espey, 2010).
        Motivated by these facts, the purpose of this study is to shed some light on the relationship
        between   team   dynamics,  team   acquaintance,  instructor  support, and  team satisfaction in  a
        STEAM Enrichment program in a middle school formal classroom setting.

Introduction
As our society moves forward, the ability for learners to work as part of a team and coordinate team efforts is
becoming more critical for the advancement of knowledge and the success in any job (Johnson & Johnson, 2005).
However, it is well-documented in the literature that students typically show lack of interest towards team projects
and experience challenges in the process of collaborative work (Espey, 2010; Vance et al., 2015).
        The scarcity of empirical studies looking into team satisfaction for K-12 students in a STEAM-based
program led the researchers to conduct the current study. Specifically, researchers in this study investigated the
relationship between team satisfaction and students' attitudes toward collaboration within a K-12 STEAM-based
program context   in  a  computer-supported     collaborative  learning environment.   Students' attitudes   toward
collaboration  were measured   through    three components:   team   dynamics,  team  acquaintance, and   instructor
support (Ku, Tseng, & Akarasriwon, 2013).
        Team dynamics measures included participation, communication, collaboration, trust, and cohesion (Ku,
Tseng, & Akarasriwon, 2013). Team acquaintance refers to students' familiarity with the team members and is
found to be strongly associated with students' attitudes towards collaboration by earlier studies (Stark & Bierly,
2009). Specifically, students who are familiar with each other are reported to more easily form teams and set goals
more quickly   than  others.  The   final component,    instructor support, is another  major driver   in   students'
collaboration. In particular, surveyed    students by earlier studies emphasized   the need for  instructor support
especially in offering timely resources and providing opportunities to view examples, among others.
        With this study, the researchers aimed to close the research gap in examining the relationship between
team satisfaction and students' attitudes toward collaboration. More specifically, researchers sought to answer the
following research question: what is the relationship between team satisfaction and students' attitude toward
collaboration in a STEAM Enrichment Program?

Framework
In this study, students were required to follow the engineering design process summarized in NASA's BEST
engineering design model (REF). The engineering design process involves six steps: a) ask, b) imagine, c) plan,
d) create, e) test and f) improve. While following these steps, students were also required to communicate with
each other while doing research, brainstorming ideas, and refining the solutions to the chosen problem.

Method: Participants, data collection, and instrument
Participants included 163 students in a STEAM Enrichment Program at a private middle school in Northern
Georgia. The STEAM Enrichment Program was required for all students in grades 4th through 10th and was part
of the weekly school schedule and the curriculum. Upon the completion of the STEAM Enrichment Program, an
online student (adapted Ku, Tseng, and Akarasriwon's survey (2013)) survey was administered to evaluate the
level of collaboration and assess satisfaction during the last week of school. The survey was employed to all
students participating in the program using google forms, of whom 40% were female.

Results

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                    865                                                  © ISLS
The three subscales of students' attitude towards collaboration (team dynamics, acquaintance, and instructor
support) were correlated with each other, but the pairwise correlation coefficients were lower than 0.5, much
smaller than the recommended cut-off of the value of 0.85 for distinguishing for an additional factor model
(Kenny, 2012). This means the three considered factors were somewhat similar but distinct enough to separately
explain variation in students' satisfaction (See Table 1).
       In addition to correlation analysis, a multiple regression analysis was carried out to investigate whether
students'   attitude toward collaboration   (as measured   by  team  dynamics,   team  acquaintance, and instructor
support) could significantly predict their team satisfaction. The results of the regression indicated that the model
explained 35.1% of the variance and that the model explained a significant amount of variation at students' team
satisfaction, F (3, 153) = 27.564, p < .001. While team dynamics ( = .740, p < .001) and team acquaintance ( =
-.447, p =.030) contributed significantly to the model, instructor support did not ( = -.458, p = .074).

Table 1: Correlation between Team Satisfaction and Team Dynamics, Acquaintance, and Instructor Support

                          1          2             3             4            Mean      Std.       Cronbach's  
1.Team Dynamics           -          .487**        .302**        .549**       44.18     9.11       .84
2.Team Acquaintance       -          -             .406**        .103         14.11     3.86       .78
3.Instructor Support      -          -             -             .003         11.6      2.81       .78
4.Team Satisfaction       -          -             -             -            38.84     10.03      .95

Implementation and conclusions
Students' negative attitude toward teamwork and project teams is frequently discussed in education literature
(Vance et al., 2015). However, the scarcity of empirical studies looking into the impact subfactors of students'
attitude toward collaboration such team dynamics, acquaintance, and instructor support led the researchers to
conduct the current study within a STEAM program context.
       The findings of this study revealed that team dynamics had a positive association with students' team
satisfaction. This result aligns with the relevant past literature which showed dynamics promoted higher teamwork
satisfaction (Liu, Magjuka, & Lee, 2008). In addition, the regression analysis showed that team dynamics and
acquaintance contributed significantly to the explanation of teamwork satisfaction and accounted for 35% of the
variance. This finding is in line with previous studies showing that students acquainted with team members built
good relationships with each other, resulting in higher team satisfaction (Ku, Tseng, & Akarasriwon, 2013; Stark
& Bierly, 2009).
       Since      "establishing team   commitment"    is stated  as an effective strategy for team   dynamics  and
acquaintance   in the  literature, future research should  explore  ways to  establish team  commitment   for K-12
students in a STEAM-based context. In an extension study, the researchers will explore the effects of increased
flexibility in forming   teams  and  assess   the impact of this flexibility on  team  acquaintance  and ultimately
satisfaction.

References
Espey, M. (2010). Valuing teams: What influences student attitudes? NACTA Journal, 54(1).
Johnson, R. T., & Johnson, D. W. (2005). Cooperative learning, values, and culturally plural classrooms. In
       Classroom Issues (pp. 29-47). Routledge.
Kenny, D.      A. (2012).   Multiple   latent variable   models: Confirmatory    factor  analysis. Retrieved  from
       http://davidakenny.net/cm/mfactor.htm
Ku, H. Y., Tseng, H. W., & Akarasriworn, C. (2013). Collaboration factors, teamwork satisfaction, and student
       attitudes toward online collaborative learning. Computers in Human Behavior, 29(3), 922-929.
Liu, X., Magjuka, R. J., & Lee, S. H. (2008). An examination of the relationship among structure, trust, and
       conflict management styles in virtual teams. Performance Improvement Quarterly, 21 (1), 77­93.
Parmelee, D., Michaelsen, L. K., Cook, S., & Hudes, P. D. (2012). Team-based learning: a practical guide: AMEE
       guide no. 65. Medical teacher, 34(5), e275-e287.
Robbins,S.P., andJudge, T.A.(2009). Organizational behavior,13thEd., Pearson Education, Prentice Hall, NJ.
Stark, E. M., & Bierly, P. E. (2009). An analysis of predictors of team satisfaction in product development teams
       with differing levels of virtualness. R&D Management, 39 (5), 461­472.
Vance K., Kulturel-Konak S., Konak A. (2015). "Teamwork efficacy and attitude differences between online and
       face-to-face students," in Proceedings of the IEEE Integrated STEM Education Conference (ISEC),
       Princeton, NJ, 246­251.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                     866                                                 © ISLS
