Theorizing and Operationalizing Social Engagement as a Precursor
   to Productive Disciplinary Engagement in Collaborative Groups
                         Toni Kempler Rogat, Purdue University, tkrogat@purdue.edu
                 Britte Haugan Cheng, Menlo Education Research, bcheng@menloedu.org
                          Andrea Gomoll, Indiana University, agomoll@indiana.edu
                         Temitope F. Adeoye, Purdue University, adeoye@purdue.edu
                      Cindy E. Hmelo-Silver, Indiana University, chmelosi@indiana.edu
                            Anne Traynor, Purdue University, atraynor@purdue.edu
                            Patrik Lundh, SRI International, patrik.lundh@sri.com

         Abstract: An important goal of CSCL is to support social engagement within small groups.
         Our aim is to theorize and operationalize social engagement (SE), as a group-level construct
         and one dimension of group productive disciplinary engagement. We conducted joint analysis
         of videotaped interactions, garnered from multiple projects with common disciplinary practices
         but task and domain variation, to operationalize SE in 3-point quality ratings. Our ratings afford
         examining SE as dynamic and interrelated with other engagement dimensions.

Introduction
An important goal of CSCL is to promote intersubjective meaning making (Suthers, 2006) which requires high
quality engagement. We aim to define and operationalize social engagement (SE) as a group-level construct, and
as one dimension   of productive disciplinary engagement     (PDE). PDE   involves  students  making  collective
intellectual progress on core conceptual ideas and disciplinary activities during authentic tasks (Engle & Conant,
2002). We include SE as part of a multi-faceted and collaborative group conceptualization of PDE. We aim to
extend research by (1) conceptualizing SE through joint analysis of videotaped interactions garnered from multiple
projects, which have common features and disciplinary practices (i.e., modeling and argumentation) but vary in
domain and task; and, subsequently, (2) operationalizing SE in 3-point quality ratings.
         To theorize SE, we draw from literature on coordination and equity. Previous studies examining social
processes during argumentation have identified competitive responses to different positions, in which students
push for the inclusion of their own perspective while ignoring others', positioning others as less competent, and
using personal attacks (Rogat & Adams-Wiggins, 2015). Previous research has identified power differentials that
result from negotiation of influence over the group's task response and the conversational floor (Engle, Langer-
Osuna, & McKinney de Royston, 2014). In contrast, when group members are responsive to and build upon
multiple viewpoints, inclusive of and integrating diverse perspectives, and contributors are treated as mutually
competent, group dynamics are coordinated and equitable.
         Barron (2003) argued that to understand how quality varies in group productivity and learning, we need
to account for the dual-space operating in collaborative groups, which includes both content and relational spaces.
Previous  research   has  primarily  investigated  cognitive   processes   (e.g.,  knowledge    co-construction;
argumentation), with  fewer studies exploring the role of  groups' social processes.    Some recent research    has
examined social and cognitive processes, but has relied on illustrative or single cases, purposefully selecting the
high or low quality examples of social engagement. Our developed rubric, grounded in theoretical review and
joint analysis, contributes to this field by enabling the examination of a large number of, and/or individual, groups
across time, inclusive of moderate-quality SE, with potential to critically inform our understanding of how SE
interrelates with group engagement dimensions to promote PDE.

Method
We contextualize PDE during collaborative tasks that involve modeling and argumentation in technology-rich
middle school science and engineering units. We draw on a rich corpus of video data collected in four research
projects where group work was central to student learning.    The range in domain, disciplinary practices and
curricular features (e.g., technology tools; scaffolds) enriched our theoretical development efforts. The project
team, with different areas of expertise and knowledge of individual curricular contexts, conducted joint analyses
of videotaped group interactions (N = 4 groups), with the goal to describe and negotiate shared understandings of
observable SE (Jordan & Henderson, 1995). These analyses informed the development of a 3-point quality rubric.

Results

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                  867                                                    © ISLS
We operationalize SE within disciplinary practices of modeling and argumentation, which are also inherently
social. Therein, productive group activity requires (1) coordination and responsiveness of different perspectives,
and (2) equal opportunity to make contributions that inform the shared product; two interpersonal processes which
are central to our operationalization of SE (Table 1). High ratings indicate collective norms that promote and
correspond with  productive   group   activity, while  low ratings  inhibit it. Observations   suggest   indicators of
coordination can be   both implicit   (seamless  physical, nonverbal   coordination)    and explicit (coordinating   a
conclusion from the evidence) (examples, Table 1). Joint analyses of SE supported rich elaboration of indicators,
including curriculum, task, domain and disciplinary differences. For example, in analysis of an engineering unit,
high-quality SE interactions were exemplified by spatial proximity and nonverbal exchange of materials (i.e.,
indicators uniquely supported within this engineering unit).

Table 1: Social Engagement Quality-Ratings

               1 ­ Low                              2 ­ Moderate                               3 - High
 Lack of coordination:                    Intermittent Coordination:             Coordinated action:
 Conversation involves separate           A subset of high-quality               Conversations build and are
 contributions without attempts to        indicators are present, but are        responsive to ideas during activity
 link, or contributions are unrelated     inconsistent                           Equitable interactions:
 Inequitable interactions:                Quick consensus                        All group members have access to
 Not all group members have access        There are no ideas to coordinate       conversational floor, materials,
 to conversational floor, materials or    as part of discussion                  task
 task, while others have heavy andconsistent access.Somewhat equitable:Most group members have accessFunctional hierarchy, withleadership or as a collective
 Dysfunctional status hierarchy may       to the conversational floor            Physicality:
 exist where groupmates are               It is unclear who has access to the    Eye contact; spatial closeness;
 positioned as more and/or less           conversational floor (e.g.,            nonverbal bids for participation;
 competent; resistance to position        dominant position is not resisted      access to materials
 Physicality:                             against or implicit agreement on
 Limited eye contact, spatial             hierarchy.)
 distance; turning away, physically
 blocking from shared product,
 technology resources

Discussion and implications
Our theoretical synthesis and operationalization of SE stands to contribute to a group literature introducing quality
ratings. The SE rubric and associated indicators afford the examination of SE as evolving, in socially negotiated
processes that unfold  over   time. Specific to  SE,   sustained low  quality   ratings within  and/or   across group
interactions may show evidence of fragmented discussion or a lack of working toward consensus. Further, we can
analyze how   SE interrelates with  other dimensions    that together  constitute PDE,   central to  CSCL's     aim to
understand interdependencies of learning processes.

References
Engle, R. A.,  & Conant,   F. C.  (2002). Guiding   principles  for fostering   productive  disciplinary engagement:
        Explaining an emerging argument in a community of learners classroom. Cognition and Instruction,
        20(4), 399-483.
Engle, R. A.,  Langer-Osuna,   J. M.,  &  McKinney     de Royston,  M.  (2014).   Toward    a Model  of  Influence  in
        Persuasive Discussions: Negotiating Quality, Authority, Privilege, and Access Within a Student-Led
        Argument. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 23(2), 245-268. doi:10.1080/10508406.2014.883979
Jordan, B., & Henderson, A. (1995). Interaction Analysis: Foundations and Practice. Journal of the Learning
        Sciences, 4(1), 39-103. doi:10.1207/s15327809jls0401_2
Rogat, T. K., & Adams-Wiggins, K. R. (2015). Interrelation between regulatory and socioemotional processes
        within collaborative groups characterized by facilitative and directive other-regulation. Computers in
        Human Behavior, 52, 589-600. doi:10.1016/j.chb.2015.01.026
Suthers, D. D. (2006). Technology affordances for intersubjective meaning making. International Journal of
        Computer Supported Collaborative Learning, 1, 315-337.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                    868                                                    © ISLS
