Embedding Computational Thinking in the Elementary Classroom:
         An Extended Collaborative Teacher Learning Experience
                    Diane Jass Ketelhut, University of Maryland, College Park, djk@umd.edu
                    Emily Hestness, University of Maryland, College Park, hestness@umd.edu
                        Kelly Mills, University of Maryland, College Park, kmills1@umd.edu

          Abstract:  We    used  design-based   research to investigate  an  extended   professional  learning
          experience    to prepare  teachers  to embed     computational   thinking in  elementary    science.
          Opportunities to interact synchronously in a community of practice - including through in-
          person   engagement    in embodied    challenges, discussion, and  resource   sharing,   appeared to
          productively support teacher preparedness to embed CT in their science teaching. However,
          asynchronous collaboration via an online platform was less effective. We describe planned
          adjustments for future iterations of the program.

Introduction
The centrality of computing in modern science has elevated the importance of computational thinking (CT) as a
critical skill for everyone  (Wing,   2006).  Elementary    teachers  have  the potential to play  an essential role in
developing foundational CT competencies among all learners. However, there is a fundamental need for effective
approaches to supporting teacher learning in this novel domain (Hestness, Ketelhut, McGinnis, & Plane, 2018).
Because CT is heavily embedded with technological tools, we are particularly interested in the role of CSCL
environments    for facilitating teacher  learning experiences.   We    are  exploring  the  research question: "What
computer   supported    design elements   can help promote     collaborative learning  for  enacting  CT, a novel  and
potentially intimidating topic, in elementary science?" Because communities of practice (CoP; Lave & Wenger,
1991)    have  shown  promise    to support  novices (i.e.  teachers) enact  new  practices  (i.e. CT-infused   science
pedagogies),   we   are seeking  to cultivate a  community   of practice among    veteran   and preservice  elementary
teachers to support teacher learning related to CT integration in the classroom. To realize this goal, we created the
CT Science     Teaching    Inquiry  Group (STIGCT),  a   collaborative learning  experience   designed  to  create new
knowledge of effective strategies to embed CT in the elementary science classroom.

Methods
We adopted a design-based research (DBR) approach, entailing iterative cycles of design and analysis. For the
first iteration of the STIGCT, we designed and facilitated seven 90-minute in-person professional development
sessions that met monthly throughout the school year. The sessions began as primarily facilitator-directed, in
which members of our team led collaborative learning activities and discussion. Midway through the year, we
shifted the design of the sessions to be primarily participant-directed, in which participants worked together to
create, share, and discuss learning activities to support CT integration. Between sessions, participants were invited
to collaborate by sharing ideas and resources via an online platform (piazza.com). Participants (N=24) included
practicing teachers (n=11) and preservice teachers (PSTs; n=13).
          We used qualitative research methods (Miles, Huberman, & Saldana, 2014) to analyze the session plans
and field notes for each STIGCT session, identifying key design elements included throughout the PD experience.
Next, we analyzed data including field notes, written reflections collected at the end of each session, and focus
group interviews collected at the end of the full experience. Where the focal design elements were referenced, we
coded evidence of how (or whether) they appeared to promote collaborative learning toward CT integration.

Findings
We describe how three focal design elements appeared to contribute to teacher collaborative learning related to
CT integration in elementary science. A summary and examples are provided in Figure 1.
          First, we found that collaborative engagement in hands-on activities, both computer-supported and not
computer-supported, appeared to foster collaborative learning about CT conceptually and improve participants'
perceptions of their CT understandings. However, we did not encounter clear evidence that this design element
on its own supported teachers in transferring conceptual CT understandings into their own classroom practice.
          Second,   incorporating   intentional  discussion opportunities   within  the   sessions helped   participants
generate ideas about how CT concepts could relate to the teaching of elementary science curriculum topics. In
addition, preservice teachers expressed a sense of empowerment when able to learn from experienced teachers
about how they were applying (or considering applying) CT in their classrooms. We encouraged participants to

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                      869                                                   © ISLS
continue sharing their CT integration ideas with one another outside of the in-person sessions, but participants
rarely made use of the online platform which was set up for this purpose.
         Last, sharing resources to support CT integration helped participants design lesson plans to enact CT in
their elementary   science classrooms. We       found that   resource sharing   that  was both lead by      facilitators    and
codesigned by participants appeared to promote a sense of empowerment. Participants understood and had the
resources to enact strategies for applying CT in their classrooms. We noted, however, that the participant-designed
lesson plans varied in the extent to which they accurately represented CT or integrated it into curricular content
in science. As with the discussion design element, participants rarely made use of the online platform to share
resources between sessions, which was one of its intended purposes.

  Element           Activity examples                            Example participant response

  CT                -Teachers manipulate an online               "[Problem decomposition was... a really big and newer
  sensemaking       ecosystem to learn about models              topic for a lot of us... I said something out loud to the
  through            -Teachers "program" a blindfolded           class... I was approaching being right, but I was maybe
  collaborative     teammate to walk a specified path,           65% right, and you were like, "Um, let me refine that." And
  challenges        modeling problem decomposition               then I was like, "Oh, okay. Now I get it a little bit more."

  Discussing        -Teachers examine standards and              "[At first, I wondered] how realistic is it to think that
  classroom         discuss opportunities for CT integration     people are implementing these things in the classroom for
  applications of   -Teachers encouraged to update each          real? ...Seeing teachers here [in the STIG] that have taught
  CT concepts       other asynchronously on CT integration       for many years kind of implementing it [CT] .... I think it
                    efforts via online platform                  just made it... seem like it was more attainable."

  Sharing           - Teachers are invited to borrow              "I really liked the activity of having people create lessons
  resources to      educational robotics tools for use in their  and then teach it to us. Because... it gave people the
  support CT        classrooms and report back                   opportunity to learn from different teachers, people they
  integration in    - Teachers co-author and present             might not know. But also, I really liked learning how
  elementary        learning activities (lesson plans) that      different people might take a lesson and interpret it in their
  science           integrate CT into elementary science         own way. I thought it was really helpful."

Conclusions and implications
The   STIGCT   design elements offered   affordances        and limitations  relevant to promoting  a CoP      focused        on
collaborative learning of how to enact CT in elementary science. Specifically, we found that hands on experiences,
discussions and resource sharing were helpful in facilitating collaborative learning around CT. However, we
struggled to maintain our CoP virtually, with low participation in the asynchronous, online space.             We plan to
modify future iterations of the STIGCT by: 1) Retaining the collaborative design of CT-infused elementary science
lessons to promote participant-created resource sharing, with greater facilitator support and more consistency; 2)
Encouraging participants to test participant-created resources in their classroom and to share their experiences
online between    in-person sessions; 3) Considering         an  alternate, more familiar  online platform     to   promote
participant discussion between sessions, and incorporating the online discussion into in-person sessions; and 4)
Inviting teachers from the first iteration of the STIGCT to continue their participation in the second year and serve
as mentors for newcomers. Through our ongoing process of design and refinement, we plan to use our learning to
develop empirically-supported resources, tools, and measures to connect physical and virtual spaces in order to
support teacher education around CT integration in elementary science.

References
Hestness, E., Ketelhut, D. J., McGinnis, J. R., & Plane, J. (2018). Professional knowledge building within an
         elementary teacher professional development experience on computational thinking in science education.
         Journal of Technology and Teacher Education, 26(3), 411-435.
Lave, J. & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning: Legitimate peripheral participation. Cambridge: Cambridge
         University Press.
Miles, M. B., Huberman, A. M., & Saldana, J. (2013). Qualitative data analysis. Sage.
Wing, J. M. (2006). Computational thinking. Communications of the ACM, 49(3), 33-35.

Acknowledgements
This material is based upon work supported by the National Science Foundation under Grant No.1639891.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                        870                                                        © ISLS
