      Visualizing Representations of Interaction States during CSCL
             Saadeddine Shehab, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, shehab2@illinois.edu
               Emma Mercier, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, mercier@illinois.edu

          Abstract:  Existing  methods    for analyzing  video  data    of small  groups  during    collaborative
          problem-solving    focus  on    analyzing   certain  aspects     of   students'  task-related    verbal
          interactions by  coding  and counting.   In this   paper, we  present   a   method   that  was used    to
          construct a  visual representation   to illustrate how    the occurrence    of  students'  task-related
          verbal interactions  changed    sequentially  over   the  class   duration   as a    function of   other
          dimensions of the group activity. Possible uses of these representations are discussed.

Introduction
One of the key features of embedding CSCL activities in real classrooms is the highly complex nature of the
collaborative process, and the multiple dimensions that influence the learning of groups within the ecosystem of
a classroom. There is an increasing number of research studies in CSCL face-to-face classrooms that collect
video  data of the  groups  as they solve   the task  (e.g.  Paquette   et al., 2018). We    need   additional  methods    to
analyze this data and understand how the group activity, especially students' task-related verbal interactions,
unfolds sequentially over the class duration and change from one class to another over time (Hmelo-Silver et al.,
2011; Reimann, 2009). This information can be used to inform future analytical approaches to the data and
future design iterations. In this paper, we describe a method that uses the video recordings of small groups
during   collaborative problem-solving    classrooms  to construct    a visual   representation   of each    of the group's
activity sequentially  over the  class duration.  Then,  we   discuss   the possible   uses    of these representations    in
making inferences about factors that can influence group activity and in planning further analysis of the data.

Collecting the video data
This method was developed as part of a multi-year design-based implementation research project that is focused
on integrating collaborative problem solving in a large introductory engineering course. The project involves
collecting  video   data,  using ceiling   mounted    cameras   and     lapel,  table  or hanging    microphones,     from
undergraduate engineering students and teaching assistants during discussion sessions (classes) that took place
in a lab classroom. During each class, students worked in small groups to solve an authentic engineering task
presented as a digital worksheet on 11-inch tablets. Tablets of students in the same group were synchronized,
allowing them to see the work of their team. The duration of each class was approximately 50 minutes.                 Data
was collected from 28 classes (4 per week, over 7 weeks).

Coding the video data
To identify how the activity of a group unfolded over the class duration we segmented the video recording of
the group during one class into consecutive 20 seconds clips. We then coded each clip using a coding scheme
adapted from Paquette et al. (2018) for dimensions that define or influence the group activity in the context of a
face-to-face CSCL classroom. These dimensions were task-relatedness (on-task or off-task), students' verbal
interactions (present or not present), teacher's verbal interactions (with the whole class, with the group, or not
present), content of verbal interactions (on-task talk, other talk, or no talk), potential issues during students'
verbal interactions (the conversation is dominated by one group member, the conversation indicates that the
group  is  confused,   or none of  the group    members      responded  to  an   interaction   attempt  by   another group
member), potential issues during group work (the group is divided into sub-groups, or one group member is left
out), and technical issues (present or not present).

Constructing a Visual Representation of Group Activity Over Class Duration
After coding all number consecutive 20 seconds clips of the group, we used the codes of each clip to categorize
the group activity into one of seven states that dominated the activity. These states are described in Table 1.

Table 1. The seven states of group activity

                  Task-          Students'      Teacher's        Content of           Issues -      Issues -      Issues -
               Relatedness        Verbal          Verbal            Verbal            Verbal         Group      Technology
State                          Interactions     Interactions     Interactions      Interactions      Work
Positive         On-Task          Present       Not Present     On-Task Talk           None          None       Not Present
Silent           On-Task       Not Present      Not Present        No Talk             None          None       Not Present

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                     871                                                         © ISLS
Other Talk      On-Task           Present       Not Present      Other Talk          None           None     Not Present
Off Task        Off-Task           N/A             N/A              N/A               N/A           N/A          N/A
Teacher-            N/A            N/A          Present with        N/A               N/A           N/A          N/A
Whole                                            the whole
Class                                              class
Teacher-            N/A            N/A          Present with        N/A               N/A           N/A          N/A
Group                                             group
Issue           On-Task            N/A          Not Present         N/A           Any code (other than none) under these
                                                                                        three dimensions is present
N/A: Not applicable

    Using the state of the group activity in each of the consecutive 20 seconds clips, we constructed a visual
representation of the group activity over the class duration. The representation illustrates how the occurrence of
the positive  state changed   over the   class duration  as  a  function of the  other  six states. An    example   of this
representation for two groups (A and B) that are in the same class is shown in Figure 1.

                        Figure 1.  The Occurrence of the Positive State Over Class Duration

Possible Uses of the Visual Representations
Comparing the visual representations of different groups in the same class provides a snap-shot of the groups'
processes  and  can  suggest  inferences  about  factors   that may   have  influenced  the  occurrence,   duration,   and
sequence of occurrences of the positive state in groups. For example, Figure 1 shows that Group A had longer
positive state durations and less silent states than Group B. Both groups did not have many or long issues states;
however,   only Group   A    had teacher-group   states  that  preceded  the occurrence     of the  positive states.   This
suggests that these teacher-group states may have promoted students' task-related verbal interactions. Further
examination of the representations from other groups in the same class and the analysis of the transcript from
Group's A video allow us to test this, or other, hypotheses. Comparing the visual representations of different
groups  in the  same   class could provide   insights about    how the   design  of the task   may  have  influenced   the
groups' activity. For example, if the representations of all the groups of one class show that positive states did
not start occurring until half way through the class, or if they show that the majority of the sequences of positive
states were very short, then it is possible that the design of the task did not promote verbal interactions between
students and further investigation might be warranted.       In addition, comparing the visual representations of the
same  group   across different   classes can help us  understand   how    stable collaborative    behaviors  are for   each
group, or whether variables such as the content or nature of the task or absence or change of one or more group
members had an impact on the occurrence and duration of the positive state of this group. This can inform
further  iterations of tasks  and  tools, taking  into   account  the complex    ecosystem     of the group   within   the
classroom context.

References
Hmelo-Silver, C.E., Jordan, R., Liu, L., & Chernobilsky, E. (2011). Representational tools for understanding
         complex computer supported collaborative learning environments. In S. Puntambekar, G. Erkens, &
         C.E. Hmelo-Silver (Eds.), Analyzing interactions in CSCL (pp. 83-106). New York, USA: Springer.
Paquette, L., Bosch, N., Mercier, E., Jung, J., Shehab, S., & Tong, Y. (2018). Matching data-driven models of
         group  interactions   to  video  analysis  of   collaborative   problem    solving    on  tablet computers.    In
         Proceedings    of the 13th International  Conference      of the Learning   Sciences.    London:    International
         Society of the Learning Sciences.
Reimann,   P. (2009).  Time   is precious: Variable-and    event-centered   approaches   to  process  analysis   in CSCL
         research. International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 4(3), 239-257.

Acknowledgments
This material is based upon work supported by the National Science Foundation under Grant No. 1628976. Any
opinions, findings, conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Science Foundation.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                      872                                                      © ISLS
