         How Embodied Interactions Manifest Themselves During
                   Collaborative Learning in Classroom Settings
                            Zuzanna Lechelt, Yvonne Rogers, and Nicolai Marquardt
                      z.lechelt@cs.ucl.ac.uk, y.rogers@ucl.ac.uk, n.marquardt@ucl.ac.uk
                              UCL Interaction Centre, University College London

         Abstract: New physical computing toolkits offer much promise for promoting collaborative
         learning by engendering embodied interactions that can support collaborative discovery. To
         examine how these can unfold during a learning activity, we conducted a classroom study
         where pairs of children explored mappings between various sensors and actuators embedded
         in a physical-digital artifact. We found how a number of embodied interactions emerged that
         were  effectively used  to progress  learning   through the processes    of showing,   sharing  and
         contesting.

Introduction
A new generation of physical toolkits has emerged over the last few years, intended to teach young children
about computing in fun and collaborative ways. These include the micro:bit (2018) and LittleBits (Bdeir, 2009).
These toolkits offer  new  opportunities for  learning   about electronics, coding   and the  Internet of Things,   by
enabling children  to connect the   digital with the physical.  A key property    of these   types of physical-digital
artifacts is their visibility coupled with shareability and portability; they can be picked up, shown to others,
pointed at and passed around. In this way, children can focus their attention to what is happening around them
as they move, manipulate, and connect physical objects in front of them. To this end, our research is concerned
with  uncovering  the range   of  embodied   interactions that  are engendered    when   interacting   with handheld
physical-digital artifacts. The aim of our research is to investigate how groups of children, aged 9 to 12, use
embodied  interaction  strategies to explore   and   discover  core physical  computing      concepts  ­ namely,    the
physical-digital mappings between sensors and actuators ­ while learning together in a classroom setting. We
present an analysis of how pairs and small groups of children exploit the physical properties of an interactive
physical-digital artifact called the Magic Cube to learn about its functionality.

Methodology
Groups of children in a classroom setting were asked to explore and uncover various physical-digital mappings
using the Magic Cube (Lechelt et al., 2016). This is a hand-sized, electronic cube with embedded sensors and
actuators, designed to teach children about computing (Figure 1, left). The goal was to determine how the form
factor and the physical-digital mappings enabled by the device give rise to embodied interaction strategies, and
where these would occur in the learning process. A discovery-based task was designed to enable the children to
explore what happens between the sensors and actuators embedded in the cubes, in terms of what they are and
how they work. Different physical actions were designed to result in different digital effects using the same
cube. For the  study,  three  sensor-actuator  mappings   were   pre-programmed      in  the cubes.   Specifically: 1)
covering the light sensor  on the cube   turned  on  the embedded   light inside  the cube,  2) shaking   the cube  at
different speeds changed the color of the embedded light and 3) blowing hot air into the temperature sensor
made a `fire' animation appear on the LED matrix in the cube.

         Figure 1. (left) The Magic Cube. (right) Classification of six embodied interaction strategies.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                    875                                                   © ISLS
         The study was conducted in computing classrooms in two primary schools in England. Participants
were aged between 9-12 years. During each session, the children were asked to work in groups of two or three;
one cube was provided for each group. The children were told that there were hidden mappings within the cube
but not told what these were. Their challenge was to collaboratively discover what they were by testing out
various physical actions (e.g., covering the cube sides with their hands, blowing into the cube, shaking the cube)
to elicit the digital effects on the cube (e.g., change the color of light, make a `fire' appear on the LED matrix).
Video  data  was  collected  of the children's  gestures  and  embodied     interactions when  using  the cube  for   the
specified learning activities. Based on the video data a classification was derived of the embodied interaction
strategies that the children used.

Findings
Overall, our analysis of the video data collected showed that the children used a range of embodied interaction
strategies  (see Figure  1, right). In  particular, we  found  that the   children alternated  between   handing  over,
grabbing the cubes and interacting with them together simultaneously, as a way of implicitly negotiating what to
do  next and  changing   their  group's  course of   experimentation  with   the  cubes. By   analyzing  the embodied
interaction strategies in terms of when they occurred in the context of the task, we found how specific strategies
contributed to negotiating discovery of the physical-digital mappings together. For instance, we found that when
starting out with exploring the cube, the children mainly interacted with the cube individually, and then changed
control of the cube by handing it over to and grabbing it from their peers. Throughout the task, there were many
moments when the children uncovered a new effect. During these "moments of discovery", we found that when
one child in a group discovered how a sensor-actuator mapping worked, rapid sequences of handovers and grabs
ensued,  in  which  the  other(s)   in the group    imitated  the  physical movement     to  reach the   same   level of
understanding. Handovers were most prevalent when the person currently holding the cube had figured out how
the effect  worked, while   the other(s) in the group    had  not. In these  situations, the person  holding  the cube
handed over the cubes to the other(s) to give them the opportunity to try it. Less frequently, the children were
seen to hand over the cube to group members as a prompt to "show me how it works." Setting the cube down
and picking the cube up occurred most frequently during "dead ends" of interaction, when a type of physical
action did not work as expected. These were observed to be implicit indicators of change of turn for control of
the cube. For example, after tilting the cube in a variety of different directions to no avail when trying to figure
out what was making the light turn on for one of the mappings, the current grasper in one group set the cube
down on the table, where another group member immediately picked it up and began testing other physical
actions.

Conclusion
Physical-digital interfaces provide much scope for promoting collaborative learning. Our analysis of children's
interactions with a hand-sized physical computing cube demonstrates how children were able to draw upon a
diverse repertoire of embodied interaction strategies, that enabled them to readily change control, take control
and hand    over control when   learning   together. We  also  found  how   collaborative   learning can  be positively
influenced by interactions that might otherwise be deemed un-collaborative (e.g., grabbing). Taken together, the
results from our classroom study suggests that the extent to which new physical toolkits, aimed at teaching
groups of children computing will be successful, depends on how well they `fit' into their hands and what this
then enables them to do together, by way of sharing, showing, and contesting.

References
BBC  micro:bit.   2016.  Micro:bit:  get creative,  get connected,  get   coding.  Retrieved February   15,  2018 from
         https://microbit.org/
Bdeir,   A. (2009,  February).    Electronics  as   material: littleBits. In Proceedings    of the   3rd  International
         Conference on Tangible and Embedded Interaction (pp. 397-400). ACM.
Lechelt, Z., Rogers, Y., Marquardt, N., & Shum, V. (2016, May). ConnectUs: A new toolkit for teaching about
         the Internet of  Things.   In Proceedings   of the  2016  CHI    Conference Extended   Abstracts    on Human
         Factors in Computing Systems (pp. 3711-3714). ACM.

Acknowledgments
This research was partially funded by the EPSRC and the BBC through an iCASE scholarship (Award Number
1623937).

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                     876                                                    © ISLS
