    Collaboration within Mathland: What Do We become Together
                  Isaac Nichols-Paez, Vanderbilt University, isaac.t.nichols@vanderbilt.edu
                       Corey Brady, Vanderbilt University, corey.brady@vanderbilt.edu

         Abstract: Research has pushed Papert's (1980) seminal ideas of mathland and microworlds but
         remain focused on computational environments designed for individual work. Current group-
         centered activities using   networked    computational   environments    distribute  mathematical
         objects among students and their relations and then assemble these objects in a shared public
         space. Within  these  new   technological  contexts,   we  ask how     students identify  with   the
         mathematical objects distributed and maintained in socio-mathematical relations.

Introduction and literature review
Over the last 40 years, research has pushed Papert's (1980) seminal ideas further in understanding students as
epistemic agents and their material environments as fostering microworlds. Yet much of this work has remained
focused  on computational    environments    designed for individual  work.    A growing    strand   of   literature has
introduced  group-centered  activities using networked    computational    environments  to  distribute   mathematical
objects among students and their relations and then assemble these objects in a shared public space (Brady et al,
2013; White & Pea, 2011). Researchers have yet to broaden Papert's constructs of mathland and microworlds to
these new technologies and students' collaborative interaction with them, but doing so reveals how these socio-
technological infrastructures (cf Hegedus & Moreno-Armella, 2009) can provide rich collaborative spaces where
students identify with mathematical objects at both the individual and collective level.
         Early work in constructionism (Papert & Harel, 1991) using microworlds focused primarily on design
and implementation of digital environments to support students' mathematics learning. But the microworld idea
offers a framework to understand any designed space embodying powerful ideas (Papert, 1980) in a self-contained
logical structure that students can explore and "bump up against" in order to (a) appropriate particular powerful
ideas, and (b) build experiences of what a logical structure is, i.e. have epistemological experiences of mathland.
Eisenberg (2003) broadened the notion of microworlds to extend it `outside the computer,' exploring the material
possibilities of physical or hybrid/instrumented objects to create a mathland in a child's familiar surroundings.
Broadening  the  construct  even  further, we  propose    to analyze  socially  distributed  activities   and learning
environments as microworlds on the basis of the patterns of interaction that they support. With such a frame, the
social peer group can   act both  as infrastructure instantiating a microworld    and  as a   social medium    linking
individuals with their mathematical roles. These interactional mechanisms among students, their participation
structures, and the mathematical structures become essential when the nature of the computational environment
leverages the peer group by aggregating distributed mathematical objects in a shared space.
         Group-centered activity design with technology support has a growing base of literature establishing its
unique capabilities and impact on classrooms (e.g. Kaput, Hegedus, & Lesh, 2007; Stroup, Ares & Hurford 2005).
Such designs leverage technological infrastructures in classroom activities to model participation structures to
mathematical structures (Brady et al. 2013; Hegedus & Penuel, 2008). For example, individual students act as
points while student-pairs form a line and the collective forms a family of lines (White & Pea, 2011). Within such
collaborative digital environments, the relationship between the classroom's social and mathematical structures
can readily be  seen as dialectic (Stroup  et al.  2005), where   the social  influences  the mathematical    and    the
mathematical  influences the  social.  We  argue   these  types of  environments   can   generate  the    conditions  in
classrooms that define microworlds as learning environments. This view highlights microworlds' interactional
nature, where the social space is a medium and a representational infrastructure.     In the context of a particular
group-centered network activity, the preceding framing leads to the following research question: How do students
identify with mathematical objects when those objects are distributed to individuals but maintained in socio-
mathematical relations in a shared public space?

Methods
To investigate the above research questions, we implemented a design-based research study of a series of activities
in the 8th grade mathematics classrooms of a partner teacher at a public middle school serving a racially and
economically  diverse population  within   a large  metropolitan  district in a midsize  southern    city in the USA.
Students ranged in backgrounds and relationships with mathematics from positive to negative, but the established
classroom culture was overall positive and focused explicitly on a growth mindset. The two authors entered into
the classroom space to assist the teacher in implementing rich mathematics tasks with technological support. All

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                   879                                                      © ISLS
three adults participated in supporting students' thinking during a series of weekly activities. Data for the larger
project was collected broadly and is ongoing, but the current study draws on data collected from two stationary
cameras and screen capture of the `teacher' computer (which was displayed publicly via a projector), along with
field notes generated during discussions of what to improve in continued activities.
        To understand how students were identifying with mathematical objects in the activities, we analyzed a
class discussion between two of the mathematics tasks. The previous week, the second author led the class in a
group-centered activity where each student controlled a point in a shared display. By following simple verbal
rules, students generated lines together; for example, "make your y-coordinate equal 4" generated the horizontal
line seen in Figure 1. Together, students generated horizontal, vertical, and slanted lines by following different
rules coordinating x and y coordinates. To better assess what the students recalled from this activity, the teacher
prompted them to write in their journals, asking, "What do you remember from last week when [the authors] were
in the room?"    Students'   responses to this prompt    revealed how  they  were   identifying  with   (or not) the
mathematical objects from the previous week's task.

                 Figure 1. Collaborative group-centered activities where students control points.

Findings
In the class discussion, students readily identified themselves with the point they controlled, using statements that
blurred themselves and their point, such as "I remember chasing each other with the dots." Further, they related
the technological space with the classroom space saying, "I like how we can see the whole class when we go in
there." The students' use of "we" was significant, signaling a collective solidarity in the community (c.f. Hegedus
&  Panuel 2008).  On   the other  hand,  students  did not (yet) seem  to  identify as strongly with   the  emergent
mathematical objects (the lines), describing these as "how [second author] would give us points and stuff to go
to." These descriptions hearkened back to traditional roles of teacher-as-rule-maker and student-as-rule-follower.
This finding   indicates further support  is needed  for groups  of students to relate  themselves   with   emergent
mathematical objects (e.g., functions and loci of points), and our ongoing work is pushing technology designs and
class discussions to explore these possibilities.

References
Brady, C., White, T., Davis, S., & Hegedus, S. (2013). SimCalc and the networked classroom. In The SimCalc
        Vision and Contributions (pp. 99-121). Springer, Dordrecht.
Eisenberg, M. (2003). Mindstuff: Educational technology beyond the computer. Convergence, 9(2), 29-53.
Hegedus,    S.   J.,  &   Moreno-Armella,      L.   (2009).   Intersecting  representation   and    communication
        infrastructures. ZDM, 41(4), 399-412.
Hegedus,  S. J., &   Penuel, W.  R. (2008).   Studying   new forms  of participation   and identity in  mathematics
        classrooms with integrated communication and representational infrastructures. Educational Studies in
        Mathematics, 68(2), 171-183.
Kaput,  J.,  Hegedus,    S.,  &   Lesh,   R.  (2007).   Technology   becoming    infrastructural    in  mathematics
        education. Foundations for the future in mathematics education, 173-192.
Papert, S. (1980). Mindstorms: Children, computers, and powerful ideas. Basic Books, Inc..
Papert, S., & Harel, I. (1991). Situating constructionism. Constructionism, 36(2), 1-11.
Stroup, W. M., Ares, N. M., & Hurford, A. C. (2005). A dialectic analysis of generativity: Issues of network-
        supported design in mathematics and science. Mathematical Thinking and Learning, 7(3), 181-206.
White, T., & Pea, R. (2011). Distributed by design: On the promises and pitfalls of collaborative learning with
        multiple representations. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 20(3), 489-547.

Acknowledgments
This material is based upon work supported by the National Science Foundation under Grant No. 1615207.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                    880                                                  © ISLS
