                 Using Epistemic Network Analysis to Explore
           Ways of Contributing to Knowledge Building Discourse
                    Leanne Ma, OISE/University of Toronto, leanne.ma@mail.utoronto.ca
                 Yoshiaki Matsuzawa, Aoyama Gakuin University, matsuzawa@si.aoyama.ac.jp
              Marlene Scardamalia, OISE/University of Toronto, marlene.scardamalia@utoronto.ca

        Abstract: This study explores Epistemic Network Analysis (ENA) to assess Knowledge
        Building discourse. Knowledge Forum notes were coded using a "ways of contributing"
        framework, and students were grouped based on their use of Knowledge Forum scaffolds.
        Findings indicate that the epistemic networks for theory, question, and source groups were
        significantly different from one  another, yet complementary.   The potential for ENA  to
        model contribution dynamics during cycles of knowledge advancement is discussed.

Introduction
Epistemic Network Analysis (ENA; Shaffer, 2017) is a method used for modeling the underlying structure of
connections in discursive data. ENA produces weighted network visualizations by quantifying the co-occurrence
of codes within discussions for each unit of analysis (e.g., individual speakers or sub-groups of speakers). These
networks can then be simultaneously compared visually and statistically to further explore the similarities and
differences between various speakers in a discussion. For example, when a group of students are engaged in
Knowledge   Building  discourse  to advance  collective understanding  (Scardamalia   & Bereiter,  2017),   they
contribute important codes to the discussion, such as theorizing, questioning, providing evidence, and so on. Past
work using statistical analyses to explore the relations between different ways of contributing to Knowledge
Building discourse have revealed positive correlations between formulating questions and proposing explanations,
as well as improving theories and providing evidence (Chuy, Resendes, & Scardamalia, 2010). The purpose of
this study is to extend this work   using ENA  as  a   technique for modeling relationships between  ways     of
contributing networks to better understand productive discourse moves during Knowledge Building.

Methods and analysis
In this study, we applied Epistemic Network Analysis to Knowledge Forum data (Scardamalia, 2017) using the
ENA Web Tool (Marquart et al., 2018). Based on approximately 100 notes, we created units of analysis by
grouping students based on their use of Knowledge Forum scaffolds. Although the class had 21 students, the
theory group had 13 students, the question group had 18 students, and the source group had 7 students. The three
networks were aggregated using a binary summation to reflect the presence or absence of the co-occurrence of
each pair of codes within a 4-line stanza window. More specifically, our ENA model included the following codes
from the "ways of contributing" framework (Chuy, Resendes, & Scardamalia, 2010): questioning, theorizing,
obtaining evidence, working with evidence, creating syntheses/analogies, and supporting discussion. The ENA
model normalized the networks for all units of analysis before they were subjected to a dimensional reduction,
which accounts for the fact that different units of analysis may have different amounts of coded lines in the data.
For the dimensional reduction, we used a singular value decomposition, which produces orthogonal dimensions
that maximize the variance explained by each dimension. Figure 1 shows the network centroids for the three
groups of students along a two-dimensional space, with the x-axis accounting for 32.1% of variation and the y-
axis accounting for 25.3% of variation. It can be seen that each group has a relatively unique profile, with the
theory group ("My theory is") occupying the top-left quadrant, the question group ("I need to understand/INTU")
occupying the top-right quadrant, and the source group ("New information") occupying the bottom-left quadrant.

      Figure 1. Network centroids for theory group (blue), question group (red), and source group (purple).

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                  881                                                 © ISLS
Mann-Whitney tests at the alpha=0.05 level showed that the theory group was statistically significantly different
from the question group (U=205.50, p=0.00, r=-0.76) along the x-axis, and the theory group was statistically
significantly different from the source group (U=29.50, p=0.05, r=0.53) along the y-axis.

Findings and future directions
The epistemic networks of the three groups were visualized using network graphs where nodes correspond to the
codes, and edges reflect the relative frequency of co-occurrence, or connection, between two codes. The positions
of the network graph nodes are fixed, and those positions are determined by an optimization routine that minimizes
the difference between    the plotted  points and their  corresponding    network    centroids. Our  model  had  co-
registration correlations of  0.95 (Pearson)  and 0.96   (Spearman)   for the  first dimension   and  co-registration
correlations of 0.80 (Pearson) and 0.82 (Spearman) for the second dimension, suggesting a good fit among the
variables of interest.

a)                                 b)                                 c)
              Figure 2. Mean networks for a) theory group, b) question group, and c) source group.
Figure 2a) shows the mean network for the theory group, where the strongest connection is between the theorizing
and questioning codes, and the weakest connection is between the questioning and supporting discussion codes.
Figure 2b)   shows the  mean  network   for the question  group, where    the strongest connection    is between the
theorizing and questioning codes, and the weakest connection is between the theorizing and obtaining evidence
codes. In this network, there is no connection between the obtaining evidence and supporting discussion codes.
Figure 2c) shows the mean network for the source group, where the strongest connection is between the theorizing
and obtaining evidence codes, and the weakest connection is between the theorizing and questioning codes. In
this network, there is no connection between the questioning and supporting discussion codes. It is interesting to
note that the three networks complement one another based on their strongest and weakest connections, with the
theory group producing the only network that holds all the codes together (e.g., questioning, theorizing, obtaining
evidence, supporting discussion).
        Our preliminary findings reinforce the centrality of theorizing and explaining in Knowledge Building
discourse to engage students in working toward creating coherence among multiple sources of information, and
in this case, multiple forms of contributions. As Chuy and colleagues (2010, p. 7) noted, "Different ways of
contributing  do not   represent independent  entities, but  function as  an  inter-related system".  Based  on  this
perspective, we anticipate that as students continue engaging in Knowledge Building discourse, the two codes ­
working with evidence and creating syntheses/analogies ­ will emerge, possibly in the empty quadrant on the
bottom-right. Over time, we expect to see students designing new Knowledge Forum scaffolds to shape their
discourse and epistemic networks as means to drive new cycles of knowledge advancement. Our study offers
ENA as a promising approach to assess Knowledge Building discourse. Additional analyses are underway to
compare  changes   in  group  and  individual networks   using network    difference  graphs  and  to understanding
differences between various educational models.   For example, inquiry learning is question-driven. Future studies
will use ENA to analyze discourse moves associated with evolution of thought in different discourse communities.

References
Bereiter, C., & Scardamalia, M. (2017). "Good Moves" in knowledge-creating dialogue. QWERTY-Open and
        Interdisciplinary Journal of Technology, Culture and Education, 11(2), 12-26.
Chuy,  M.,   Resendes,  M., &  Scardamalia,   M. (2010,  August). Ways     of contributing   to knowledge   building
        dialogue in science. Paper presented at the Knowledge Building Summer Institute, Toronto, Canada.
Marquart, C. L., Hinojosa, C., Swiecki, Z., Eagan, B., & Shaffer, D. W. (2018). Epistemic Network Analysis
        (Version 1.5.2) [Software]. Available from http://app.epistemicnetwork.org
Scardamalia, M. (2017). Knowledge Forum. In K. Peppler (Ed.), The SAGE Encyclopedia of Out-of School
       Learning (pp. 401-403). Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE.
Shaffer, D. W. (2017). Quantitative Ethnography. Madison, WI: Cathcart Press.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                    882                                                   © ISLS
