        Identifying Learning Leaders in Collaborative Learning
                           Yinying Wang, Georgia State University, Ywang103@gsu.edu
                            Min Kyu Kim, Georgia State University, mkim120@gsu.edu

        Abstract:     This  study applies social network analysis  to identify learning   leaders  in online
        collaborative learning. We used indegree, outdegree, and betweenness to categorize learners by
        their learner participation roles. Three learner roles (full facilitator, transactional facilitator, and
        attractive facilitator) fit the theories of learning leadership and were effective in identifying
        learning leaders. The findings pave the foundation for further research developing real-time
        instrument for instructors to identify learning leaders, and provide timely learning support.

Introduction
The purpose   of   this paper  is to explore a computational   approach to identifying    learning leaders       in online
collaborative learning. Specifically, we used three network metrics--indegree, outdegree, and betweenness--
generated from social network analysis (SNA) to examine social dynamics in online discussions and thus identify
learning leaders. Given the social nature of learning leadership, learners' social interactions can be tracked in
online learning systems. The data on social interactions can thus enable us to identify learning leaders. However,
the literature on leadership and online learning has been mostly running in parallel with little overlap. In this study,
we first integrate the literature on leadership and online learning, and then applies social network analysis to
develop and compare two leadership classification models to identify learner leaders. Specifically, we ask two
research questions:
    x   How do we use social network metrics to characterize different learner roles in online discussion?
    x   How do we identify learning leaders from the learner participation model?

Prior literature has proposed a computational approach to classify different learner roles in online learning by
using three social network analysis metrics in combination: (1) indegree--the number of messages sent by a
learner; (2) outdegree--the number of messages received by a learner; and (3) betweenness--the extent to which
a learner controls the communication between two other students in a community (Kim et al., 2018, in press). The
three metrics correspond to popularity, influence, and mediation, respectively. Drawing on prior literature, the
current study defines different learner roles in online collaboration each of which is matched with a combination
of the thresholds of the three metrics (see Table 1). In our previous studies (Kim et al., 2018), we introduced two
models of leaner participation classification: three-level model (full participant, inbound participant, and and
peripheral participant) and four-level model (full participant, engaging participant, peripheral participant, and
marginal participant).   We hypothesize that full participants, given the social nature of leadership (Wang, 2018),
can be identified as learning leaders but insufficient to detail various characterstics of learning leaders.

Table 1: Learner roles

                  Learner Role                                       Thresholds for the MetricsIndegreeOutdegreeBetweenness
 Full Facilitator                                      > 75                     > 75                     > 75
 Transactional Facilitator                             < 75                     > 75                     > 75
 Attractive Facilitator                                > 75                     < 75                     > 75
 Topical leading discussant                            > 75                     > 75                     < 75
 Issue Seeker                                          < 75                     < 75                     > 75
 Active Commenter                                      < 75                     > 75                     < 75
 Attractive participant                                > 75                     < 75                     < 75
 Transitioning Participant                             < 75                     < 75                     < 75
 Occasional Participant                                > 75                    zero or 1                 < 75
 Marginal Participant                                  < 75                    zero or 1                 < 75

Methods
This exploratory study used 21 students (5 male and 16 female) enrolled in a graduate-level online course that
taught foundations of instructional design and technology. For 12-weeks asynchronous discussions, Each student
was assigned at least a week to serve as a peer-moderator. For the online discussion each week, we extracted
social network data on who communicated with whom, how often the learners communicated, and what the

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                     883                                                       © ISLS
content of their communication was. We used the NodeXL software to calculate the indegree, outdegree, and
betweenness-centrality   metrics.  Using  the filtering     approach  (i.e., the 75th percentile) described   earlier, we
classified individuals' participation profiles for each week, centerining on the three learner roles: full facilitator,
transactional facilitator, and attractive facilitator.

Results
As expected, the number of leaders varied across weeks, raning from 2 to 5 (not including topical discusssants),
which seemed reflecting dynamic and situatioinal learner interation in that community. Concerning the topical
discussant, at least one topical discussant per week was identified (see Table 2). We decided to take the first three
roles as leadership in online discussion community, because those roles fited our theortical justification of learning
leaders, and conseravative apporoach to identifying leaders seemed better for a small group discussion (N = 21).

Table 2: The number of learning leaders in each week by corresponding learner roles

                        WK2    WK3     WK4    WK5       WK6     WK7    WK9      WK10    WK11      WK12    WK13     WK15
   Full Facilitator       2      1      3       1         4      1       1        1       2         2       1        2
   TransactionalFacilitator             1       1                2                2                 1       2
     AttractiveFacilitator2      3              1                        1        2       3         1                1
 Topical Discussant       2      1      1       2         1      1       1        1                 2                1

       We then further reviewed topical discussants. For example, as depiected in the network visualization of
week 12 (see Figure 1), two topical discussants (i.e., 216 and 223) positioned around the leaders (i.e., 205, 208,
214, and 219), building their subgroups. We viewed that as far as their participation level is concerned, topical
discussants would    be at  the fully engaged  level    (i.e., full participant), but  still grow to  becoming   leaders.
Therefore, we determined not to have the topical discussant in the leader classifications.

                                Figure 1. Network visualization of the learner roles

       This study proposed how to use social network analysis to identify learning leaders in collaborative
learning. This approachpaves the foundation for further research that develops real-time instrument for instructors
to identify and classify learning leaders, and provide learning intervention and support in a timely manner.

References
Kim, M., & Ayer, T. (in press). Learner participation profiles in an asynchronous online collaboration context.
       Internet and Higher Education.
Kim, M., Ayer, T., & Bakshi, S. (2018, April). Profiling learner engagement in asynchronous online discussions:
       Validity and associations with motivation and performance. Paper presented at the American Educational
       Research Association Annual Meeting, New York, NY.
Wang. Y. (2018). It all starts with social ties: Developing school leadership from the social network perspectives.
       NASSP Bulletin, 102(4), 323­340.

Acknowledgments
The study reported in this paper is based on the work in "How people develop learning Leadership: Learner
Characteristics, Leadership Style, and the Dynamics of Asynchronous Online Learning" supported by Spencer
Foundation (#201900017).

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                       884                                                    © ISLS
