   Supporting Meaningful Revision of Scientific Ideas in an Online
                                                Genetics Unit
                              Emily J. Harrison, Libby Gerard, and Marcia C. Linn
                  emilyharrison@berkeley.edu, libby.gerard@gmail.com, mclinn@berkeley.edu
                                         University of California, Berkeley

         Abstract: This research investigates two ways to encourage revision of scientific essays an
         online  genetics   unit. Revising is   difficult for students,  due   partly to   lack   of practice and
         guidance. We examine the effects of two activities designed to support gaining ideas from
         evidence  by  comparing    an  essay annotator    activity that  models   the essay    revision   process
         (text) to an activity in which students annotate screenshots of interactive models from the unit
         (model).  All students   improved   in their ability  to revise,  but low  prior  knowledge     students
         benefited more from the text annotator condition.

Introduction
Complex scientific topics such as genetic inheritance are notoriously challenging for students; understanding
inheritance requires integration of phenomena occurring at various levels, ranging from DNA, genes, and alleles
to inheritance  of chromosomes     to  phenotypic  expression     (Jacobson  &  Wilensky,      2006).  Students  especially
struggle  with  revising explanations   after encountering     new  evidence   (Berland    &    Reiser, 2009).   Typically,
students' revisions   include only   surface-level or  grammatical    fixes    rather than  integration    of new     content
(Crawford et al., 2008; Bridwell, 1980), resulting in a collection of disconnected ideas. We explore revision
guidance in the form of a text annotator (Fig 1), designed to make the revision process more visible, and a model
annotator, designed to reinforce interpretation of evidence from the output of genetics simulations and models.
         We employ the knowledge integration (KI) framework for curriculum design and analysis of student
work since   it emphasizes   eliciting and building   on   students' prior  ideas,  making     it an  ideal framework    for
promoting  integrated  revision   (Linn &  Eylon,  2011).   Within   the   knowledge   integration    framework,   revising
ideas can help students integrate new concepts, and may especially help students who come in with low prior
knowledge (LPK). Our goal in this work is to encourage revision to help students move beyond rote skills and
towards   purposeful  and   usable  construction of   knowledge.    The    genetics   unit employed     in  this study  was
designed according to the knowledge integration framework to promote building on students' prior knowledge.

Methods
Six classes of 6th grade students (N=173) from one teacher participated in this study (94% non-white, 89%
free/reduced lunch,   30%   ELL).  Students   completed    our 10-day   Genetics   and  Simple    Inheritance    unit during
class periods, working individually on the pretest and posttest, and working in pairs or groups of 3 on the unit
itself. A revision question was also included on the pre/post test, asking students to revise their explanation after
receiving new information about a pedigree. This question allowed us to assess students' ability to incorporate
new  knowledge     in their scientific  explanations  before   and   after completing      the unit.  Two   essay  revision
assessments that were embedded in the curriculum unit were analyzed as well (Sibling and Punnett Square).
After answering each of these questions, student groups received one of the two types of experimental guidance
(text or model annotation), and were then prompted to revise their initial response.

                   Figure 1. Example revision guidance activity for the text annotator condition.

         All items    were  scored  using  a  5-point Knowledge      Integration   (KI)    scale, which  rewards      making
connections between scientific ideas. For each revision item (pre/post and embedded), KI scores were given to
both the initial and revised essays and revision gain was calculated (revised score minus initial score). For some

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                      885                                                        © ISLS
analyses, we categorized students that received a score of 1 or 2 on their pretest essay as "low prior knowledge"
(LPK) and students that received a 3-5 as "high prior knowledge" (HPK). This cutoff was chosen because a KI
score of 3 must include at least one normative scientific idea, while a score of a 2 does not. Qualitative revision
codes  were   also  given  to  the embedded    essay revisions and  pre/post   revision item based   on how  a  student
revised. A code was given for whether students made connected (C) or disconnected (D) revisions. Another
code was given for whether students added new (N) ideas in their revision or expanded existing (E) ideas that
were already present in their initial response.

Results
All students improved in KI score from pretest (mean=1.89) to posttest (mean=2.61) [t(152)=9.66; p<0.001] and
students' revision gain score improved significantly from pre to posttest, regardless of condition [t(86)=4.40;
p<0.001]. Students gained, on average, only 0.02 points from their revisions on the pretest, but gained 0.62
points from their revisions on the posttest. This shows the revision activities can improve students' revision
skills. Low prior knowledge students gained an average of 0.56 points more than high prior knowledge students
from pretest to posttest [t(152)=2.17; p<0.05] across both conditions. We also found that LPK students revised
by adding new ideas more often on the posttest than in their pretest revisions [t(143)=3.82, p<0.001].
         For both embedded items, all students improved from initial to revised score (Siblings: [t(175)=4.19,
p<0.001]; Punnett Square:[t(175)=5.90, p<0.001]), with an average gain of about 0.20 points on each. Students
in the   text annotator   condition   were more   likely  to   revise  by adding   new   ideas   on the   Siblings item,
approximately 2.94 times as often as students in the model annotator condition [z(175)=2.40; p<0.05].
         The text annotator provided the greatest advantage on the Siblings item for LPK students; they revised
2.64 times as often as those in the model condition [z(98)=1.99, p<0.05] and were 2.58 times as likely to revise
by adding new ideas as compared to LPK students in the model condition [z(155)=1.97; p<0.05].
         On the embedded Siblings item, high prior knowledge students were 4.54 times as likely to revise in a
connected way as compared to LPK students [z(169)=2.53; p<0.05]. Similarly, on the Punnett Square question,
high prior knowledge students were 3.43 times as likely to revise in a connected way [z(169)=2.13; p<0.05].
Our   curriculum    activities not only supported   LPK   students  in adding  ideas, but   also helped   HPK   students
successfully connect their prior knowledge to new science content.
         Students who made any revisions at all on either embedded question achieved an average revision gain
score of 0.33 points higher from pre to post than students who did not revise at all during the unit [t(118)=6.65;
p<0.001]. In addition, making connected revisions on the embedded revision questions resulted in, on average, a
pre to posttest gain of 0.44 points more than students who did not make connected revisions on the embedded
assessment questions [t(152)=2.10; p<0.05]. This suggests that practice making connected revisions during the
unit resulted in increased pre/post learning gains.

Significance
This study reveals that students can improve their understanding of genetics as well as their ability to revise
their ideas   after encountering   new  evidence   by  using   curricular supports designed    to help  with revisions.
Engaging in integrated revision during instruction is connected to significantly greater pre to post learning,
supporting    our KI perspective   that making  connections    is a powerful   learning strategy. In  addition, our   text
annotator activity was more effective in supporting low prior knowledge students to add more new ideas to their
revised explanations, and to revise more often. This reveals that students, especially LPK students, perhaps need
less guidance directed toward helping them interpret model output and instead need help distinguishing which of
their ideas   are relevant for  their explanations.  This activity  may   help by making    the  revision process  more
visible.

References
Berland, L. K., & Reiser, B. J. (2009). Making sense of argumentation and explanation. Science Education,
         93(1), 26­55. http://doi.org/10.1002/sce.20286
Bridwell,  L.  (1980).  Revising    strategies in twelfth  grade    students' transactional  writing. Research     in the
         Teaching of English, 14, 197­222.
Crawford, L., Lloyd, S., Knoth, K.: (2008) Analysis of student revisions on a state writing test. Assessment for
         Effective Intervention, 33, 108­119.
Jacobson, M.J & Uri Wilensky (2006) Complex Systems in Education: Scientific and Educational Importance
         and Implications for the Learning Sciences, Journal of the Learning Sciences, 15:1, 11-34.
Linn, M. C., & Eylon, B. S. (2011). Science learning and instruction: Taking Advantage of Technology to
          Promote Knowledge Integration. Routledge.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                      886                                                     © ISLS
