        Use of Spatial Sensemaking Practices in Spatial Learning
                  Abha Vaishampayan, The Pennsylvania State University, abv5104@psu.edu
                      Julia Plummer, The Pennsylvania State University, jdp17@psu.edu
                  Patricia Udomprasert, Harvard University, pudomprasert@cfa.harvard.edu
              Susan Sunbury, Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory, ssunbury@cfa.harvard.edu

        Abstract:  This  paper  describes   an  approach  to  understanding    how   11-12-year-old   students
        (N=185) engage in spatial thinking through use of sensemaking practices. There is limited
        research  on  nature of students'     spatial thinking  when   learning   discipline-specific content
        knowledge during classroom instruction. We use embodied cognition to examine the kinds of
        sensemaking practices students use when applying perspective-taking skill to learn seasons and
        lunar phases, and the teacher's role in shaping those practices.

Introduction
Spatial thinking is important in predicting students' success and achievement in the fields of science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (Wai, Lubinski & Benbow, 2009). However, there is limited research on how
students learn spatial thinking and what kinds of practices or strategies might be useful in improving students'
spatial thinking. We begin to fill this gap in the literature by analyzing the nature of students' engagement in
spatial problem-solving, and examining the role of the teacher in supporting students' spatial sensemaking. We
analyzed how students from 6th grade science classrooms applied the spatial skill of perspective taking (PT
hereafter, Liben & Downs, 1993) to astronomy topics.         PT skill has been found to be correlated with students'
explanations  of astronomical  phenomena      (Plummer    et al., 2016). In  this study,  we examined    physical  and
interactions (dialogues with  peers    and teachers)  to  study   the nature  of  sensemaking practices   used  in the
classroom. This study adapts Ramey and Uttal's (2017) analytical framework of spatial sensemaking practices,
which they developed to examine students' use of spatial skills to solve engineering design problems. However,
the present study identifies practices that capture participants' use of perspective taking when they are making
sense of concepts related to seasons and lunar phases. We refer to this framework as PT sensemaking practices.
This study is guided by the following research question: How do middle-school students engage in perspective-
taking sensemaking practices when participating in a seasons and lunar phases curriculum?

Theoretical framework ­ Embodied cognition
We used the following principles of embodied cognition in analyzing the nature of PT sensemaking practices: 1.
we offload cognitive work onto the environment (Kirsh & Maglio, 1994), 2. offline cognition is body based
(Wilson, 2002), and 3. embodied cognition can manifest in social interactions (Abrahamson & Lindgren, 2014).
These principles were used to connect how participants' actions contribute to their PT sensemaking practices by
supporting their cognitive activities.

Context and methodology
The study took place in a suburban public middle school in the Northeastern U.S. A total of 185 students (ages
11-12 years) participated in a 10-day curriculum, which was taught by a member of the research team. The
curriculum was designed by our team of researchers to promote the use PT skill while teaching seasons and lunar
phases. We   videorecorded all 10-days     of instruction to  capture  talk, actions such as gaze and   gestures,  turn
transitions, and collaborative activities, which are otherwise difficult to capture through field notes. Each class
period was 45 minutes per day. We analyzed the data using interactions analysis (Jordan & Henderson, 1995).

Findings
We found two main themes for PT sensemaking practices in the classroom ­ students themselves used practices
to aid their perspective taking and the teacher used practices to support students' use of perspective taking. The
analysis revealed three PT sensemaking practices that were unique to the teacher - a) PT questioning, b) eliciting
students' gestures (Nathan, 2008), and c) grounding students' thinking with gestures (Nathan, 2008). We found
four PT sensemaking practices common to both students and the teacher ­ a) using gestures (enhancing speech,
complimenting speech, with bodily movement), b) PT epistemic actions (physical and virtual object manipulation,
Kirsch & Maglio, 1994), c) PT representations (sketching), and d) using fixed objects as proxy.
        PT questioning refers to a question asked either by the teacher or the student that requires PT skill to
answer it. e.g. "who [on earth] should see the sun [rising] first?"   This question requires the students to imagine
the sun's path from an earth-based perspective and then connect it to space-based perspectives, to visualize which

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                     887                                                    © ISLS
part of the earth would face the sun first as it rotates. Eliciting students' gestures refers to prompts for students to
use gestures to support their sensemaking. Grounding students' thinking in gestures refers to instances when the
teacher used gestures to emphasize meaning of students' responses by making their thinking visible.
         From the common PT sensemaking practices observed, using gestures refers to participants using their
hands  to simplify visualization  of  different perspectives. PT  epistemic actions   include  practices when    the
participant manipulates objects in the environment to reduce cognitive load. Examples include using a model earth
and rotating it to figure out the directionality of its rotation instead of mentally visualizing. PT representations
refers to translating mental visualizations with a drawing. For instance, the teacher drew a sketch of earth and sun
model to show how the sun's rays hit a specific location on earth because of its tilted axis. Use of fixed objects as
a proxy refers to a visualization practice such as using a wall-clock as a proxy for the North Star, which was then
used as a reference to determine direction of earth's tilt by visualizing a space-based perspective.

Discussion
This research study examines how 6th-grade students and their teacher engaged in perspective taking through
sensemaking   practices and  how  those  practices  are enabled by elements  of their    learning  environment. The
principle of embodied cognition - we offload cognitive work onto the environment ­ suggests that use of external
tools or objects helps in simplifying cognitive processes. We saw evidence of that when students, as well as the
teacher, used earth models to simulate earth's motion that simplified application of PT skill. The second principle
­ offline cognition is body-based - suggests that gestures are useful in externalizing thinking processes. The word
"offline" suggests processes in the world that are removed from the context. Body-based actions such as gestures
or movement, become a part of the learner's "toolbox," providing ways to organize their thinking and cognition.
In our study, we found that this principle was operationalized when students and the teacher communicated
through  gestures and   used gestures  for externalizing  their mental visualizations    of space-  and earth-based
perspectives. We also observed that the teacher encouraged students to use their models and gestures to clarify
their thinking and helped in breaking down the process of using PT skill.   Thus, embodied cognition sometimes
manifested through social interactions (Abrahamson & Lindgren, 2014).
         A close examination of students' actions, interactions, and the teacher's enactment of the curriculum
provided  insight into how   spatial information is communicated   and  is used for constructing    explanations of
astronomical phenomena. In essence, gestures, speech, external objects, and linguistic prompts together seem to
create fluidity in students' spatial thinking as they engage in constructing explanations, follow teacher prompts,
and collaborate with peers. This study has implications for how students' spatial thinking can be effectively
fostered through intentionally designed learning environments, curriculum, and instruction that leverage students'
spatial skills to support their spatial learning using principles of embodied cognition.

References
Abrahamson, D., & Lindgren, R. (2014). Embodiment and embodied design. The Cambridge handbook of the
         learning sciences, 2, 358-376.
Jordan, B., & Henderson, A. (1995). Interaction analysis: Foundations and practice. The journal of the learning
         sciences, 4(1), 39-103.
Kirsh, D., & Maglio, P. (1994). On distinguishing epistemic from pragmatic action. Cognitive science, 18(4), 513-
         549.
Liben,  L. S., &    Downs,   R.  M.    (1993).  Understanding    person-space-map   relations:    Cartographic  and
         developmental perspectives. Developmental psychology, 29(4), 739.
Nathan,   M.   J.  (2008).   An  embodied      cognition  perspective  on   symbols,      gesture,  and  grounding
         instruction. Symbols and embodiment: Debates on meaning and cognition, 18, 375-396.
Plummer, J. D., Bower, C. A., & Liben, L. S. (2016). The role of perspective taking in how children connect
         reference frames when explaining astronomical phenomena. International Journal of Science Education,
         38(3), 345-365.
Ramey, K. E., & Uttal, D. H. (2017). Making sense of space: Distributed spatial sensemaking in a middle school
         summer engineering camp. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 26(2), 277-319.
Wai, J., Lubinski, D., & Benbow, C. P. (2009). Spatial ability for STEM domains: Aligning over 50 years of
         cumulative psychological knowledge solidifies its importance. Jrl of Educational Psychology, 101, 817.
Wilson, M. (2002). Six views of embodied cognition. Psychonomic bulletin & review, 9(4), 625-636.

Acknowledgments
This research was funded by National Science Foundation under grants #DRL-1503395 & 1502798. Special
thanks to Erin Johnson, Kyungjin Cho, Henry Houghton and Erika Wright for their support in this research.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                    888                                                  © ISLS
