       Teacher Perceptions on Collaborative Online Professional
       Development for In-Service Teachers on a MOOC Platform
   Katherine Miller, Graduate School of Education, University of Pennsylvania, kmmiller@gse.upenn.edu
        Susan A. Yoon, Graduate School of Education, University of Pennsylvania, yoonsa@upenn.edu
       Jooeun Shim, Graduate School of Education, University of Pennsylvania, jshim@gse.upenn.edu
                   Daniel Wendel, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, djwendel@mit.edu
                   Ilana Schoenfeld, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, ilanasch@mit.edu
                   Emma Anderson, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, eanderso@mit.edu
                       David Reider, Education Design, INC, david@educationdesign.biz

          Abstract: This study seeks to address the growing need for greater access to effective, on-
          demand, low-cost professional development (PD) through the development of a small private
          online course (SPOC) as a pilot test for a scale-up to a full massive open online course (MOOC).
          Traditional MOOCs are not designed for collaboration and social interaction among participants
          that build communities, which has been shown to be an important aspect of effective PD. This
          study provides insights in designing for collaboration on a traditional MOOC platform (in our
          case edX). A pilot study was run with a small group of in-service teachers to test a collaborative
          design with an eye to how the design will scale to a full MOOC.
Objectives and theoretical framework
There  is a growing   need among   teachers  for greater access   to effective, on-demand,  low-cost professional
development (PD) (Fishman et al., 2013). Traditional face-to-face PD is expensive, and limited in relevance,
applicability, and ability to scale (Hill, 2015). Online PD is a rapidly growing option that can make it more broadly
accessible. PD offered online can be as successful as face-to-face (Fishman et al., 2013). Massive open online
courses (MOOCs) provide the opportunity to explore the viability of such online approaches at larger scales.
However,    there are drawbacks   to  MOOC    participation  that pose  barriers  to implementing   effective   PD.
collaboration among participants and social interaction that build communities are two conditions that encourage
engagement but are not well-supported technologically in MOOCs (Kop, 2011). We seek to design a MOOC that
overcomes these barriers to collaboration and community building. In order to do this research, a pilot study was
run with a small group of teachers in order to explore how successfully a MOOC platform and framework can be
used to encourage collaboration with the aim of eventually scaling to larger participation.
          We build on research that positions teachers as knowers and agents of change (Cochran-Smith & Lytle,
1999). This  posits that teachers are active participants in building  their own   knowledge  rather than    passive
recipients (Fenstermacher, 1994). Through a cross-case study Booth (2012) found that social learning was able to
build knowledge    sharing and trust  among  teachers. Other  studies  have  demonstrated   that collaboration  can
increase knowledge creation and sharing in an online space (e.g., Duncan-Howell, 2010). In order to encourage
collaboration in our SPOC, we built on existing best practices for encouraging collaboration in online PD (e.g.
Booth, 2012; Hew & Cheung, 2014). These findings were used directly in the development of the collaborative
learning portion of the course and the prompts that led teachers into that space.
Methods
This paper is part of a long-standing program of research funded by the U.S. National Science Foundation which
undertakes the design and dissemination of a curriculum to teach common topics in high school biology through
complex systems simulations (Yoon et al., 2017). In adapting the PD for the complex systems curriculum to a
wider audience, the PD was moved to an online platform: Edge, the pilot testing platform for edX. We used three
design categories which emerged from the literature to promote collaboration throughout the course: 1) periodic
required discussions in the online forum; 2) open-ended questions based on course content to prompt the sharing
of reflections on practice; and 3) expectation of participant comments on others' reflections. The participants in
the first implementation of the course were eight in-service teachers from six different schools in three urban
districts in the Northeastern US.
          This paper is part of a larger study which collects data at both the teacher and student level over an entire
year. A selection of the data from the summer PD was analyzed: teacher enrollment forms, teacher interviews,
and teacher post-surveys were used as primary sources of data, while preliminary data from the discussion board
posts was used to triangulate some of the findings. We combined the open-ended responses from the enrollment
forms, satisfaction surveys, and interview transcripts which were all then inductively mined for themes. The
themes were given positive and negative levels and a coding manual was created representing the themes and

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                   889                                                    © ISLS
levels. Two researchers achieved an inter-rater reliability Cohen's kappa score of 0.87.
Results and discussion
Six themes emerged in terms of the way that participants collaborate within the SPOC: (a) asynchronicity is a
hinderance to collaboration; (b) online delivery is not a hinderance to collaboration; (c) struggle is a motivator for
collaboration; (d) participants view each other as resources; (e) not all open-ended questions are created equal;
and (f) individual motivations have an effect on collaboration. The course was run fully asynchronously based on
assumptions  about  teachers' available   time  and schedules    during the  summer. These   assumptions,  though
supported by   some  of  the teachers'   comments,  led to  a  level of asynchronicity  that was   a hinderance to
collaboration. Based on  the  first finding and supported   by previous  research that  suggests a combination  of
synchronous and asynchronous technologies create an ideal space for interaction (e.g. Hew & Cheung, 2014) a
semi-synchronous design that allows teachers freedom to complete the course on their own time but within a
synchronous framework of weeks would be a better design than a fully asynchronous one..
       Participants' responses to the question about face-to-face delivery combined with the moments when
they most wished for support provides a guideline for when synchronous check ins may be the most useful during
the course. Portions of the course where teachers were asked to learn new academic content (e.g., programming,
scientific argumentation) were places where participants struggled the most and when they wished for greater
collaboration As participants were shown to view each other as resources, increased synchronicity may be enough
to provide peer support to participants at these points of struggle, especially if prompts are modified to ensure that
they not only encourage participants to share their thoughts but also be rigorous or controversial in a way that
elicits a range of responses. Prompts were designed to do this as per previous research that supports these findings
(e.g. Booth, 2012) however, the level to which prompts were successful depended on the motivations of the
participants for engaging in the course.
       A number of participants commented that though they found reading others' posts useful, they were not
motivated to respond. Further research into phrasing for discussion prompts and how they can support active
knowledge development is needed to better address the needs and motivations of a diverse participant group,
especially as this project moves towards scale.The goal of this project is to scale the current course up to true
MOOC participation levels. As such, the small number of participants in our pilot run of the course is a limitation
of this study. However, each of the findings presented in this paper has implications for future iterations on the
design of collaborative MOOCs for in-service teachers. As researchers develop meaningful PD within MOOCs,
a comprehensive list of best practices for creating and sustaining collaboration is necessary. Our research suggests
several themes that may be promising for future content development.
References
Booth, S. E. (2012). Cultivating knowledge sharing and trust in online communities for educators. Journal of
       Educational Computing Research, 47(1), 1-31.
Cochran-Smith, M., & Lytle, S. L. (1999). Chapter 8: Relationships of knowledge and practice: Teacher learning
       in communities. Review of research in education, 24(1), 249-305.
Duncan-Howell,   J. (2010).  Teachers  making   connections:   Online   communities  as a source   of  professional
       learning. British Journal of Educational Technology, 41(2) 324-340.
Fenstermacher, G. D. (1994). Chapter 1: The knower and the known: The nature of knowledge in research on
       teaching. Review of research in education, 20(1), 3-56.
Fishman, B., Konstantopoulos, S., Kubitskey, B. W., Vath, R., Park, G., Johnson, H., & Edelson, D. (2013).
       Comparing the impact of online and face-to-face professional development in the context of curriculum
       implementation. Journal of Teacher Education, 64(5), 426-438.
Hew, F.,  & Cheung,   W.  (2014).   Students'  and  instructors' use of  massive  open  online  courses (MOOCs):
       Motivations and challenges. Educational Research Review, 12, 45-58.
Hill, H. (2015). Review of The Mirage: Confronting the hard truth about our quest for teacher development.
       Boulder CO: National Education Policy Center.
Kop, R. (2011). The challenges to connectivist learning on open online networks: Learning experiences during a
       massive open online course. Intl Review of Research in Open and Distance Learning, 12(3), 19-38.
Yoon, S., Anderson, E., Koehler-Yom, Evans, C., Park, M., J., Sheldon, J., Schoenfeld, I., Wendel, D., Scheintaub,
       H.,  &   Klopfer, E.  (2017).  Teaching  about complex    systems  is no simple  matter:  Building effective
       professional development for computer-supported complex systems instruction. Instructional Science,
       45(1), 99­121.
Acknowledgements
This work was funded by a US National Science Foundation Discovery Research K-12 grant (#1721003).

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                   890                                                  © ISLS
