Shall We Learn Together in Loud Spaces? Towards Understanding
      the Effects of Sound in Collaborative Learning Environments
                                 Milica Vujovic and Davinia Hernández-Leo
                           milica.vujovic@upf.edu, davinia.hernandez-leo@upf.edu
                                          Universitat Pompeu Fabra

        Abstract: In this paper we question the role of environmental sound on the process of CL. The
        first pilot study is presented where we investigated effects of environmental sound on EDA and
        voice  VA   of the participants. The     created visualization presents   the dependence   between
        mentioned   parameters and    serves as  an  awareness   tool for participants in CL.  Preliminary
        results are provocative; there seems to be mentioned dependences and participants accept the
        proposed visualization as a useful tool to support self-regulation during CL.

Introduction
Investigating the process of collaboration in learning remains challenge due to many unclear aspects of socio-
emotional and cognitive interactions (Pijeira-Díaz, Drachsler, Järvelä & Kirschner, 2016). Additionally, broad
application of collaborative learning finds  its  challenges  in implementation    because it  is "so noisy" due to
participants' interaction that can hinder learning (Graetz & Goliber, 2002). As in any other activity, interactions
are tightly related to the environment (Malmberg, et al. 2018), and successful learning should be supported by the
space where it takes place (Yeoman, 2008). The effect of environmental sound on CL has been underexplored in
the sense of its effect on aspects of collaboration such as cognitive and socio-emotional interactions, that are
reflected through physiological changes and conversation. Electrodermal activity (EDA) and voice activity (VA)
measurements could help us understand and further explore connection between the environmental sound and
collaborative learning process. Examples in the literature show different ways of visualizing physiological data
with graphical user interface such as SLAM-KIT (Noroozi et al, 2018) and voice data        with Reflect, a reactive
table that monitors the collaborative interaction   based  on voice   activity of participants (Bachour, Kaplan  &
Dillenbourg, 2010). We focus on loud spaces within university campus, used for collaborative activities, given
their pedagogical interest, orchestration complexity and their direct relation to the sound footprints of learning
spaces. We present a pilot study that opens the question of the role of environmental sound in Collaborative
Learning (CL), using multimodal learning analytics (MMLA), that supports CL in many ways (Ochoa et al, 2013;
Spikol, Ruffaldi & Cukurova, 2017). We also propose visualization of the changes of EDA and VA and their
relation to sound footprints of learning spaces.

Understanding the effect of sound in CL through a pilot study
We have conducted a first pilot study, measuring EDA and VA, where qualitative data is also collected through
interviews with participants. Two types of environments were identified (a quiet room where only the participants
stayed and a loud space with many people). The same type activity was carried out in both spaces, with the same
level of difficulty and duration of activity. The first group performs activity first in the loud environment, then in
a quite one, while the other group first performs activity in a quiet environment, and then in a loud one. Activity
is based on learning a set of words in Swahili language (Carpenter, et al, 2008), where participants receive a list
of English-Swahili pairs of words from where they should learn. Participants had no prior knowledge of Swahili.

Visualization and discussion of preliminary results
We propose   a visual  representation (Figure    1) that aims to  clearly present  two  measured   parameters from
participants (EDA and VA) and characteristics of environmental sound, where it is possible to understand the
changes that occur in time. The level of sound from the environment was expressed by means of decibels, EDA
by number of peaks in the signal occurred above the certain threshold that indicates arousal, while the voice
activity was presented by time periods during which the speech occurred. Results indicate that there may be a
dependence between the environment and the behaviour of the participants as shown in the Figure 1, where the
EDA and VA values greatly differ in two environments. The visualization of the data was shown to all participants
in order to understand if it can be used as an awareness tool. All participants stated that the visual representation
is an effective way to look at all the parameters at the same time as it can be used as a tool for determining
interdependence of collaboration parameters.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                    891                                                  © ISLS
               Figure 1. Visualization ­ unique graphic presentation for three measured parameters.

Conclusion
Based on the pilot study, we cannot make clear conclusions because of the small sample in which the experiment
was conducted, but we can see that there are differences in EDA and VA measured in different environments.
This tells us that it is necessary to expand the study to a larger number of samples in order to see how and to what
extent the sound from the environment affects the aspects of collaborative learning. The future work implies the
extension of the study towards understanding what kind and level of environmental sound can be beneficial for
collaboration, as well as the further development of  visualization  and its implementation  in the   process of
collaboration as a conscious tool.

References
Bachour, K., Kaplan, F., & Dillenbourg, P. (2010). An interactive table for supporting participation balance in
        face-to-face collaborative learning. IEEE Transactions on Learning Technologies, 3(3), 203-213.
Carpenter, S. K., Pashler, H., Wixted, J. T., & Vul, E. (2008). The effects of tests on learning and forgetting.
        Memory & Cognition, 36(2), 438-448. https://doi.org/10.3758/mc.36.2.438
Graetz, K. A., & Goliber, M. J. (2002). Designing collaborative learning places: Psychological foundations and
        new frontiers. New Directions for Teaching and Learning, 2002(92), 13-22. https://doi.org/10.1002/tl.75
Malmberg, J., Järvelä, S., Holappa, J., Haataja, E., Huang, X., & Siipo, A. (2018). Going beyond what is visible:
        What multichannel data can reveal about interaction in the context of collaborative learning?. Computers
        in Human Behavior.
Noroozi, O., Alikhani, I., Järvelä, S., Kirschner, P. A., Juuso, I., & Seppänen, T. (2018). Multimodal data to design
        visual learning analytics for understanding regulation of learning. Computers in Human Behavior.
Ochoa, X., Chiluiza, K., Méndez, G., Luzardo, G., Guamán, B., & Castells, J. (2013, December). Expertise
        estimation  based  on simple  multimodal features.  In Proceedings   of the 15th ACM  on    International
        conference on multimodal interaction (pp. 583-590). ACM.
Pijeira-Díaz, H. J., Drachsler, H., Järvelä, S., & Kirschner, P. A. (2016). Investigating collaborative learning
        success with physiological coupling indices based on electrodermal activity. In Proceedings of the sixth
        international    conference    on   learning   analytics    &    knowledge     (pp.   64-73).    ACM.
        https://doi.org/10.1145/2883851.2883897
Spikol, D., Ruffaldi, E., & Cukurova, M. (2017). Using multimodal learning analytics to identify aspects of
        collaboration in project-based learning. Philadelphia, PA: International Society of the Learning Sciences.
Yeoman, P. (2018). The Material Correspondence of Learning. In Spaces of Teaching and Learning (pp. 81-103).
        Springer, Singapore. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-10-7155-3

Acknowledgements
This project has received funding from the European Union's Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme
 n e    e   a ie  ko   o  ska-Curie grant agreement No. 713673. Milica Vujovic has received financial support
through the "la   Caixa"  INPhINIT   Fellowship Grant for   Doctoral studies  at Spanish  Research   Centres  of
Excellence, "la Caixa" Banking Foundation, Barcelona, Spain. This work has been partially supported by the
National Research Agency of the Spanish Ministry of Science, Innovations and Universities MDM-2015-0502,
TIN2014-53199-C3-3-R, TIN2017-85179-C3-3-R.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                  892                                                 © ISLS
