  Structure for Agency: Possibilities and Challenges for Adaptive
     Collaborative Learning Support in Educational Equity Projects
                                    Suraj Uttamchandani and Cindy Hmelo-Silver
                                  suttamch@indiana.edu, chmelosi@indiana.edu
                                                  Indiana University

        Abstract:     Adaptive   collaborative    learning    support  (ACLS)      has  potential    to  support
        educational equity projects. We outline how student agency might be conceptualized in CSCL
        environments,       discussing    content-focused,    inquiry-based,      and   dialogical      learning
        environments.      For each, we  consider  the potential  and  challenges   of ACLS      for supporting
        student agency and conclude with open questions for CSCL researchers who seek to program,
        design, and evaluate the role of ACLS in equity-oriented CSCL environments.

Introduction: Structure, agency, and equity
In CSCL, there has been increasing interest in issues of educational equity. For example, consider Wise and
Schwarz's  (2017)   provocations    that ask  whether  or  not  CSCL    should   give  up   on   educational change,    or
Rummel, Walker, and Aleven's (2016) discussion of what an adaptive support educational utopia should be.
This reflects a political turn in the learning sciences broadly that seeks to understand what role learning research
can play in improving lives and in social justice (e.g., Politics of Learning Writing Collective, 2017). This is a
timely goal, particularly in light of the increasing need for global citizenship education (UNESCO, 2014).
        We    argue   that when   educational  equity  is  defined  as equitable   access   to  ambitious  collaborative
practices that promote learner agency, dialogue, and identity development, CSCL's understanding of scripts and
scaffolding has the potential for unique and useful contributions to educational equity projects. However, there
is tension between viewing scripts as compromising learner agency versus viewing scripts as supporting new
forms of   learner agency   (Wise   &   Schwarz,  2017).  Building  on   a series  of  NSF-sponsored     workshops,     we
explore the possibilities and challenges of ACLS for supporting student agency and educational equity projects.

Adaptive support for agency
As Calabrese Barton and Tan (2010) illustrate, from a sociopolitical perspective, learning is about recreating
"practices in socially  and  culturally  situated ways   that confer  on   one  more   (or less) agency   with    which to
participate across communities" (p. 190-191). These approaches understand and position students as cultural-
historical actors (agents), rather than the passive recipients of education (Freire, 1972; Vossoughi & Gutiérrez,
2017). We see agency as linked to identity development defined broadly, where in equitable learning situations
students can take on and take up disciplinary identities rather than be rejected by them (Bell, van Horne, &
Cheng, 2017).   We    also  understand   learner  agency   as  including   students'   ability to question   knowledge,
including how that knowledge was generated and what purposes it has been and might be used for.
        There is evidence that ACLS can support cognitive learning outcomes (e.g., Rau, Bowman, & Moore,
2017). One tension is the role of ACLS in learning when content is considered more fluid. Rummel et al. (2016)
imagine a dystopian scenario for learning in a chemistry class where students (and teachers) have no way to
override their school's ACLS technology, students are paired with frustrating partners because such pairs are
marked by   the ACLS    as  supporting   "constructive   conflict," and   predictive   mechanisms    write off    students'
potential early. By contrast, in the utopian scenario, the teacher and the ACLS technology confer on next steps
and the ACLS orients to the students in a more human way (e.g., by encouraging them to take a break as they
feel frustrated). What is the same, however, is the content of each lesson: standard chemistry. We argue that a
real concern by CSCL with issues of disciplinary agency must attend more deeply to questions about the content
of learning. CSCL has long known that learning is especially productive when students engage in real-world
problems, problems that are of personal meaning, or open problems in a discipline (Hmelo-Silver, 2004; Papert,
1980). For example, in a science class this could be sustained engagement with a science-based simulation (e.g.,
Wallcology;   Slotta, Quintana,  &   Moher,   2018),  in  which   scripted grouping    and  activity  sequences    support
students in enculturating into a scientific community of practice.
        While these approaches reposition students as problem solvers rather than recipients of knowledge,
they  pose  significant problems     for  adaptive   support.  For  example,    it is  much    more     difficult in such
environments  for  ACLS    to  take  on  the role of "intelligent tutor,"  able to understand    best   pathways  through
known-answer problems and guide students to and through such pathways. Instead, we imagine that adaptive
support can focus on collaborative practices. In this way, even when agnostic to content, support could help

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                     895                                                       © ISLS
students it understands as frustrated by prompting collaborative learning strategies or could, based on what it
hears and sees, prompt teachers to visit groups that appear especially sullen or enthusiastic.
          From a critical Freirian perspective, "Simply replacing the content of teaching (from hegemonic to
counter-hegemonic ideas) does not unsettle the social and intellectual relations that sustain an unequal society"
(Vossoughi & Gutiérrez, 2017, p. 141).     With this in mind, it is also important that collaborative environments
do not simply seek to support students' agency through robust content, but rather also through fostering more
dialogical forms of learning. For example, Kolikant and Pollack (2015) used the notion of "dialogical agency"
to study the computer-mediated discussions between Jewish and Arab Israeli high schoolers as they analyzed
loaded historical documents. They recognized that from a conception of collaboration that focuses on dialogue
rather than convergence, "the role of the Other is to generate a dialogic agency in oneself" (p. 331). While we
can  imagine  ACLS    playing the role of   an  "other" in  supporting dialogue   and  agency,  we   are weary    of a
"critical" classroom   in which   learners talk only  to machines   throughout    the day. Additionally,   there  are
significant technological barriers to creating ACLS that can respond to the wider range of comments students
might make in dialogical rather than acquisitionist learning environments.

Conclusion: Challenges in structuring for agency
Clearly,  ACLS   has  immense   potential  for supporting  content  agency  and   disciplinary identification. Given
ACLS's ability to support teachers, it might also be especially transformative in under-resourced classrooms.
Therefore, CSCL should not give up on educational change but instead consider how ACLS can (a) increase
access to (b) learning environments that support deep rather than shallow learner agency. Moving forward, the
CSCL   community     must therefore contend    with how  to  program,  design, and  evaluate   the use of  ACLS   for
environments where content is not pre-determined and where dialogical forms of learning are valued.

References
Bell, P.,  Van  Horne,  K., &  Cheng,   B.  H.  (Eds.).  (2017). Designing  learning   environments    for equitable
          disciplinary identification [Special issue]. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 26(3).
Calabrese Barton, A., & Tan, E. (2010). We be burnin'! Agency, identity, and science learning. The Journal of
          the Learning Sciences, 19(2), 187-229.
Freire, P. (1972). Pedagogy of the oppressed (M. B. Ramos, Trans.). New York, NY: Herder & Herder.
Hmelo-Silver, C. E. (2004). Problem-based learning: What and how do students learn?. Educational psychology
          review, 16(3), 235-266.
Kolikant, Y. B. D., & Pollack, S. (2015). The dynamics of non-convergent learning with a conflicting other:
          internally  persuasive  discourse     as  a   framework     for  articulating  successful    collaborative
          learning. Cognition and Instruction, 33(4), 322-356.
Papert, S. (1980). Mindstorms: Children, computers, and powerful ideas. Basic Books, Inc..
Politics of Learning Writing Collective (2017). The learning sciences in a new era of US nationalism. Cognition
          & Instruction 35(2), 91-102.
Rau, M. A., Bowman, H. E., & Moore, J. W. (2017). An adaptive collaboration script for learning with multiple
          visual representations in chemistry. Computers & Education, 109, 38-55.
Rummel,    N.,  Walker,   E., &   Aleven,   V.   (2016).  Different futures    of adaptive  collaborative     learning
          support. International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education, 26(2), 784-795.
Slotta, J.D., Quintana, R.M., & Moher, T. (2018). Collective inquiry in communities of learners. In F. Fischer,
          C. Hmelo-Silver, S. Goldman, & P. Reimann (Eds.). International Handbook of the Learning Sciences.
          New York. Routledge.
UNESCO (2014). Global citizenship education: Preparing learners for the challenges of the twenty-first century.
          Paris: Unesco. Retrieved from http://unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0022/002277/227729E.pdf.
Vossoughi, S. & Gutiérrez, K.D. (2017). Critical pedagogy and sociocultural theories. In I. Esmonde & A. N.
          Booker (Eds.). Power and privilege in the learning sciences: Critical and sociocultural theories of
          learning. New York, NY: Routledge.
Wise,  A.   F., &    Schwarz, B.  B.   (2017).  Visions  of  CSCL:    eight provocations   for   the   future  of the
          field. International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 12(4), 423-467.

Acknowledgements
This  research  was   funded  by  NSF   grant   DGE   #1547731.    Any    opinions, findings,   and  conclusions     or
recommendations expressed in this material are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of
the National Science Foundation.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                    896                                                   © ISLS
