                       Conceptualizations of Learning in ijCSCL
                  Jonan P. Donaldson, Drexel University, jonan.phillip.donaldson@drexel.edu

          Abstract: This paper presents an analysis of conceptualizations of learning in International
          Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning articles from a 5-year period and a
          comparison   data  set  of articles in   the same     period from   the  Journal     of  Educational
          Psychology. Findings are interpreted through the lens of critical pedagogy. Findings reveal a
          conceptualization of   learning in the  educational   psychology   articles that is  problematic   in
          terms of supporting and reproducing systems of oppression but learning scientists who study
          computer-supported collaborative learning tend to use a conceptualization of learning that is
          agentic, empowering, and aligned with critical pedagogy.

Conceptual metaphors and conceptualizations of learning
This  study used  conceptual   metaphor    theory  and critical theory  lenses  to understand     conceptualizations   of
learning among computer-supported collaborative learning researchers. Conceptual metaphor theory suggests
that the metaphors of learning we use dictate our practices in teaching and learning and influence what we value
(Deignan,   2010;  Lakoff   &    Johnson,  1999).  Conceptualizations    of  learning    are grounded     in conceptual
metaphors   and   related worldviews   and   paradigms   (Gibbs,   2014). Critical    theorists   have argued    that the
dominant   positivist  transfer/acquisition/banking  conceptualization    of learning    must   be  rejected    and  have
characterized critical pedagogy   through   the construction  conceptualization    of learning    (Apple, 2014;   Freire,
1970;  Giroux,  2013;  Kincheloe,    2007).  The   construction  conceptualization    of learning   has   been   used  by
educational researchers for over a century (see Dewey, 1897).

Methods
Conceptual  metaphor   analysis  (Deignan,   2010) was   used   to characterize conceptualizations     of learning,   and
axial coding  (Corbin  &   Strauss,  2015) to analyze  alignments   between    conceptual    metaphors,   practices,  and
worldviews.   Conceptual   metaphors  are  characterized  by  analyzing  clusters  of  surface  metaphors    people   use
when  discussing  a   particular concept   (Gibbs, 2014). Seventy-eight     articles  in the   International Journal   of
Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning (ijCSCL) and a comparison set of 211 articles in the Journal of
Educational Psychology (JEP) from 2013 to 2017 were analyzed. Analysis of co-occurrence patterns was used
to describe   underlying   conceptual  metaphors.   Co-occurrence      patterns between      conceptual   metaphors    of
learning, practices,  and worldviews   were   analyzed.  Findings   were  then  analyzed     through   critical metaphor
analysis to identify and characterize conceptual metaphors and patterns in worldviews, paradigms, and practices
through which systems of power are enacted and reproduced (Charteris-Black, 2004).

Findings
Seventy-eight percent of articles in JEP used the transfer/acquisition conceptualization of learning, and only
6.6%   used   the  construction   conceptualization.   In  contrast,   22.3%    of    articles  in  ijCSCL      used  the
transfer/acquisition conceptualization, and 53.6% the construction conceptualization (Fig. 1).

                               Figure 1. Conceptual metaphors in JEP and ijCSCL.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                    897                                                       © ISLS
          In JEP 37.1% assumed that learning is quantifiable, and 36.6% that test scores measure learning. None
used   situative or sociocultural   perspectives.  On    the   other hand, in ijCSCL    11.6%    assumed    that learning is
quantifiable,  and  10.5%     that test scores measure     learning. Over  half  (51.2%)   used  situative or  sociocultural
perspectives. Practices endorsed by JEP researchers included textbooks (14.8%), learning standards (13.3%),
lectures (11.9%), workbooks (5.9%), and grades (5.2%). Practices endorsed by ijCSCL researchers included
collaboration    (22.3%),  discussion   (12.2%),  reflection   (12.2%),  and  identity  development      (4.3%). Across  the
entire data   set (both   JEP   and     ijCSCL)  there   were    strong  relationships  between  the   transfer/acquisition
conceptualization, a set of practices (testing, lecturing, textbooks), and a belief that the purpose of education is
for career/workforce demand. There was a strong relationship between the construction conceptualization, a set
of practices (discussion, projects, community, agency), and beliefs that the purpose of education is for social
change, social justice, empowerment, or community engagement.
          Critical theorists have asserted that the transfer/acquisition conceptualization of learning is dominant in
society, and sees learning as the transfer of pieces of knowledge from teachers and books into the minds of
learners who are then expected to be able to transfer the acquired knowledge to new contexts (Kincheloe, 2007).
Hager and Hodkinson (2009) argued that although this is the dominant metaphor in society today, it is rarely
recognized as such. The findings of this study suggested that this transfer/acquisition conceptual metaphor of
learning is prominent among educational psychologists, and consists of a constellation of interrelated surface
metaphors for knowledge, mind, learning, and education. These surface metaphors provide the structure for the
underlying conceptual metaphor, which is then framed, reinforced, and filtered through particular worldviews
and  paradigms.   CSCL     researchers   tend  to have     conceptualizations   of learning  grounded    in  a construction
conceptual metaphor: meaning is individually, collaboratively, and collectively constructed.

Significance
Despite the long history of the construction conceptualization among educational researchers, the findings in
this study   indicate    that within    the domain    of   educational   psychology    the positivist  transfer/acquisition
conceptualization     of learning  remains   dominant,     and construction  conceptualizations    compatible    with  social
justice, critical pedagogy, and empowerment work remain marginalized. On the other hand, among learning
scientists who    work   with  computer-supported       collaborative   learning   the construction   conceptualization   of
learning is dominant, but the transfer/acquisition conceptualization continues to be used and reproduced. This
research provides strong empirical evidence supporting arguments by critical theorists suggesting that efforts
toward changing conceptualizations of learning is not only crucial in our work in informal and formal learning
contexts,  but   also in  our  work   with   students   in learning  sciences programs     and  in   our work    with  fellow
researchers.  This    conceptual   change   work  for   critical pedagogy   will   involve  critical reflection  and   action
regarding   the  metaphors    we   use, as  well  as  practices  in  our designs   for learning. Furthermore,     this study
suggests   that   the critical  work     of  problematizing    and   changing    worldviews     and  values    may    require
problematization    and  perhaps    even rejection   of metaphors    of  learning, knowledge,   mind,    and education  that
perpetuate and reproduce oppressive conceptualizations of learning.

References
Apple, M. W. (2014). Official knowledge: Democratic education in a conservative age. NY: Routledge.
Charteris-Black, J. (2004). Corpus approaches to critical metaphor analysis. New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
Corbin,  J.  M.,  &   Strauss,  A.   L.  (2015).  Basics    of qualitative research:    Techniques    and   procedures   for
          developing grounded theory (4th ed.). Los Angeles: SAGE.
Deignan, A. (2010). The cognitive view of metaphor: Conceptual metaphor theory. In R. Maslen & L. Cameron
          (Eds.), Metaphor analysis: Research practice in applied linguistics, social sciences and the humanities
          (pp. 44-56). London: Equinox Publishing.
Freire, P. (1970). Pedagogy of the oppressed. New York: Continuum.
Gibbs, R. W., Jr. (2014). Conceptual metaphor in thought and social action. In M. Landau, M. D. Robinson, B.
          P. Meier, M. Landau, M. D. Robinson, & B. P. Meier (Eds.), The power of metaphor: Examining its
          influence on social life. (pp. 17-40). DC: American Psychological Association.
Giroux, H. A. (2013). On critical pedagogy. New York: Bloomsbury Academic & Professional.
Hager, P., & Hodkinson, P. (2009). Moving beyond the metaphor of transfer of learning. British Educational
          Research Journal, 35(4), 619-638. doi:10.1080/01411920802642371
Kincheloe, J. L. (2007). Critical pedagogy in the twenty-first century. In P. McLaren & J. L. Kincheloe (Eds.),
          Critical Pedagogy: Where Are We Now? (pp. 9-42). New York: Peter Lang Publishing, Inc.
Lakoff, G., & Johnson, M. (1999). Philosophy in the flesh: The embodied mind and its challenge to Western
          thought. NY: Basic Books.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                         898                                                      © ISLS
