  Using Collaborative Agent-based Modeling to Explore Complex
        Phenomena with Elementary Preservice Science Teachers
             Anthony Petrosino, The University of Texas at Austin, ajpetrosino@austin.utexas.edu
                  Max Sherard, The University of Texas at Austin, mksherard@utexas.edu
              Corey Brady, Peabody College, Vanderbilt University, corey.brady@vanderbilt.edu

         Abstract: This poster investigates preservice teachers' abilities to use, evaluate, and revise
         participatory agent-based models deployed with the Group-based Cloud Computing (GbCC)
         platform. This poster discusses two cases within a larger design-based implementation research
         study with preservice elementary science teachers. By implementing models with preservice
         teachers, we hope to (a) make adjustments to the GbCC learning technologies, and (b) develop
         more  informed  and aligned  pedagogies     for teaching in socially-mediated    and generative
         learning environments.

Introduction
For classrooms to engage in more socially mediated and generative teaching and learning, instructors must design
situations for students to construct relations between prior knowledge, experience, and new information (Wittrock,
1991).  Using, building, evaluating, and  revising  agent-based   models are critical  to the practice   of science
(Petrosino, 2003; Schwarz et al., 2009); however preservice teachers require support before feeling confident in
implementing   modeling  lessons in  the classroom   (Valanides &  Angeli, 2006). To    address this,    agent-based
models, such as NetLogo (Wilensky, 1999), engage users in manipulating variables and recompiling code as they
run simulations using multiple agents, extending our ability to understand emergent phenomenon. Furthermore,
engaging in models in classrooms can typically be done independently, which doesn't leverage the group-nature
of classrooms.
         Group-based Cloud Computing (GbCC) is a web-deployed, agent-based modeling program, powered by
NetLogo Web, that allows learners to collaborate, reprogram, and share models (Petrosino & Stroup, 2017). In
line with the focus of this conference, GbCC models provide opportunities for extending and embedding learning
about complex phenomenon. This study discusses two cycles of research using GbCC models with preservice
teachers to explore ecosystem change and disease transmission. The GbCC platform is a powerful computational
tool; however, "powerful technological tools, in the absence of powerful pedagogy, detract from rather than
contribute to learning" (Philip & Garcia, 2013, p. 313). With this insight in mind, the goal of this poster proposal
is to:
   1)    discuss two efforts to engage preservice teachers in higher-order modeling
         uses (evaluating and revising); and
   2)    determine supports for engaging teachers in developing knowledge and
         practices of using models in instruction.

Methods
This research is part of a larger design-based implementation research study (Fishman,    Figure 1. Example of
Penuel, Allen, Cheng, & Sabelli, 2013). This poster summarizes two sequential case           attempted code
studies  which seek to   explore how  preservice    teachers engage  with  and attempt    to  evaluaitei and revise
computational models about collaborative models. Each case study occurred in an elementary science methods
course in a teacher preparation program. Both case studies involved two 3-hour lessons with between 20 and 30
students enrolled in the course. Both cases used a modeling framework to engage teachers with the simulations;
which includes: (a) exploring models; (b) planning and revising models based on a task; and (c) discussing
affordances and limitations for teaching. Classroom artifacts were collected after teachers evaluated and attempted
to revise the models (photographs of student work, pictures of white board plans, and notes). Pre- and post-
questionnaires were delivered, collected, and open-coded in both case studies to investigate: (a) conceptions of
models and simulations in case one; and (b) beliefs about the necessity of vaccination in case two.

Cycle 1: Ecological modeling
Our first modeling lesson engaged 24 preservice teachers in using GbCC models to learn about tritrophic cascades
in Yellowstone. Using a modified NetLogo Wolf Sheep Predation model (Wilensky, 1999), participants were
encouraged to explore the model, evaluate the model for affordances and limitations, and attempt to modify the
model. Findings from this cycle of research showed that preservice teachers were hesitant to make programming

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                   901                                                   © ISLS
modifications using the GbCC recompile and share features; however, they demonstrated significant efforts to
show what their model would look like, and even engaged in pseudo-coding and some coding (Figure 1) to plan
how the model might function. Pre- and post-questionnaires asked participants to reflect on the nature of models
and simulations as well as their functions for science and science education. Results showed that students tended
to view models as only static and simulations as dynamic; and attributed most functions to simulations rather than
their idea of models.

 Table 1: Frequency of codes related to theme 3 - functions of models and simulations

 Function(model)Pre  Post   Change      Function(simulation) Pre     Post   Change
 Dynamic        0      0      0         Dynamic                5      8        3
 Interactive    0      0      0         Interactive            7      9        2
 Observe        0      0      0         Observe                2      0        -2
 Static         1      2      1         Static                 0      0        0

These findings illuminate the need to: (a) provide more supports for ways to re-program          Figure 2. Example
the models; and (b) provide more time to engage in drawing and pseudo-coding before             of participant model
engaging in actual reprogramming of the models.

Cycle 2: Disease transmission modeling
In the  Fall of  2018,  44 preservice teachers  engaged  in  a series of  GbCC        modeling  experiences related  to
vaccination and disease transfer in populations. Similar to case one, participants were asked to modify the model
to think about a new scenario where the model would represent schools with varying socioeconomic conditions
and vaccination rates. Learning from the first case, the researchers provided participants with more time to visually
plan their model modifications before attempting to pseudo-code or code to make changes. All participants were
able to generate complex visual models which incorporated many social variables to predict vaccination rates for
differing schools. Planned   models   were all visual, and   the researchers  ran     out of  time before encouraging
participants to make programming changes to the models. Models tended to either show three screens to represent
three differing schools or were more sophisticated and planned models which could predict the rate of vaccination
based on socioeconomic status (Figure 2).

Implications of the work
These data as well as other information not included in this poster abstract support that preservice teachers are
able to engage with and evaluate models which represent complex phenomena which are socially and ecological
relevant. Future cases and design work will provide more time to move from visual modifications to computational
changes as well as supporting preservice teachers in planning with collaborative agent-based models.

References
Fishman, B. J., Penuel, W. R., Allen, A.-R., Cheng, B. H., & Sabelli, N. (2013). Design-Based Implementation
          Research: An Emerging Model for Transforming the Relationship of Research and Practice. Yearbook
          of the National Society for the Study of Education, 112(2), 136­156.
Petrosino, A. (2003). Commentary: A framework for supporting learning and teaching about mathematical and
          scientific models. Contemporary Issues in Technology and Teacher Education, 3(3).
Petrosino, A. J. & Stroup, W. M. (2017, June). Group-based cloud computing for STEM education. Paper at the
          annual convention of the American Society of Engineering Education, Columbus, OH.
Philip, T., & Garcia, A. (2013). The importance of still teaching the iGeneration: New technologies and the
          centrality of pedagogy. Harvard Educational Review, 83(2), 300-319.
Schwarz, C. V., Reiser, B. J., Davis, E. A., Kenyon, L., Achér, A., Fortus, D., ... Krajcik, J. (2009). Developing
          a learning progression for scientific modeling: Making scientific modeling accessible and meaningful
          for learners. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 46(6), 632­654. doi:10.1002/tea.20311
Valanides, N., & Angeli, C. (2006). Preparing preservice elementary teachers to teach science through computer
          models. Contemporary Issues in Technology and Teacher Education, 6(1), 87-98.
Wilensky, U. (1997). NetLogo Wolf Sheep Predation model. Center for Connected Learning and Computer-
          Based Modeling. Retrieved from http://ccl.northwestern.edu/netlogo/models/WolfSheepPredation
Wilensky,    U. (1999).  NetLogo. Northwestern   University,  Evanston,   IL: Center      for Connected Learning and
          Computer-Based Modeling. http://ccl.northwestern.edu/netlogo.
Wittrock, M. C. (1991). Generative teaching of comprehension. The Elementary School Journal, 92, 169-184.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                    902                                                     © ISLS
