 Robots to Help Us Feel Safe: A Problem-Based CSCL Experience

                         Andrea Gomoll, Indiana University, agomoll@indiana.edu

       Abstract: This case study works to understand the trajectory and success of one computer-
       supported    collaborative learning (CSCL) experience   highlighted  as transformational by the
       instructor who taught it. Reflective co-design sessions held between researcher and instructor,
       which featured shared viewing of video data collected throughout this CSCL experience, is
       analyzed in order to unpack this implementation and how it might inform the design of other
       CSCL experiences that address locally relevant problems.

       Keywords: Problem-based learning, case study, engineering design, robotics

Introduction
Opportunities to grapple with current events and to learn through the negotiation of real human problems are
essential as we work to give voice to citizens of the world (Gutierrez, 2008). The case study presented here is
motivated by the need to empower teachers and learners to address the events and problems that they perceive as
relevant in their classrooms. Students engaged deeply in a problem-based CSCL environment as they identified a
local need and designed, built, and programmed a robot to address it. This environment supported the development
of user-centered design practices as students considered the social worlds around them and how to meaningfully
design technologies for these spaces. The design task provided a CSCL context for students to negotiate shared
goals and understanding (Suthers, 2006). This study examines what made this particular experience meaningful
for students and the instructor and how this understanding can be used to inform broader CSCL design.
       Problem-based learning (PBL), a student-centered instructional approach to collaborative learning that
presents students with an ill-structured and authentic problem, provides a promising starting point in the effort to
empower student voices (Savery, 2006). Well-designed PBL experiences provide a context for students to use
their voices to create change in their local communities (e.g., Svihla & Reeve, 2016). This case study explores
the emergence of a socially relevant problem in a PBL afterschool robotics experience. Over the course of ten
weekly sessions, students grappled with the problem statement "design a robot that can serve a need in your local
community." The wider school community was concerned about student safety, a concern exacerbated by the
increasing frequency of shootings in US schools. Following the shared experience of a "lockdown" procedure
where students and staff are required to huddle in the back of their classrooms with doors locked, students designed
a robot to help the school community to feel safer during these procedures.

Method
Nine students ages 12-14 participated in this afterschool robotics curriculum in the rural Midwestern United
States. This group included three female students and seven male students. All students were white. We identified
critical events within the afterschool robotics unit to unpack this particular PBL experience. Interaction analysis
(Jordan & Henderson, 1995) was used to zoom in on the interactional accomplishments that constructed this case.
We asked: 1) What student actions and key facilitation moments are identified by the instructor as transformative
within reflective co-design? 2) How did students take up the problem statement? 3) How can the trajectory of this
unit inform the design of future PBL units that empower students to create change?
       Data sources included video data collected for each afterschool session as well as video data collected
during four debrief and co-design sessions held with the first author and instructor. These sessions were used to
inform the design of the next iteration of the robotics unit. Joint video analysis of scenes from the afterschool club
supported the effort to create, deepen, and sustain a locally meaningful experience for students. Co-design video
was analyzed in order to better understand where the instructor highlighted critical events and how these events
were taken up by students. Data sessions were held with research team members to identify critical events across
the data set. Extracts will be presented in this poster highlighting key themes in facilitation and student uptake of
the design problem.

Results
The instructor of the afterschool club pinpointed this experience as the "realest PBL unit" she had ever facilitated.
Preliminary analysis indicates several aspects of facilitation and student activity that made this robotics experience
meaningful for students and instructor. The instructor highlighted students' shared experience of a lockdown
procedure (and her move as a facilitator to foreground this experience) as important in the trajectory of the

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                  903                                                 © ISLS
students' motivation  to   solve a local  problem   through   the design of   a hallway  patrol  robot.  Time  spent
brainstorming, as well as probing questions provided throughout the brainstorming process, were also identified
as supportive of students' engagement. For example, the extract featured below was highlighted by the instructor
as a turning point in students' brainstormed design ideas. Here, students were able to articulate a design solution
connected to the shared experience of a lockdown procedure:

        Instructor: We don't know what's going on outside of our classrooms. We're just in here waiting
        to  see when  it's going   to be  over...So is there  something  that  robots could do  to  help us
        know...what more is going on when we can't look out our windows?
        Brandon: ...Maybe the robot could be outside with cameras and like the teachers can see on a
        tablet...what's going on using those cameras.

This initial brainstorm triggered a flurry of ideas related to a robot that could provide a live video feed of the
hallways and make the school safer during lockdowns. The instructor was inspired to share student ideas with the
school principal, office staff, and safety committee members. This discussion led to the organization of a feedback
session where students presented initial design ideas and a user testing session where prototypes were tested by
these stakeholders. Feedback     sessions were  recorded, and   students   had  the opportunity  to reflect on their
presentations as they moved forward. Beyond the success of prompting related to shared experiences (seen in the
extract above), the instructor found that students made great progress with their design ideas when they were given
these chances to interact with local stakeholders and present their working ideas.

Discussion and conclusions
The robot design challenge presented here provided an authentic context for students to collaborate around a
problem that was personally meaningful and socially relevant. It was empowering for both students and teacher--
as seen in a culminating design showcase held with community members, presentations given by participating
students at a local schoolboard meeting, and ongoing co-design reflections with the instructor.     In understanding
this particular case, identified for its poignant social relevance, we understand how to better design future curricula
that amplify student and teacher voices and create change. CSCL experiences hold great potential as contexts that
can support learners as they communicate, co-construct, and shape their collaborative learning. Technology can
provide some of this support, but the design of CSCL experiences must also consider facilitation and the structure
of learning environments   (Jeong  &   Hmelo-Silver,   2016). Across  this curriculum  trajectory,  key  moments of
inspiring student engagement, identified within the work of co-design, were used to inform the design of future
CSCL   experiences. For    example,   design principles informed   by this analysis   include 1) situating  problem
statements within local contexts, 2) providing ample space and time for brainstorming, 3) modeling how to address
unexpected challenges, and 4) providing opportunities for students to reflect on their ongoing work using video.
These design insights not only informed the development of a next iteration of this particular robotics curriculum,
but they might also be taken up in a wide variety of CSCL contexts.

References
Gutiérrez, K. D. (2008). Developing a sociocritical literacy in the third space. Reading Research Quarterly, 43(2),
        148-164.
Jeong, H., & Hmelo-Silver, C. E. (2016). Seven affordances of computer-supported collaborative learning: How
        to support collaborative learning? How can technologies help?. Educational Psychologist, 51(2), 247-
        265.
Jordan, B., & Henderson, A. (1995). Interaction analysis: Foundations and practice. The Journal of the Learning
        Sciences, 4(1), 39-103.
Savery, J.R. (2006). Overview of problem-based learning: Definitions and distinctions. Interdisciplinary Journal
        of Problem-Based Learning, 1(1), 9-20.
Suthers, D. D. (2006). Technology affordances for intersubjective meaning making. International Journal of
        Computer Supported Collaborative Learning, 1, 315-337.
Svihla, V., & Reeve, R. (2016). Facilitating problem framing in project-based learning. Interdisciplinary Journal
        of Problem-Based Learning, 10(2), 10.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                    904                                                  © ISLS
