   An Exploration of Female Engagement and Collaboration: The
                                   Bricks and Bits Maker Project
             Ezequiel Aleman, Universidad Tecnológica del Uruguay, ezequiel.aleman@utec.edu.uy
                     Pryce Davis, University of Nottingham, pryce.davis@nottingham.ac.uk

          Abstract: This poster explores how learners engage in "maker" activities when collaborating
          and how participation can become more inclusive when framing activities in order to connect
          learners with children in their own community. We describe the first iteration of the Bricks and
          Bits project where undergraduate engineering students were challenged to re-design the toys of
          children. Bricks and Bits specifically reimagines making as a service learning project in order
          to increase the inclusion of female participants.

Introduction
The institutionalization of makerspaces in schools and universities can be seen as a positive step towards the
democratization of the maker movement. However, it can also have a detrimental effect on some of the most
distinctive features of the movement such as spontaneity, creativity or innovation (Dougherty, 2012). Practitioners
need to transform their discourses to involve those people who have traditionally been left out of these activities.
The underrepresentation of women, for example, is a typical characteristic of the maker movement and many
STEM careers caused by the lack of more adequate programs to cater for the interests of non-traditional maker
groups (Davies, 2018).
          Increasing the   number   of women      involved in STEM     domains   can boost  the   quality  of  research as
diversity enables more creative work while reducing bias (Marginson et al., 2013). However, enrolling a large
number of women is not enough to assure their full inclusion in a project. Effective learning design of makers
projects must include a more specific framework to favor the exchange of ideas among participants and enhance
their collaboration during the design process.
          An  equity-oriented   mindset    characterized   by shared   activity, creativity and   imagination,    and   the
acknowledgement      of a   wider  definition of   learning,  intelligence and   science can    contribute  to a  broader
participation of  underrepresented    communities     in STEM   domains    (Vossoughi  et   al. 2013). There   have  been
different approaches    to  address   the exclusion   of women    and  other    underrepresented  groups    in the maker
movement by engaging them in gender-specific groups or implementing new fabrication tools (e.g. Kafai, Fields,
& Searle, 2014). In this study, we conceive making as a purposeful activity, in which people can face meaningful
challenges and raise awareness of their potential to respond to the needs of society (Unterfrauner & Voigt, 2017).
By framing    maker     activities as  activities that   can  connect  participants  with   their communities      and  its
circumstances, the participation of women can be broadened (Holbert, 2016).

Current project
The maker project presented in this paper, Bricks and Bits, follows a project-based service learning (PBSL)
approach to learning as it attempts to align the purpose of the project (engage learners in an inclusive environment
to construct objects) with the development of a fruitful relationship with the wider community. Bricks and Bits
engages participants to re-design a toy for children aged 6-7 based on the characteristics of the toy and the
outcomes   of  an  initial interview   following  a   design  thinking methodology     (Brown    and  Katz,   2009). This
transforms a typical tinkering project, such as building a toy, into a project in which all participants must consider
the needs and values of a child, the constraints of the toy that is provided, and find balance between the child's
expectations and the students' limitations and possibilities.
          In this poster,   we explore    how female     makers  in  activities framed to   connect   with   the learners'
community make positive contributions during the initial phases of the design process but take a more secondary
role when dealing with primary features of the design process. Our analysis suggests that there was a significant
enrollment of women whose participation influenced positive collaboration for all participants. We also suggest
that women in this study tended to be excluded from decisions regarding primary features of the final design.

Initial findings and discussion
Of the 35 students who participated in Bricks and Bits, 63% (22 out of 35) were male, and 37.1% (13 out of 35)
were female.   While    the numbers    are still  not balanced,  the  participation of women      is still higher  than in

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                       905                                                     © ISLS
Engineering programs in Uruguay where women constituted only a 26.2% of students in 2017 This difference is
even  more   dramatic when   compared   to  the regional stats  of this university where  female    participation in
engineering programs is 6.25% (Ministerio de Educación y Cultura, 2017). This increase in female participation
can be connected with the nature of the project, which rather than promoting the program as a space for tinkering
and  experimentation  with   robots or microcontrollers,  was   introduced as a Toy  Factory    for children in   the
community.
        Despite the positive outcomes in terms of female students' own perception of their participation, it is
evident that within this  design process,   female participants had  few opportunities to contribute   in the  most
distinctive features of the design. The analysis of the interactions shows that as each team progressed from the
planning phase towards the prototyping and testing phase, the interactions of women decreased significantly.
        It can be argued that the fact that female participants had less experience with fabrication tools could
have hindered their participation. We believe, however, that a better design of the initial interview and the actions
to be carried out immediately after, could prevent participants from jumping into conclusions too early in the
process providing those with less experience in fabrication with more time to develop their own ideas.
        Despite these challenges, women who took control of the aesthetic features of the toys, such as painting,
decorating, sewing, or printing accessories with a 3D printer, felt they had made a positive impact on the final
product taking their share of ownership of the final design. Another positive outcome of this design process is that
100% of the women (13 out of 13) claimed they would participate again in the project and that they would also
like to be trained in the use of fabrication tools, more specifically 3D printing and e-textiles. Considering that the
majority of the female participants did not mention "making" as a reason to join this program, this new interest in
fabrication can turn into a positive entry point to engage female participants in maker projects. Female participants
also showed   great ability  to work   with people  from  different  teams  and benefit  from   their talents. This
collaborative attitude among teams was mostly fostered by female participants and ended up making the whole
design experience a more enjoyable one for all participants.
        We offer the first iteration the Bricks and Bits project as an initial exploration for framing making
activities as service learning projects in order to increase the inclusion of female participants. The high number of
female participants who spontaneously signed up for this program encourage us to continue looking for evidence
of the impact this framing can have on other similar contexts.

References
Brown, T., & Katz, B. (2009). Change by design: How design thinking transforms organizations and inspires
        innovation. New York: HarperCollins
Davies, S. R. (2018). Characterizing hacking: Mundane engagement in US hacker and makerspaces. Science,
        Technology, & Human Values, 43(2), 171-197.
Dougherty, D. (2012). The maker movement. Innovations: Technology, Governance, Globalization. 7(3), 11-14
Holbert, N. (2016). Leveraging cultural values and "ways of knowing" to increase diversity in maker activities.
        International journal of child-computer interaction, 9, 33-39.
Kafai, Y., Fields, D., & Searle, K. (2014). Electronic textiles as disruptive designs: Supporting and challenging
        maker activities in schools. Harvard Educational Review, 84(4), 532-556.
Marginson,   S., Tytler, R., Freeman,   B., &   Roberts, K.  (2013). STEM:    country  comparisons:   international
        comparisons of science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) education. Final report.
Ministerio de Educacion    y  Cultura  (2017).  Anuario  Estadístico de  Educación.  [Statistic Annual  Report    of
        Education ­ Ministry of Education and Culture].
Unterfrauner, E., & Voigt, C. (2017). Makers' ambitions to do socially valuable things. The Design Journal,
        20(sup1), S3317-S3325.
Vossoughi, S., Escudé, M., Kong, F., & Hooper, P. (2013). Tinkering, learning & equity in the after-school setting.
        In annual FabLearn conference. Palo Alto, CA: Stanford University.

Acknowledgments
We thank `Chevening Scholarships, the UK government's global scholarship programme, funded by the Foreign
and Commonwealth Office (FCO) and ANII for their support

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                   906                                                  © ISLS
