The Development and Application of a Social Reading Platform and
                               the Double-level Scaffolding
                 Xiangdong Chen, East China Normal University, chen_xiangdong@163.com
             Chen Guo, University at Albany, State University of New York, cguo3@albany.edu

        Abstract:    Social reading is a new mode of reading which facilitates students' reading and
        interaction, encourage expressions of multiple ideas and promote collaborative inquiry. In this
        poster presentation, we describe our designs of a double-level scaffolding and a social reading
        platform. We then present findings of a preliminary experiment conducted to a group of students
        from a university reading workshop to examine the functionality of the scaffolding and the
        platform. The results indicate that the participants demonstrated an active utilization of the
        scaffolding and a relatively high level of acceptance of the platform.

Introduction
From a sociocultural perspective, reading is a complex process of development that entails a transaction between
readers and texts, and the meaning of texts and discourses are varied by different communities (Rosenblatt, 1978).
One of the central tasks of reading instruction is to guide students to make sense of printed words and promote
their knowledge building process (Hamilton & Paris, 2014). Pedagogical scaffolding can help reduce learners'
cognitive loads (Hmelo-Silver,  et al., 2007), structure   complex tasks (Reiser,  2004),    and improve   reading
comprehension (Fisher & Frey, 2012). When learning tasks reach to a high level of complexity, students may
need the aid of different types of scaffolds to support the process of reading and learning.

Scaffolding and platform design

The double-level scaffolding
According to Tabak's (2003) distributed scaffolding patterns, we design a synergistic double-level scaffolding.
One level of the scaffolding is called "Reading Discussion", another is called "Knowledge Building". "Reading
Discussion" scaffolding is built on Taboada and Guthrie's (2004) cognitive strategies for reading comprehension
and Toulmin's model of argument (Voss, 2006). It contains six elements: problem inquiry, material support,
opinion expression,   opinion elaboration,  view challenge,    and summary     making. "Knowledge        Building"
scaffolding consists of six scaffolds from the Knowledge     Forum  (Scardamalia,  2002):    my  theory, I need to
understand, new information, this theory cannot explain, a better theory, and putting our knowledge together
(Figure 1). The arrangement of two scaffoldings can be adjustable to specific instructional demands and scenarios.

Figure 1. The double-level scaffolding for social reading.    Figure 2. Interface of the social reading platform.

The social reading platform
Figure 2 shows a sample interface of the social reading platform. The platform has the following characteristics:
(1) The setting of two different reading space: "Individual Reading Space" and "Group Reading Space". The
former space is designed for individual users to set reading plans, record reading progress, write reading notes
and reflections and organize related materials. In the latter space, users can manage group readings, interact and
discuss with others, and present information in groups. (2) The function of platform management: Users can make
personalized settings, such as add and revise personal information, check reading status and select reading groups.
(3) The integration of visualization tools in the platform: Adoption of the concept maps and chromatic nodes and

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                 907                                                    © ISLS
lines make it easy to clarify the logic and the connections among views and posts. (4) The customization of
scaffolding: Instructors can choose to manage the scaffolding in various forms and provide to students according
to different instructional or research requirements and contexts.

Scaffolding and platform application
To examine the functionality of the scaffolding and the platform, sixteen students between the ages of 18 and 33
years old from a university reading workshop were invited for the preliminary application. They were reading a
section of a book named Homo Deus: A Brief History of Tomorrow by Yuval Noah Harari (Harari, 2016) then.
The  participants launched a one-week   online discussion  activity     on this book  section in the social reading
platform. They were suggested to post threads to raise questions, express opinions, add comments to other's posts
and share related materials in the topic discussion module in the "Group Reading Space". For the arrangement of
the double-level scaffolding, the "Reading Discussion" was designed as the first level and "Knowledge Building"
as the second level. We investigated participants' engagement in the discussion activity and their usage of the
double-level scaffolding. A total number of 105 posts were collected which covered five main topics related to
the book section. We also conducted a brief survey to the participants to know their acceptance of the platform.

Results
The experiment has three main findings: (1) The participants demonstrated an active discussion engagement (each
participant posted 6.56 posts on average) and a relatively high level of collaborative learning and interaction (90%
of the posts were add-on comments) during the social reading activity. (2) For the usage of the scaffolding, the
most frequently-used   scaffolds of the "Reading   Discussion"     scaffolding    and the  "Knowledge    Building"
scaffolding are   View Challenge  (26.42%)  and My  Theory    (40.56%)      respectively, which   can indicate that
participants generally had a good level of critical thinking skills and were willing to share personal thoughts and
ideas on the reading material. (3) Most of the participants were satisfied with the platform designs and claimed
its positive impacts on their reading and the interactions with others.

Discussion
Although the complexity of the scaffolding and the designs of the platform need to be upgraded and improved,
the experiment was not conducted in a standard reading classroom setting as well, this study has some pedagogical
and academical implications: First, an online platform for social reading has been developed, which can be a
functional tool for the development and organization of collaborative reading activities in either face-to-face and
online reading courses. Second, this study proposes a synergistic double-level scaffolding with a firm theoretical
footing. This scaffolding can meet the requirements of various types of reading instructions due to its flexibility
and versatility. Third, this study provides a case of how scaffolding and online reading platform can be utilized to
support collaborative reading inquiry and knowledge building among students.

References
Fisher, D., & Frey, N. (2012). Close reading in elementary school. The Reading Teacher, 66 (3), 179-188.
Hamilton E. E. & Paris, S. G. (2014). The Development of Children's Reading Comprehension. In Handbook of
       research on reading comprehension (pp. 56-77). New York: Routledge.
Harari, Y. N. (2016). Homo Deus: A brief history of tomorrow. London: Penguin.
Hmelo-Silver, C. E., Duncan, R. G., & Chinn, C. A. (2007). Scaffolding and achievement in problem-based and
       inquiry learning: a response to Kirschner, Sweller, and Clark. Educational psychologist, 42(2), 99-107.
Reiser, B. J. (2004). Scaffolding complex learning: The mechanisms of structuring and problematizing student
       work. The Journal of the Learning sciences, 13(3), 273-304.
Rosenblatt, L. M. (1978). The reader, the text, the poem: The transactional theory of literary work. Carbondale:
       Southern Illinois University Press.
Scardamalia, M. (2002). Collective cognitive responsibility for the advancement of knowledge. Liberal education
       in a knowledge society, 97, 67-98.
Tabak, I. (2004). Synergy: a complement to emerging patterns of distributed scaffolding. Journal of the Learning
       Sciences, 13(3), 305-335.
Taboada, A., & Guthrie, J. T. (2004). Growth of cognitive strategies for reading comprehension. In J. T. Guthrie,
       A. Wigfield, & K. C. Perencevich (Eds.), Motivating reading comprehension: Concept-oriented reading
       instruction (pp. 273­306). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Voss, J. F. (2006). Toulmin's model and the solving of ill-structured problems. In D. Hitchcock & B. Verheij
       (Eds.), Arguing on the Toulmin model (pp. 303­311). Berlin: Springer.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                  908                                                    © ISLS
