     Imagination in Adolescents' Collaborative Multimodal Science
                                                    Fictions
                              Maria Kolovou, University of Miami, mxk1058@miami.edu
                                   Ji Shen, University of Miami, j.shen@miami.edu
                      Blaine E. Smith, University of Arizona, blainesmith@email.arizona.edu

        Abstract: Understanding how to cultivate students' imagination has been a challenge in STEM
        learning. We developed a program that engages adolescents in gaining STEM knowledge and
        digital literacies while collaboratively composing multimodal science fiction narratives. In this
        study, we identified instances in student products that signify imagination from a critical aspect:
        devising     details. Through  the  examples described,  an  emergent    framework  for examining
        imagination is introduced as an outset for future work.

Introduction
During  the  past    decade,  studies readdressing  the importance   of  imagination  in   learning have    increased
considerably, partly because many of the complex problems in the 21st Century require unique and creative
solutions (G    vean  , Gillespie, & Valsiner, 2015). However, there   has been  little research on how imagination
can be cultivated and evaluated in a multimodal learning environment. Emphasizing imagination, we have created
an educational program to assist students in generating science fiction narratives. In this study, we analyzed
student-generated artifacts in terms of imagination. The driving question of this study was: How can imaginative
capacity be identified and evaluated in students' collaboratively generated multimodal artifacts?

Theoretical framework
Vygotsky (2004) explained that imagination develops in an increasingly progressive and complex way through
certain cultural tools such as language. Egan (1998) suggested some imaginative cognitive tools, which led Fetes
(2010) to propose eight imaginative capacities. Among these capacities, grasping details is the focus of this study.
Grasping details refers to "holding in one's imagination the individual richness of particular cases, situations,
events, that makes them unique" (Fettes, 2010, p3). During the creative multimodal process, adolescents draw
details from their experiences and popular media to devise characters, events, and plots, in unique combinations.

Methods
The data for this study come from an informal educational program designed to engage adolescents (age 10-13;
3-5 students per team) in collaboratively producing multimodal science fictions while learning STEM and digital
literacies. The program consisted of a five-day summer camp, a fall extension, and a final presentation in a local
film  festival. Each   student    adopted one  or more  specific roles  (writer, designer,  or  scientist) and close
collaboration was expected during the entire process. Students gained experience with a range of digital tools to
create a variety of multimodal elements (e.g., comics, animation, sound, movie) to extend their narratives.
        There were 42 students participated in the summer program and 21 of them continued with the fall
extension. As a result, a total of 12 multimodal science fictions were generated. Multiple sources of data were
collected, including pre-, mid-, and post-surveys, video records, group-based semi-structured interviews, and
multimodal artifacts.   To understand how imagination was incorporated in students' work, in this study we first
examined their artifacts for three aspects: characters (i.e., people, such as protagonists and antagonists portrayed
in the narrative), events (independent unit of action that, in sequence with other events, comprises the plot of the
narrative), and science (scientific knowledge or facts incorporated in the fiction). For each aspect, we conducted
a two-level coding. In the first level, we identified the instances that we considered as `details'; in the second
level, we analyzed these details into finer categories using a ground-up approach.

Findings
Four themes emerged in our analysis and we illustrate them with concrete examples in the following.

Theme 1: Creating deep characters in a fictitious world
Narratives with high imagination are those with sophisticated character-building schemes. The narrative, "Haluki
Star" highlights  several aspects   that  were also found in   other strong examples:   (a) Descriptive    details (b)
Relationship    with others.  (c) Connection  with the environment.  (d) Expression  of  emotion.   For    instance, a

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                     909                                                  © ISLS
character in the narrative is an alien species called Halukinumasanluka, who was portrayed as having their own
language ("they use different sounds connected with hand movement", "they take long pauses between syllables")
and walking patterns ("go in zig zags"). They are "short and round, like barrels... have a face, like us humans,
and long pointy, fingers and toes.... However, their eyes are as dark as night".

Theme 2: Crafting rich experiences in unfamiliar events
Another feature that is common in narratives with high imagination is that their events, especially unfamiliar ones,
are filled with rich experiences and surprising twists. The narrative "What Would Happen If The World Stopped
Spinning", is an example of how different kinds of devising details give believability to the imaginative events.
In the narrative, three friends struggle to survive after the Earth is hit by an asteroid, stops spinning, and is full of
radiation and mutated former animals. Events of the story plot are enriched with devised details, many of which
are from students' everyday experiences. The key features include the following: (a) Enumerating variety. For
example, when Luke builds a shelter, a variety of details that are not all directly associated with the actual building
give depth to the event: Shelter is built underground to protect from radiation; a machine that extracts oxygen
from water is used; wood, steel, and stone were found; and supplies were consumed. (b) Opposing binaries with
transitional inbetweenness. For instance, in the narrative creatures are portrayed as "animals that we usually know
and love evolved to vicious monsters".

Theme 3: Incorporating science details in creative ways
Narratives with high imagination tend to incorporate many science details in creative ways. These science details
are used to support portraying the characters or explain why or how events happen. For instance, in the narrative
"Haluki Star", Lucy's traveling through time and space is described with incredible details about personal feeling:
"...I am being squeezed until there is nothing left of me. Then emptiness becomes black. It feels as if I am flying.
An odd coolness passes over me. My whole body feels on fire...." (from narrative "Haluki Star").

Theme        4: Composing        multimodal     artifacts   as    a
coherent a whole
Narratives   in high level of imagination are often   equipped   with
complementary     and creative multimodal  artifacts.  For instance,
Figure  1  shows   a  snapshot of a   product that integrates  three                                      Image
different modalities to create an ambiance and connect to settings
in the plot.                                                                                              Text

Discussion and implications                                                                               Sound
Our preliminary analysis shows the importance of devising details
in creating  highly  imaginative  multimodal  science  fictions. An     Figure 1. Sample page in "Tsunami Terror".
emergent     framework to   identify and  evaluate imagination    in
students' multimodal artifacts can serve as a step for further exploration. What we have found at this stage includes
the following. First, details can be devised in different ways to support character building, events unfolding,
science incorporation,  and   multimedia  integration. Writing   techniques (e.g., inclusion of opposing binaries,
metaphors) may equip students with ways to devising details that are more nuanced and humanized. Multimodal
representations (e.g., comic/animation software) may provide a new cultural tool for young students to exercise
and expand imagination. Future research will examine how students discuss, use, and externalize imagination
when composing in a collaborative learning environment.

References
Egan, K., & NetLibrary, Inc. (1998). The educated mind: How cognitive tools shape our understanding. Chicago:
        University of Chicago Press.
Fettes, M. (2010). The TIEs that bind: How imagination grasps the world. In K. Egan & K. Madej (Eds.) Engaging
        imaginations and developing creativity in education (pp 2-16). Newcastle: Cambridge Scholars.
Gl veanu, V.P., Gillespie, A., & Valsiner, J. (2015). Rethinking creativity: Contributions from social and cultural
        psychology (Cultural dynamics of social representation). New York, NY: Routledge.
Vygotsky, L. (2004). Imagination and creativity in childhood. Journal of Russian & East European Psychology,
        42(1), 7-97.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                   910                                                  © ISLS
