       Telepresence Robots as Embodied Agents in the Classroom
                                      Penny Thompson and Sarinporn Chaivisit
                             penny.thompson@okstate.edu, yam.chaivisit@okstate.edu
                                            Oklahoma State University

        Abstract: Telepresence robots are emerging as a way for distant or homebound students to attend
        face-to-face classes, but their influence on the classroom environment is not yet well understood.
        This in-progress study explores the experiences of students in a face-to-face classroom where one
        student attended via telepresence robot. The focus of this study is the extent to which the robot is
        perceived as an embodied agent in a shared physical space.

Telepresence robots are emerging as a way for distant or homebound students to attend face-to-face classes (Goodman,
2017). It is therefore important to understand how the use of these robots influences the classroom environment. This
in-progress study explores the experiences  of  students in  a  face-to-face doctoral level course where one  student
attended class using a telepresence robot that allowed her to connect remotely but still maneuver through a shared
physical space with her classmates.

Learning with robots in shared space
The physical space of a classroom can affect the learning process by, for example, encouraging students and instructors
to move around in the room when engaged in collaborative tasks (Brooks, 2012; Gurzynski-Weiss, Long, & Solon,
2015). While remotely-located students connecting to their classrooms through videoconferencing may be excluded
from this physical engagement, or be dependent on others (e.g., relying on a classmate to move the device on which
they are connecting), a telepresence robot allows remote students to move independently in the shared learning space.
The presence of a robot in the classroom, however, has the potential to alter the classroom experience for both
remotely-located and physically-present students in ways that are not yet well understood.
        Research  has  shown  that  people tend to anthropomorphize   machines,   attributing human-like  features  to
technology tools (Nass & Moon, 2000; Nass, Steuer, Tauber, & Reeder, 1994) and to perceive robots as embodied
agents (Epley, Akalis, Waytz, & Cacioppo, 2008). That is, they perceive the robot as having a physical body and
having agency over how that body moves in the physical space and interacts with humans. Perceptions of robot agency
and independence are enhanced by a robot's ability to interact with humans within a shared physical space (Brincker,
2016). Brincker discusses interactions between agents in the context of affordance spaces. Gibson (1977) defined
affordance as an opportunity for action provided by the environment. Brincker (2016) shifts the focus from "what the
environment can be said to abstractly furnish one person seen in isolation" to an acknowledgment that "there are
necessarily at least two perspectives and two embodied agents standing in...relation to the same environment" (p. 452).
We can perceive other agents as either existing in their own affordance space or as sharing ours, allowing for "some
level of mutual and reciprocal perceptible influence on each other's affordance field" (p. 452).
        A remotely-located student connecting with classmates via telepresence robot is an embodied agent in his or
her own affordance space, but how students in the classroom perceive a person mediated through a telepresence robot,
and how this perception affects the learning environment, is not yet fully understood. When a medical issue prompted
one student to attend class via telepresence robot for a large portion of one semester, we had an opportunity to explore
students' experiences as embodied agents in a shared learning space in the presence of a robot. This in-progress study
addresses the following research questions: (1) How did the remotely-located student experience the shared learning
space  when  attending class using  a telepresence robot?   (2) To what extent   did  the student  attending class via
telepresence robot feel like an embodied agent? (3) How did face-to-face students experience a shared learning space
that included a classmate attending via telepresence robot? (4) To what extent did the face-to-face participants view
their remotely-located classmate to be an embodied agent?

Methods
This study focuses on participants' subjective experiences of their interactions in the shared learning space. The setting
is a doctoral level course in counseling psychology with an enrollment of 10 students. The course met face-to-face
once per week for three hours and consisted mainly of student-led discussions on reading assignments.    One student
used a Double 2 telepresence robot to attend class at a distance for the first 11 weeks of the 16-week semester. In the
12th week of the semester, she was able to begin attending class in-person.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                    911                                                    © ISLS
        Data for this initial exploratory study consisted of interviews with the student who used the telepresence
robot and her classmates who interacted with her. The interview format was unstructured, giving the participants an
opportunity to speak freely about their experiences with the robot, and allowing the researchers to adapt the interview
based on the thoughts and ideas provided by the participants.  However, the researchers were particularly interested
in the degree to which the in-person students viewed the user of the robot as an embodied agent sharing their learning
space, and the extent to which the robot user felt like an embodied agent in the classroom. Data were analyzed using
the approach   outlined by Saldaña    (2009) to discern  important  themes that capture the essence of participants'
experience.

Significance
Results of this study will provide greater understanding of the experiences of learners in classrooms that contain a mix
of face-to-face and remote students.  This will help instructors design and manage these experiences to maximize the
benefits of learning in a shared space while maintaining the increased access that telepresence robots provide.

References
Brincker, M. (2016). Dynamics of Perceptible Agency: The Case of Social Robots. Minds and Machines, 26(4), 441-
        466.
Brooks, D. C. (2012). Space and consequences: The impact of different formal learning spaces on instructor and
        student        behavior.      Journal      of       Learning     Spaces,      1(2),     retrieved        from
        http://libjournal.uncg.edu/index.php/jls/article/view/285/275.
Epley, N.,  Akalis, S.,  Waytz,   A., &  Cacioppo,    J. T. (2008).  Creating social connection through   inferential
        reproduction: Loneliness and perceived agency in gadgets, gods, and greyhounds. Psychological Science,
        19(2), 114-120.
Gibson, J. J. (1977). The Theory of Affordances. In R. Shaw & J. Bransford (Eds.), Perceiving, acting, and knowing:
        Towards an ecological psychology (pp. 67-82). New York: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Goodman,    J. (2017).  Meet Sheldon,  the Robot  Student.  Retrieved  from https://www.insidehighered.com/digital-
        learning/article/2017/04/26/robots-classrooms-connect-distance-learners-classrooms
Gurzynski-Weiss, L., Long, A., & Solon, M. (2015). Comparing Interaction and Use of Space in Traditional and
        Innovative Classrooms. Hispania, 98(1), 61-78.
Nass, C., & Moon, Y. (2000). Machines and mindlessness: Social responses to computers. Journal of Social Issues,
        56(1), 81-103.
Nass, C., Steuer, J., Tauber, E., & Reeder, H. (1993). Anthropomorphism, agency, and ethopoeia: computers as social
        actors. In INTERACT'93 and CHI'93 conference companion on human factors in computing systems 111-
        112. ACM.
Saldaña, J. (2009). The coding manual for qualitative researchers. Thousand Oaks: Sage Publications: Thousand
        Oaks, CA.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                     912                                                   © ISLS
