 Child-material Computing: Material Collaboration in Fiber Crafts
                                  Anna Keune, Indiana University, akeune@iu.edu
                         Kylie Peppler, University of California, Irvine, kpeppler@uci.edu

         Abstract: In computer science education, fiber crafts remain largely disconnected from their
         historical role as models for computers. This risks overlooking a compelling, low-cost context
         for  computer    science learning    and for  exploring   human-machine     collaborative  learning
         processes. Building on bodily-material collaboration, we analyzed the computational concepts
         associated with fiber crafts during a middle school course and found that computation was
         contingent   on  child-fiber  collaborations. This has  implications   for theorizing materials   as
         active participants in collaborative learning.

Introduction and background: Fiber crafts and computing
Fiber crafts are a compelling context for examining the material nature of collaboration in computer science
learning, because textile manipulation occupies a pivotal role in the history of computing; the earliest computers
were  modeled  after  the  Jacquard   loom that  used  punch  cards  to program  fabric  patterns (e.g., Plant, 1995).
Despite  this connection,   in computer   science  education  fiber  crafts remain  largely disconnected   from   their
historical role as models for computers. The field of e-textiles is a notable exception that highlights the potential
of technology-augmented fiber crafts for high-quality STEM learning (Buechley, 2006). By swapping wires for
conductive   yarn,  the practice  of  sewing   becomes   a way   for  youth  to  connect crafting, engineering,    and
computing    (e.g., Peppler,   2013;   Kafai,  Fields, &   Searle,   2014).  However,    we  know   little about    the
computational concepts used for non-technologically augmented fiber crafts or which learning processes they
drive. Reinvigorating the historical connections of fiber crafts and computing promises a compelling low-cost
context for computer science learning and for exploring human-machine collaborative processes.
         The framework of bodily-material collaboration (Davidsen & Ryberg, 2015), focused on collaborative
learning processes    between   children   and  new    technological  materials, invited us  to   expand   notions  of
collaboration by    framing materials  as active  participants. This  poster examines  youth's  collaborative   STEM
learning processes as they perform fiber crafts. Our qualitative analysis of video data from a middle school craft
course examines fiber crafts as a context for computer science education by showing how weaving mirrored the
computer-programming notion of parallel processes. We discuss three child-material collaborative processes for
computer science education and their implications for computer-supported collaborative learning.

Methods
This qualitative study draws on data collected during a six-session craft course at a Midwestern public school to
examine the inherent computational concepts of weaving and fabric manipulation. Each session lasted 60-90
minutes, was attended by eight middle school students, and was video-recorded. During the sessions, we also
conducted 5- to10-minute semi-structured interviews with the youth about their design process. The interviews
were also video-recorded to capture the youths' embodied meaning making. We analyzed youth engagement
with the fiber crafts by iteratively coding the video for computational concepts of the K-12 Computer Science
Framework (e.g., programming: functions, loops; computing systems: software and hardware) and transformed
them  to  Python    programming.     Then    we  coded  how     youth described   body   movements   in    relation to
computational concepts (e.g., tools used and how). For this poster, we present an illustrative case of a beginner's
lace pattern  woven   into  a tapestry by  a middle school   fabric-based   computer, Jasmine,  who  had   little prior
experiences in computing and crafting. We first present how the project relates to programming and then turn to
software and hardware at the site of the child-material collaboration.

Findings: Weaving parallel processes
When a computer program, the implementation of parallel processes requires the programmer to identify two
patterns that progress simultaneously and to bring these together into a computer program. Through the creation
of a lace pattern, Jasmine used this concept to move her project forward. Jasmine intended to weave an opening
into her tapestry and explained her graphical project plan (Figure 1, left):

         So this is the hole right here. And [the yarn] goes one way. Then, [the yarn] goes the other
         way. And then [the yarn] goes this way and then you skip these strings, where the hole is going
         to be, and then you go the same way and then you go this way and do the same as you did.

In her explanation of the first three project plan lines, which include the first lace line, Jasmine's use of "skip

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                     913                                                   © ISLS
these strings" suggests that she planned to use one yarn color on one shuttle (i.e., a carrier of yarn) to produce
the design. The project plan arrows support this, where the arrow on line three points into the same direction
before and after the "hole." This seems to continue the row, rather than build both sides of the fabric in parallel.

              Figure 1. Jasmine's weaving pattern, loom project, and Python code of pattern design.

On the loom, Jasmine engaged two yarn colors, teal and rose, on two shuttles to create her lace pattern (Figure
1, center). Alternating, she moved the teal shuttle from left to right and the rose shuttle from right to left, before
shifting warp-thread positions. Both sides of the tapestry advanced in parallel. On graph paper, this would have
been represented as two arrows pointing toward one another rather than in the same direction. As part of our
analysis, we transformed all students' weaving patterns into Python programming language to discover their
inherent computational  concepts.    As Jasmine    and  the loom  came   together,  the  pattern changed   into a  more
complex task that showed the use of functions, loops, and ranges as two processes emerged (Figure 1, right).

Discussion and implications
Thinking   with  the framework   of  body-material  collaboration,    we  recognize   that the Python    code does   not
capture how Jasmine and the fiber craft materials came together to form a human-material collaboration. We
identified three child-material collaborative   processes   that fostered the  fiber  crafts-based computation.    First,
Jasmine and the loom simultaneously programmed and processed the pattern instead of delegating tasks to the
machine. For the lace pattern, the loom called for a shift in the computational process: Both sides needed to
advance in parallel and, therefore, a change in programming was needed. Second, Jasmine became a part of the
emerging   computation.  Through    left-right movements,    Jasmine's   arm  plus   the shuttle that held the  "pixel-
making" material (i.e., yarn) became the computational processing unit. Third, this slowed down computing and
made  the   usually  invisible computational    processes   visible.  Together,    these child-material   collaborative
processes highlight the active role of materials in what computation can become. Computation in fiber crafts
seemed contingent on child-material collaborations. Leveraging these processes for computer science education
could present a low-cost context for interrogating the role of humans in computation. Identifying contexts for
exploring  human-machine     interactions such   as fiber-based   approaches   to   child-material  computing,   are of
increasing usefulness  for computer-supported      collaborative learning  as  ubiquitously   spreading  computational
algorithms alter learning processes and the role of people in relation to computation.

References
Peppler,   K. (2013). STEAM-powered       computing      education:   Using   e-textiles   to  integrate the  arts and
         STEM. IEEE Computer, September 2013, pp. 38-43.
Buechley,  L.  (2006,  October).   A construction   kit for  electronic  textiles. In 2006    10th IEEE   international
         symposium on wearable computers (pp. 83-90). IEEE.
Davidsen, J. & Ryberg, T. (2015). "This is the size of one meter": Children's bodily-material collaboration and
         understanding  of   scale around  touchscreens.    In   The  Computer     Supported  Collaborative   Learning
         (CSCL) Conference 2015 (Vol. 1, pp. 70-77). Gothenburg, Sweden: ISLS.
Kafai, Y., Fields, D., & Searle, K. (2014). Electronic textiles as disruptive designs: Supporting and challenging
         maker activities in schools. Harvard Educational Review, 84(4), 532-556.
Plant, S. (1995). The future looms: Weaving, women, and cybernetics. Body & Society, 1(3-4), 45-64.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by a collaborative grant from the National Science Foundation (#1420303) and a grant
from the   Center  of Craft, Creativity,  and   Design  awarded    to Kylie   Peppler.   Any   opinions, findings, and
conclusions   or recommendations    expressed   in this article  are not those of  National   Science Foundation,    the
Center of Craft, Creativity, and Design, Indiana University, or the University of California.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                    914                                                     © ISLS
