    Dialogic Intervisualizing: Rethinking Text-Discourse-Learning
                Relations in Multimodal Problem-based Learning
                      Susan M. Bridges, The University of Hong Kong, sbridges@hku.hk
                           Lap Ki Chan, The University of Hong Kong, lapki@hku.hk
                 Judith L Green, University of California, Santa Barbara, judithlgreen@me.com
                           Asmalina Saleh, Indiana University, asmsaleh@indiana.edu
                      Cindy E. Hmelo-Silver, Indiana University, chmelosi@indiana.edu

         Abstract: Examining the nature of digital texts in the developing contexts of problem-based
         learning (PBL)   constitutes an  expansion    in research on dialogic   approaches  to learning   in
         technology-rich,  inquiry-based   designs. This   study  adopts  Interactional Ethnography    as  an
         orienting theory to frame the purposeful tracing of the unfolding knowledge co-construction
         processes across a medical PBL cycle. We investigate how these processes are interactionally
         accomplished  in  and  across intertextually  tied   events where   devised,  generated,  accessed,
         curated  and appropriated  digital texts  are connected   in webs   of meaning.   The  concepts   of
         multimodality    and intertextuality  from   literacy studies   provide  explanatory   theories   to
         investigate how digital texts in the developing dialogic space are consequential the learning
         process across the phases of a PBL cycle. We propose the concept of dialogic intervisualizing
         to theorize these new text-discourse relations in inquiry-based learning.

         Keywords: Interactional ethnography, multimodality, problem-based learning; facilitation

Background
Given the  socio-cognitive    foundations   of PBL    with  collaborative  disciplinary knowledge    co-construction
occurring in  small group  dialogues,  designing   ethnographic,   discourse-based   studies to capture   and analyze
interaction-based learning  processes  in-situ  is both   logical and compelling.    Attending  to  the processes  of
appropriation and development of curated and student-devised digital resources is critical because these resources
provide access to, and structure information by embedding expert knowledge and skills in these virtual spaces
(Savin-Baden, 2016); however, this is less explored.      This study aims to trace participants' learning trajectories
as facilitators and students engage in dialogic activity while utilizing multimodal resources.

Approach
The study  is theoretically   grounded  in  Interactional  Ethnography     (IE) with  learning  socially-situated and
discursively constructed across times, events and configurations of actors and artifacts (e.g., texts) (Green &
Bridges, 2018).  This perspective  is particularly  important  in  seeking  to  understand the  dialogic   relationship
between  social  activity and   collective-individual cognitive   development   (Derry  et al,  2010).  With  specific
reference to multimodal texts, we align with the notion of "intersemiotic relations" (Bateman (2014). One Year 2
medical student PBL group in the 6-year Bachelor of Medicine and Bachelor of Surgery (MBBS) program and
their expert PBL facilitator (n = 12) form a telling case. The archived materials for analysis included video
recordings of three face-to-face PBL tutorials (~ 2 hours each) and student learning materials collected across the
problem cycle. Classroom videos were transcribed and PBL case materials (tutor and student guides; student
generated materials) were collected. Recall interviews were recorded and transcribed and added to the archive.
The team   co-analyzed    video recordings  and  transcripts  to  identify rich points  associated  with   educational
technologies and multimodal texts and to trace the consequential nature of these texts for medical student learning
(Green & Bridges, 2018).

Results and discussion
The `rich point' (Agar, 2006) for tracing intervisual ties between texts was identified where a student (S11) was
asked by a peer to draw a representation of the point he was seeking to explain. Figure 1 illustrates both the
chronological relationship  between   texts and  talk  from Tutorial  1  and Student  11's   (S11) initial whiteboard
drawing attempt (Artefact 1) to the S11's final representation (Artefact 7) which was composed and circulated
(unbeknown to the facilitator) after the final tutorial (Tutorial 3) and maps this to the phases of the PBL cycle of
inquiry.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                     915                                                   © ISLS
                            Figure 1. Dialogic intervisualizing across the PBL cycle.

Drawing on Interactional Ethnography, multimodality and intervisuality, we also expand the conceptualization of
the role of visualizing (as a verb) in dialogic learning contexts such as PBL. Our argument is the ongoing process
of student-led semiosis evident in the analysis above, whereby meaning-making is supported through the building
of discourse ties between graphic representations as visual `texts' and the actions proposed or made transparent
by members in the PBL cycle (e.g., facilitator, students). The concept of dialogic intervisualizing recognizes the
dynamism and centrality of new text types as contextualization cues to meaning and sociocultural processes. The
concept also emphasizes not only student agency and autonomy in a fluid and dialogic learning process such as
PBL but also the centrality of the expert facilitator in guiding the process of textual selection, curation, critique
and final appropriation. We also propose that the concept of dialogic intervisualizing situates the event and textual
processes, the developing composition and a meta-discursive set of orienting signals as well as processes of
naming key phenomena.

Conclusion
For this Interactional Ethnography,   we   have examined     this   process   of facilitated textual production and
interpretation within  and across the dialogic  learning   space    that is a PBL   cycle  in a process  of dialogic
intervisualizing. This analysis   proposes theoretical     insights through    the  proposed    concept of  dialogic
intervisualizing which broadens the conceptualization of dialogic learning and social semiotic conceptions of
intervisuality at their point of intersection in inquiry-based learning designs.

References
Agar, M. (2006). An ethnography by any other name... Forum: Qualitative Social Research, 7(4).
Green, J.L & Bridges, S.M. (2018). Interactional Ethnography. In F. Fischer, C. E. Hmelo-Silver, S. R. Goldman
         & P.  Reimann.  (Eds). International  Handbook     of the  Learning     Sciences. NY:  Routledge/Taylor &
         Francis.
Bateman, J. (2014). Text & Image: A Critical Introduction to the Visual/Verbal Divide. London. NY: Routledge.
Danish, J. A. (2013). Designing for Technology Enhanced Activity to Support Learning. Journal of Emerging
         Learning Design (1).
Derry, S. J., Pea, R. D., Barron, B., Engle, R. A., Erickson, F., Goldman, R., Rogers, H., Koschmann, T., Lemke,
         J. &  Sherin, M. G. (2010). Conducting video research in the learning sciences: Guidance on selection,
         analysis, technology, and ethics. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 19(1), 3-53.

Acknowledgments
Funded under the General Research Fund (GRF) of the Research Grants Council, HKSAR. (Ref: 17100414).

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                   916                                                    © ISLS
