Exploring the Potential of IVR Technology to Promote Collaborative
                               Learning in Science Experiences

                                               Omar Ceja and Sara Price
                                  omar.salgado.17@ucl.ac.uk, sara.price@ucl.ac.uk
                     University College London, Institute of Education, UCL Knowledge Lab

         Abstract: This poster explores how different types of virtual reality technology (VR) allow for
         various degrees of collaborative enactment within virtual environments. This two-staged study
         analyzed    the  engagement   and  reflections  of 27  students  with three forms  of VR    hardware.
         Findings from direct observations and students' perceptions suggest that the capabilities of
         high-end immersive virtual reality (IVR) can allow for more meaningful and natural forms of
         embodied interactions, locomotion, and verbal communication.

         Keywords:     Computer     supported  collaborative    learning  (CSCL),  Virtual  reality  assisted education
         (VRAE), enactment in VR, embodiment in IVR, sensorimotor contingencies for virtual collaboration.

Introduction
For years,   studies have    explored  the  potential of non-immersive     virtual reality (NiVR)    for training, skills
development, and formal education (Jensen & Konradsen, 2018; Wang, Wu, Wang, Chi, & Wang, 2018). As a
platform, NiVR has reached a stable state of maturation; however, immersive virtual reality (IVR) is still in an
early evolutionary state. With the advent of the first modern commercial headsets since 2014, companies like
Google,  HTC,      Sony,   and  Oculus   have  contributed   to  creating   a  saturated  and  fragmented    market  by
commercializing headsets with very distinct features that can afford users rather different experiences, all under
the umbrella term of virtual reality (VR). This has become problematic not only for its rate of adoption, but also
for its implementation in educational settings, and for educational research. Although there is little evidence
supporting   the notion   that these new   and varied   versions  of the  technology   can enhance   instruction in any
significant way compared to NiVR, the push from these companies has led to initiatives seeking to bring IVR into
classrooms,   i.e. Google    Expeditions,  Immersive   VR   Education,    zSpace,  and Avantis    Education's ClassVR,
Furthermore, these ventures follow the assumption that IVR headsets can inherently support learning due to their
perceived qualities and fail to acknowledge that the findings from the empirical studies on the educational uses of
NiVR do not necessarily carry over to IVR. Some researchers have tried to address this gap in the literature;
however, there still is little consensus on the usefulness of IVR for educational purposes. Whilst some studies
have shown positive results (Dede, Salzman, & Bowen Loftin, 1996; Ketelhut, Nelson, Clarke, & Dede, 2010;
Webster, 2016),     others present   a less favorable   vision  on  the  educational advantage    of IVR   (Makransky,
Terkildsen, & Mayer, 2017; Moro, Stromberga, & Stirling, 2017; Parong & Mayer, 2018).

Methodology and analysis
This piece of research comprises a pilot study carried out in preparation for a larger project exploring how high-
end IVR    technology     (1)  affords sensorimotor   experiences    that could   support  learning  through  embodied
interactions. During data collection, it became evident that the qualities that make high-end IVR technology more
advanced allowed for deeper interactions and showed the potential to support collaborative activities.
         This pilot study took place in a secondary school in London with a sample of 21 girls aged 11-13 and a
separate sample of 6 adult participants at university level, its aim was to test different data collection instruments
and to define the sensorimotor differences between low and high-end IVR, and NiVR. Due to limitations of time
and number of headsets available, only a few students were able to use the VR technology directly. Those who
were selected for participation were randomly allocated into three groups where they performed science related
activities using a type of VR hardware and a piece of commercial software specifically designed for each platform:
those in the control group used desktop-based VR technology, group 1 used Samsung's Gear VR headset, and
group 2  and  the   adult sample   used  an HTC  Vive    headset.  Data   was  collected through   video recordings, an
observation log, notes from interviews and discussions, and short pre and post-tests. Participants were briefed on
the study asked to opt in through consent forms, additionally, parental consent was sought for underage students.
         Thematic analysis was carried out on the notes made from unstructured interviews and on the embodied
interactions  observed    on  the video  recordings.  Coding    was  done  in  two stages  (first deductively  and  then
inductively).

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                       917                                                    © ISLS
Discussion and findings
The experimental design of this pilot study brought about a few lessons going forward. Firstly, although some
NiVR platforms are capable of embedded collaborative work, the version of the software used here relied on
external collaborative activities. Students were able to perform the tasks in pairs and take turns and negotiate the
steps to follow. Based on the notes and video recordings, it was observed that students not only became more
engaged with the activities whilst working in pairs, but they were also more willing to explore the virtual spaces
as they had to navigate them by taking into consideration the requests of their partner. In contrast, those who
performed   the activities on   their own followed  a more    linear path which   aligned  to the directives    in the
environments. Although this outcome in the control group is worth exploring further, the conditions of the study
groups led to more unexpected collaborative uses of the technology given the isolating nature of wearing a headset.
On the one hand, the stereoscopic 3D view and first-person perspective of the technology used in both cases added
to a more immersive experience, but on the other, the hardware used in the first group limited students to a fixed
position which hindered exploration. Additionally, the pointer-like controller in this group did not allow for more
natural and direct manipulation of objects and for the exploration of the space as was possible with the technology
used in the second study group. Regardless of the constrains, students who were not using the technology at the
time still engaged with their peers through voice commands after visualizing the virtual environment on a screen.
Furthermore,   the fact that the second  group involved  being  able  to  manipulate objects  and physically    walk,
allowed non-participants to spatially navigate the virtual space with the help of the screen and physically help
their peers move and walk as they would a visually impaired person, although participants were perfectly capable
of performing the activities themselves. This demonstrated not only the impact that collaboration can have in
virtual spaces as pupils could discuss solutions and negotiate a common understanding of concepts, but more
importantly, it showed the need for collaboration that students have for deeper engagement with the environment.
        Ultimately, what this pilot study has done is raise a number of questions in relation to the use of VR as
an instructional tool such as in what ways and to what depth are embodied interactions and locomotion involved
in supporting learning through this medium, which learning domains have the potential to be more effectively
supported by VR technology, and how can VR instruction shape distance learning and collaboration.

Endnotes
(1)  High-end IVR refers to tethered headsets that require a powerful computer to operate. In contrast, low-end IVR describes
     untethered headsets with low computing power either embedded in the casing or based on a mobile phone.

References
Dede, C., Salzman, M. C., & Bowen Loftin, R. (1996). ScienceSpace: virtual realities for learning complex and
      abstract  scientific concepts.  In Proceedings  of  the IEEE    1996 Virtual   Reality  Annual  International
      Symposium (pp. 246­252). IEEE.
Jensen, L., & Konradsen, F. (2018). A review of the use of virtual reality head-mounted displays in education and
      training. Education and Information Technologies, 23(4), 1515­1529.
Ketelhut, D. J., Nelson, B. C., Clarke, J., & Dede, C. (2010). A multi-user virtual environment for building and
      assessing higher order inquiry skills in science. British Journal of Educational Technology, 41(1), 56­68.
Makransky, G., Terkildsen, T. S., & Mayer, R. E. (2017). Adding immersive virtual reality to a science lab
      simulation causes more presence but less learning. Learning and Instruction.
Moro, C., Stromberga, Z., & Stirling, A. (2017). Virtualisation devices for student learning: Comparison between
      desktop-based (Oculus Rift) and mobile-based (Gear VR) virtual reality in medical and health science
      education. Australasian Journal of Educational Technology, 33(6), 1­10.
Parong, J., &   Mayer,  R.   E. (2018).  Learning science in  immersive   virtual reality. Journal of       Educational
      Psychology, 110(6), 785­797.
Wang, P., Wu, P., Wang, J., Chi, H.-L., & Wang, X. (2018). A Critical Review of the Use of Virtual Reality in
      Construction Engineering Education and Training. International Journal of Environmental Research and
      Public Health, 15(6), 1204.
Webster, R. (2016). Declarative knowledge acquisition in immersive virtual learning environments. Interactive
      Learning Environments, 24(6), 1319­1333.

Acknowledgements
This project is sponsored by the government of Mexico through the National Council of Science and Technology.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                    918                                                     © ISLS
