      Using Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning (CSCL) for
          Global Curriculum Inquiry: A Case Study in Hong Kong
 Sally Wai-Yan Wan, Faculty of Education, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, sallywywan@cuhk.edu.hk

         Abstract: This poster aims at presenting the findings of a case study of a group of student
         teachers  using online    discussion  as a   form  of Computer-Supported      Collaborative      Learning
         (CSCL) in doing inquiry projects in collaboration with prospective teachers from Spain and
         experienced   teachers    from   Canada.  Data   was   collected  from  individual   and     focus group
         interviews, as supplemented with online discussion threads. Findings evidenced the processes
         and potentials  of   global  curriculum   inquiry  using   online discussion   in   developing    student
         teachers' global citizenship. Implications about the use of online discussion for supporting the
         development of global citizenship in teacher education as well as future research directions
         are then discussed.

Introduction
There  have  been  increasing   attentions  to  the needs   of  educating  global   citizenship    in teacher    professional
development in contributing to the sustainable development of the global world (Goodfellow, Lea, Gonzalez, &
Mason, 2001). In this connection, the recent Education for Sustainable Development and Global Citizenship in
Education   2030   initiated by  the  UNESCO      (UNESCO,       2017),  developing  global   citizenship     is one  of the
Sustainable Development Goals which calls for embedding global citizenship themes and concepts within all
areas of  learning and  teaching.    Different  local and   international  scholars found    that  teachers'  awareness     of
global citizenship are narrow and insufficiently prepared (Lee & Leung, 2006; Groves & O'Connor, 2017).
         One of the potential ways in attaining the goal of developing student teachers' global citizenship is the
use of  Computer-Supported      Collaborative    Learning   (CSCL)    technologies,    which    can   facilitate the  socio-
cognitive processes  of  learning    (i.e. working    in groups)  through    social interaction    with   the support    of a
computer  or  the  internet   that   connects  and  engages    people   in sharing   and  creating    knowledge     through
scaffolding  dialogues  across   multi-cultural   regions   (Sorensen,   2008)   whilst  it. Evidence     showed   that  the
applications of  CSCL    (e.g. He    &  Huang,  2017)    enable  the effectiveness   of  learning     and teaching.   A  few
scholars (e.g. Sorensen, 2008) discussed and evidenced how CSCL technologies may help the development of
global citizenship  but  these  studies    were not   conducted  in  teacher    education  settings.   Meanwhile,     to our
knowledge, how CSCL may help develop global citizenship of student teachers (teachers) is seldom explored
and documented     from  an  Asian   perspective.  Therefore,   the  aim  of the  case  study   is to explore    how  online
discussion as a form of CSCL facilitate the development of student teachers' awareness of global citizenship
through real experiences in interacting with others around the world, with the key research question, How do
student teachers perceive and experience the use of online discussion for developing global citizenship? What
motivates student teachers to get engaged in online discussion with `others'? What do they learn from `others'?.

Context of the study
The  case study  was based    on   a global curricular   inquiry project   that occurred  in  a postgraduate     diploma    of
education (PGDE) programme in a public university in Hong Kong. The overarching objectives of the project
are: (a) to develop student teachers' awareness of global citizenship through engaging in online discussion with
their "global peers" (i.e. a group of 18 student teachers from a university in Spain and two experienced teachers
from  Canada),  and (b)  to  enable   student  teachers  to interact with  their  "global  peers"   and   engage   in online
dialogue around curricular issues. Participating student teachers worked in groups to initiate and compromise
curriculum-related inquiry topics for collaborative discussion on an online discussion platform (i.e. Weebly ­ an
online blogging system), where experienced teachers from Canada and student teachers from Spain engaged in
the online discussion with the local Hong Kong student teachers. At the end of the online discussion, student
teachers presented their findings and reflections based on the global curricular inquiry projects.

Data collection and analysis
Using a qualitative approach, multiple sources of data were collected from a purposive sample of six informants
(four females  and  two  males).     Data  included individual   and  focus  group  interviews,    as  supplemented      with
discussion threads on the online discussion platform. During the process of interviewing, the researcher showed
the online discussion platform for assisting participants to elicit thoughts and reflect upon experiences. Thematic
analysis was done to search for the patterns and themes as emerged from the qualitative datasets.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                       921                                                       © ISLS
Key findings (1): Fostering deep learning processes
Interaction with  peers  locally and  inter-culturally plays   a  vital role  in  driving the  participants' motives in
engaging in online discussion. For example, this student teacher mentioned,

        I think Spanish students are really very serious in participating in the discussion. This really
        motivates    us  much more.   This encourages   us  to think    and   respond to  them as they  are  so
        devoted and responded to us, we also had to be whole-hearted and continue the discussion
        together. (Student K1, PGDE Year 1)

Apart from interactivity of online discussion, the quality of the interaction also helps ignite the participants'
willingness to participate in the online discussion.

        I   think my  motivation   is based   on Spanish  students'     responses   because Spanish   students
        responded to us in very details... very long and precise. ... if we can know how many students
        exist there, that will even be better. (Student I2, PGDE Year 1)

Key finding (2): Reflecting on different learning issues
The participants realized that learning can be globally emerged and collaborative across different countries.
They expressed that they knew more about the global world and discovered the differences in how to learn in
difficult cultural contexts. One of the participants shared that,

        They [Spanish students] were really serious. Theirs was very informative. ... At the end that
        was quite good, we understood what exactly Spanish were doing was quite different. ... for
        example, in our topic about tutorial class, because attending tutorial classes is very popular, so
        we would like to know about how Spanish side looks like. (Student K1, PGDE Year 1)

The kind of global learning apparently was beneficial to teacher preparation. One participant concluded her
learning experience in this way, saying that,

        When doing discussion, there are many insights, or seeing more things, and some viewpoints
        are different, then that actually can exchange different points of view, that's good for my own
        learning and I can get prepared for my future teaching career as I know more about what other
        countries    are doing   in   curriculum  and  this   experience      makes  me   know  how    to use
        technologies for learning and teaching. (Student K2, PGDE Year 1)

Conclusion and implications
This case study explored how the use of online discussion as a form of CSCL was perceived and experienced by
student teachers to inquire curricular issues through collaborating with Spanish student teachers and Canadian
teachers. Implications about the development of global curricular inquiry in teacher education as well as future
research directions are discussed.

References
Goodfellow,  R.,  Lea,   M., Gonzalez,    F., &  Mason,   R.  (2001).   Opportunity   and   equality: Intercultural and
        linguistic issues in global online learning. Distance Education, 22(1), 65-84.
Groves, J. M., & O'Connor, P. (2017). Negotiating global citizenship, protecting privilege: western expatriates
        choosing local schools in Hong Kong. British Journal of Sociology of Education, 1-15.
He, J., & Huang, X. (2017). Collaborative online teamwork: Exploring students' satisfaction and attitudes with
        Google    Hangouts   as  a supplementary   communication        tool. Journal of  Research  on  Technology   in
        Education, 49(3-4), 149-160.
Lee, W. O.,  &    Leung,  S. W.  (2006).  Global  citizenship  education      in Hong Kong    and Shanghai    secondary
        schools: Ideals, realities and expectations. Citizenship Teaching and Learning, 2(2), 68-84.
Sorensen,   E.    K.    (2008).  Design    of    dialogic   eLearning-to-learn:       meta-learning   as     pedagogical
        methodology. International Journal of Web Based Communities, 4(2), 244-252.
UNESCO (2017). Education for Sustainable Development and Global Citizenship in Education 2030 / SDG 4.
        Retrieved    on  November     11,  2018  from:  https://bangkok.unesco.org/content/education-sustainable-
        development-and-global-citizenship-education-2030-sdg-4.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                     922                                                     © ISLS
