Interactive Visualizations to Enhance Social Learning Practices in
                                             MOOC Platforms
                                 Philip Tubman, Phil Benachour, and Murat Oztok
              p.tubman@lancaster.ac.uk, p.benachour@lancaster.ac.uk, m.oztok@lancaster.ac.uk
                                                 Lancaster University

         Abstract: In MOOCs, social learning theory is challenged to perform at scale, but platforms
         do not have specific functionality which affords scalability. This study examines a design-
         based research intervention in the learning platform: The Comment Discovery Tool. Results
         from the initial iteration of this tool suggest positive impact, but further work is suggested to
         develop MOOC pedagogy in line with novel toolsets.

Introduction
MOOCs     typically have    a  thousand   or more   enrolled  learners.   Kizilcec et   al. (2013)   demonstrate   that
contribution in forums is strongly linked with `completing' learners, and suggests that platform designers should
build features that promote pro-social behaviour as this encourages learning. Previous research (Tubman, Oztok,
& Benachour, 2016) discovered that conversations in the FutureLearn MOOC platform consistently decrease
dramatically after the first reply, regardless of course size or subject matter. This suggests that the platform and
sociomaterial factors are foundational to the pedagogy of MOOCs. This study re-imagines the social learning
features through the design paradigm of `stigmergy'. Stigmergy is defined as "communication through signs left
in the environment" (Dron, 2006; Elliott, 2016).       This paper seeks to find answers to the following questions
about a bespoke platform intervention: Does the platform intervention have a statistically significant impact on
the length  and    unique  members     of conversations?    Does  the  platform    intervention affect   the types  of
conversations on the platform?
         We propose a taxonomy of `conversation types' based on unique participants: a social dimension based
on turn taking and the length attribute of a conversation to quantify the impact of our intervention. Our research
extends  Chua et   al.'s (2017)  comment    categories from   single post onto the  whole   conversation.  This paper
analyses the first iteration  of a platform  design intervention: an   interactive `word    cloud' we call `Comment
Discovery Tool' (CDT). The tool functions by visualising all the comments into a `word cloud', taking the top
200 words used. Learners can click several words which filters comments and redraws the cloud. The intention
is that learners will be drawn to words through their implicit meaning. The tool also encourages a sense of
`play' and an appreciation of which concepts `go together'.

Methodology
This study examines the FutureLearn MOOC platform, which is distinctive in that it follows the Conversational
Framework and has a `comments' thread on each individual page so conversations can be free-flowing around
the immediate  content.   This   study takes a  mixed-methods,   design-based  research     approach investigating the
impact of a platform plugin embedded into 8 out of a total of 35 courses. The results from this study are from
the first iteration of the design intervention.

Results
257239   conversations   were   analysed. An    ANOVA    analysis    showed that   the unique   learners variable  was
significant, F(1, 257239)=496.265, p=0.00, and also that the conversation length variable was significant, F(1,
257239)=601.703, p=0.00. Cohen's d scores were also calculated for a measurement of impact, and generated a
score of 0.15 for  unique   learners,  0.12 for conversation  length. This  suggests   the  CDT has  had  a  small but
noticeable impact across the courses in DBR phase 1.
         304 people responded fully to a 15-question survey. There was a positive correlation between valuing
social interaction and all the questions relating to learning; social learners see the value in the CDT, and are
inclined to comment      more  themselves.   These  are all important  factors in  the  theoretical  understanding  of
sociocultural learning (discovery, diversity and participation). However, there was a smaller impact in terms of
discovery of new people, which may indicate that learners are more inclined to use the tool in order to connect
ideas, so for vicarious learning. More experienced learners (who had participated in more than 1 other course)
were more inclined to use the CDT multiple times, so familiarity with the platform is correlated with disposition
to try out novel approaches.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                     925                                                   © ISLS
Table 1: Descriptive statistics

                                      Courses          N               M              SD
                                      (n=35)
            Unique Learners           no CDT           225618          1.33           0.80
                                      CDT              31621           1.46           0.91
            Conversation              no CDT           225618          1.48           1.43
            Length
                                      CDT              31621           1.67           1.70

Discussion
A DBR  approach    is taken in   this research with  a social  constructivist theoretical framework.  The  primary
finding is that the intervention does appear to have an impact on the social dimensions, and this is shown both
quantitatively and qualitatively, so we believe this meets the challenge by Kizelcic et al. for effective pro-social
platform tools. Some learners comments that they were unsure how to use the tool suggesting the scaffolding
could be improved to make the affordances more transparent. Others suggested that some words in the CDT
were not very meaningful, so didn't add value to the activity.     There is another side to this insight: individual
words can  be computationally      operationalised,    but it does not  change   the pedagogy   or  the  culture     of
participation (Fischer, 2011). A potential development could encourage learners to hashtag their comments so
an emergent folksonomy of more specific and meaningful terms can emerge, which follows the `stigmergic'
design principles.

Conclusion
We believe that    visualising  participation into  meaningful  units, and  according to   learner preference       adds
something new  to   the pedagogy   of  scale.  We   have extended  the  FutureLearn  platform  design  in terms      of
visualising `trends' in the user generated comments and believe that this development could be further improved
by embracing hashtags, folksonomies and developing the stigmergic design paradigm. Further research should
examine in more depth using an interview methodology what specific impacts the CDT activity is having on
learning in order to develop and embed it more effectively into pedagogy suited for MOOCs.

References
Chua, S.-M., Tagg, C., Sharples, M., & Rienties, B. (2017). Discussion Analytics: Identifying Conversations and
       Social Learners in FutureLearn MOOCs. MOOC Analytics: Live Dashboards, Post-Hoc Analytics and the
       Long-Term Effects, 36­62.
Dron, J. (2006). The way of the termite: a theoretically grounded approach to the design of e-learning environments.
       International Journal of Web Based Communities, 2(1), 3. https://doi.org/10.1504/IJWBC.2006.008611
Elliott, M. (2016). Stigmergic collaboration: A framework for understanding and designing mass collaboration. In
       Mass collaboration and education (pp. 65­84). Springer.
Fischer, G. (2011). Understanding, fostering, and supporting cultures of participation. Interactions, 18(3), 42­53.
Kizilcec, R. F., Piech, C., & Schneider, E. (2013). Deconstructing disengagement: analyzing learner subpopulations in
       massive open online courses. In Proceedings of the third international conference on learning analytics and
       knowledge (pp. 170­179). ACM.
Tubman, P., Oztok, M., & Benachour, P. (2016). Being social or social learning: A sociocultural analysis of the
       FutureLearn    MOOC      platform. Presented at the  The 16th   IEEE International Conference  on  Advanced
       Learning Technologies, Austin, Texas: IEEE.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                    926                                                 © ISLS
