           Revision Analysis of Students' Position-Time Graphs
                               Emily J. Harrison, Beth McBride, and Marcia C. Linn
                  emilyharrison@berkeley.edu, beth.mcbride@sri.com, mclinn@berkeley.edu
                                          University of California, Berkeley

        Abstract: This research investigates the types of revisions students make to position-time
        graphs they construct. In our online graphing unit, students construct position-time graphs and
        then revise their graphs after receiving various forms of feedback. We examine how and why
        students attempt to revise their graphs, finding that students continue to have difficulty with
        constructing and revising position-time graphs. We then suggest areas for support in the future
        design of guidance for graph construction.

Objectives
Interpreting and constructing data visualizations is a skill necessary for scientific literacy since it allows for the
elucidation of patterns and underlying processes and helps to reveal correlations between events (Friel et al.,
2001;  Wu  &    Krajcik, 2006). Construction   and   revision of    graphs are important practices, however    middle
school students  are   rarely asked   to interpret, let alone construct,   graphs in science classes   (Boote, 2012).
Position-time   graphs are  particularly  difficult for students,   and many   students interpret graphs  as  pictorial
representations of an event rather than a relationship between the two variables on the axes (Brasell, 1987). This
study looks at types of revisions students make to their position-time graphs after completion of our online
graphing unit in order to determine where further guidance is needed.
        This study employs a Web-based Inquiry Science Environment (WISE) unit, titled Graphing Stories,
which was designed according to the Knowledge Integration (KI) framework, a constructivist framework that
involves eliciting and building off of students' prior knowledge (Linn & Eylon, 2011). Students' issues with
interpreting graphs often come from a difficulty in connecting the significance of graphical features, such as
scale, slope, and direction of lines, to the thing they represent in reality. The KI framework encourages making
these connections in our curriculum by eliciting students' prediction graphs (their initial ideas), giving them
guidance that helps them to distinguish between ideas, and then prompting them to revise.

Methods
Two teachers from one middle school (62% non-white, 22% free/reduced lunch, 12% ELL) participated in this
study, with a total of 10 classes of 8th grade students (N=231). Students completed the 5-day Graphing Stories
unit during 50 minute class periods. Students worked in collaborative workgroups assigned by their teachers,
mostly pairs with a few students working individually. Students completed the pretest one day before beginning
the unit, and the posttest one day after completing the unit. Both pre and posttest were completed individually.
        The online Graphing Stories unit is designed as an introduction to interpreting and constructing data
visualizations, addressing    several NGSS   science    and engineering  practices (NGSS   Lead   States, 2013). The
curriculum focuses mainly on constructing and interpreting position-time graphs, and includes animations that
match up to student-constructed graphs to give visual feedback. Students construct graphs with various graphing
tools, and have several opportunities to revise their graphs after receiving various forms of feedback. For this
study, we focus on the types of revisions students made on a posttest item that asks them to construct a position
time graph and then revise their graph after receiving guidance. The prompt states: "Karim wanted to bike up a
big hill in his neighborhood. He went slowly up the steep hill, then really fast on the way down the other side.
Use the graph below to sketch his ride. Think about the different speeds he went during his ride." Students then
examine and evaluate graphs created by two fictional students before revising their own graph. After making
revisions, students are prompted to explain what they changed about their graph and why.

Results
Students' graph revisions for the assessment item were categorized into six different groups based on aspects of
the graph that they changed (Figure 1). Only 15% of students (N=35) correctly drew the graph, and had no need
to revise. Of those that did not correctly draw the graph, many (N=85, 36%) chose not to revise their graph,
generally citing that  they   believe they were already     correct despite their graphs going    back to the  starting
position. About 20% of students (N=48) revised the slope of their graph, either correcting the speed or making
difference between the two speeds more apparent. Many students needed to revise the direction of their line, but
failed to recognize their error, keeping their "graph-as-picture" representation.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                     927                                                   © ISLS
   Figure 1. Graph revision categories with student examples about the reasoning behind their change and
  percentages (left column); one example for each category showing initial graph (center) and revised graph
                                                (right).

Significance of study
Graphing is an important skill, but students are rarely asked to construct, let alone revise, graphs. These results
show that students need further guidance to recognize position-time graphs as a relationship between these two
variables rather than a drawing of what is happening. Students also need practice evaluating their own work for
correctness, in light of new information they have learned. In developing guidance, we should specifically target
the relationship between line direction and position as a concept to emphasize.

References
Boote, S. (2012). Assessing and understanding line graph interpretations Using a scoring rubric of organized
          cited factors. Journal of Science Teacher Education, 1­22. doi:10.1007/s10972-012-9318-8
Brasell, H. (1987). The effect of real-time laboratory graphing on learning graphic representations of distance
          and velocity. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 24(4), 385-395.
Friel, S. N., Curcio, F. R., & Bright, G. W. (2001).   Making    sense of graphs:   Critical factors influencing
          comprehension and instructional implications. Journal for Research in Mathematics Education, 32(2),
          124­158. doi:10.2307/749671
Linn, M., & Eylon, B.-S. (2011). Science learning and instruction: Taking advantage of technology to promote
          knowledge integration. New York: Routledge.
Wu, H.-K., & Krajcik, J. S. (2006). Inscriptional practices in two inquiry-based classrooms: A case study of
          seventh graders' use of data tables and graphs. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 43(1), 63­95.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                  928                                                 © ISLS
