Research as Learning from Youth: Leveraging Collaborative Digital
               Tools to Position Youth as Experts on Themselves
                         Cynthia Graville, Saint Louis University, cgravill@slu.edu
                Joseph Polman, University of Colorado, Boulder, joseph.polman@colorado.edu

    Taylor Morgan, Claire Englander, Jordan Fair, Kurt Lott, Tessa McGartland, BriYana Merrill, Kennedy
Morganfield, Darby Moore, Annie O'Brien, Adam Rush, Patrick Shanahan, Erik Swenson, Ben Sylar, Michael
                                          Teasedale, and Erikah White
                                       sli.intern.collective@gmail.com
                                             Saint Louis University

         Abstract: This paper explores collaboration in a co-research team including teen interns and
         traditionally-credentialed adult researchers. Through collective redesign of roles and methods,
         the team  leveraged  common   cloud-based    collaboration   and productivity  tools to  support
         positioning teen interns as expert researchers on themselves. Digital youth practices and formal
         research conventions were hybridized into a new set of "syncretic" research practices.

Introduction
CSCL   research  draws from   a diversity of approaches,   spanning    a wide   continuum of  methodologies    and
theoretical underpinnings (Jeong and Hmelo-Silver, 2010). In most CSCL research, the theoretical approach,
research methods,  and analysis  are designed  and undertaken   by    traditionally-credentialed adult researchers.
Building upon work that researches "with" participants, instead of "on" participants (Bang and Vossoughi, 2016;
Gutiérrez and Jurow, 2016; Kirshner, 2015), our work seeks to reimagine the traditional assignment of power and
expertise in research relationships, while leveraging common collaborative digital tools for learners (university
researchers) to collaborate with experts (youth interns). This paper represents the collective research and writing
of a co-research team comprised of members traditionally positioned as both "participants" and "researchers." To
clarify and delineate roles, the use of "we" in this paper represents the voice of the traditionally-credentialed adult
researchers, except for youth-written sections indicated by italics.

Background, theoretical, and experiential approach
This project is part of a larger US NSF-funded cyberlearning research project seeking to create authentic contexts
for young  adults' engagement   in artifact-oriented, technology-based,   science-data  journalism.    The specific
context explored for this paper was an out-of-school, paid summer internship for 15 high school students at a
Midwestern University. Youth interns (1) designed science data infographics for publication; and (2) conducted
self and peer research as co-researchers within the multi-institutional partnership. This self and peer research
served as  the primary data collection for the internship,  and youth    co-researchers maintain   refusal and co-
authorship rights to research products directly derived from their work. Adult co-researchers served as internship
program facilitators and as data managers and archivists of the youth-generated data and analysis.

Theoretical approach of adult co-researchers
We approach learning and identity development from a sociocultural perspective, drawing on communities of
practice (Wenger, 1998), notions of mediated action (Wertsch, 1998), and trajectories of identification (Wenger,
1998). We approach research as a form of learning, as CSCL when mediated through digital tools, wherein we
foster youth agency and position ourselves as novices apprenticing to the domain, community, and practices of
youth. Research as learning with youth is supported by symmetrical dialogue between youth and adults, fosters
social relationships among the entire research team, and makes intangible cultural tools more observable (Tabak
& Baumgartner, 2004). Youth have "funds of knowledge" that they have accumulated over time (González, Moll,
& Amanti, 2005), and we position these funds as valuable expertise and students as brokers of this expertise.

Experiential approach of youth co-researchers
We believe that learning happens every day, all the time, in and out of school. We learn from friends, family,
media, experiences, and, yes, school. The knowledge that "counts" for teenagers is usually the kind given to us
by adults, and we are judged by how well we can repeat it. However, we are far more complex than our collective
tests, report cards, and ACT scores could ever indicate. In schools, youth culture is seldom treated as important--
in fact, it is often devalued as "distracting" and "off topic," and we are told that it has no place in learning. As
teenagers, we  are constantly positioned  as "who  we  will become"      after some magical   undefined  period of

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                  929                                                   © ISLS
"adulthood" suddenly grants us the wisdom implied in the statement "when you're older, you'll understand."
Adults normally expect  us  to accept their words   as "expertise," unquestioned by our own   experiences  and
knowledge. We find it puzzling that research that tries to understand our thinking process ignores so much of it.

Syncretic practices
During the summer   internship, youth and   adult co-researchers collaboratively designed and refined a set of
"syncretic" research practices (Gutiérrez and Jurow, 2016), merging everyday youth communicative practices
(the way interns naturally annotated media, wrote about themselves, used humor and sarcasm) and professional
practices (found in research discourse and action). Youth interns communicated with peers and the adult research
team, documented, annotated and reflected on daily activities, thinking processes, struggles and problem-solving
strategies throughout the summer. This began with individual self-structured research logs and culminated in
"Self-Case Videos," narrated slideshows drawn from individual and collective datasets. Figure 1 details how
everyday digital youth communication practices merged with formal research conventions in syncretic research
practices. At left are the formal research conventions and practices, and at right are the youth practices and
conventions with small visual examples. The middle column indicates the syncretic practices that emerged.

                                   Figure 1. Syncretic Research Practices.

References
Bang, M., & Vossoughi, S. (2016). Participatory design research and educational justice: Studying learning and
        relations within social change making. Cognition and Instruction, 34(3), 173­193.
boyd, d. m. (2008). Taken out of context: American teen sociality in networked publics. Berkeley: University of
        California Press.
González, N., Moll, L.  C., &   Amanti, C.  (2005). Funds   of knowledge: Theorizing practices in households,
        communities, and classrooms. New York: Routledge.
Gutiérrez, K. D., & Jurow, A. S. (2016). Social design experiments: Toward equity by design. Journal of the
        Learning Sciences, 25(4), 565­598.
Jeong, H., & Hmelo-Silver, C. E. (2010, June). An overview of CSCL methodologies. In Proceedings of the 9th
        International Conference of the Learning Sciences-Volume 1 (pp. 921-928). Chicago: ISLS.
Kirshner, B. (2015). Youth activism in an era of education inequality. New York: NYU Press.
Lesko, N. (1996). Denaturalizing adolescence: The politics of contemporary representations. Youth & Society,
        28(2), 139-161.
Tabak, I., & Baumgartner, E. (2004). The teacher as partner: Exploring participant structures, symmetry, and
        identity work in scaffolding. Cognition and Instruction, 22(4), 393­429.
Wenger, E. (1998). Communities of practice: Learning, meaning, and identity. Cambridge University Press.
Wertsch, J. V. (1998). Mind as action. New York: Oxford University Press.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                  930                                                © ISLS
