  Mezclado: History of our Neighborhoods in Augmented Reality
                      Kit Martin, Northwestern University, kitmartin@u.northwestern.edu

         Abstract:  We  held  two    years of community    meetings  where   we  iteratively designed  and
         prototyped a community augmented reality app. We aim to reimagine two neighbourhoods to
         overcome  stigmatization    and change  the perspectives.  This  design objective   motivates our
         augmented reality history app.

Introduction
Experiences outside the classroom inform what individuals believe about the past (Wineburg, 2001). Over the last
two years, we engaged our communities in a process of history making through the design and testing of an
augmented reality (AR) experience. Our stated mission is 1) to counteract the effects of community and racial
stigmatization by demonstrating the positive assets of the communities to residents and to others from outside the
neighborhoods;  and 2)  to  build ongoing   collaboration between   cultural and  ethnic groups  that are too      often
separated, toward the increased mutual understanding, respect, and support that will contribute to long-term
constructive social change.

Origin of the project
Nine African American and Latinx graduates of the nine-month Multicultural Leadership Academy hosted by the
Latino Policy Forum conceived the project. The Academy focused on creating collaborative relationships between
African  Americans  and  Latinx   to overcome  significant  historical divisions between  the  groups  and create    a
positive force for social change. After graduating, the team conceived of this project, and obtained the support of
the Field Museum, which had been a technical advisor to the Academy, and the Chicago Park District, which is
sponsoring a project to engage communities in the stewardship of natural areas in urban parks.

Frames and discourse
When children make games, as in Vygotsky's (1978) depiction, they assign new meanings to common objects.
For example, behind the couch becomes the robbers' den. The broomstick becomes the cowboy's horse. Through
these sign manipulations, we map meanings of one social setting onto another imagined place. This remapping is
the heart of creating an augmented reality, when applying the lens of figured worlds (Holland et al., 1998).       New
digital artifacts are placed into space to remap their meanings for audiences. The process has a dissociative
element. People learn  to  "detach   themselves" (Holland   et al., 1998, p. 50)  from their  experienced  physical
surroundings and enter this imagined world. In this world, people use collectively developed signs and symbols
(Vygotsky, 1978). For example, a prop as simple as a stick might launch a child into a world as a cow wrangler
riding horseback. In our implementation, I argue that the community remixes digital artifacts and imaginatively
uses visual primitives. In other words, we symbolically remap our spaces to create an augmented space to tell the
story of our neighborhoods.

Augmented reality
Augmented  reality is an  emerging    technology that creates  an   enhanced image  or   environment  on  electronic
devices (smartphones, tablets, or goggles) by overlaying computer-generated images, sounds, and text on a real-
world environment   (New    Media    Consortium,  2014).  The   technology   has been  used   in informal  learning
environments (Yoon, S., Anderson, E., Lin, J., & Elinich, K, 2017), including historical AR education (Harley, et
al., 2018). We are prototyping an AR "app" that enables visitors to experience and interact with stories of history,
cultural milestones, natural features, civic activism, and artistic inspiration not visible in the real landscape.

Research question
Our question is, how can an AR app allow for new kinds of historical practices that can empower communities
both by creating artifacts to reshape perceptions, and by using created artifacts to reflect on community space?

Results: Design based trajectory to date
The app brought into the discussions "new narratives" around how connecting murals through the app can support
deeper connections to community resources, and how AR triggers can challenge existing deficit beliefs about the
community. The app contains five layers: history, art, environment, heroes, and English as a second language.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                   931                                                  © ISLS
                                                               These layers interact, such that users can choose
                                                               what they see at each site, while also seeing the
                                                               overlapping frames that inform each other in the
                                                               space. We have finished the second prototype with
                                                               these layers. The user can explore the information
                                                               provided in their chosen   topic.   When   the user
 Figure 1. The launch screen, description of the five layers   activates an AR trigger, shown on the right side
       and map that shows where AR sites are located.          of Figure 1, the trigger displays video and audio
                                                               to discuss the history of the site.
         In our second prototype, we framed our neighborhoods through semiotic remapping. When users arrive
at AR sites, they hold up their phone to see the augmented elements appear on the phone screen. These elements
overlay the image as seen through the camera. The elements can be video, audio, or 3D avatars of historical
figures. These elements reframe the space, from one of every day to one with history built in.
         In one section of the experience, we have users interact with an AR trigger that superimposes a video on
the narrator's old street in Bronzeville. In a discussion of this experience one viewer changed his understanding
how the place had changed. He discussed the history, but also created a new understanding. He saw that people
created a place name to overcome a negative historical narrative. The connection of the video appearing in the
place affected his understanding of both. This is the hope of mezclado, where imaginative pivots in lived space
can shift our understanding of space. In this way we can mix reality in a way that reflects the lived reality of a
place to more fully respect the process that brought us to our current neighborhoods.

Augmented murals for deeper connection
Mural artists contribute to the contested history of neighborhoods. AR creates deeper links between the resources
in our community, the narratives that shape our understandings, and the wider audience who might just pass by
these aspects that define our past. We understand the history of a place differently after inserting AR into everyday
experiences. With augmented reality we seek Mezclado. The artist's vision of linking the art on the street to online
media for history is the work of our project. The artists connect the visual elements of the mural to the information
about where it came from as a way to share history. The process of bringing together multiple signs and symbols
re-imagines spaces and their history.

Conclusion
We constructed two prototypes in two years and will continue to iterate our augmented reality experience. In our
design based research, we see the possibility of meeting our goals to ameliorate the effects of community and
racial stigma, and to increase collaboration between  marginalized  groups.  This     process contributes to  how
historical content is consumed and understood, deconstructed and re-imagined.

References
Harley, J. M., Lajoie, S. P., Tressel, T., & Jarrell, A. (2018). Fostering positive emotions and history knowledge
         with location-based augmented reality and tour-guide prompts. Learning and Instruction.
Holland D., Lachicotte W. Jr., Skinner D., & Cain C. (1998). Identity and agency in cultural Worlds. Cambridge:
         Harvard University Press.
New Media Consortium. (2014). NMC Horizon Report: 2014 K-12 Edition. Austin, Texas: The New Media
         Consortium.
Vygotsky, L. S. (1978). Mind in society: The development of higher mental process.    ed. and  trans. M. Cole, V.
         John-Steiner, S. Scribner & E. Souberman. Harvard University Press (original work published 1930­
         1935).
Wineburg,  S.,  Mosborg, S., &  Porat,  D. (2001). What    can Forrest  Gump  tell us  about   students' historical
         understanding? Social Education, 65(1), 55-55.
Yoon, S., Anderson, E., Lin, J., & Elinich, K. (2017). How augmented reality enables conceptual understanding
         of challenging science content. Journal of Educational Technology & Society, 20(1), 156.

Acknowledgements
Northwestern's Knight Lab, and specifically, Rebecca Poulson who developed the second prototype of the app,
Craig and Corey Stevenson, Art Richardson, Carman Weathington, Erika Allen, Henry Cervantes, and Dr. Patricia
Novick, as well as US Department of Education, Institute of Education Sciences, Multidisciplinary Program in
Education Sciences, Grant Award # R305B140042 for supporting this work.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                  932                                                  © ISLS
