        Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning and Learning
                                Sciences Research in EducMap
                                Heisawn Kim, Hallym University, heis@hallym.ac.kr
                             Joomi Kim, Hallym University, joomi.kimm@gmail.com
 Kris Lund, UMR ICAR, Ecole Normale Supérieure de Lyon, University of Lyon, kristine.lund@ens-lyon.fr
                         Sebastian Grauwin, University of Lyon, sebgrauwin@gmail.com

        Abstract:  This    study  examined the    positions  of Learning Sciences  (LS)   and Computer-
        Supported Collaborative Learning (CSCL) research in educational research using EducMap, a
        map of global educational research. LS/CSCL research has a presence in about one third of
        educational research, a substantial presence given its relatively short history.

Introduction
Learning Sciences (LS) and Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning (CSCL) seek to advance sciences and
practices of learning. They have a relatively short history compared to educational research at large, but have been
actively expanding its impact and relevance. In this paper, we examined the place of LS and CSCL in educational
research using EducMap, a map of bibliographical clusters in educational research.

Methods
EducMap was constructed using a bibliographic coupling technique analysis. Educational research papers were
extracted from Scopus and were linked when they share at least two references. This resulted in a map of 19
research clusters that differ in their core references (Jeong, Lund, Grauwin, & Jensen, in preparation). LS and
CSCL core papers were identified based on the papers listed in syllabi and webinar sections of the NAPLES site
and recent reviews on CSCL. Removing overlapping papers, the LS core paper list contains 452 papers and the
CSCL core paper list contains 251 papers in total (Jeong & Kim, 2018). We located clusters in which these LS
and CSCL core papers appear in one of the key places of the cluster (e.g., the top 15 most cited references or in
the top 10 more representative or most cited papers within the cluster). We identified these cluster as LS and/or
CSCL clusters, but note that this does neither mean that the respective fields "own" the clusters nor the absence
of another field. They are only one of the many key references associated with the clusters. EducMap is available
for three time periods (i.e., `2000-2004', `2005-2009', `2010-2014') at the moment, but the current paper reports
on the second period in which CSCL was being established as a field with the first publication of ijCSCL in 2006.

Results
Of the 19 clusters in EducMap, seven clusters were identified as LS, two of which were also identified as CSCL
(Figure 1). LS/CSCL research has a presence in about one third of the clusters in this period, a substantial presence
given its relatively short history. What are the clusters of research in which LS or CSCL core papers have a
presence? The biggest LS cluster is the Learning Systems cluster. Papers in this cluster address a diverse set of
issues from language learning, professional development, and/or identities, and yet are closely connected by a set
of shared references. References about socio-cultural perspectives (e.g., Lave & Wenger, 1991) were visible,
suggesting that sociocultural theory is serving as a theoretical background to papers in this cluster. The next
biggest LS cluster    is the Motivation  cluster. It mainly  consists of papers   that addressed goal orientation,
development of interests, among other things, and tend to ground their research on theories of social learning and
motivation (e.g., Bandura, 1997; Dweck & Leggett, 1988). The School Building cluster, the next biggest LS
cluster, tends to consist of papers about inquiry learning, scientific argumentation, and technology, among other
things. Consensus documents such as National Science Education Standards were highly cited in this cluster. The
rest of the LS clusters appear to be about medical education with an emphasis on problem-based learning (PBL)
and teacher training.
        Two clusters, Cognitive Systems and Internet, were also identified as CSCL clusters, that is, both LS and
CSCL core papers appeared in these clusters. The Cognitive Systems cluster is interested in CSCW and learning
systems  with emphasis       on animated models,     computer-based   instruction and    expertise-reversal effects.
References related to cognitive load theory and multimedia learning were highly cited in this cluster. As for the
Internet cluster, research addresses topics related to computer-mediated communication, asynchronous online
discussions, as well as content analysis methods. Papers related to communication theories (Short, Williams, &
Christie, 1976) and content analysis were highly cited in this cluster, suggesting a close link between content
analysis methods and online communication.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                    935                                                  © ISLS
                          Figure 1. LS and CSCL clusters on EducMap during 2005-2009.

Discussions
The results showed that seven out of the 19 research clusters in educational research were classified as LS and/or
CSCL   clusters    during   2005-2009.  LS/CSCL       research has  a  strong  presence   in clusters that emphasize
sociocultural theory, science education, motivation, and teacher training. A strong presence in such clusters are
aligned with the missions of the fields, and are encouraging. At the same time, LS/CSCL research was not clearly
visible in other clusters. LS/CSCL research does not need to have strong presence in all educational research, but
a lack of presence in clusters that emphasize educational policy, and disciplinary learning other than science
education is somewhat unexpected because these are issues that LS/CSCL consider important. The LS/CSCL
research community needs to make more concerted efforts to reach out and make connections in these research
areas. This study is the first application of biographical coupling to LS/CSCL research. Cautions are needed in
interpreting the   results, but the  results provided  insights  about   the positions of LS  and  CSCL    research in
educational research as a whole. We hope this study sparks lively reflections and discussions about where future
research   efforts need   to be  directed to  fulfill the missions    of learning sciences   and  computer-supported
collaborative learning.

References
Bandura, A. (1997). Self-efficacy: The exercise of control. New York: Freeman.
Dweck, C. S., & Leggett, E. L. (1988). A social-cognitive approach to motivation and personality. Psychological
         review, 95(2), 256.
Jeong, H.,   &  Kim,  J.    (2018). Core  research    publications of  Learning   Sciences   and Computer-Supported
         Collaborative Learning. In Ogata, H. et al. (Eds.) Extended Summary Proceedings: 26th International
         Conference on Computers in Education (pp.1-3). Philippines: APSCE.
Jeong, H., Lund, K., & Grauwin, S. (in preparation). Knowledge bases of educational research.
Lave,  J., &  Wenger,     E. (1991).  Situated  learning:  Legitimate    peripheral participation (Vol.   521423740).
         Cambridge: Cambridge university press.
Short, J., Williams, E., & Christie, B. (1976). The social psychology of telecommunications. John Wiley and
         Sons: London.

Acknowledgments
This work is supported by the National Research Foundation of Korea (2016R1D1A1B03935697) and also by the
LABEX      ASLAN     (ANR-10-LABX-0081)         of the    University  of  Lyon   in  the  framework    of  the French
"Investissements d'Avenir" (ANR-11-IDEX-0007).

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                      936                                                  © ISLS
