     Using a Resource Activation Lens to Understand Classroom
          Enactments of Computationally-Based Science Curricula
                        Jooeun Shim, University of Pennsylvania, jshim@gse.upenn.edu
                          Susan Yoon, University of Pennsylvania, yoonsa@upenn.edu
              Noora F. Noushad, Heritage Xperiential Learning School, nora.noushad@gmail.com

          Abstract: In this  study, we  examine how   teachers use  existing resources to  enhance their
          teaching practices  in  a computationally-based   science curriculum. We   used  a theoretical
          framework that examined how two teachers differentially activated material, cultural, social,
          and symbolic resources in different teaching contexts. This led to differing instantiations of their
          curricula and ultimately differing student learning outcomes. We discuss implications for this
          research in terms of the qualities of implementation that need to be emphasized in professional
          development activities.

Introduction and theoretical considerations
Studies on reforming science teaching in urban schools stress the need to design high-quality computationally-
based curricula (Denning, 2017). Due to a lack of administrative support to teach inquiry-based science, teachers
in urban schools need to have opportunities to acquire support elsewhere (Barton & Berchini, 2013; Furman et
al., 2012). Furthermore, despite the importance of collaboration between teachers for lesson planning and delivery,
teachers in urban schools often become isolated (Vangrieken et al., 2015) and are not able to find experts to
support curricular reform efforts (Fischer et al., 2017). In previous research, we have written about the need to
use social capital strategies to support teachers to adopt new curricula in urban contexts. Social capital is the
garnering of resources from one's network, which is distinct from human capital that consists of the knowledge
and skills each individual possesses. Using resource activation framework (Rivera Maulucci, 2010), we describe
two cases in which the teachers show differential activation methods and abilities and the aspects of the teaching
that more or less supported this activation. This study is guided by the following questions: (1) To what extent
does activation   happen? (2) Are   there additional resources that need  to be activated? and (3) What         are the
implications for activation of resources for professional development (PD)?
          Rivera Maulucci (2010) describes a science teaching framework based on the activation of material,
cultural, social, and symbolic   resources in urban  schools.  In science teaching contexts, activating        material
resources could look like a teacher finding a short news clip to facilitate students' discussion about the application
of science in the real world. Activating cultural resources could be a teacher participating in PD and adapting
their lesson plans to their district's science vision. Whether and how the development of social networks and
collaboration are encouraged in the teaching system falls under the category of social resources. A teacher's
symbolic resources might be activated when the teacher is afforded some autonomy to design lessons using new
pedagogy.

Methods and context
Two high school science teachers, Emily and James, were voluntarily recruited in their second year of teaching
for this study. Both teachers were trained in the same pre-service program in which the principal investigator
taught and interacted with the teachers in course work. Emily taught ninth-grade biology in an independent school
that was comprised of 25% underrepresented minority students and 47% low income. James taught ninth-grade
chemistry in an urban public school that was comprised of 99% underrepresented minority students and 100%
low income. Both teachers attended a two-week long PD workshop during the spring semester of 2017. As part
of a larger design-based exploratory research study, the PD workshop was designed to help teachers develop
mobile curricula for students to take scientific action in their community through an app programming tool called
App Inventor. The workshop entailed content-based modules focusing on the App Inventor programming tool
(week 1), and opportunity to design their own app projects and to construct curricula (week 2). Emily developed
an eight-day lesson plan within an ecology unit to teach concepts related to the health of environmental streams,
including analyzing and collecting data to make decisions about the water quality of their local stream. James
developed five-day lesson plans for a water cycle unit to teach essential characteristics of the water cycle as part
of environmental   chemistry, including   the investigation of water  problems  with drought   or floods       in their
neighborhood and making apps to address water overabundance or shortage.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                   937                                                      © ISLS
        To answer our research questions, we collected data from four sources: (i) teacher's post-implementation
interviews with 19  overarching  questions   to probe  their experience   and perspectives  on the   success of their
implementation; (ii) classroom observations including classroom context, reports of the instruction and activities
taking place, and their  interactions with resources;  (iii) lesson  plans and worksheets   that contained   detailed
information about the design of the curricula and classroom activities; (iv) students' app projects that contained
additional information about how they applied what they had learned from the computational activities. We used
a multiple case  study  methodology    (Yin, 2017)  to provide     a rich description of  our participant's  resource
activation. Since the study was exploratory and design-based, all data sources were qualitatively assessed and
discussed by the project team.

Findings

Differences in activating material and cultural resources
The data from our study also revealed that teachers activated material resources to enhance cultural resources in
their classrooms in different ways and with varying degrees of difficulty. For Emily, her very clear understanding
of how she intended for the apps (material resource) to support content knowledge (cultural resource) influenced
what she perceived as challenges and how she needed to activate support. The biggest challenge for Emily was
finding out the best ways to teach App Inventor to students along different developmental paths so that they
individually would have enough understanding of programming to complete the science activity she planned.
After Emily revisited the PD materials, she created her own instructional materials to integrate. For example, after
assessing the available PD resources, she found a recycling app, which is adapted from Hello Purr. Emily asked
students questions about the purpose of each block in the app to familiarize them with the engineering design
process. Then, she asked students to remix the app using at least two of the suggestions from the PD website.
From the data, James showed a weaker understanding of how building and using apps could support his science
instruction goals. His idea was to have students work in groups to create apps that addressed some problems
related to water. That could mean tracking the users' water usage, educating the users about water crises around
the world, or animating the water cycle. However, the actual implementation did not go as planned. On Day 1,
James introduced the sample rock-scissors-paper (RSP) app and students followed James step by step. On Day 2,
James distributed handouts that included different ideas that allowed students to remix the RSP app individually.
On Days 3 through 5, students were asked to develop an app using the worksheets where they could write their
app idea and draw a prototype. Unlike Emily, James was most interested in figuring out what to teach with App
Inventor rather than how this material resource could be used to support students' content learning of the water
cycle. Somewhere in the implementation of his lessons, James forgot his pedagogical goals (cultural resource),
which led to computation focus-teaching in his classroom. This lack of contextualized resources for James to
activate cultural resources precluded him from seeking and learning more about available and applicable science
topics or ways to teach them like Emily did. Both teachers thought of ways to utilize PD resources to support
student learning during their unit implementations; however, James's inability to situate the programming in his
science curriculum limited the time to teach the science content.

References
Barton, A. C.  &  Berchini, C.  (2013). Becoming    an insider:    Teaching science   in urban settings. Theory Into
        Practice, 52(1), 21-27.
Denning, P. J. (2017). Computational thinking in science. American Scientist, 105(1), 13-17.
Furman,  M.,  Barton, A. C., &  Muir,   B. (2012).  Learning    to teach  science in  urban schools  by becoming   a
        researcher of one's own beginning practice. Cultural Studies of Science Education, 7(1), 153-174.
Vangrieken,   K.,  Dochy,   F.,  Raes,   E.,    &  Kyndt,    E.  (2015).   Teacher    collaboration:  A  systematic
        review. Educational Research Review, 15, 17-40.
Fischer, C., Fishman, B., Dede, C., Eisenkraft, A., Frumin, K., Foster, B., & McCoy, A. (2018). Investigating
        relationships between school context, teacher professional development, teaching practices, and student
        achievement in response to a nationwide science reform. Teaching and Teacher Education, 72, 107-121.
Rivera Maulucci, M. S. (2010). Resisting the marginalization of science in an urban school: Coactivating social,
        cultural, material, and strategic resources. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 47(7), 840-860.
Yoon, S. A., Yom, J. K., Yang, Z., & Liu, L. (2017). The effects of teachers' social and human capital on urban
        science   reform initiatives: Considerations   for professional   development.   Teachers  College   Record,
        119(4), n4.
Yin, R. K. (2017). Case study research and applications: Design and methods. Sage publications.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                   938                                                   © ISLS
