Learning with Multiple Representations and Student Engagement in
          Secondary Education: A Preliminary Review of Literature
                              Engida Gebre, Simon Fraser University, egebre@sfu.ca
                              Addisu Bailie, Simon Fraser University, abailie@sfu.ca

          Abstract: Research on learning with multiple representations and the need to develop students'
          representational competence    has   increased in  recent   years. However,  studies   rarely address
          instructional approaches to develop students' skills of learning with these resources. It is also
          the case that the nature of student engagement when they use representations in their learning
          is rarely examined. We report preliminary findings of a systematic review on the nature of
          student engagement when using multiple representations. Our analysis resulted in 4 categories
          of student engagement revealing various levels of learner agency. Results provide insight for
          research and practice in designing and understanding learning with multiple representations.

The ability to learn with multiple representations (MR) is an essential skill for secondary school students. In the
context of science education, learning involves not only understanding concepts and scientific facts but also using
the various representational tools and inscriptions that are needed to engage in the processes of scientific inquiry
(Gilbert, 2008; Lemke, 1998). Lemke (1998) argued that textual descriptions are not sufficient to learn about
science,  engage    in scientific inquiry    and  represent scientific understanding    of a phenomenon.       However,
instructional approaches to develop learners' abilities to use multiple representations are limited. Furthermore,
despite the complimentary nature of research on multiple representations and student engagement (Gebre, 2018),
the two research foci progressed independently. This paper presents a preliminary systematic review of existing
literature with the purpose of examining the nature and purpose of student engagement in learning with MR.

Multiple representations and student engagement
Different researchers use different concepts to refer to the use of representations in learning such as "multiple
representations"  and   "representational    competence".   In this paper,   we build  on Gebre  and    Polman's (2016)
distinction and use "multiple representations" to refer to the various visual tools (e.g., graphs, drawings, images,
text) students   use in their learning. "Representational      competence"   refers to the abilities of   the learners to
understand, critique and learn with multiple representations (Gebre & Polman, 2016;          diSessa & Sherin, 2000).
The importance of multiple representations as tools of learning and communication has been highlighted in recent
literature (Gilbert, 2008; Namdar & Shen, 2016; Wu & Puntambekar, 2012). For example, Namdar & Shen (2016)
argued that the use of multiple representations in learning supports the development of argumentation in science
education. However, instructional approaches for representational skills are rare (Wu & Puntambekar, 2012).
          Defining student engagement as the nature, extent and quality of students' interaction with the learning
context   including  materials, tools, activities and other    people (Azevedo,   2006),  we focus   on   two aspects  of
engagement: cognitive and agentic engagement. Cognitive engagement is students' involvement in deep learning
strategies, complex cognitive activities and active learning processes. It relates to the nature of learning activities
and   the extent to  which the    activities are instrumental   in fostering learners' abilities to  deal with  complex
problems. Agentic engagement refers to the extent of learners' involvement in making constructive contributions
to the flow of learning and instruction including, their agency to make decisions/choices as well as personalizing
the learning experience to their needs and contexts (Reeve and Tseng, 2011). Cognitive and agentic engagement
are important because studies showed that high engagement has been related to students' involvement in framing
learning activities and processes (Schmidt et al., 2018). This study answers the question, "What is the nature of
student engagement in learning with multiple representations?"

Methods
We conducted a concurrent abstract search of three databases (ERIC, EBSCOhost and PsycInfo) using terms
`representation' OR `visual' OR `drawing' AND `learning' OR `achievement' OR `outcome' AND `high school'
OR `secondary school'. We used four inclusion/exclusion criteria: a) secondary education, b) MR as a main focus
of the study and/or intervention, c) learners' direct interaction with representations and d) assessment of outcomes
or satisfaction. Thirty-four articles were selected for further analysis or data extraction (27 in STEM areas, 5
language and arts and 2 in geography). Data extraction involved reading the methodology section of the studies
and   open-coding   the nature  of student   engagement   or   interaction (when  they use  MR)   with    the purpose  of
understanding what learners were doing or required to do in the instructional process as reported in the studies.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                       941                                                    © ISLS
Results
Of the total 34 studies, only 16 (47%) involved the use of computers as tools of learning and representation (12
STEM, 3 language and arts and 1 geography). Only fifteen studies involved collaboration or group work among
learners the remaining 19 studies focused on individual learning. However, collaboration did not depend on
computer   use  (6  studies used   collaboration without  computers), nor  did  the  use  of computers    guarantee
collaboration among learners (7 studies involved collaboration with no computer use).
         Our preliminary analysis resulted in four categories representing the variation in student engagement
while using representations: learning from (N=14), manipulating (N=8), representing ideas or processes (N=11)
and constructing complex representations (N=4). Note that the total of coded segments adds up to 37 this is
because three studies involved more than one activity related to use of multiple representations.
         "Learning from" involved the use of expert-generated representations by students in the learning process.
What is expected of the learners is to understand, interpret, discuss or write about the representation. For example,
Homer    &  Plass  (2010)   examined   students' learning from  simulation   diagrams  with  narration   and  iconic
representations. "Manipulating" involved students in choosing variables and/or values to change in a given model
or representation and observe the effects of their manipulation. Five of the eight studies coded as manipulation
involved the use of computer in learning. "Representing" involved creating visual images, pictures or drawing to
represent a specific idea or data. For example, Smajdek and Selan (2016) required students to create a drawing
representing their understanding of a text (provided by teachers) within five minutes of reading. In most cases,
teachers   provide the task (sometimes   including the variables  involved). For example,    a teacher   can ask her
students to represent a car in acceleration and students draw their understanding of a speeding car. Finally,
"constructing"  related to  complex  representations which   involved defining  the problem    and variables,  using
evidence or data to support claims, organizing the data and constructing representations. McDermott & Hand
(2013) engaged     students in producing visualization-embedded    writing in a  chemistry   class with  subsequent
creation of checklist to assess the quality of "embeddedness" in science communication (p. 226). Similarly, Gebre
& Polman (2016) used multiple representations to foster young adults' science literacy.

Discussion
Multiple   representations  can serve  both  as  learning and  communication    tools for students    to understand
phenomenon     and  express  their understanding.  However,   the manner   MR   are deployed    in learning   design
determines their role in fostering student-centered and complex learning. Learner agency and complex cognitive
activities increase as  the nature  of student   engagement  progresses from  "learning   from"  to   "constructing"
representations. However, the findings imply that learning design with MR has a long way to go in terms of
addressing learner agency and attending to the tenets of student-centered approaches to instruction.

References
Azevedo, F. S. (2006). Personal excursions: Investigating the dynamics of student engagement. International
         Journal of Computers for Mathematical Learning, 11, 57-98. DOI 10.1007/s10758-006-0007-6
Gebre, E. (2018). Learning with multiple representations: Infographics as cognitive tools for authentic learning
    in science literacy. Canadian Journal of Learning and Technology, 44(1), 1­24.
Gebre, E., & Polman, J. L. (2016). Developing young adults' representational competence through infographic-
    based science news reporting. International Journal of Science Education, 38(18), 2667­2687.
diSessa,   A. A., & Sherin,  B. L.  (2000). Meta-representation:  An  introduction. The  Journal   of Mathematical
         Behavior, 19(4), 385­398. doi:10.1016/S0732-3123(01)00051-7
Gilbert, J. (2008). Visualization: An emergent field of practice and enquiry in science education. In J. Gilbert, M.
           Reiner, & M. Nakhleh (Eds.), Visualization: Theory & practice in science education (pp. 3­24). Springer.
Lemke, J. (1998). Multimedia literacy demands of scientific curriculum. Linguistics & Education, 10(3), 247­271.
Namdar, B., & Shen, J. (2016). Intersection of argumentation and the use of multiple representations in the context
         of socio-scientific issues. International Journal of Science Education, 38(7), 1100-1132.
Reeve, J. & Tseng, C. (2011). Agency as a fourth aspect of students' engagement during learning activities.
         Contemporary Educational Psychology, 36, 257-267. doi:10.1016/j.cedpsych.2011.05.002
Schmidt, J. A., Rosenberg, J. M. & Beymer, P. N. (2018). A Person-in-Context Approach to Student Engagement
         in Science: Examining Learning Activities and Choice, 55(1), 19-43. DOI:10.1002/tea.21409
Smajdek, A. & Selan, J. (2016). The impact of active visualisation of high school students on the ability to
         memorise verbal definitions. CEPS Journal 6 (4), 163-186
Wu, H. K., & Puntambekar, S. (2012). Pedagogical affordances of multiple external representations in scientific
         processes. Journal of Science Education and Technology, 21(6), 754-767.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                    942                                                  © ISLS
