     An Exploratory Study of Automated Clustering of Themes to
    Identify Conceptual Threads in Knowledge Building Discourse

                           Gaoxia Zhu, Leanne Ma, Andrew Toulis, and Monica Resendes
          gaoxia.zhu@mail.utoronto.ca, leanne.ma@mail.utoronto.ca, andy.toulis@mail.utoronto.ca,
                                              monicaresendes@gmail.com
                                                   University of Toronto

         Abstract:      In this  study,  we   adopted    Jaccard  index  and   tf-idf without    stop   words   to
         automatically cluster the ideas students discussed in on an online knowledge building platform
         called Knowledge Forum. We visualized the clusters, provided keywords that most represent
         the context of each cluster and compared the generated themes with manual coding themes.
         The    results suggest  that most    of the generated   themes  were  consistent   with  human   coding
         results.

Introduction
Knowledge Building advocates that students take collective responsibility for continually improving ideas and
pursuing  more    coherent   explanations  as    a community    (Scardamalia   &   Bereiter, 2014).   During  Knowledge
Building, students   generate    diverse  ideas,   build onto  each other's   ideas,  and   introduce   new ideas  to  their
community    both    face  to   face  and in   Knowledge      Forum-a   software   environment      developed to   support
Knowledge    Building    practice (Scardamalia,     2004).   Developing  an   understanding  of  the  themes  that  a class
works on is the starting point of understanding the frontier of community knowledge.
         Methods to identify meaningful semantic themes have been a focal area of research in CSCL (e.g.,
Suthers, Lund, Rosé, Teplovs, & Law 2013). In this study, we suggest that text classification approaches, which
extract and represent important information from documents, have the potential to help identify broad themes in
online discussions (Mu, Stegmann, Mayfield, Rosé, & Fischer, 2012). The Jaccard index also referred to as
Intersection over    Union,  has  been  widely     used  for comparing   the  similarity between    samples  in automatic
classification, citation   analysis,  information   retrieval and   so  forth (Hamers    et al., 1989).  To  help  capture
conceptual threads in students' Knowledge Forum discussions, we developed a note clustering tool adopting the
Jaccard index. This tool creates automated visualizations of sentences with overlapping keywords as clusters,
and we   created   a conceptual   label   for each   thematic  cluster. In detail, we  explored     whether automatically
generated themes were consistent with human coding results of conceptual threads in the student discourse.

Methods
The dataset analyzed in this study consists of 298 Knowledge Forum notes generated by grade 1 students (11
boys, 11 girls). Over the span of three months, students engaged in Knowledge Building discourse about the
water cycle. Two researchers coded the Knowledge Forum notes into 15 conceptual threads (i.e., a group of
notes which aim to address the same thematic issue). The manually coded conceptual threads were compared
with the automated clusters generated by the note clustering tool used in this study.
         The text classification processes mainly consist of five steps: 1) We manually spell-checked all the
Knowledge Forum notes given the difficulty of automatically correcting the notes written by junior students. 2)
We segmented the notes into sentences based on punctuations via the NLTK sentence tokenizer (Bird, Klein, &
Loper, 2009).     Then  symbols,  stop-words,    and  small   sub-words  were   removed     from the  sentences (Patel, &
Shah, 2013). Also, since most notes students wrote were related to water, we removed "water" from the analysis
to achieve a clearer picture of other themes. 3) The lowest frequency for a word to be included into the analysis
is tow since    a keyword    needs   to appear   at  least twice to form   a  connection    with other  sentences.  4) We
connected similar sentences together to form a network using Jaccard index. The metric we used for similarity
threshold is representing    the  number  of  intersection   keywords   across  sentences   out  of all words used  in  the
union of keywords between any two sentences. We set 3/5 as the threshold. 5) We performed clustering on the
network formed. We use the Louvain Method (Blondel, Guillaume, Lambiotte, & Lefebvre, 2008) for clustering
nodes into what are known as communities in the network sciences literature.
         We visualized the networks formed under this procedure using visNetwork, a package in R. The notes
are represented using red dots and were connected using red lines. In order to summarize the context of each
cluster, we extracted the top words used by notes within each cluster using the tf-idf method which highlights
top words used by the cluster and removes highly frequent words used across the whole dataset. Each cluster
summary was marked using a blue dot, and the size of the blue dot indicates the popularity of the cluster ­ the
more sentences (red lines) in a cluster, the bigger the dot (as shown in Figure 1).

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                        943                                                     © ISLS
Results
393 sentence units were segmented out of the dataset, and 136 keywords were kept in analysis. Figure 1 shows
16 clusters were formed by the tool. The two researchers identified 15 conceptual threads. Here, we qualitatively
matched the two sources of clusters--the ones displayed outside of round brackets were generated by the tools
while the ones inside the brackets were identified by the researchers: water evaporates when it is hot (why does
water evaporate, why can't you see water vapour); evaporation makes clouds and rain (how does water vapour
go back into water, rain, why does the earth need clouds/water); clouds block vapor (where does water vapour
go if there are no clouds); clouds are light so they float (how does water vapour float, clouds' weight, how can
water be so light); the atmosphere stops clouds to go to space (the atmosphere); the color of clouds (clouds'
colour); water freezes when the weather is cold (ice); and meteorites hit the earth (where did water come from,
can you   make   water). All  the  human   coded   themes    were    extracted by   the  note clustering  tool except
"groundwater." Possible reasons for why this theme was not picked up were that students did not use enough
overlapping keywords when discussing this topic or the proportions of overlapping words they used in sentences
did not meet the chosen threshold.

                       Figure 1. Automated clusters generated by the note clustering tool.

Discussions and conclusion
We see this method as an option to speed up the manual process of connecting notes together. We imagine
people applying   this network   method to   a raw   dataset to jump-start     the  connection   process for  students,
summary process for teachers and analysis process for researchers. We noticed that clusters may represent the
same   theme due   to  different  keywords   used,   different ways    students    wrote their   ideas,  and  different
combinations of ideas. For instance, the two cluster context summaries "ice, cold, evaporate, turns, freeze" and
"whether, freeze, cold" are both related to the theme of "ice." We also noted that the assumption of intersection
of words misses out on words that are synonyms, such as "cold" and "freezing." Ideally, we would consider
these words to be the same unit and hence count it in our intersection, and only count once in our union. We are
working on a method currently for this as future work.

References
Bird, S., Klein, E., &   Loper, E. (2009).   Natural language   processing     with Python:   analyzing  text with the
          natural language toolkit. " O'Reilly Media, Inc."
Blondel, V. D., Guillaume, J. L., Lambiotte, R., & Lefebvre, E. (2008). Fast unfolding of communities in large
          networks. Journal of statistical mechanics: theory and experiment, 2008(10), P10008.
Hamers, L. et al. (1989). Similarity measures in scientometric research: The Jaccard index versus Salton's cosine
          formula. Information Processing and Management, 25(3), 315-18.
Mu, J., Stegmann, K., Mayfield, E., Rosé, C., & Fischer, F. (2012). The ACODEA framework: Developing
          segmentation   and  classification  schemes  for     fully  automatic    analysis   of  online  discussions.
          International journal of computer-supported collaborative learning, 7(2), 285-305.
Patel, B., & Shah, D. (2013, March). Significance of stop word elimination in meta search engine. In Intelligent
          Systems and Signal Processing (ISSP), 2013 International Conference on (pp. 52-55). IEEE.
Scardamalia, M. (2004). CSILE/Knowledge forum®. Education and technology: An encyclopedia, 183-192.
Scardamalia, M., & Bereiter, C. (2014).    Knowledge building and knowledge creation: Theory, pedagogy, and
          technology. In K. Sawyer (Ed.), Cambridge handbook of the learning sciences (2nd ed.), pp. 397-417.
          New York: Cambridge University Press.
Suthers, D. D., Lund, K., Rosé, C. P., Teplovs, C., & Law, N. (2013). Productive multivocality in the analysis of
          group interactions. Springer US.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                   944                                                     © ISLS
