 Intelligent Cognitive Assistants to Support Orchestration in CSCL
                                 Haesol Bae, Indiana University, haebae@iu.edu
                            Krista Glazewski, Indiana University, glaze@indiana.edu
                       Cindy E. Hmelo-Silver, Indiana University, chmelosi@indiana.edu
                        James Lester, North Carolina State University, lester@ncsu.edu
                     Bradford W. Mott, North Carolina State University, bwmott@ncsu.edu
                       Jonathan Rowe, North Carolina State University, jprowe@ncsu.edu

         Abstract: This design paper proposes an intelligent cognitive assistant framework that utilizes
         AI-based multimodal learning analytics for developing a teacher dashboard. Using six data
         streams, we suggest this design can extend teacher's instructional capacity in technology-rich
         collaborative  inquiry-focused    science   classrooms.  We   discuss how   this tool can  support
         teacher's orchestration in relation to relevant learning practices in complex problem-solving
         activities in a CSCL environment.

Introduction
Teacher  orchestration  is critical for   supporting CSCL.  It is  defined as  productively coordinating   supportive
interventions across many learning activities occurring at multiple social levels (Dillenbourg et al., 2009). Because
it requires teachers to instantly facilitate a range of activities and resources at the same time, teacher orchestration
is considered to be an exceptionally complex task (Prieto et al., 2018). Teacher professional development (PD)
can be a promising solution; however, it often takes teachers away from the classroom. Traditional PD formats
do not provide the most relevant and contingent support when teachers need it most (Jenkins & Agamba, 2013).
Thus, we propose how an intelligent cognitive assistant in a teacher dashboard can provide just-in-time guidance.
Employing learning analytics affords teachers opportunities to track students learning activities and extend their
instructional capacity to provide contingent and adaptive teaching (Ferguson, 2012). In this poster, we outline the
design principles of the Intelligent Augmented Cognition for Teaching (I-ACT) framework that uses AI-based
multimodal learning analytics for developing a teacher dashboard.

Using multimodal learning analytics for the design of I-ACT cognitive assistant
In inquiry-based CSCL environments, a core competency of effective teachers is classroom orchestration which
ranges   from engaging  learners    as  both  individuals and  groups, establishing  learning  priorities, assembling
instructional resources, supporting complex thinking, and enabling students to build connections between ideas
(Prieto et al., 2017). In the collaborative learning environment, teachers are often asked to conduct multiple forms
of learning activities which pose considerable orchestration load (Prieto et al., 2017). Tools for learning analytics
seek  to use  data from learners    and the  classroom and  promote   awareness  and   reflection through   collecting,
analyzing, and synthesizing multiple data sources into visualizations (Ferguson, 2012). Several dashboards have
focused on classroom orchestration and support for teachers to support collaborating groups such as TinkerBoard
(Son,  2012)  and  Collaid  (Maldonado     et al., 2012).  Typically, in these  dashboards,  activity information  is
visualized on a large display to capture learner performance and to deliver insight into collaboration among
students using audio, physical, and positioning traces of student activity. Emphasis is placed on providing real
time data visualizations including social interaction, time spent, or artifacts produced to enable teachers to detect
when to intervene.

                            Figure 1. I-ACT Teacher augmentation in the classroom.

         The I-ACT cognitive assistant will be designed to directly support K-12 science teachers by providing
context-sensitive guidance. It will be driven by AI-based multimodal learning analytics (see Figure 1) from six
data streams: learning environment interaction traces, motion tracking, facial expression tracking, gesture tracking,
gaze  tracking, and  assessment     data. First, I-ACT    science classrooms   will track students' problem-solving

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                     947                                                   © ISLS
interaction data. I-ACT will track not only the location and movement of teachers and students in the classroom
but also students' facial expressions, gestures, and gaze to supply a rich set of learner information. Additionally,
I-ACT   cognitive    assistants    will  collect    assessment   data   during   the course   of  students'   problem solving.
Collectively, the multimodal learning analytics will guide teachers in effectively orchestrating science inquiry
with a data-rich picture of student problem-based learning (PBL) and collaboration. During class, the I-ACT
cognitive assistants will provide real-time recommendations and guidance to teachers to reduce orchestration load
so that they can effectively scaffold learners throughout the full teaching workflow in science PBL through their
laptop or  tablet.   For example,      the   I-ACT    cognitive  assistant  will alert  teachers  to tell  which students need
assistance with the highest priority, what types of problem-solving and collaboration support strategies might be
most effective, and when they need to pause activities to provide a mini lecture, either to particular students, to
specific groups of students, or the whole class.
         More     specifically,    I-ACT     will reduce  orchestration   load   across three    phases of implementation: (1)
prospective     guidance,   (2)    concurrent     guidance,   and   (3)   retrospective  guidance    post-implementation.   In
prospective pedagogical guidance stage, I-ACT will provide "forward guidance" to plan successful classes and
anticipate triggers   that might      lead   to failure. The  assistant  will proactively  suggest   strategies  and anticipate
potential obstacles to manage orchestration load. Next, in the concurrent pedagogical guidance stage, I-ACT will
help teachers with facilitation such as initiating inquiry, scaffolding problem-solving process, and pushing for
deep knowledge       construction.    Classroom      implementation    of  technology-rich   inquiry    puts an extremely  high
orchestration load on teacher performance so the assistant will be beneficial for teachers during this stage. Lastly,
in retrospective pedagogical guidance stage, I-ACT will guide teachers in reflecting on their orchestration moves
and help them make successful ones continue. It is a critical step to provide reflection space to make sense of what
went well, what did not, and why, because what teachers encounter in the classroom is new. Further, the I-ACT
cognitive  assistants'   prospective,      concurrent,   and   retrospective   guidance   will   be  improved   with the  same
multimodal data that was collected during class time in a tight feedback loop. This poster will present a design
case of middle school students participating in a life science unit in which they learn about ecosystems. We test
our design as students collaboratively engage with a problem scenario centered on an aquatic ecosystem that has
become polluted as a result of human activity using the Crystal Island narrative game (Rowe et al., 2011), which
generates highly granular problem-solving logs during three stages of orchestration.

Conclusion
Although there has been a lot of research and development of learning analytics tools and resources over the last
decade,  much     of the existing     research    and practical  tools  has not  fully  supported   enabling  and transforming
teaching and learning practice, which is, in part, due to the lack of meaningfully developing these metrics in
relation to relevant learning practices. I-ACT cognitive assistant will demonstrate a promising design case that
can help teachers extend their teaching capacity to provide contingent and adaptive scaffolding in technology-rich
inquiry teaching environment, where learning technologies support both student collaboration learning and PBL.

References
Dillenbourg, P., Järvelä, S., & Fischer, F. (2009). The evolution of research on computer-supported collaborative
         learning. In Technology-enhanced learning (pp. 3-19). Springer, Dordrecht.
 ie o,        ,   a ma,     ,    i    inski,    ,  o   g e       iana,    J , & Dillenbourg, P. (2018). Multimodal teaching
         analytics: Automated extraction of orchestration graphs from wearable sensor data. Journal of computer
         assisted learning, 34(2), 193-203.
Jenkins,  S.,   & Agamba,     J.   J. (2013).   The   missing link  in  the CCSS     initiative: Professional development  for
         implementation. Academy of Educational Leadership Journal, 17(2).
Ferguson,  R.     (2012).  Learning      analytics:   drivers,   developments    and    challenges. International  Journal  of
         Technology Enhanced Learning, 4(5/6), 304-317.
Son, L. H. (2012) Supporting reflection and classroom orchestration with tangible tabletops. PhD Thesis.
Maldonado, R. M., Kay, J., Yacef, K., & Schwendimann, B. (2012, June). An interactive teacher's dashboard for
         monitoring groups in a multi-tabletop learning environment. In International Conference on Intelligent
         Tutoring Systems (pp. 482-492). Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg.
Rowe,  J.  P.,  Shores,  L.   R.,  Mott,   B.   W.,  &   Lester, J. C.  (2011).  Integrating  learning,   problem solving, and
         engagement in narrative-centered learning environments. International Journal of Artificial Intelligence
         in Education, 21(1-2), 115-133.

Acknowledgments
This study was made possible by the National Science Foundation, award # 1839966.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                            948                                                      © ISLS
