          Mediating Collaboration in History with Network Analysis
  Haesol Bae, Kalani Craig, Joshua Danish, Cindy E. Hmelo-Silver, Suraj Uttamchandani, and Maksymilian
                                                      Szostalo
              haebae@iu.edu, craigkl@indiana.edu, jdanish@indiana.edu, suttamch@indiana.edu,
                                  chmelosi@indiana.edu, mszostal@indiana.edu
                                                  Indiana University

          Abstract: This poster discusses a promising collaboration platform to encourage students in co-
          constructing historical knowledge    through  a network   visualization tool. The  tool uniquely
          mediated collaboration   at  both   the small and   large group level   in a  big lecture  format
          undergraduate history class. The findings demonstrated the tool mediated a specific sequence
          of collaborating processes at both levels and students' ability to see the historical relationships.

Introduction
Novice history learners struggle to consume lengthy historical texts because they tend to see such texts as an
established list of facts to memorize rather than as an interpretive argument supported by evidence (Wineburg,
1991). It is particularly challenging for them to grasp the connections between the many participants and events
within the text. Given the length and scope of many historical texts, students can benefit from collaborating to
divide the text into more digestible components, and then working together to construct an argument based on the
entirety of the corpus. However, framing history as an interpretive account through collaborative effort is unusual
in undergraduate history classrooms because the large lecture format that is common to many undergraduate
survey classes makes it challenging to coordinate students' activities. In this poster, we suggest that network
visualization tools can offer a promising collaboration platform to encourage co-construction of the connections
within historical texts. The aim of this study is to provide a deeper understanding of how a network analysis tool
called Net.Create (see Figure 1) might function to mediate students' collaboration at both the small group and
whole class (i.e., large group) level as they explore the details of a history text through network creation and
analysis.

                        Figure 1. Net.Create interface and students' constructed network.

Net.Create as a tool for supporting collaborative learning
From the lens of sociocultural theory, learning, thinking, and acting are mediated or transformed by tools and
signs (Roth & Lee, 2007). The study of mediated action is concerned with both individual's active use of cultural
tools and the mediator's influence on individual's use. Therefore, mediators both shape and are shaped by the
individual (Danish, 2014).  In    this study, we   positioned Net.Create  as a mediating    tool to scaffold   student
collaboration across the small and large group level and to provide a meaningful joint task that affords discussion.
Net.Create is a network analysis tool that supports student entry of information about relationships among person,
group, event, or place in historical texts into a database of connections that is then visualized live as each new
entry is added. Network analysis can represent the connections within historical texts by collecting and visualizing
data as a set of elements (nodes) and connections between the elements (edges), and the history students can build
and use the aggregated information from each node and edge connections to interpret history. The specific features
in the tool can scaffold the collaborating process by mediating students' conversation while students determine
which historical piece can be recorded as a node and categorize it into person, group, event, or place. Next, the
edge entry prompts scaffold students to look at the relationship between nodes, select the directionality of the
edge, and provide a citation. As nodes or edges are recorded, they are instantly visualized in the whole class
network. By using this tool, small groups of students engage with the historical significance for each detail while
reading the part of the text and collaboratively co-construct the historical connections among many possible
entries and can simultaneously see and reflect on the whole class network. The process of dividing a long historical
source into smaller sections and offering those sections for small-group data entry is a good model for other
networks outside of history where simultaneous or team-based network data entry is needed, focusing on network
interactions.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                     949                                                    © ISLS
Methods
This study used the Net.Create tool during two 50-minute class sessions in a classroom of 73 students taking a
survey history course at a midwestern United States university. Students were divided into groups of 2-3 students.
The classroom was a large lecture hall where seats were arranged in tiers. Each group had at least one shared
laptop to collaboratively use the tool. A total of 8 groups voluntarily participated in the data collection including
video, pre/posttest, and software log data. Each group was assigned to a different chapter from a text about
Alexander the Great and asked to make entries with using the Net.Create tool. We selected Alexander the Great
because it was the most complex, lengthy source in a course on ancient history taught by history instructor who
had agreed to participate in the study. At the end of each class, students were asked to interpret Alexander's
leadership style. To analyze the data, we employed discourse analysis (Potter, 2003) to discover a pattern of
interaction in the classroom.

Findings
Our analysis showed that the Net.Create tool shaped students' particular collaborating sequence in working with
the historical text. To begin the activity, students as a group first read the text and started to think and discuss
about what would be a reasonable item to record as a node before entering nodes and edges (e.g., So, do we put
either of that down (pointing the screen), should we put Ammon, should we put Homer). While entering them, the
prompts in the tool to add nodes and edges led the students to engage the text in a more interpretive way and
pushed them to look for connections. For example, when students were asked to categorize their entry by person,
group, event, or place, they discussed about selecting the most reasonable argument as a group based on what they
read (e.g., So I know we mentioned the dream in an event description, but should we make the dream into an event
on its own?) Then, they seamlessly started to look for another node to connect through an edge (e.g., And then,
you've gotta add an edge). These patterns of discourse prevailed across the data set. Also, the Net.Create tool
uniquely mediated student collaboration in interpreting the historical text at both small and large group level. As
soon as a small group of students entered nodes and edges in the tool, they were instantly able to observe how
their group's entry was visually connected to the whole group network. This feature of the tool afforded students
a way to visualize how they were contributing to the whole network and realize how each node was related in the
bigger history context (e.g., Whoa! This is so cool! We should keep going! We need to contribute). Later in the
class, the instructor was actively utilizing the co-constructed whole network for a whole class discussion (e.g.,
What do you guys see here? Which nodes aren't connected?)

Discussion and conclusion
These findings suggest that the Net.Create tool mediated how students collaborated at both the small and large
group level to engage with a new-to-them historical monograph in a manner that helped them begin to situate
ideas within the text. First, in order to create a network, students had to identify nodes and edges within the text,
which led them to have productive conversations about the important people, places, and events in the text. Second,
as students used Net.Create   to connect nodes  via edges, the tool mediated their  ability to see the historical
relationships and made it salient when nodes were connected to primary network or not. Third, the tool leveraged
the larger community to support students in making sense of an entirely new text in a limited time. Lastly, the
network served as a reference point for the whole class discussion, leveraging the work of small collaboration
groups to support whole  class   connections. By dividing  up  a large, unfamiliar text into smaller pieces and
assigning those to small collaborating groups whose work fed back into a whole-class network, the large lecture
format that typically limits collaboration options became a positive feature of the activity. These results provide
evidence that Net.Create demonstrated promise in supporting students in co-constructing historical knowledge.

References
Danish, J. A. (2014). Applying an activity theory lens to designing instruction for learning about the structure,
        behavior, and function of a honeybee system. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 23(2), 100-148.
Potter, J. (2003). Discourse analysis and discursive psychology. Qualitative research in psychology: Expanding
        perspectives in methodology and design, 73-94.
Roth, W. M., & Lee, Y. J. (2007). "Vygotsky's neglected legacy": Cultural-historical activity theory. Review of
        educational research, 77(2), 186-232.
Wineburg, S. S. (1991). Historical problem solving: A study of the cognitive processes used in the evaluation of
        documentary and pictorial evidence. Journal of educational Psychology, 83(1), 73.

Acknowledgements
This study was made possible by the National Science Foundation, award #1848655.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                  950                                                 © ISLS
