    Evaluating the Impact of a Smart Greenhouse Intervention on
                    Interest and Identity Using a New Framework
                            Amy R. Semerjian, Boston College, amy.semerjian@bc.edu
                 Collette Q. Roberto, University of California, Berkeley, roberto_c@berkeley.edu

          Abstract: A mixed methods study of a 14-day computational-thinking-and-computer-science-
          infused   environmental science       intervention  observed     193  middle    schoolers  to engage
          behaviorally. Based  on self-reports     and  observations,    some  students   increased coding   and
          computer science (CCS) interest and negotiated CCS identity. New criteria for the study and
          evaluation of identity development, strongly related to interest development, may provide a
          useful framework for other interventions intended to broaden computational participation.

Infusing  computational  thinking (CT)    in    science  classrooms   benefits from   fostering a lasting,  positive   CCS
identity, particularly  for  students from   non-dominant     populations     (Kafai, 2016).  This  14-day,   CT-infused
intervention was designed to teach CCS content and support student CCS interest and identity. Content included
students  building  automated  tabletop   greenhouses      capable    of small-scale  urban  farming. In   pairs    or trios,
students wrote MicroPython code for a Wio Link ESP8266 board which they connected to actuators, sensors,
and displays, applying new CT and CCS skills to collecting data and controlling environmental variables for
their basil, cilantro, or lettuce plants. Such content related to identity in that, "[p]rogramming is not an abstract
discipline, but a way to `make' and `be' in the digital world" (Kafai, 2016, p. 27).

Theoretical frameworks
Hidi and Renninger (2006) inductively found interest to develop over four fluid phases. In Phases 1 and 2,
individuals attend to content fleetingly, whereas in Phases 3 and 4, students show "enduring predisposition to re-
engage    content"  (p.111). Interest  intersects     with identity   where   these  constructs share   markers.    Identity
resources, in signaling to students who they are and can be, are the main mechanism by which identities become
available  in science-learning  environments       (Pinkard  et  al., 2017).  Nasir   and  Cooks  (2009)   describe    three
interrelated types of identity resources ­ material, relational, and ideational ­ upon which three new criteria for
development of students' CCS identity were based. Criterion 1 was the provision to students of the three types
of identity resources:  material  resources     of the  curriculum    on  the design  of  an automated  greenhouse       and
investigation of scientific questions, relational resources of student-teacher relationships and teacher-assigned
work groups, and ideational resources of teachers' beliefs affording space for students to exchange ideas. Table
1 details what students could do with the design affordances from Criterion 1 to develop their CCS identities.

Table 1: Framework for Identifying Student Usage of Identity Resources, Including Phases of Interest, Abridged

                       Material Resources                   Relational Resources             Ideational Resources
 Criterion 2 (C2):     Students first engage with           Students develop extended        Students position selves in
 Use of identity       curriculum, re-engage (Phase 2).     work partnerships with           CCS (Phase 3), & negotiate
 resources             May repurpose curriculum.            teachers and each other.         CCS identity.
 Criterion 3 (C3):     Students re-purpose curriculum,      Students have long term          Students have lasting,
 Sustained use of      applying it to other contexts,       relationships and networks in    "sticky," ideas about who
 identity resources    e.g., at home (Phase 4).             CCS (Phase 4).                   they are in CCS (Phase 4).
Note: "Phase" refers to the four phases of interest found in Hidi and Renninger (2006).

Material Resources (C2, C3) describe how a student might, over time, shift her relationship to CCS content
through curriculum materials. A student may start out with perfunctory behavioral engagement (C2) but as she
develops expertise, she may also begin to deepen her interest. When a student realizes she is re-engaging content
independently (C3 and interest Phases 3-4), knowing that she has turned to the same content repeatedly in the
past supports her believing that she would continue to do so in the future, helping her to further identify with
CCS. Ideational Resources similarly progress from less likely to re-engage without support (C2) to highly likely
to re-engage (C3), in this case with ideas about CCS content as well as who one is in relation to CCS (e.g.,
beliefs, goals, and hopes about oneself in CCS). Relational Resources, which may be the most impactful, as
disciplinary relationships are crucial to defining one's disciplinary identity (Pinkard et al., 2017), progress from
structured, compulsory participation with others (C2) to voluntary and externally-affirmed participation (C3).

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                        951                                                     © ISLS
Research questions and study design
Our research questions were whether changes occurred in students' (1) CCS Interest, or (2) CCS Identity. In an
explanatory design, data from surveys (pre, post), interviews (pre, post, five-month follow-up), and observations
provided evidence to use Table 1 as a rubric to answer the research questions. From 193 students (m=95, f=94,
non-binary=4; Latinx=88, White=70, other=35), 16 focal-group students were selected for deeper scrutiny based
on differences in pre-interviews and -surveys on CCS confidence,        proficiency, and prior experience as well as
long-term scales on CCS Identity (items=12, D=.88), and CCS Interest (items=12, D=.92).

Results and implications
Before the intervention, Latinx students reported less frequency of prior experience than White/other ethnicity
students [65% vs. 85%, F(1, 118) = 1.412, p = .027]. Long-term CCS Interest and CCS Identity scale scores did
not change statistically significantly (for all students, by gender, or by ethnicity/race), but did show gains in
reliability. Shorter-term, qualitative results supported interest and identity development.
          One student's  experience   in   the greenhouse   intervention  exemplified  different criteria for  identity
development being met or considered. Gal (names are pseudonyms) began with no prior CCS experience, low
interest, and a stereotypical,  male-gendered     idea of coders  as "some  weirdo  sitting in a room   typing  on his
computer." During the unit, Gal used relational identity resources (C2) when she coached a worried friend, Mae.
In turn, Mae used relational identity resources when she encouraged Gal's interest in coding a robotic arm. Gal
then used the material identity resources (C2) of robotic equipment when she independently re-engaged with
coding in experimentation with the robotic arm. The coaching opportunity may have helped Gal to develop the
ideational identity resource (C2) of understanding that CCS takes "determination, perseverance, and optimism."
Gal's attainment   of Criterion  2  for  all  identity resources  supported  the  conclusion   that her CCS    identity
developed   during the  intervention, as   did her  interest. In the post interview, Gal   had a  new,  non-gendered
conception of coders as scientists who make "gadgets" for useful automation. She pondered a later scientific
investigation with her partner (C3, Material and Relational Identity Resources), but, five months later, had not
done it. Gal still considered herself highly interested but felt a bit "less" CCS identity than after the unit, perhaps
due to a lack of opportunity to re-engage in any CCS projects that could have re-triggered interest.
          Our analysis of the 16-student focal group found that the combination of presence (C1) and use (C2) of
identity resources shifted students' ideas about what mattered in the content and who they were in relation to it.
All students  achieved   piqued  interest;  none  were  indifferent. Some   were  observed  using   ideational identity
resources when they proposed, defended, and revised ideas on greenhouse design. We believed that the use of
relational identity resources had potential for lasting impact when students felt safe enough to critique and build
upon each other's ideas, particularly when their partners were also their friends, a relationship that would outlast
the unit. Students adopted ideas about what is valued (e.g., in greenhouse design) as well as enacted practices
(e.g., idea-generation, critique) to decide who one is and can be in CCS. The quality and quantity of the interest
that students discussed in their follow-up interviews suggested that the spaces where students applied CCS to
the greenhouse  problem,   in  being  pushed   into public view   as a site for active negotiation,  aided in  identity
development (Nasir & Cooks, 2006; Pinkard et al., 2017). Aligned with Gal's outcome, other students attributed
drops in interest and identity to not having more CCS activities to do after the curriculum unit had ended.
          This work went beyond an existence proof that CT can be embedded into mainstream science classes,
towards   organizing  an understanding     of identity resources, strongly  related to interest, to support students'
developing  CCS    identities. We   believe  that this intervention  showed  potential for  impacting   students' CCS
interest and CCS identity development, specifically through the provision, engagement, and re-engagement with
high-quality  material, relational, and  ideational resources.   We  believe that in the future,  using these  newly-
developed criteria not just for evaluation, but also as targets or goals for curriculum design, would help to create
curricula that support the development of students' CCS interest and CCS identity.

References
Hidi, S., & Renninger, K. A. (2006). The Four-Phase Model of Interest Development. Educational Psychologist,
          41(2), 111-127. doi:10.1207/s15326985ep4102_4
Kafai, Y. B. (2016). From computational thinking to computational participation in K--12 education. Communications
          of the ACM, 59(8), 26-27.
Nasir, N. i. S., & Cooks, J. (2009). Becoming a hurdler: How learning settings afford identities. Anthropology &
          Education Quarterly, 40, 41­61.
Pinkard, N., Erete, S., Martin, C. K., & McKinney de Royston, M. (2017). Digital Youth Divas: Exploring narrative-
          driven curriculum to spark middle school girls' interest in computational activities. Journal of the Learning
          Sciences, 26(3), 477-516.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                      952                                                  © ISLS
