       When Words Are Not Enough: What Student Gestures and
       Embodied Responses Tell Us About Understanding Science
                                             Through Dance
             Lindsay Lindberg, University of California, Los Angeles, Lindsay.Lindberg@ucla.edu
                           Danielle Keifert, Vanderbilt University, keifert@gmail.com
                       Noel Enyedy, Vanderbilt University, noel.d.enyedy@vanderbilt.edu
                     Joshua Danish, Indiana University Bloomington, jdanish@indiana.edu

        Abstract:    First and  second   grade  students  in  a    technology-based  immersive     learning
        environment     collaboratively created  and   performed    dances   as  an  embodied      form   of
        sensemaking to reinforce scientific learning. Providing verbal and gestural feedback on a dance
        synthesized embodied, enactive, and cognitive practices. Students watching dances used gesture
        where their vocabulary was no longer adequate to describe their scientific understanding. We
        argue  that legitimizing  multimodal  forms   of expression  expands  on   students' collaborative
        reasoning tools.

Introduction
First and second grade students at the [School] participated in a seven-day unit of study exploring states of matter
using technology, play, and embodied forms of inquiry and representation. The final day asked students to create
and perform   dances   showing a  designated  state change   (e.g. liquid to gas), while their    peers watched  the
performance and tried to guess which state change they performed. The dances were used and viewed as cultural
artifacts that supported and deepened science learning and inquiry. Building on research that recognizes the role
the body plays in sense-making and the role of gesture in social interactions (Goodwin, 2018; Goldin-Meadow,
2004), this poster positions dance  as  part of an  embodied  science  learning  approach    that expands  students'
available reasoning tools. We claim students presented understandings of micro- and macro-level phenomena in
their dances, and relied upon gesture and embodiment to fully express their understanding of complex science
ideas during discussions.

Methods
iSTEP--interactive Science through Technology Enhanced Play--is a multi-year design-based research study
(Design Based Research Collective, 2003) exploring scientific inquiry through embodied play. We used inductive
methods and interaction analysis (Jordan & Henderson, 1995) to analyze video data from two classrooms of 25
6-8 year-olds, working with two teachers. Students engaged with ideas of water particles on a macro level (e.g.
water vapor is gas), and on a micro level (e.g. particles in a gas move quickly). A researcher led the final day,
where students choreographed dances demonstrating a state change in groups, performed them, and gave and
received feedback on their dances as a means of integrating their understanding of how both micro (particles) and
macro (observable) levels engage concurrently.

Findings and analysis
Dance challenged students to engage in reasoning strategies in both choreography and as while viewing their
peers' dances.  First, we  present  students  demonstrating  simultaneous    understanding     of macro   and micro
particulate behavior   physically through  dance.   Students collaboratively  engaged    in  multimodal    forms of
expression to simultaneously represent particulate behavior as water particles in liquid, and as water (Figure 1).

  Figure 1. Students simultaneously represent macro and micro particulate matter of liquid with their bodies.

Students represented water at a macro level by using "curvy" lines in their bodies including a rounded spine and
articulations of the wrist and arms. Students showed the micro-level by demonstrating the spacing (close together)
and movement    (slow)  of liquid water  particles. This dance  presented  their understanding     of the particulate
behavior of water laminated (Goodwin, 2018) upon their understanding from lived-experience of macro-water
behavior. We   see  these  movements  explored  during   choreographing   and  performing    a dance   as supporting

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                   953                                                    © ISLS
sensemaking at both micro- and macro-levels through dance and conversation. We suspect that their exposure to
MR technology and invitation to choreograph a dance supported their ability to move freely and present their
understanding of the states of matter with their bodies across both levels. A complex task was accomplished
because dance and the body were accessible as reasoning tools to support sensemaking and representation.
         We   also   analyze  student  observers   engaging with  multimodal    forms  of expression   to  support
understanding content knowledge in response to their peers' performances. It is important to note that even though
some students had not yet presented their dance, all students had already choreographed and practiced their dances.
After watching a group perform, the audience members guessed that liquid was represented in the dance (Figure
2).

                                    Figure 2. Students discuss a group's dance.

When prompted to describe why he thought the dancers were evoking liquid, a student stated, "Uhm, liquid
because they were going slow when they got there, was kinda like a wave." At this point, Rosie said, bu-bu-bu-
bu-shhhhhh (wave noise with wave arm movement; Figure 2B), and Clementine said, "that reminded me of a
wave...good..." and generated her own wave movement with her arms (Figure 2C). In this moment, students
articulated scientific concepts with a combination of words and gestures, communicating with more rigor than
they had previously managed with words alone. We argue that these physical embodiments are different than
gestures   studied previously  (Goldin-Meadow,     2004) in that students engaged  in   this process  are utilizing
multimodal forms of expression and representation informed by their own experiences of choreographing dances,
engaging with the mixed reality visualization, and grappling with the scientific content verbally with peers in
small and large group discussions.

Discussion and Implications
The  instances presented in   which student movements    simultaneously   instantiated micro and  macro   levels of
systemic   behavior  indicated that talking about  scientific phenomena   was   challenging,  but the body  could
accomplish simultaneous, laminated, multi-leveled movements where linear words currently fail them. Current
literature positions embodiment     as a tool  for sensemaking   (Wilson, 2002),  and   gestures  as  important  in
communication and meaning making by emphasizing as well as building new meaning (Goodwin, 2018). Here
we argue that choreographing, performing, and watching classmates perform dances demonstrating scientific
concepts supported understanding of the science curriculum by privileging both linguistic and embodied sense-
making. The data we present show evidence of the body leading the sense-making process in rigorous scientific
inquiry. In future work, we want to explore how this process leads to deeper scientific inquiry that supports the
development of representational knowledge, embodied sense-making, and understanding science through dance.

References
Design-Based   Research  Collective.   (2003). Design-based   research: An  emerging    paradigm  for educational
         inquiry. Educational Researcher, 5-8.
Goldin-Meadow, S. (2004). Gesture's Role in the Learning Process. Theory Into Practice, 43(4), 314-321.
Goodwin, C. (2018). Co-operative action. New York, NY: Cambridge University Press.
Jordan, B., & Henderson, A. (1995). Interaction analysis: Foundations and practice. The journal of the learning
         sciences, 4(1), 39-103.
Wilson, M. (2002). Theoretical and review articles: Six views of embodied cognition. Psychonomic Bulletin &
         Review, 9 (4), 625-636.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by a grant from the National Science Foundation grant#1629302.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                   954                                                 © ISLS
