  Using Sentence Embeddings to Automatically Extract Cohesion
                and Alignment Metrics in Problem-Solving Tasks

                         Alejandro Andrade, ACTNext, ACT, Inc., laandrad@indiana.edu
                              Chris Georgen, Indiana University, cgeorgen@iu.edu
                           Michael Stucker, Indiana University, mstucker@indiana.edu

        Abstract: We introduce an automated approach that builds on sentence embeddings, a novel
        natural language processing technique that extracts meaning from sentences, to create two
        quantitative measures that serve as proxies of collaborative learning. Cohesion is extracted as
        adjacent   utterance  similarity  and represents  the amount    of overlap     between   contiguous
        conversational turns. Alignment is extracted as a similarity between a focus utterance and a
        reference text and represents the degree to which a conversation utterance aligns with the
        task. These two dimensions divide the quality of conversation in four quadrants.

Introduction
Pre- and post-collaboration scores measure the effect of collaboration on students' learning in a distal manner.
For in-vivo measures of collaboration, however, researchers investigate the interaction among participants while
they solve a problem as a group. The challenge is that metrics that assess a group's collaboration quality are hard
to come by manually. In particular, producing hand codes of a group's collaboration requires sizable human
resources. To tackle  this  issue, various studies have   investigated  the   use   of automated    approaches  to help
researchers and instructors reduce the costs of hand coding collaboration transcripts (Mu, Stegmann, Mayfield,
Rosé, & Fischer, 2012). Natural language processing (NLP) techniques offer solutions to automatically extract
viable measures of collaboration. Some automatically extracted features can predict the quality of a collaborative
activity by analyzing linguistic properties of the transcript (Andrade, Georgen, & Stucker, 2017). Various studies
have explored computational techniques to extract the cohesion of a conversation (Luna Bazaldua et al., 2015).
Cohesion   refers to  the similarity of  adjacent utterances, and   it measures     the semantic    alignment  between
interlocutors (Graesser, McNamara, Louwerse, & Cai, 2004). Cohesion is indicative of the development and
maintenance  of   shared  understanding,  which   has been shown    to be  a  good     predictor of learning in groups
(Roschelle, 1992).   Other studies   have used similar   techniques to  extract   a group's  alignment  with   the task
(Andrade et al., 2017). Task alignment is related to how similar a participants' discourse is to the disciplinary
ways of talk--i.e., how discipline experts talk. Previous research has shown that task alignment is correlated to
course grades (Barron, 2003). Our goal is to investigate the value of a new computational approach that potentially
improves the measures of cohesion and task alignment as proxies of a group's collaboration quality. We ask: how
is collaborative learning related to patterns of conversational cohesion and task alignment?

Measuring cohesion and task alignment
The development of word embeddings has facilitated the geometrical representation of words. Mathematically, a
word embedding is a function that maps a word to a vector of numbers within a multidimensional space (Schnabel,
Labutov, Mimno, & Joachims, 2015). For instance, word embeddings capture semantic similarities that can
reproduce  linguistic analogies such  as  "Insect is  to Ant  as Fruit is  to Apple"    in a geometrical  space.   This
geometrical space allows for algebraic expressions such as: Insect ­ Ant + Apple = Fruit. Recently, Google
released a Universal Sentence Encoder for sentence embedding (Cer et al., 2018). Instead of mapping single
words, sentence embedding provides a mapping between a span of text and a vector of numbers. Cosine similarity
examines the semantic similarity between two sentence embeddings. Computing a group's conversation cohesion
is an iterative process in which a similarity value between adjacent utterances is calculated. Computing task
alignment is an iterative process in which each utterance is compared to a reference text. In this case, the reference
text is an expert's way of solving the problem. This comparison uses the cosine similarity between the focal text
(a student's utterance) and the reference text (expert written solution).

Collaboration quadrants and predicting learning gains
Since cohesion and alignment values are captured at each communicative exchange, we hypothesize that there is
a time dependency     between these  two  dimensions   of collaboration.   A  conceptual   space  with four  quadrants
represents the intersection between levels of high and low values in each dimension. For instance, there are
moments in the conversation students have high levels of cohesion (their talk builds upon each other) as well as

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                    955                                                     © ISLS
high levels of task alignment (their talk mostly refers to the problem at hand). On the other hand, there are moments
when  their conversation  has   high cohesion   but    low alignment       (great off-task  talk); low   cohesion    but high
alignment (e.g., their on-task but do not seem to take up each other's ideas); and low cohesion and low alignment.

Results
Table 1 shows brief excerpts illustrating what these collaboration quadrants look like in practice. These excerpts
were  taken from  a transcript, during    those conversational   exchanges        our algorithm    pointed   out towards    the
corresponding quadrant. A quick appraisal of quadrants seems to validate the qualitative differences at these
conversational moments.

Table 1: Collaboration Quadrants

                 High Cohesion                                                     Low Cohesion
 High            S17: It is impossible for DC to flow across a capacitor.          S17: Oh, yep ok there we go.
 Alignment       S06: And AC is like the sin wave right.                           s06: Or test point 1.
                 Yeah AC is a sin wave. Wait let me zoom in even more on           S17: Oh, you want to try it at 1.
                 this. Well I mean there is some oscillation, so it is in          s06: And then connect this to ground and
                 between 3.5 and 4. So maybe it is not actually I mean it          this timing control thing is so annoying.
                 looks like AC.
 Low             S1: So how can we prove that it is going to light up twice.       S1: Trying to remember where that was.
 Alignment       S2: Isn't that just because in that one second period it is       We did that in that last.
                 going to light up twice.                                          S2: It is in. You find it. I can't see it. Go
                 S1: Yeah but how do we prove this on circuit wizard.              to the bottom. Virtual instruments
                 S2: I'm not too sure about that one.                              oscilloscope.
                 S1: Here let's try this. Shucks. Let's throw in a circuit board   S3: Channel one is for the positive. Oh,
                 or something.                                                     come on.

Discussion and conclusion
The use of sentence embeddings allows for the geometrical representation of the meaning of whole sentences,
which can be transferred to the encoding of utterances from collaborative transcripts. Our results show that these
two measures of collaboration, automatically extracted from the transcripts, are highly correlated to learning gains.
The development of cohesion and alignment values during a conversation create a quadrant space that informs
the quality of the talk. Some of these quadrants are productive and some are not. For instance, successful groups
spend more time in a kind of conversation that has high cohesion and high collaboration. Not so successful groups
tend to spend more time in quadrants where there is low cohesion and low alignment.

References
Andrade, A., Georgen, C., & Stucker, M. (2017). Exploring a Text-Mining Approach as Rapid Prototyping Tool
       for Formative Assessments in Inquiry-Based Online Learning. In B. Smith, M. Borge, E. Mercier, & K.
       Y. Lim (Eds.), Making a Difference: Prioritizing Equity and Access in CSCL (Vol. 1, pp. 151-158).
       Philadelphia, PA: International Society of the Learning Sciences.
Barron, B. (2003). When smart groups fail. The journal of the learning sciences, 12(3), 307-359.
Cer, D., Yang, Y., Kong, S.-y., Hua, N., Limtiaco, N., John, R. S., . . . Tar, C. (2018). Universal sentence encoder.
       arXiv preprint arXiv:1803.11175.
Graesser, A. C., McNamara, D. S., Louwerse, M. M., & Cai, Z. (2004). Coh-Metrix: Analysis of text on cohesion
       and language. Behavior research methods, instruments, & computers, 36(2), 193-202.
Luna Bazaldua, D. A., Hao, J., Khan, S., Liu, L., von Davier, A. A., & Wang, Z. (2015). On convergence of
       cognitive and non-cognitive behavior in collaborative activity. Paper presented at the Proceedings of the
       8th International Conference on Educational Data Mining Conference.
Mu, J., Stegmann, K., Mayfield, E., Rosé, C., & Fischer, F. (2012). The ACODEA framework: Developing
       segmentation and classification schemes for fully automatic analysis of online discussions. International
       journal of computer-supported collaborative learning, 7(2), 285-305.
Roschelle,  J. (1992). Learning  by  collaborating:    Convergent conceptual       change.   The   journal    of the learning
       sciences, 2(3), 235-276.
Schnabel,  T., Labutov,  I., Mimno,   D.,   &   Joachims,  T.  (2015).       Evaluation methods    for   unsupervised    word
       embeddings. Paper presented at the Proceedings of the 2015 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
       Language Processing.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                      956                                                          © ISLS
