       Gaming the Schoolyard: Promoting High School Students'
   Collaborative Learning through Geolocative Mobile Game Design
                        Judy Perry, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, jperry@mit.edu

          Abstract:  Geolocative   augmented     reality game     design offers  students a  potentially rich
          collaborative learning  experience    connected    to their local   school's physical   and cultural
          environment.  This qualitative   study   describes    a pilot  implementation   of  a  collaborative
          geolocative mobile game design curriculum within a high school computer science classroom
          setting, considered through the lens of embodied and enactive learning, and suggests ways in
          which teacher facilitation strategies can support utilizing this approach in a classroom setting.

Background
Geolocative mobile augmented reality (AR) games situate gameplay within a real-world context. As the player
moves around the physical environment, their location-aware mobile device senses their position, triggering in-
game content (e.g., interactions with virtual characters). Students can learn from and engage with a physical
setting via location-based AR games in scenarios ranging from investigating a fictionalized toxic spill (Klopfer
& Squire, 2008) to exploring the illegal wildlife trade in a zoo-based whodunit (Perry & Nellis, 2012).
          Constructionism  suggests  deep  learning     can stem  from   making  and   sharing  personally meaningful
digital artifacts (Jonassen, Howland, Moore & Marra, 2003), including location-based AR games (Klopfer &
Sheldon, 2010; Perry, Coulter, Rubio, & Holden, 2015; Vogel & Perry, 2018). When working collaboratively
(Resnick, 1996), students can externalize and refine their ideas with one another, and divide tasks enabling more
complex designs. Making an AR game involves a range of skills, including manipulating maps, thinking in
geospatial terms, creating visual designs, coding, writing, playtesting and iteration (Vogel & Perry, 2018). This
pilot study  examines   one high   school  class   that utilized  an  AR  game   design  curriculum,   examining  how
embodied and enacted learning intersected with the unique affordances of geolocative game design.

Implementation of collaborative AR game design curriculum

Methods, sample and data collection
In Spring 2018, researchers collaborated with a high school computer science teacher who assigned a three-
week class project in which students used TaleBlazer, a free AR creation platform, to make a geolocative game
on their school's campus. The 10 students in grades 9-12 were divided into three working groups. Participation
in the  research  study  was   voluntary   and   uncompensated.       Each  group   was   tasked  with designing    and
implementing a location-based AR game for school's lower school students. The teacher challenged his students
to create an AR   game   artifact that, "takes  place   outside [anywhere   on  the school's  large  campus],  uses the
physical environment, tells a powerful story, [and] uses game mechanics in some way." Researchers gathered
qualitative data, including  interviews  with   the instructor    and participating students,  three  sessions of class
observation field notes, digital game artifacts, and draft game design notes. Researchers analyzed data looking
for ways in which embodied and enacted learning appeared to impact students' experience, ways in which the
teacher scaffolded student work, and opportunities to improve future iterations of the tools and curriculum.

AR game design through the lens of embodied and enacted learning
Embodied    learning considers the  role  of the   learner's physical   body  as integral to  the learning experience.
Location-based    AR games   require    players to move     through  the real world  as the  game   unfolds. AR   game
designers therefore consider ways in which their game design decisions (e.g., where they position their virtual
characters) impact their players (how far players walk, how quickly they move, etc.). Youth game designers
were sometimes surprised to see how the physicality of the experiences played out. During a playtest, one group
of game designers observed young game players joyfully counting the number of stairs (a clue in the game) by
running up and down the stairs while counting, rather than just standing and pointing. For the game designers,
this observation reinforced the ways in which the potential for physicality in the game could be engaging for the
learners. The teacher also reminded student game designers of the ways in which players (in this case younger
students at the middle school) would be physically affected by the choices they made (e.g., they might get tired).
He also noted that due to the affordance of the AR editor's primarily a top-down view of the Google map,
designers did not anticipate the time and effort to move through the game space and sometimes "put down the
dots" without fully considering implications of distance between game hot spots, backtracking, etc.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                      957                                                   © ISLS
         Enacted  learning  refers  to interactions between  the individual  and  their environment  that promote
learning. For location-based AR games, the game space integrates with the larger social, physical, and cultural
context. Moreover,  AR    games frequently   ask players to  examine, observe  or  infer something  about the  real
world to progress in the game. AR game designers are tasked with considering where, when, and how to ask
players to interact with the real world in their game designs. Even though most students were very familiar with
their school environment, nevertheless the teacher provided time for students to walk the grounds, pick their
game's specific locations and artifacts, and determine ways in which they would ask the player to engage with
the environment. Midday through the process, the teacher raised concerns that students were not yet able to
develop a robust game concept beyond a superficial "tour" as a way to create a location-based game.

         [The   students]  needed  to  do some   research to  come   up  with some   ideas   around their
         theme...Their original idea was to do a tour of campus, but unless they could find something
         specific to say about their theme regarding each of the buildings, I think it'll be hard to be
         comprehensive enough. It might be kinda of a pain to force [building name] to match [famous
         alumnus of the school] in some way, you know... (interview, April 8, 2018)

Later, the teacher noted that by considering the role of a narrative, students began to think holistically about
their game, and more thoughtfully integrate locations, commenting, "I think when we first started talking about
it was just a series of locations, and now they're starting to put the pieces together... so I'm happy about that."

Discussion and conclusions
Two key challenges emerged with the AR game design curriculum. First, students unfamiliar with this genre of
enacted learning ­ in which the physical context of the game plays a significant role ­ were put into the role of
designer. Sample games did not demonstrate enough complexity and variety, leaving students ill equipped to
envision more   creative,  complex  game  mechanics   and defaulting  to closely  mimic  the models  and/or   initial
suggestions  of the teacher, which    was problematic.  Student  designers  would  likely benefit  from additional
varied  sample  games    (including previous   year's student  projects) helping   students  to envision  a   wider
possibility space of projects. Second, the top-down map view tools themselves had unintended consequences by
not providing students, who typically do not consider embodied learning constraints and impacts, with a sense
of spatial scale, leaving them unable to anticipate player fatigue or feasibility of completing the game within the
allotted time. Early prototyping, and potential changes to the tool (e.g., distance calculators) might potentially
help designers quickly uncover such flaws. As educators consider implementing AR game design curricula, the
novelty  of   students' considerations    of enacted  and    embodied    learning ought   to be    scaffolded  both
technologically and pedagogically for student designers to successfully work within this genre.

References
Jonassen,   D.H., Howland,   J.L.,  Moore,   J.L.,  & Marra,   R.M.  (2003).  Learning   to  solve problems    with
         technology: A constructivist perspective. Merrill Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle River, New Jersey.
Klopfer, E., & Sheldon, J. (2010). Augmenting your own reality: Student authoring of science-based augmented
         reality games. New directions for youth development, 2010(128), 85-94.
Klopfer, E., & Squire, K. (2008). Environmental Detectives--the development of an augmented reality platform
         for environmental simulations. Educational Technology Research and Development, 56(2), 203-228.
Perry, J., Coulter, B., Rubio, J. & Holden, C. (2015). How I Learned to Stop Worrying and Love Youth Game
         Creation. Games+Learning+Society, Madison, WI.
Perry,  J., &  Nellis,  R. (2012).  Augmented      Learning: Evaluating  Mobile   Location-Based    Games   at  the
         Zoo.   ISTE, San Diego, CA.
Resnick, M. (1996, July). Distributed constructionism. In Proceedings of the 1996 international conference on
         learning sciences (pp. 280-284). International Society of the Learning Sciences.
Vogel, S., & Perry, J. (2018). We got this: Toward a facilitator-youth "apprenticeship" approach to supporting
         collaboration and design challenges in youth-designed mobile location-based games. In D. Herro, S.
         Arafeh, R. Ling & C. Holden (Eds.), Mobile learning: Perspectives on practice and policy (Digital
         Media and Learning), (pp. 143-168). Charlotte, North Carolina: Information Age Publishing, Inc.

Acknowledgments
Thank you to Lisa Stump, Eric Klopfer, and Emma Anderson for contributing to this work.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                   958                                                  © ISLS
