Designing Learning Analytics for Teacher Learning: An Analytics-
 Supported Teacher Professional Development (ASTPD) Approach

          Gaowei Chen, Kennedy K. H. Chan, Carol K. K. Chan, Jinjian Yu, Liru Hu, and Jiajun Wu
         gwchen@hku.hk, kennedyckh@hku.hk, ckkchan@hku.hk, albenyu@hku.hk, liruhu@hku.hk,
                                             wujiajun@connect.hku.hk
                                             University of Hong Kong

                         Lauren B. Resnick, University of Pittsburgh, resnick@pitt.edu

         Abstract:    Researchers   have recently   emphasized     the contribution   of learning  analytics
         interventions  to  the  advancement    of theory.    We   propose an  analytics-supported  teacher
         professional development (ASTPD) approach and evaluated the impact of the ASTPD approach
         on   teacher learning  and  reflection about   their dialogic  instruction. The  results show   that
         integrating learning analytics and TPD drawing on educational theories and the TPD context
         had an impact on the participating teachers' dialogic practice as well as their student learning
         outcomes.

Introduction
While the recent years have witnessed an increased interest in the use of data to inform educational decision-
making, relatively less attention has been paid to the role of theory in designing learning analytics interventions
(Knight  &  Shum,    2017;  Wise   & Shaffer,   2015).  In this paper   we propose   an  analytics-supported  teacher
professional development (ASTPD) approach, which aims at leveraging learning analytics to facilitate teachers'
reflection about their classroom practice. The ASTPD transforms the prevalent video-based TPD activities around
the temporal and sequential lesson observations into analytics- and visualization- supported TPD activities, which
is likely to increase the efficiency and effectiveness of TPD.

The present study
The ASTPD approach is informed by the sociocultural (Vygotsky, 1978) and situated learning theories (Brown,
Collins, &  Duguid,   1989). The   theories highlight  the importance   of situating teacher   learning in artifacts of
practices and mediating teacher learning through productive and meaningful talk, tasks, and tools leveraged by
participants' collaborative  interpretation and  communication      of data-based evidence.    The ASTPD    approach
employs learning analytics technologies to provide teachers with the analytics and data in form of visualisation of
their own classroom data for using in TPD tasks and activities.
         Based on the ASTPD approach, Chen, Clarke, and Resnick (2015) developed a teaching analytics tool,
Classroom Discourse Analyzer (CDA) to facilitate in-service teachers' reflection on teacher-students classroom
talk interactions in audio- and video- recorded classroom lessons. The authors have upgraded the CDA tool to a
web-based   version,  CDA   2.0, a web   platform  that presents   formative feedback  in  the formats  of interactive
graphics, videos and transcripts, not only about the classroom process, but also about data summaries of individual
and group classroom interactions. In this study, we report the use of CDA 2.0 in a TPD program. CDA is aimed
to leverage learning analytics technologies to ease teachers' search, access, extract, and focus of information in
video-based observation of their own and others' teaching, as well as to improve their individual, collaborative,
and  repeated learning  effects. Specifically,  CDA    provides  process-  and product-  oriented  learning   analytics
support for one important aspect of teacher learning objective, teachers' ability to use of academically productive
talk to engage students into deep thinking and reasoning, drawing upon the Accountable Talk theories (Chen et
al., 2018; Resnick, Michaels, & O'Connor, 2010).

Data sources
In this paper, we report on the effects of conducting ASTPD sessions for secondary mathematics teachers' learning
about dialogic instruction across four semesters in two school years. There were in total 46 sixth- and seventh-
grade participating teachers in the same school district. Twenty-four teachers were randomly assigned to the
ASTPD treatment group who attended six ASTPD sessions across two years to learn and reflect on their classroom
talk in  addition to  workshop   learning,  and 22  teachers    to the comparison    group who    only  learned about
Accountable Talk through the same workshops. No statistical differences of the two groups were found regarding
teacher gender, age, years of teaching, and their educational level.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                    959                                                    © ISLS
Results and discussion

Teacher Accountable Talk moves
The quality of teacher talk in the two groups was further compared based on teacher's average frequency of
accountable talk moves used in one class including revoice, say more, press for reasoning, challenge, restate, add
on, agree/disagree and explain others. The eight talk moves were grouped by four goals (Resnick et al., 2010).
First, teachers help individual students share, expand and clarify their own thinking through say more and revoice.
Second, teachers help students listen carefully to one another through asking students to repeat or rephrase other's
viewpoints (restate). Third, teachers help students deepen their reasoning through pressing for reasoning and
challenge. Lastly, teachers help students think with others through agree/disagree, add on, and explain others.
Except for the second goal (teacher talk moves that help students listen carefully to one another), differences on
the other three goals between two groups all reached statistical significance in ANCOVAs, suggesting that the
ASTPD intervention improved teachers' enactment of productive talk moves in the classroom.

Student average words per turn and achievement
Students in the experimental group spoke more words per turn by the end of the project than the beginning, while
numbers of student words per turn in the comparison group were similar in both the pre- and post-test. Students
of both groups were instructed to complete a pre-test and a post-test, with different but comparable items. An
independent t-test showed that the treatment group and comparison group had a difference regarding the gain
scores from pre to post test.

Teacher perceived affordances of the ASTPD approach
We identified four ways in which the ASTPD approach has supported the teachers' learning to enact productive
dialogue practices,  including:  (1)   focusing  teachers' attention on  certain dialogue  practices for targeted
improvement,    (2) raising  teachers' awareness  of their  dialogue  practices through  quantifying the dialogue
practices, (3) deepening teacher reflection on practices through comparison with others' dialogue practices and
(4) supporting noticing and reflection on the changes in dialogue practices by continued feedback on changes.

Conclusion and implications
It is conjectured that this new TPD model will maximize the benefits of classroom data in widening teachers'
space of reflection. It balances teachers' autonomy to focus on different areas of their own concern while focusing
their attention on  salient features relevant to dialogue  practices and hence  creating a space for personalized
learning. The paper has significant contributions to the thinking modes related to effective teacher learning and
PD facilitated by learning analytics. The ASTPD approach has raised our awareness on the relation between
learning and reflection, as well as the emphasis on the relevance of using the teachers' own classroom data in their
professional learning community to inform their future practice.

References
Brown, J. S., Collins, A. M., & Duguid, P. (1989). Situated cognition and the culture of learning. Educational
         Researcher, 18(1), 32-42.
Chen, G., Chan, C. K. K., Yu, J., Hu, L., Clarke, S. N., & Resnick, L. (2018). The impact of video-based and data-
         supported professional development on classroom dynamics. In Proceedings of the 13th International
         Conference of the Learning Sciences (ICLS 2018).
Chen, G., Clarke, S. N., & Resnick, L. B. (2015). Classroom discourse analyzer (CDA): A discourse analytic tool
         for teachers. Technology, Instruction, Cognition and Learning, 10(2), 85-105.
Knight, S., & Shum, S. B. (2017). Theory and Learning Analytics. In C. Lang, G. Siemens, A. Wise, & D. Gasevic
         (Eds.), The Handbook of Learning Analytics (pp. 17-22). Society for Learning Analytics Research.
Resnick, L. B., Michaels, S., & O'Connor, C. (2010). How (well structured) talk builds the mind. In D. Preiss &
         R. Sternberg (Eds.), Innovations in educational psychology (pp. 163-194). New York, NY: Springer.
Vygotsky, L. S. (1978). Mind in society. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Wise, A. F., & Shaffer, D. W. (2015). Why Theory Matters More than Ever in the Age of Big Data. Journal of
         Learning Analytics, 2(2), 5-13.

Acknowledgment
This work was supported by Hong Kong RGC grant No. 27606915 and PICO grant No. 2017.A8.073.18C.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                   960                                                  © ISLS
