                     Using Voice Assistant Skills in Family Life
                                Diana Beirl, UCL, UK, dianabeirl01@gmail.com
                                   Yvonne Rogers, UCL, UK, y.rogers@ucl.ac.uk
                             Nicola Yuill, University of Sussex, nicolay@sussex.ac.uk

        Abstract: Voice assistants are increasingly prevalent in family life, being used, for example,
        for  listening  to  music, finding  out information,    asking  jokes and playing   games     together.
        However, little research shows how such technology influences dynamic family interactions
        in the home over time. An in-the-wild study was conducted in six family homes over three
        weeks. An Alexa, with a number of skills, was set up in each home for the families to use. The
        findings showed differences in use over time. To begin, family cohesion behavior and family
        rituals were most prevalent. At the end of the study, the skills were found to motivate distinct
        family interaction patterns: including more collaboration to manage Alexa and scaffolding of
        children's interactions with Alexa, given developmental differences in users' grasp of Alexa's
        capabilities   and  limitations. We  discuss  how    voice assistants support  different  interaction
        patterns and potentially, offer different learning opportunities.

Introduction
A new technology in many family homes is a voice assistant, such as Amazon's Alexa or Google Home. These
devices are often placed in the kitchen or living room, enabling all to interact with it; providing an additional
source of entertainment for the family, for example, telling jokes, playing music, keeping track of time and
playing games. Recently, Amazon's Alexa has expanded its repertoire by enabling users to download a diversity
of `skills'. These are voice-driven capabilities that are intended to provide a more personalized experience. For
example, "Open   the   Magic  Door"  is  an adventure  skill  that allows  users to choose  their path    in a  story by
selecting different options through the narrative. Another one, "Kids court", allows families to settle arguments
in an Alexa-run court while learning about the law.
        Many of the skills are designed to support multiple users taking part at the same time, offering the
potential for families to play together. This kind of social interaction is further encouraged by the affordance of
the physical device ­ that differs from other virtual voice assistants, found on phones and laptops, insofar as
their physical presence affords joint ownership and use ­ similar to other domestic devices, such as the radio,
TV and toaster. Little is known, however, about how this combination of device and interactive user experiences
are used by families in their own homes.
        Playing games and music together can contribute to family bonding and building social and emotional
connections  (Boer  et al., 2014). However,   the  pervasive  uptake    of technology  in the  home   is  often seen  as
disrupting such  shared  engagement,     arguably  resulting in less face-to-face conversation   (Turkle,    2015). But
might the introduction of virtual assistants, as shared devices, provide both new opportunities and challenges for
the ways   families interact in the home?   In  particular,  could the   new  types of skills, that   run on  the  voice
assistants, support these kinds of family interactions, by enabling new repertoires and learning to emerge? If so,
how  do  they manifest  themselves?    Conversely,   could   interacting with  them  lead   some  family   members    to
dominate while others get frustrated? Could they even promote sibling rivalry and family arguments?
        We    began  to address  these   questions by conducting     an in-the-wild study   observing   how    the voice
assistant, Alexa, was used and accommodated in family homes over a period of three weeks. Three different
types of skills were downloaded onto it, for the categories of music, storytelling and games. These skills differ
in the role that Alexa plays. In providing music, Alexa acts purely to provide content for the user to enjoy either
for themselves or as a shared experience. The user usually drives what is played, either independently or in
consultation  with  other   people present. In  storytelling,   Alexa  has  a greater  role in providing     potentially
immersive content. An audio story is presented with options that lead to different outcomes. hence providing
more interaction between Alexa and the users. Games, such as Kids Hub, support a diversity of interaction
styles, that have more potential for multiple users interacting with Alexa, as well as parent-child pairs.
        The aim of our study was to explore how families learn the new skills and appropriate them into their
life. Video observations and interviews were conducted to collect data for how and how often families used the
skills. The findings from the study were analysed in terms of different kinds of family interactions exhibited
across families. A  number   of different  types  of interactions  were  identified that  facilitated family   cohesion,
bonding and empathy. Some entailed helping children to learn how to play, ask questions and take turns. Others
encouraged rituals, routines and rivalry often exhibited in family life. We discuss how families adapt and exploit

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                     96                                                       © ISLS
the constraints imposed by voice assistants, like Alexa, to play, talk and learn and conversely, how different
Alexa skills shape family interactions.

Background
The home provides an informal learning environment where it is commonplace for parents to buy technological
devices,  video   games   and   electronic toys  for their  children to   learn  with. Family    practices,   such  as  how
technology    is used   for play in the    home,  have   an influence    in developing  children's     competencies    with
technology (Plowman et al., 2010). Children's experiences with technology are influenced by specific family
contexts  and   family  culture (Weisner,  2002).  But   how   effective is home   technology    in  supporting  learning?
Plowman et al. (2012) conducted a two-year long observation of families, with pre-school children, on use of
technology in the home. They identified four main areas of learning which can be supported by technology: (i)
acquiring operational skills such as learning how to click buttons and learning about cause and effect situations,
(ii) expanding    general   knowledge   such   as  early literacy  and   numeracy,     (iii) increasing   self-efficacy   for
curiosity-driven learning and (iv) learning about technology in everyday life.
         Based on an ethnographic study of family routines, Davidoff et al., (2005) forewarned how smart home
devices may negatively impact the balance of control in the management of family life, such as leisure planning.
However, studies of the introduction of novel technology into family homes has been found to impact family
behavior   in a  variety of ways. For   example,   Ganesh   et al. (2014)   found  that the   deployment    of augmented
reality technology in a family home setting was able to positively distract pre-school age fussy eaters from their
dislike of green vegetables but also negatively distracted their siblings. The technology worked by removing the
fussy eater's focal attention from the peas on their plate and instead switching their attention to observing and
playing with animated lights projected onto it. Instead of simply refusing to eat the peas ­ as they normally did -
the augmentation encouraged the young children to view the plate of food in a new way, and in doing so, shift
their focus from eating as a primary activity. However, when parents and siblings also took part in encouraging
the fussy child to eat their peas, the new technology sometimes triggered a negative response, causing sibling
jealousy and competition. Hence, the context had a positive effect on the fussy eater but also impacted on the
social dynamics of the family.
         It has also been found that technology designed for the home can engage all family members. Plowman
et al. (2010), for example, observed how parents and older siblings contribute to young children's engagement
with home technology through guiding and scaffolding their interaction through spoken language, gestures and
expressions. Conversely, school-age children can take more leading roles: a study of parent-child shared reading
on   tablets versus paper   books  reported  that  school-age    children   sometimes   dominated     when   reading   from
screens  compared    to  paper  (Yuill &   Martin, 2016).   Furthermore,    device type  affected   the   nature of  family
interaction: using a screen altered the pair's physical positioning and the interaction quality was less warm than
for  paper   books. Parents  may  also  introduce    a narrative through    the technology     that may   be  of particular
motivational interest to their child. For example, Bhömer et al. (2010) designed a photo sharing device intended
as a table centerpiece where personal photos downloaded from Facebook could be shared with the family at
mealtimes. They found how different family members used the device as an opportunistic display of affection to
each other, saying how much they loved particular photographs that popped up. They also found it was used to
highlight and reinforce family ties, through the types of conversation that were triggered.
         Short   et al.  (2017) found  greater  intergenerational  equity   of  participation  with  a robot  assistant   for
activities with distinct participant roles. Reeves and Nass (2006) have conducted much research investigating
how people approach and treat computers. They will often confide in them more and anthropomorphize them,
treating them as if they had human-like qualities.     Other research has shown how people respond to technologies
as though they were human even if they know they are not (Fong et al, 2003). Additionally, people have been
shown to attribute personalities to technology and to apply similar politeness norms from human conversation to
such interactions (Nass et al., 1999).
         Virtual Assistants add a new dimension to how home technology can play out in family life. Not only
can they take over the control of certain everyday activities, such as reminding users about events, they can also
act  as ambient   conversational  `partners'.  The   nature and   equity    of family  interactions   is also likely   to be
influenced by the structure of different activities provided by virtual assistants. Young children have judged
various virtual assistants to be friendly and trustworthy, and to vary in intelligence (Doucleff, 2017). Druga et
al., (2017) found that younger children (3-4 years old) experienced difficulty interacting with conversational
and chat agents, resulting in them becoming restless. Sometimes, they would try to reword their questions or
speak slower. While people so far have used virtual assistants primarily to seek information, they have also been
shown to contribute to humor in social situations and interruptions in human conversation (Porcheron et al.,
2018).  Multi-member     households    and  particularly  those  with  children   are  more    likely  to personify    voice

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                       97                                                       © ISLS
assistant devices. However, a study investigating virtual assistants in multi-party conversation demonstrated a
number of problematic features which affect the flow of normal social interaction (Purington et al., 2017). This
included the need to repeat and refine queries which were not understood by the virtual assistants, and enforced
silence by conversation participants so that the virtual assistants could better understand their queries. However,
these devices  also enabled   collaboration, in  that any member     could  interact  with the device   at any given
moment. Family members also tended to reason and reflect about the queries that were made. Porcheron et al.
(2018) also   examined  how    voice assistants were  used   by families in  their own    homes.  They  conducted  a
conversational  analysis   of some   audio  recordings  that revealed subtle  cues    and  mechanisms   used   during
conversations. They report how a family's interaction with the Amazon Echo is seamlessly interwoven with
other ongoing activities, for example, at family mealtimes where parents are at the same time trying to get their
child to eat their food. They point out how our conversations with each other and voice­assisted technologies
interleave in nuanced ways, rather than being separate conversations between the family or the family and the
device, that jump from one to another.
          A recent panel discussion on voice assistants (Kaye et al., 2018) identified as important research foci
the ways that families interact with voice assistants, and how users understand their capabilities and limitations.
Some answers are provided by Sciuto et al. (2018) who analyzed Alexa voice logs for 75 users over a period of
about a year, and also interviewed a number of Alexa-owning families with young children under 4. However,
to understand the roles that Alexa plays in family interaction, we also need to observe audiovisual dynamic
interactions in families with varying compositions, and children across a wider age range, preferably over a
period of time and in relation to a range of different voice assistant skills that might engage users differently.
The aim of our research was to explore how families approach and interact with different skills downloaded
onto Alexa in their own home. Our focus was on how parents and children engage with different skills when
they are together, across a range of ages and family types, including only children and those with siblings.

Method
An in-the-wild study was conducted in six family's homes. The families were given an Alexa to use at home
over a period of 3 weeks. They were visited at the beginning and end of the study period when all or most of the
family could be present. Ethical approval was obtained from the University Ethics Committee and informed
written consent for self and children was gained from parents, as well as assent from the children. They were
told that their conversations with Alexa would be recorded for subsequent analysis. All families were given the
opportunity to review the Alexa recordings before analysis in case they wanted to remove any items: none chose
to remove items.

Participants
Participants were recruited through flyers, social media, word of mouth and snowballing in south-east UK. The
details of the families who participated in the study are shown in Table 1. All had children in the age group of 2-
13 years. A broad age range of children was selected to increase the potential for a wider set of interactions to be
revealed. Five of the families had used a voice assistant at home and the other was familiar with them.

Skills
Three skills were pre-loaded onto the voice assistants. These were (i) Music, (ii) Pac-Man stories and (iii) Kids
Hub. The families with previous experience were familiar with playing music but did not have experience with
the other two  skills. The skills were  all highly-rated on  Amazon   and   appropriate   for the wide  age range of
participating children. They   were  chosen  for  the types  of interaction they offered   and the  degree  to which
multiple family members would likely participate in using them. (i) Music is essentially providing content, as
easily for an individual as for a group. Individual use is supported because music interest likely varies across our
wide age range. However, music could also potentially encourage playful interaction in the form of dancing and
singing, given the shared audio experience for anyone in the room at the time. (ii) Pac-Man stories is a spoken
interactive adventure   style game.  It similarly   provides content  accessible for   an  individual, but has  more
potential for interaction, because   Alexa  invites the player  to choose   alternate paths.  The game  incorporates
sound effects and music, thus supporting the user to become immersed in the story. As with music, this may
also have the potential to encourage participation in the form of dancing or engagement from family members
not primarily using the skill. (iii) Kids Hub supports a diverse range of more interactive participation, allowing
users to choose from a variety of activities including songs with actions, Tongue Twisters, Pictionary and Kiddy
Olympics. These activities can be readily used by more than one person and are appropriate for families with
single and multiple children.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                    98                                                    © ISLS
Table 1: Details of families who participated in the study

              Children            Age         Parents           Previous voice assistant
Family 1      Boy                 6           Mum, dad          Yes ­ Google Home
Family 2      Boy                 11          Mum, dad          Yes ­ Amazon Alexa
Family 3      Boy                 13          Mum               Yes ­ Amazon Alexa
Family 4      Boy, girl, girl     6, 9, 11    Mum, dad          Yes ­ Google Home
Family 5      Boy, boy            7, 10       Mum, mum          No
Family 6      Girl                2           Mum               Yes ­ Amazon Alexa

Procedure
The researcher visited each family home for about an hour and set up the Amazon device in a place chosen by
the family ­ the living room or the kitchen. She explained how to use the three skills. The families were free to
explore them.    A   camera   was  set  up in the    corner of  the room   to record the  interactions   during her  visit.
Afterwards, the family members were asked about their reflections of Alexa and how they imagined it would be
used in the home. The families were asked to explore the skills for a week. They were then sent a link to the
online Alexa  Skills    catalogue  and  given the    option of  downloading    additional skills, for  the following  two
weeks. The researcher visited the families again at the end of the study to ask them to reflect on their use of the
Alexa skills.

Data collection and analysis
Video recordings were taken during the first and second visits and conversations and interactions with Alexa
transcribed.  In addition,  the voice   recordings    from  when    anyone   interacted with Alexa   were  collected  and
transcribed. Both were coded separately for each visit by one rater using NVivo software, and all codings were
reviewed by a second rater and placed into themes. These themes were extracted and validated as modelled by
Saldana  (2016),     by discussing   them   with     colleagues and   checking    interpretations with   the  participants
themselves during the second visit.

Findings
All the families   tried  out  the  three  skills and  several  families   downloaded    other skills. There   was   much
enthusiasm about how they had interacted with Alexa and how it became part of their family rituals. Usage of
the skills persisted across the three weeks - as evidenced by the conversations recorded by Alexa. Some families
reported using the device during meal times while others used it during shared activities such as cooking or
after-school play. The younger children (aged 6) in the families were curious about Alexa, asking it a range of
questions, as if it was a friend, for example, "Alexa, what am I doing right now?", "Hey Alexa, what's your
second name and your third name?", "Alexa, who is your favorite YouTuber?", "Alexa, is Google and Siri your
friends?" One family (family 1) even resorted to asking Alexa during a meal time to resolve a debate: "Once we
used it when we were all eating, like we were having our meal and asking it questions...That's what it was, we
were discussing something, and we didn't know who was right, so we asked Alexa..."
        To examine further the different ways Alexa became integrated into family life we identified and then
categorized excerpts from the transcripts in terms of three main themes: family cohesion, family rituals and
scaffolding.  These   were  further  classified   in terms  of  the specific  mechanisms   used   when   interacting with
Alexa. Certain themes recurred both within a single observation (i.e. behaviors were observed repetitively in the
same family   or   a theme    was mentioned   a   number    of times within   the same   family)  in addition to being  a
common theme across families. The quantity of incidences together with specific examples and comments made
by the families are provided below. The most frequent interactions observed were in the scaffolding category,
where different family members helped each other but especially younger children interact with Alexa.

Family cohesion
Many   forms  of   family cohesion   was   observed   across   all families.  These were  classified  in terms  of shared
laughter, teasing, exchanging gestures and facial expressions and family rivalry.

Shared  laughter.    The  interactions  with  Alexa    often   resulted in much   shared  laughter.   62   instances were
identified during the three weeks for all families. They typically happened when family members were playing a
game and when a mishap occurred, that Alexa was not privy to. For example, when playing the Kids Hub skill,
family 3 chose the activity "Pictionary", a charades-style guessing game. In this game, Player 1 has ten seconds

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                        99                                                    © ISLS
to leave the room and following this Player 2 is given a word which they have to draw. Player 1 then comes
back in the room, looks at what the other person has drawn and tries to guess the word. In one game, the son
overheard Alexa give his mother the word "dog" to draw. They continued playing the game and the mother
mentioned the word by mistake to which the son retorts:

        Mother: "This doesn't even look like a dog"
        Son: "You just told me!"
        At which point they both laugh and the mother continues, "Well you heard it anyway. I'm not good <at
        drawing> this looks like a cat, maybe even a pig"

Shared laughter was also observed in situations where Alexa didn't work as intended, for example when it was
unintentionally activated by a TV ad (family 4). Alexa's misunderstandings of what someone said were also a
source of amusement. One child recalled a situation where Alexa misunderstood his mother's request: "Oh,
when you were asking how long to cook sausages for. And then it tried to order sausages!" (family 3).

Teasing. There were also several instances of teasing (34) recorded, although considerably less than the shared
laughter, across five of the families. Typically, family members interacted with Alexa to make fun of or provoke
other family members in a playful way. For example, the child in family 2 was playing a music quiz online and
losing to an opponent (Tom) in Texas. He kept looking at his dad to see if he knew the answers:

        <Alexa plays next song>
        <Child laughs and grimaces to his dad to indicate that he doesn't know the song>
        Child: "Skip"
        Alexa: "The song is Timber by Pitbull, Tom answered correctly"
        Father: "Tom needs to get out more."
        <Next song comes on and child looks at his dad and laughs>
        Father: "don't ask me!"

The parents in family 1 often asked Alexa to play the good morning and the good evening song. When asked
about this, the mother laughed and said that she would put the song on to annoy her son in the morning while he
was getting ready for school or when it was time to get ready for bed.

Exchanging gestures and facial expressions. Families often reacted to interactions with Alexa by exchanging
facial expressions, mimicking Alexa or making faces in response to things that it said. There were 41 instances
of this coded for families 1,3,4 and 6. An example of exchanging facial expressions was when the mother and
son (family 1) were listening to "fun facts":

        Alexa: "In the 18th Century it was believed that kissing a donkey could relieve toothache."
        <Son and mother make a disgusted face at each other >

An example  of mimicking  Alexa  was when       one family  switched Alexa    from having a British accent  to an
Australian one. The father then started speaking in an Australian accent which the children found funny. They
then also tried to talk in an Australian accent. This led to much banter.

Family rivalry. A normal aspect of family life is sibling rivalry - when children think they are getting unequal
amounts of attention or responsiveness from their parents, or intergenerational conflict. 45 instances of this were
coded for families 2, 3, 4 and 5. Family 2 said they sometimes struggled to take turns to choose music because
they did not like each other's choices. In contrast to other personal technologies, where the person holding a
device or remote control has sole control, everyone has equal access to control of Alexa. This can mean anyone
can override or interrupt what the other has asked Alexa to do as one father commented:"It was like one of us
would put music on and then the other one would change it when they couldn't put up with it anymore, so we
weren't taking turns."One mother also explained how when her children try to use Alexa at the same time it
could lead to arguments. For example, the      siblings in Family 4  often   competed for Alexa's attention with
different requests and then became upset when the mother gave her support to the other one:

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                   100                                                  © ISLS
         Mother: "Alexa play barking"
         Youngest child: "I don't want that!"
         Mother: "Well you're gonna get it."
         Youngest child: But he got what he wanted!

Another time a mother (family 5) tried to reason with her elder child about needing to be fair with his younger
brother:

         Mother: " Did you take it in turns?" <when asking Alexa for music>
         Elder child: "Yeah, but then he got to choose."
         Mother: "Well probably because you'd been up for an hour already and had loads of choices before he
         came and had breakfast."

Family rituals
Family rituals are an integral part of family life. These were much in evidence when interacting with Alexa,
with 58 instances coded across all families. Most were triggered during the playing of a song. For example,
when a child requested Alexa play the `Baby Shark' song every day, the mother groaned each time, but then the
whole family   would  start dancing and singing    along. Another      example, is where  the mother   of family 1
requested a song on her son's behalf to which the father looked at the son and encouraged him to show off his
dance moves:

         Mother: "Alexa play the gummy bear song."
         <Son looks at his mum>
         Father: "Show her your dance moves"

Another  child (family 4)   commented how    their parents now  refer    them   to ask Alexa  if they want to find
something out rather than looking it up themselves on the internet: "If mum or dad are doing something and I
ask them a question instead of going like have you searched it up they would say go and ask Alexa." This shift
requires them formulating and talking aloud their query which the parents can be privy to if in the same room
and join in or be aware of what their children are trying to find out.

Scaffolding
A common occurrence was when family members collaborated by encouraging each other when using Alexa.
111 instances of these were observed across all families ­ making this the most frequently observed category.
This happened either when the family worked together as a team or when a more competent family member
helped a younger member interact with Alexa.
         When playing a story skill with Alexa, such as PacMan, family members sometimes whispered to each
other what they should do before asking Alexa ­ so as not to let it hear or know about their discussion before
making their choice. Thumbs up gestures and nodding were also employed during this kind of behind the scenes
negotiation process. Sometimes one person would take the role of leader while the rest of the family members
would whisper to each other what to answer. For example, family 4 discussed which option to choose before the
youngest child eventually shouted out their answer:

         Alexa: "You could pick up the fork or you could read the sign."
         <All whisper to each other to decide which one.>
         Mother: "What do you want to do?"
         Youngest child shouts: "Pick up the fork!"

When Alexa did not recognize what a younger member of the family said, other family members often repeated
it slowly to encourage the child to try again but to speak more clearly. For example, the youngest child in family
4 wanted to play a funny song but was not able to say the word of the song correctly. His older brother helped
him by repeating it and gesturing at Alexa to indicate where to speak. One mother (Family 5) commented on
how it was much harder for the younger child to be understood by Alexa. When they struggled with some of the
questions she would try to rephrase it to be simpler, so the child could learn how to be more concise. Similarly,

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                  101                                                    © ISLS
in family 2,  the father  pointed out how  Alexa does        not   understand   his 11-year-old  son as well  as   himself.
Another mother (Family 1) often encouraged her child to interact with Alexa by pointing at it:

          Mother to child: Do you want to hear another?
          <Mother points at the Alexa to encourage child to ask>
          Child to mother: "yes"

Another strategy families used to encourage their children to speak to Alexa was to tell them how to ask Alexa
questions. Families also encouraged their children to practice speaking to it. Hence, there were many examples
of parents helping their children to learn how to speak with Alexa to make themselves understood.

Discussion
The findings demonstrated how families engaged in a diversity of interactions when using the Alexa skills. They
developed new family rituals and encouraged each other to talk to and take part in games with Alexa. Many of
these  interactions could be  seen as  contributing      to social  and  emotional   bonding, leading   to further family
cohesion.  For example,   the  use of non-verbal behavior          while interacting   with Alexa   provided  a means  of
expressing empathy. They all took to having a new voice in the family home ­ like having a new family pet.
However, the interactions that occurred were not always harmonious and sometimes led to family disputes. In a
way, this reflects the richness of family life, where children learn to compete with their siblings but also learn to
empathize with them; where families develop new rituals by playing games or performing together and in doing
so bond over them but at other times use the opportunity to tease each other.
          Lots of shared laughter occurred because of Alexa's mishaps especially when it misunderstood them.
For younger children, this could be quite frustrating and at times challenging. Parents and elder children were
acutely aware of what they were going through and would often try to help them out, by showing them how to
interact with Alexa. Other times, activities with Alexa led to joking, joshing and teasing, building upon pre-
existent family discourses about particular interests or sensitivities. Alexa was also incorporated into existing
family dynamics and could sometimes encourage or amplify those, for example, when commenting on different
tastes in music   or different realms  of expertise      across    family   members.   Different interests across  family
members could also lead to disagreement, particularly when children wanted to play certain songs or games
repeatedly. This happened both between siblings and between parents and children.
          Alexa in its current form was unable to recognize different family members by their voice. This meant
it could  not  understand  different   people talking       simultaneously    ­  which     families often  do   in family
conversations, and during which they are able to hone in on what one person is saying (cf. the cocktail party
effect). To adapt to Alexa not being able to do this, families adapted their behavior. For example, they would all
sit together, often on the same sofa, facing Alexa and communicate with it, as a family unit, rather than carry on
having a conversation with each other. Alexa became the central focus for their interaction. This differs from
Porcheron et al.'s (2018) finding where the conversation with Alexa was interwoven with the parents taking
turns to talk to cajole their child to eat their dinner.
          Families frequently used back-channel methods of communicating, such as whispers, to avoid getting
unintended  responses  from    Alexa. Sometimes  this       was    done  in the spirit  of  pretend play,  where   families
whispered together so that the children would learn how to make joint decisions together when playing a game
that others would not be able to hear ­ in this case Alexa. Once agreed on their answer, an elected person (self
or other) in the family would call it out to Alexa. This pattern of interaction was observed when families played
games together. However, problems sometimes occurred when there were younger children in the family who
found it difficult to follow the rules of playing a game or a quiz, or when siblings felt unequally treated. When
such times arose, families changed tack to deal with them, for example, the parents and elder children adopted
helper roles to encourage and make suggestions for what the younger child should say to Alexa.
          Alexa was also found to encourage families to jointly act out together, namely singing and dancing.
Having   an external  participant  made this  appear      like   a performance,     as evidenced  by  parents   sometimes
referring to Alexa as a potential audience, for example, suggesting that their children show Alexa their dance
moves. Listening to music together is something families may already do, for example on journeys in the car.
Teenagers may listen to music together and act out the singer's dance routines. With Alexa, it became possible
for families to feel comfortable with all the members dancing and singing repeatedly. Even the mother groaning
appeared to enjoy being part of the ritual. And, as Druga et al., (2017) point out, family rituals have a positive
impact on family cohesion and emotional well-being. In terms of learning, children were inducted into a whole
range of skills in how to tailor their communication to a new audience member, how to hold the floor, and how

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                        102                                                    © ISLS
to use  back    channels of    communication     when  there are  interactants  with  different needs.  Having   a new
interactant in the house also gave new possibilities for performance, and engagement with music in particular.
Further work will reveal how the role of voice assistants in the family may evolve over the longer term.

Conclusion
Voice assistants, like Alexa, are making big in-roads into family homes. Our study showed how families readily
appropriate them into their family life, playing, singing, performing and even asking Alexa questions to resolve
family disputes. Alexa was found to encourage much shared laughter and helping each other but also trigger
sibling rivalry,  teasing  and    family   arguments.  However,     both   negative   and  positive aspects  of  family
interactions are an integral part of learning about each other and developing empathy skills. Contrary to Turkle's
(2015) concerns about the digital age, interactions with voices assistants such as Alexa, may even help children
learn the art and joy of conversation in the presence of humans and machines.

References
Bhömer, M.T., Helmes, J., O'Hara, K. & van den Hoven. E. (2010). 4Photos: a collaborative photo sharing
         experience. In Proc. of NordiCHI '10. ACM Press, 52-61.
Boer, D., & Abubakar, A. (2014). Music listening in families and peer groups: Benefits for young people's
         social cohesion and emotional well-being across four cultures. Frontiers in Psychology. 5.
Davidoff,   S., Lee, M.K.,     Yiu, C., Zimmerman,     J. &  Dey,  A.  (2006).  Principles of  smart  home  control. In
         International conference on ubiquitous computing (UBICOMP). Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg. 19-34
Doucleff,     M.     and       Aubrey,    A.     (2017).    Alexa,     Are     You     Safe     for    My    Children?
         https://www.npr.org/sections/health-shots/2017/10/30/559863326/alexa-are-you-safe-for-my-children.
Druga, S., Williams, R., Breazeal, C. & Resnick, M. (2017). "Hey Google is it OK if I eat you?" In Proc. of the
         2017 Conference on Interaction Design and Children (IDC '17), ACM Press. 595­600.
Fong,   T., Nourbakhsh,    I., &  Dautenhahn,    K. (2003).  A  survey    of socially interactive robots. Robotics and
         Autonomous Systems. 42(3-4), 143-166.
Ganesh,  S.,  Marshall,  P.,   Rogers,  Y.  &  O'Hara,   K. (2014).  FoodWorks:     tackling fussy  eating by   digitally
         augmenting children's meals. In Proc. of NordiCHI'14. ACM Press, 147-156.
Kaye, J., Fischer, J., Hong, J., Bentley, F.R., Munteanu, C., Hiniker, A., Tsai, J.Y. & Ammari, T. (2018). Panel:
         Voice Assistants, UX Design and Research. In Proc. Conference on Human Factors in Computing
         Systems (CHI EA '18). ACM, New York, 01, 5 pages.
Nass,  C.,  Moon,  Y.,   & Carney,    P. (1999).   Are people   polite to  computers?   Responses   to  computer-based
         interviewing systems. J Appl Soc Psychol 29, 5: 1093-1109.
Plowman, L., Stephen, C. & McPake, J. (2010). Growing up with technology: Young children learning in a
         digital world. New York: Routledge.
Plowman, L., Stevenson, O., Stephen, C. & McPake, J. (2012). Preschool children's learning with technology at
         home. Computers & Education, 59 (1), 30­37.
Porcheron, M., Fischer, J.E., Reeves, S. & Sharples, S. (2018). Voice Interfaces in Everyday Life. Proceedings
         of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI '18). 640, 12 pages.
Purington, A., Taft, J.G., Sannon, S., Bazarova, N.N. & Taylor, S.H. (2017). "Alexa is my new BFF": Social
         Roles,   User Satisfaction,    and Personification  of  the  Amazon    Echo.   Proc. of  the  CHI  Conference
         Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI EA '17). ACM Press. 2853­2859.
Reeves, B. & Nass, C. (2006). The media equation: How people treat computers, television, and new media like
         real people and places. Stanford, CA: CSLI.
Saldana, J. (2016). The coding manual for qualitative researchers. Sage.
Sciuto, A., Saini, A., Forlizzi, J. & Hong.J. (2018). "Hey Alexa, What's Up?: A Mixed-Methods Studies of In-
         Home Conversational Agent Usage." In Proceedings of DIS'2018, 857-868. ACM, NY.
Short,  E.S.,   Swift-Spong,   K.,  Shim,  H.,   Wisniewski,   K.M.,   Zak,  D.K.,  Wu,   S. &  Matari,    M.J. (2017).
         Understanding     social   interactions with socially  assistive robotics in intergenerational family  groups.
         26th IEEE International Symposium on Robot and Human Interactive Communication. 236-241.
Turkle, S. (2015). Reclaiming conversation: the power of talk in a digital age. Penguin.
Wang, B., Taylor, L. & Sun, Q. (2018). Families that play together stay together: Investigating family bonding
         through video games. New Media & Society.
Weisner, T. (2002). Ecocultural understanding of children's developmental pathways. Hum. Dev., 45, 275-281.
Yuill, N. & Martin, A. (2016). Curling up with a good E-Book: Mother-child shared story reading on screen or
         paper affects embodied interaction and warmth." Frontiers in psychology 7 (2016): 1951.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                       103                                                  © ISLS
