           Balancing the Scales: Implications of Model Size for
                                   Mathematical Engagement

                        Kylie Peppler, University of California, Irvine, kpeppler@uci.edu
                      R. Mishael Sedas, Indiana University, Bloomington, rmsedas@iu.edu
                          Anna Keune, Indiana University, Bloomington, akeune@iu.edu
                     Suraj Uttamchandani, Indiana University, Bloomington, suttamch@iu.edu

         Abstract: We discuss a constructionism-based geometry curriculum in which middle school
         students built models of tents, first at a full, large-size scale, and then at a small scale. We build
         on body syntonicity to analyze how students learn through relating abstract knowledge to the
         knowledge of their bodies. Using video data, we analyze the affordances and constraints for
         students' mathematical engagement in creating models. We conclude with brief implications
         for mathematics education and for CSCL research.

Introduction and background: Mathematical modeling and scale
Given the value of geometry learning for both educational and industrial applications, it is necessary to design
pedagogical practices that support such learning in ways that are meaningful for adolescents (Ma, 2016). While
math educational researchers have studied the use of a variety of tools and manipulatives including project-based
math curricula (e.g., Galindo & Lee, 2018), it is not yet clear whether students working with differently sized
artifacts has unique affordances for their understanding of geometry. Thus, we sought to understand a) what
mathematical practices were made visible in students' engagement with model-making activities, and b) what
were the particular affordances for mathematical engagement in building large-scale and small-scale models?
         In this poster, we present initial findings from a project-based geometry curriculum implemented by
middle   school teachers,  in which students   designed and built tents at two scales.  Our  analysis is based       on
constructionism (Papert, 1980), in which learning is presumed to happen most effectively when learners create
personally meaningful objects in social contexts. Furthermore, Papert (1980) argued that anything can be learned
if it is coherent, `in tune,' or compatible with the learner's knowledge of their own bodies (i.e., body knowledge).
This is what Papert calls "body syntonicity" (1980, p. 68). For example, the abstract notion of the height of a
triangle is in tune or related to the learners' knowledge about the height of their own bodies. Our analysis, guided
by the concept of body syntonicity, showed that students engaged their bodies and target math concepts differently
across the two scale tents. This points to implications for the design of collaborative learning environments,
including how to structure the scaling up and down of model making within collaborative and project-based
learning (PBL) curriculum.

Methods
This poster draws on data collected during a PBL math course that took place in a chartered public middle school
with 72 students. The course was structured for students to design and build tents at two different scales: (1) large-
scale structures that could fit a group of eight students and (2) small-scale models. The large-scale tent was built
before the smaller, model-scale one, contrary to common practices where the model or prototype is built before a
full-scale version. We focus on one small group of eight students as they worked across large- and small-scale
structures, video-recording their work for qualitative analysis throughout the unit. We iteratively coded the videos
to identify moments when students employed geometry concepts and practices based on state standards (e.g.,
triangle attributes, scale drawing, angle computation,   Pythagorean theorem).  Following    the concept        of body
syntonicity and using interaction analysis (Jordan & Henderson, 1995), we zoomed in on particular episodes that
involved  geometry   concepts  and  analyzed how  student groups  engaged   differently with the math,   tools,     and
materials in each small- and large-scale tent.

Findings
During the building of the large-scale tent, the focal students used their bodies as resources while engaging with
math. They first marked the location of the five vertices of their pentagon-shaped floor plan, starting with the
center point (C, see Figure 1). One youth, Tom, suggested they use some nearby PVC pipes as rulers because the
metric tape was not available. The flexible pipes were long enough for the students to lay them flat on the grass
and then lower their own bodies to the ground to visually place the pipes as a way to ensure a straight line between
two points. With a protractor from point C, students measured 72 degrees between two imaginary lines (CB and

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                   961                                                       © ISLS
CD). However, the combination of makeshift rulers and a measurement error caused by using a small protractor
when trying to identify point D led to them placing the flag for the third vertice outside the pentagon (Figure 1,
left, point E). Thus, the segment BE ended up longer than the expected 8 feet (BD). As the students worked again
to locate the right location for point D, Tom lay down, using himself as a `ruler' to estimate the height of the
triangle (distance CF) that needed to be 5.5 feet long (Figure 1, center).

Figure 1. Tom discovered segment BE is too long (left). Tom estimates the height (center). Area diagram (right).

Moreover, the use of the two different scales impacted tool selection, a notable difference in the division of labor,
as well as the size and behavior of the materials due to their weight. For instance, in the large-scale tent, multiple
students had to help each other as they placed the roof and used heavy tools when placing the wooden stakes to
support the walls (Figure 2a). In the small-scale model, one student could cut and sew the canvas roof panels or
use simpler tools such as glue guns to install the tent walls (Figure 2b). In fact, group work and collaborations
were impeded more in the small-scale work than in the large building project.

Figure 2a. Large-scale tents afforded collaboration.   Figure 2b. Small-scale tents afforded one-person tasks.

Discussion
The order of first engaging with large-scale models before working on a smaller scale seemed to support students
not only in repeated use of particular geometric concepts and practices, but also in allowing them to engage
differently. For instance, students used their whole bodies to experience actual heights and lengths when lying
down as "rulers" or simply by moving around and inside the tents (or watching others doing it). Students did not
rely solely on "imagining"  how     long 5.5 feet looks,   they collaboratively   created non-standard units   of
measurement that anchored concepts to the world and to themselves. This points to important insights for the
design of collaborative learning environments for geometry learning: Scaling-up before scaling-down may deepen
mathematical collaborative engagement. It also points to ways that future computer-supported programs for digital
model-making, simulation, and mixed reality might consider matters of scale. As for size changes, we need to pay
attention to the impact on the type and use of the tools, the division of labor, and to the sensory information
provided by the physical materials.

References
Galindo, E., & Lee, J. (Eds.). (2018). Rigor, relevance, and relationships: Making mathematics come alive with
        Project-Based Learning (1 Ed.). Reston, VA: National Council of Teachers of Mathematics.
Jordan, B., & Henderson, A. (1995). Interaction analysis: Foundations and practice. Journal of the Learning
        Sciences, 4(1), 39-103.
Ma, J. Y. (2016). Designing disruptions for productive hybridity: The case of walking scale geometry. Journal of
        the Learning Sciences, 25(3), 335-371.
Papert, S. (1980). Mindstorms: Children, computers, and powerful ideas. New York, NY: Basic Books.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                  962                                                   © ISLS
