          Knowledge Building in Robotics for Math Education
                    Ahmad Khanlari, University of Toronto, a.khanlari@mail.utoronto.ca
              Marlene Scardamalia, University of Toronto, marlene.scardamalia@utoronto.ca

        Abstract:   When  integrating  robotics into teaching    activities,     most educators employ
        Competition-Based Learning (CBL) approach. However, CBL may diminish robotics potential,
        because competitions may discourage active construction of knowledge and the development
        of talent by isolating students. In this study, we aim to employ knowledge building pedagogy
        and technology and explore if and how knowledge building creates an innovation network in
        robotics.

Introduction
It has been claimed in some studies (e.g., Giannakopoulos, 2009) that Competition Based Learning (CBL) is the
most effective way to integrate robotics into subjects such as math and physics. In CBL, students build and
program their robots in order to accomplish challenges, beat others and get credit (Kanda, Shimada, & Koizumi,
2012). Although the concept of competition in education is supported by several studies, there are several concerns
in regards to competitions in education. One concern is that during competitive activities, communication and
helping others is usually minimized because students usually perceive their goals as only being reached if other
students fail to achieve their goals (Johnson, Johnson, & Smith, 1991). In fact, the growing emphasis on the final
products of competitive activities sometimes leads students to disregard other goals such as groups' interactions,
collaboration and a shared vision (Cohen, Brody, & Sapon-Shevin, 2004). One potential solution for this concern
is to teach robotics employing collaborative approaches. In this study, we employ knowledge building pedagogy
and technology and explore whether knowledge building pedagogy and technology has the potential to create an
innovation network in robotics?

Theoretical framework
The 12 Knowledge Building principles frame Knowledge Building as an idea-centered pedagogy with students as
epistemic agents, creating knowledge through engaging in complex socio-cognitive interactions in which students
create community  knowledge (Scardamalia  &  Bereiter, 2006).   In this study,    we  employ Innovation network
framework (Gloor, 2006) to explore how students collaborate with each other, and whether an innovation network
is formed. Gloor identified three forms of network engagement: (1) Collaborative Innovation Network (COIN)-
at the core is a team of self-organized and intrinsically self-motivated people who have a collective vision; (2)
Collaborative Learning Network (CLN)- people with shared interests join the core community to discuss new
ideas, learn, and apply innovations; (3) Collaborative Interest Network (CIN)- people at the periphery, often
lurkers, seemingly share interests but do not contribute content. We may think of these different networks as
concentric circles, with a ripple effect from innovative core to the periphery.

Method and plan of analysis
This study explores knowledge work in a Grade 5 class. A total of 24 Grade 5 students attended this study and
explored Mathematics topics (e.g., proportion, measurement, patterning) using robotics, employing Knowledge
Building pedagogy and technology. Students used Knowledge Forum to share their ideas, ask questions, and
discuss their problems with all other students in the community. In order to address the research question, we
employed social network analysis to explore whether the three networks identified by Gloor (2006) is formed.
The notes posted by students in Knowledge Forum is collected, and the network of writers (who communicated
with whom) is created. The measures that are used in this study are betweenness centrality and density. As Gloor
(2006) described, a central cluster of people in the network with high density and low betweenness centrality
forms a COIN. On the other hand, CLNs and CINs have higher betweenness Centrality and lower density, because
"external members are connected only to core team members but not among themselves" (Gloor, 2006, p. 150).
Other statistic measures like note reading is used to examine which students form the CLN and which the CIN.

Data analysis and preliminary results
Figure 1.a shows students' contributions network. According to Gloor (2006), a highly connected cluster of people
is a strong indicator of the emergence of an innovation team. Considering this criterion, a potential COIN team is
identified and shown in Figure 1.b

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                  963                                                   © ISLS
                    Figure 1. a. Students' contributions network, b. the potential COIN network.

            According to Figure 1.b, Alt, Tho, Ash, Ang, Rya are the potential COIN members. To verify the COIN
members have been correctly identified, Gloor suggested a COIN network has a high group density and low group
betweenness centrality. The results of the SNA show that while the density of the whole network is 0.253, the
density of the identified COIN is 1.5, which is in line with Gloor's statement. Also, the group betweenness
centrality, as calculated according to Freeman's index, is 0.027536, which is considered low. Therefore, the results
of the SNA    show   the network  consists  of Alt, Rya, Ash,   Ang,   and Tho has a high  density  and low group
betweenness centrality, which confirms the emergence of a COIN.
            On the other hand, Gloor stated that the CLN and CIN have low density and high group betweenness
centrality. The  density  of the  remaining  network  (i.e.,  the whole network,   excluding the COIN   members)
calculated as 0.11, and the group betweenness centrality equals to 0.052809. The calculated measures confirm the
remaining students form a CLN and a CIN. As stated by Gloor, the CLN members not only -like experts- actively
share knowledge but also -like students- actively seek knowledge (Gloor, 2006). On the other hand, while a
minority of people in a CIN share knowledge, the majority of them are silent knowledge seekers (lurkers) who do
not usually contribute any content (Gloor, 2006). Therefore, students who have posted a reasonable number of
notes (i.e., above the average) and have been actively reading notes (i.e. reading the notes more than the average)
form the CLN. Using log data and considering the criteria described above, Ryd, Kri, Ali, and Tal form the CLN
network. Therefore, the other 14 students form the CIN network. To verify this finding with social network
analysis, we have separated the CLN and CIN networks to calculate network density and the group betweenness
centrality for each network. The network density of the identified CLN is 0.417 and its Group betweenness
centrality equals to 0.046087. On the other hand, the network density of the identified CIN is 0.082 and its
betweenness centrality is 0.136361. The results show that both these networks have lower density and higher GBC
compare to the COIN, which confirm the CLN and CIN are correctly identified.

Conclusion and discussion
This study   was the  first attempt to   employ knowledge     building pedagogy  and technology  in  robotics. The
preliminary  results show    that employing    knowledge  building   pedagogy   in robotics  creates a  community
knowledge in which an innovation network is formed. However, not only the emergence of the COIN is important,
but also the movement of individuals between networks is important; it is important to have a community in which
there are not insiders and outsiders but one where everyone can move between roles of doer, explainer, and critic.
For future direction, we aim to conduct such analyses over time and explore how student collaboration patterns
change over time, and whether students move from one network to the other two networks.

References
Cohen, E.G., Brody, C., & Sapon-Shevin, M. (Eds.) (2004). Teaching cooperative learning: The challenge for
        teacher education. Albany, NY: Suny Press.
Giannakopoulos, N. (2009, September). Experiences from WRO 2009 competition and verifications about the
        robotics incorporation in the school. Paper presented at the Lessons Learnt from the TERECoP Project
        and New Pathways into Educational Robotics across Europe, Athens, Greece.
Gloor, P.   (2006). Swarm    creativity: Competitive advantage    through  collaborative innovation  networks. NY:
        Oxford University Press.
Johnson, D., Johnson, R., & Smith, K. (1991). Active learning: Cooperation in the college classroom. Edina, MN:
        Interaction.
Kanda, T., Shimada, M., & Koizumi, S. (2012). Children learning with a social robot. In the Proceedings of the
        7th annual ACM/IEEE Intl Conference on Human-Robot Interaction (pp. 351­358). ACM, NY, NY.
Scardamalia, M., & Bereiter, C. (2006). Knowledge building: Theory, pedagogy, and technology. In R. K. Sawyer
        (Ed.), The Cambridge handbook of the learning sciences (pp. 97-115). Cambridge University Press.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                     964                                                 © ISLS
