Microblogging for Joint Construction of Meaning in the Classroom
                     Jan Arild Dolonen, University of Oslo, Norway, j.a.dolonen@uv.uio.no
                      Ingvill Rasmussen, University of Oslo, Norway, ingvillr@iped.uio.no
                     Sten Runar Ludvigsen, University of Oslo, Norway, stenl@iped.uio.no

          Abstract: In this study we present a digital microblogging tool called Talkwall with the aim
          to  contribute  to research   focusing   on  how     digital  technology  can   facilitate  student
          participation, dialogue, and learning in the classroom. By analyzing classroom interactions,
          we show how Talkwall supported joint meaning making in a whole-class setting.

Introduction
Research   on   classroom  dialogues   shows    that  much    variation in  classroom  dialogues      exists worldwide
(Alexander, 2008). The reason is that teaching often comes with established norms for classroom interactions,
and if teachers use questions to keep topics closed down instead of opening them up, this may limit student
engagement and the educational potential of talk. Generally, dialogue is considered productive for learning if
the classroom is a place of purposeful inquiry in which students can express ideas, listen to each other, consider
alternative perspectives, and share and build on each other's ideas (Alexander, 2008; Littleton & Mercer, 2013).
          A  growing  body   of research   finds that digital  technology   may  facilitate dialogic   teaching  in  the
classroom (Major et al., 2018). This research indicates that sharing objects on interactive whiteboards provides
opportunities for shared attention and joint reference in whole-class teaching. The shared objects also provide
opportunities  for participation, as students can    interact with and  manipulate  them,   as well   as save  them  for
further discussions later. Furthermore, microblogging (e.g., Twitter) also seems to support joint construction of
meaning in the classroom. The short-message format (e.g., tweets) seems productive for mobilizing and eliciting
students' understanding   of  a topic, starting  conversations   or bringing   new  information   into   conversations.
Talkwall is a microblogging tool that aims to support participation and dialogue in the classroom (Rasmussen &
Hagen,   2015). In  this study, we   focus on how    Talkwall   can support  joint construction  of   meaning   through
whole-class teaching and discussions.

                                    Figure 1. A screenshot of Talkwall with descriptions.

Talkwall
Talkwall is a browser-based tool comprising a task description on top, a feed on the left, and a wall (Figure 1).
The teacher   posts tasks that  are displayed centrally. Each   task   has one feed and  one   wall.  To  contribute an
answer to a task, the student clicks the "+" symbol at the bottom of the screen to open a message box, in which
students  can enter their text. The  contribution is  then    submitted to the feed with no    limits as to  how many
contributions students can add to the feed. In Talkwall, participation and dialogue are supported mainly through
three mechanisms: short textual contributions, the feed, and the wall. The short-communication format's intent
lies in the premise that microblogging is so commonplace, it may encourage students to participate, and the
format can be read quickly to exchange ideas and elicit possible discussions (Rasmussen & Hagen, 2015). For
the teacher, the feed is intended to provide an overview not only in terms of participation, but also in how
students formulate their ideas. For students, the feed is meant for them to both acquire and build on their peers'
ideas. The teacher may highlight certain contributions in the feed to share interesting ideas concerning the task

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                    965                                                      © ISLS
that students are working on currently. Contributions in the feed also can be pinned to the wall to promote
interesting contributions, arrange them, and synthesize their information through dialogue.

Setting and method
In this study, we used data from a lower secondary school in Norway, where we conducted video observations
of a social sciences class of approximately 26 students (13-14 years old, seated in groups of three and four)
during the winter of 2017. The teacher had more than 20 years of experience and described herself as having
ordinary knowledge of ICT. She is one of several teachers who participated in the "Digitalised Dialogues Across
the Curriculum" project (DiDiAC) funded by the Research Council of Norway [FINNUT/Project No: 254761],
which  aims  to   develop   and enhance   classroom  dialogue   by   using  Talkwall.  A rich data  set was  collected,
comprising  field   notes,  video recordings,  interviews, and   log  data. The  video   recordings from   whole-class
sessions comprise the core data, and analyses of verbatim transcriptions of video recordings are used to provide
concrete descriptions of social interactions. In this study we take a sociocultural perspective, and to understand
what is going on, we apply Linell's (2009) concept of "joint construction". This analytic concept refers to the
collective construction of discourse and meaning mediated by tools.

A teacher's work with students' views in a whole-class setting
In  what  follows,  we  provide   an example   of a  typical  discourse from   a one-hour   lesson. The  theme  is   the
Industrial Revolution.    The  teacher first  introduced the  lesson's goals,  and  some   central concepts. She   then
introduced a task called "odd one out," in which each group of students was presented with a set of four pictures
and corresponding words describing the pictures. Each group's task in Talkwall was to decide which picture in
its set did not fit the Industrial Revolution period and why. Each group used a tablet to write their answer in
Talkwall. When all groups were done with the task the teacher used her tablet to pin each group's contribution
one at a time. Each pinned contribution was projected onto a large screen in front of the classroom so that it
could be discussed in a whole-class setting. The following excerpt begins just as the teacher has pinned Group
B's contribution to the wall.

1.    Teacher:        Group B. Horses, coal, factories, machines. Horses. Please, explain (5.0)
2.    Ann:            Uhm, horses are out because they were used before the industrial revolution
3.    Teacher:        Okay? Yes. So horses were the only ones used before the industrial revolution? Is there
                      anyone else that has thoughts about this? (2.0) (Tom from another group raises his
                      hand) Yes, Tom?
4.    Tom:            Weren't machines used before the industrial revolution?

From  this  exchange   a   few  aspects   become  apparent.   First, Talkwall  supports  mobilizing    and eliciting of
students'  ideas, as  the contributions   make  the students' opinions  visible  (line 1). The second   aspect  is that
contributions pinned   to  the  wall become    productive for starting  conversations. Contributions    become  shared
objects for shared attention and joint reference. Group B's contribution on Talkwall was projected on a large
screen in front of the classroom, and the teacher used the contribution in Talkwall to trigger a justification from
the group  (line  1). Third,  through  the task  and the  public display   of their contributions  the  groups become
accountable to the learning community and have to provide reasons for their choice (line 2). Finally, the shared
attention towards the contributions and the teacher's orchestration of the class provide opportunities for other
students to participate with potentially different perspectives (line 3 and 4). Thus, what this exchange illustrates
is how Talkwall to a certain extent affords joint construction of meaning through the public display of students'
written contributions, through which the teacher can build a whole-class dialogue.

References
Alexander, R. (2008). Towards dialogic teaching: Rethinking classroom talk (4th ed.). Thirsk: Dialogos.
Linell, P. (2009). Rethinking language, mind, and world dialogically: Interactional and contextual theories of
          human sense-making. Charlotte, NC: Information Age Publishing.
Littleton, K. & Mercer, N. (2013). Interthinking: putting talk to work. Abingdon: Routledge.
Major, L.,  Warwick,    P., Rasmussen,    I., Ludvigsen,  S., &  Cook,  V.  (2018).   Classroom dialogue   and  digital
          technologies: A scoping review. Education and Information Technologies, 23(5), 1995­2028.
Rasmussen,   I.,  &  Hagen,  Å.   (2015). Facilitating students' individual   and collective  knowledge    construction
          through microblogs. International Journal of Educational Research, 72, 149­161.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                     966                                                   © ISLS
