          Tools to Facilitate Teacher and Student Collaboration in
                                                   Assessment
                                  Kate Thompson, Harry Kanasa, and Susan Chapman
              kate.thompson@griffith.edu.au, h.kanasa@griffith.edu.au, s.chapman@griffith.edu.au
                                              Griffith University, Australia

          Abstract: This paper reports on an ongoing design based research project in which researchers
          and teachers collaborate to design, teach and assess STEAM units of work. Drawing on research
          on project based learning and interdisciplinary collaboration, we investigate two computer-
          supported tools that mediated between: students in groups reaching consensus on disciplines
          included in their project, and students and teachers engaging in self- and teacher-assessment
          using a rubric. We make recommendations for future iterations of the research.

Introduction and background
STEM education is a priority nationally and internationally, as countries identify areas of investment for future
workforce planning. STEAM education includes the Arts (e.g. Herro & Quigley, 2017). STEM/STEAM education
can include   units   of work  that   require students to make   connections  between   discipline  areas (e.g. Costin,
Thompson & Chapman, 2018). STEM/STEAM learning environments provide challenges both for researchers to
understand the interplay of teacher and learner activity, as well as for the design of assessment by teachers (Costin
et al., 2018).  Computer      supported  collaborative  learning  (CSCL)   "refers  to situations  in which  computer
technology plays a significant role in shaping the collaboration" (Goodyear, Jones & Thompson, 2014, p. 440).
Research that explores how individuals learn to work in interdisciplinary teams in graduate or professional settings
(e.g. Pennington et al., 2015) focuses on the integration of disciplinary perspectives to create a shared model of a
given system to then represent and mediate conversations about the phenomenon in study. Goodyear et al. (2014)
argue that the computer component of CSCL can play different roles in the support of collaboration, including
providing a visual representation of the task or scaffolding particular epistemic processes, such as knowledge
building. In project based learning (PBL) students work in small groups where a question or problem organizes
or drives activities, and these activities produce artefacts, products or solutions which address the driving question.
(Blumenfeld, Soloway, Marx, Krajcik, Guzdial, & Palincsar, 1991). Jonassen (2000) provides a description of
eleven    problem  types:  logical,  algorithmic,  story, rule-using, decision making,   trouble-shooting,  diagnosis-
solution,   strategic performance,    case analysis,   design,  and dilemmas.  For   students   to become  intentional,
constructive learners they need to assume some authority and take responsibility for their learning. Black and
Wiliam (2009) identify the core role of peers in formative assessment (through peer teaching and collaborative
learning)   and the   learner themselves   (providing  opportunities  to develop metacognition,    motivation,  interest,
attribution, and self-assessment). Boud and Falchikov (1989) state that "Self-assessment refers to the involvement
of learners  in making    judgements    about   their own  learning,  particularly about  their achievements    and the
outcomes of their learning" (p. 529). There have been several studies indicating a discrepancy between teacher or
tutor evaluation of student work, and self-evaluation, even using criteria co-developed with students (Orsmond,
Merry & Reiling, 2000). We present a STEAM unit of work developed over several years, as part of ongoing
design-based research project in which researchers and school teachers work closely to collaboratively design,
teach   and assess  STEAM      units. We   examine    two computer-supported   tools that mediated    the collaboration
between: students in groups reaching consensus on disciplines included in their project, and students and teachers
engaging in self- and teacher-assessment using a rubric, and provide recommendations for the next iteration of
the research.

Methods
Design-based research methods connect theory to the design of a particular activity, which is then implemented
and evaluated (Sandoval and Bell, 2004). The combined design approach applied to the development of this
project is explained in full elsewhere (Thompson et al., 2016). This study was conducted in an Australian high
school, with eight girls and 14 boys in years 7 and 8. The curriculum for Government schools until Year 10 is
mandated by a national body, the Australian Curriculum and Assessment Authority (ACARA). Given the different
expectations  of  working     for students in  the STEAM     areas, designing  integrated assessment   is  challenging.
Students participated in an 8-week program devised to scaffold independent STEAM inquiries in preparation for
a  local, regional  science   fair. The student  STEAM     projects were  classified by  the researchers  according  to
Jonassen's (2000) typology of problem-solving. Data was collected using the students' portfolios. The assessment

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                       967                                                  © ISLS
rubrics were based upon standardised criteria sheets currently in use in the school. To encourage reflection and
assessment literacy on the part of the student, a self-assessment rubric was included. In the results section we
compare the overall score allocated by students and the teacher and investigate the elements of the rubric in which
there was the greatest discrepancy in assessment.

Results and discussion
Applying Jonassen's (2000) typology of problem-solving, of the nine projects, six were classified as decision-
making, one as trouble-shooting and two were classified as design projects. Students tended to over-estimate the
number of disciplines included in their project, although most groups did identify a focus discipline aligned with
the researcher's. The strongest similarity was the importance placed on Science, which was generally a heavily
weighted component in the projects. Arts received the least weighting by students. The STEAM projects provided
clarity in learning, experience in developing stages of inquiry, the integration of skills from different disciplines,
and an opportunity to synthesise past learning with emerging learning. The rubric was not used effectively as a
tool to negotiate project scope or expectations with these students.

Conclusions
The examination of the role of two tools to support collaboration and self-assessment has revealed the potential
of enabling further student agency in STEAM units of work, and in subsequent iterations, the learning goals of
the students will be more closely aligned with the rubric, negotiated with the teacher, and re-negotiated at key
points during the Technology projects. By more closely scaffolding the different Science and Technology (design)
processes, the rubric could be used to facilitate learning associated with metacognition, motivation and self-
assessment. The effectiveness   of project   based learning, and  in  STEAM   units of work   is dependent  on the
willingness of educators to allow students to regulate and control their own learning, and the willingness of
students to accept this responsibility.

References
Black, P., & Wiliam, D. (2009). Developing the theory of formative assessment. Educational Assessment,
        Evaluation and Accountability, 21(1), 5-31.
Blumenfeld, P., Soloway, E., Marx, R., & Krajcik, J., Guzdial, M., & Palincsar, A. (1991). Motivating project-
        based learning: Sustaining the doing, supporting the learning. Educational Psychologist, 26(3-4), 369-
        398, doi: 10.1080/00461520.1991.9653139
Boud, D., & Falchikov, N. (1989). Quantitative studies of self-assessment in higher education: A critical
        analysis of findings. Higher Education, 18, 529-549.
Costin, D., Thompson, K., Chapman, S. (2018). Productive collaborative design of a STEAM unit of work in a
        multi-age class.   Integrated    education for  the  real world.  5th International  STEM     in Education
        Conference, 21st-23rd November 2018, Brisbane.
Goodyear,  P, Jones,  C., &   Thompson,    K.  (2014). Computer-supported     collaborative learning: Instructional
        approaches, group processes and educational designs. In J. M. Spector, M. D. Merrill, J. Elen, & M. J.
        Bishop (Eds.), Handbook of Research on Educational Communications and Technology (pp. 439-452).
        New York: Springer. Doi: 10/1007/978-1-4614-3185-5_35
Herro, D., &  Quigley, C.  (2017).  Exploring   teachers' perceptions  of STEAM     teaching through  professional
        development: implications for teacher educators. Professional Development in Education, 43(3), 416­
        438. https://doi.org/10.1080/19415257.2016.1205507
Jonassen, D. H. (2000). Toward a design theory of problem solving. Educational Technology Research and
        Development, 48(4), 63­85. doi.org/10.1007/BF02300500
Jonassen, D. H. (2003). Learning to solve problems with technology (2nd ed.), Upper Saddle River, NJ: Merrill.
Orsmond, P., Merry, S., & Reiling, K. (2000). The use of student derived marking criteria in peer and self-
        assessment. Assessment and Evaluation in Higher Education, 25(1), 23-38.
Pennington, D., Bammer, G., Danielson, A., Gosselin, D. C., Gouvea, J., Habron, G., Hawthorne, D., Parnell, R.
        A., Thompson,     K., Vincent,   S., & Wei,  C. (2015)    The EMBeRS    project: Employing    model-based
        reasoning in socio-environmental synthesis. Journal of Environmental Studies and Sciences.
Sandoval, W., & Bell, P. (2004). Design-based research methods for studying learning in context: Introduction.
        Educational Psychologist, 39(4), 199-201. doi: 10.1207/s15326985ep3904_1
Thompson, K., Gouvea, J., & Habron, G. (2016). A design approach to understanding the activity of learners in
        interdisciplinary settings: Environment and Diversity. To be presented at the International Conference
        of the Learning Sciences, June 19-24, Singapore, 2016.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                    968                                                 © ISLS
