    Negotiation of Epistemic Territories and Collaborative Learning
 in Workplace Interactions: The Case of Requests for Assistance
      Vasiliki Markaki Lothe, Université Grenoble Alpes, Vasiliki.Markaki-Lothe@univ-grenoble-alpes.fr
                        Laurent Filliettaz, Université de Genève, Laurent.Filliettaz@unige.ch

         Abstract:   Vocational   learning    processes within     interaction are    poorly documented     in  the
         scientific literature. Difficulties lie in the need to identify "observables" that provide access to
         the interactional ingredients of learning processes as well as to the dynamic transformation of
         practices. In line with research work that focuses on epistemic asymmetries within interaction,
         we propose here to examine situations where novice professionals encounter difficulties and
         thus  call upon   their colleagues,  more   or less   experienced,    to ask  for   help. Building   upon
         research work on the critical concept of "epistemic territories" as it has been developed within
         Conversational    Analysis,  we   will  highlight  how     request   sequences  for    assistance project
         upcoming possible instructional activity. We are therefore interested in informal vocational
         learning   situations that take  place   independently    of  a  curriculum,   and  in  the interactional
         processes that constitute them.

A conversation-analytic approach of epistemics
We are interested in work situations where novice professionals encounter difficulties and thus call upon their
colleagues  to ask  for help.  We   are  therefore  interested  in informal   vocational   learning  situations  and  in  the
interactional processes that constitute them. But how can a conversation-analytic approach usefully document
learning processes in the workplace?
         At a methodological level, the purpose of a conversation analytical approach (Mondada, 2013) is to
provide insights into the organization of human interactional practices. These practices carry different pragmatic
meaning that can be grasped through the analysis of verbal and non-verbal behaviour. Interactional analysis
aims to group these practices, compare them and identify, for a given context, what brings them together and
what  opposes  them.    By  identifying  social functions   of  professional   practices,    conversation  analysis  reveals
patterns of actions, namely, interactional strategies mobilized by participants in a work situation for all practical
purposes.  These  patterns  of   actions then represent    situated responses    to   practical problems   that participants
encounter  moment    after  moment   within   the  interaction. It  is worth   noting  here  that  the interest in  studying
language practices leads to the need for audiovisual recordings and their fine-grained transcription.
         Research work of the sociologist John Heritage on "epistemic territories" has particularly caught our
attention (Heritage, 2012). The concept of "epistemic territories" refers to the set of theoretical and practical
knowledge   implemented     within  participants  action:  "epistemic     territories embrace   what   is known,   how   it is
known, and persons' rights and responsibilities to know it" (2012, p. 5-6).
         Beyond     the sequential  and   temporal   organization      of the  interaction,  Heritage's    work   raises  the
knowledge issue as an interactional resource. He shows that any situated action is always based on the belief in
a shared knowledge. Shared knowledge primarily concerns the different grammatically possible and socially
acceptable  ways    of  producing   statements  with   unambiguous      pragmatic     value, depending     on the  speaker's
knowledge about the status and knowledge of the other person. Thus, the same idea will not be expressed in the
same way depending on whether you are addressing a colleague or a friend, someone who is an expert in the
field or someone    who    knows    nothing   about what   a   particular  idea   or  action implies   and  so  on.  Shared
knowledge is not considered as an abstract cognitive process but it is analysed through the choices that are made
and   actions initiated by  participants  within    an  ongoing    activity.  Heritage's   work    has shown    that  shared
knowledge is salient within interaction when tensions or discrepancies are observed between what is expected
and   what participants  effectively achieve.   Tensions    are observed      through  the   ways  participants  will either
thematize a particular issue or treat it within interaction by reorganizing their activity by means of, among other
things, reformulations, and sequences of explanations or evaluations.
         Several key distinctions in Heritage's recent work provide analytical tools that allow us to address the
issue of interactional workplace learning processes. He distinguishes the "epistemic status" (linked to the socio-
professional  category   of the  participant)   from   the "epistemic     stance  more   knowledgeable     K+   versus   less
konwledgeable   K-"    (linked to the   roles actually  embodied    by    the professional   within  the   interaction). The
distinction between epistemic stance and epistemic status is important since, in action, one does not always
coincide with the other. In other words, someone who has the status of expert does not always act or is not
always identified as an expert (Mondada, 2013).

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                       969                                                       © ISLS
Data
Data were collected in an insurance call centre in France over five days, for a total of thirty hours of video
recordings.   We  filmed   two  teleprospectors   with two  cameras   and  a   call  recorder.    The  team  is  quite
heterogeneous in terms of professional experience within this service. This is particularly interesting for our
study, since  it abounds  with moments    when   teleoperators encounter  "new"     situations that are  more  or less
problematic and for which they call upon the expertise of their team leader or colleagues.

Analysis
The collection of excerpts on which we have worked documents requests for assistance when teleoperators face
practical problems where they do not know how to answer a customer's question or encounter difficulties in
applying a specific technical procedure. Systematically, these requests to co-workers are formulated "by turning
off the microphone", which prevents the client from hearing the exchanges between professionals. Requests for
assistance are the subject of several studies in the field of conversational analysis (Kendrick and Drew, 2016). In
our study, we examine sequences of requests for assistance in the light of the participants' epistemic territories
within interaction. We focus our attention on moments when a teleoperator presents an inadequacy in terms of
professional knowledge with regard to the customer on the phone. We show that in the context of human service
professions, this type of problem and its resolution can be problematic. In the following excerpt LOU is the
teleoperator,  YAN   the  manager   and TEO    the customer    (shortened excerpt).   TEO     makes   an  appointment
following LOU's call. He asks to send him confirmation through a text message but LOU does not know if this
is possible. She turns off the microphone and questions her manager Yan (see Table 1).

Table 1: Transcript and analysis

          Transcript                                     Analysis
          9   LOU can we send an sms confirmation?       Question
          10 YAN uh no                                   Answer
          11 LOU do we send a letter\=                   Relaunch, looking for another way to confirm
          12 YAN =he is online?                          Request for clarification
          13 LOU yeah                                    Answer
          14 YAN he just notes uh the appointment        Solution
          15 LOU he just notes? we send nothing?         Confirmation request
          16 YAN no we send nothing                      Answer

What we find in our data is not simply about imitating or reproducing the different steps of a task. Indeed, a
common conceptualization of the work and adherence to its organizing principles are necessary to transform
LOU's K- stance to a K+. However, in a work situation, this conceptualization rarely involves traditional means
of training such as anticipation, explanation, description, and so on. Our study shows how professionals make
their actions visible and intelligible to their colleagues within disruptive moments.

Conclusion
The analysis of participants relative epistemic positions (greater knowledge K+) versus (lesser knowledge K-)
over the  course  of the  interaction, as well  as of  the participation  framework    that   they  configure, aim  to
document    interactional  traces of   implementing    professional  practices of    others   and   deepen  thus  our
understanding of the learning processes in work situations as they occur in interactions between more or less
experienced professionals (Koschman, 2013).

References
Heritage, J. (2012). Epistemics in action: Action formation and territories of knowledge. Research on Language
         & Social Interaction, 45(1), 1-29.
Kendrick, K.H.    &  Drew,  P. (2016),  "Recruitment:  Offers, Requests,  and  the   Organization   of   Assistance in
         Interaction", Research on Language and Social Interaction, 49(1),1-19.
Koschmann, T. (2013), "Conversation analysis and learning in interaction", In The Encyclopedia of Applied
         Linguistics (Carol A. Chapelle, ed.), Oxford, U.K., Wiley-Blackwell, pp. 1038-1043.
Mondada,    L.   (2013),  "Displaying,  contesting and   negotiating  epistemic     authority  in  social interaction:
         Descriptions and questions in guided visits", Discourse Studies, vol. 15, no. 5, pp. 597­626

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                   970                                                     © ISLS
