Understanding Teachers' Collaboration for Designing Technology-
                                         Enhanced Learning
                   Chunli Wang, East China Normal University, CLWANG66@163.com
                   Xiaoqing Gu, East China Normal University, xqgu@ses.ecnu.edu.cn

       Abstract:   This    study  examined   the effectiveness  of teacher   collaboration  in   promoting
       teachers' attitudes and perceived competence toward design. Team design talk was analyzed.
       Additional data included teachers' attitude and perceived competence questionnaire. Results
       showed that teachers' perceived competence toward design improved after collaboration, yet
       their attitude toward    design did not   change significantly.  Qualitative analysis showed   that
       challenging ideas was found positively correlated to the formation of team shared mental model.

Introduction
Encouraging  collaboration  among   teachers is  essential for effective  professional development   programs.    As
teacher design talk is the main resource for understanding teachers' collaborative design, this study attempts to
analyze how teachers go through the collaboration. One promising line of research that may shed light on teachers'
collaborative design process is shared mental model (SMM). SMMs are "`knowledge structures held by members
of a team that enable them to form accurate explanations and expectations for the task, and in turn, to coordinate
their actions and adapt their behavior to demands of the task and other team members'' (Cannon-Bowers, Salas,
& Converse,  1993, p.     228). Johnson, Lee,  Lee, O'Connor,    Kahlil,  and   Huang  (2007)    identified five key
dimensions of shared mental models: (1) team knowledge, (2) team skills, (3) team attitudes, (4) team dynamics,
and (5) team environments. Research suggested that if members had very different response to questionnaire
assessing the SMMs, team members were likely to have large gap towards completing tasks (Razzouk & Johnson,
2013). In this study, we focus on what kind of collaborative action helps the formation of SMM.

Method

Research questions
There are three main research questions in this study: (1) Whether the collaborative design helped to improve
teachers' attitudes toward and perceived competence in designing technology-enhanced learning; (2) How teams
went through the collaborative process; (3) How is the relationship between the collaborative process and SMM
similarity within a team.

Context and participants
This study was carried out in a summer graduate course about design technology-enhanced learning. Students
who joined this graduate program were young teachers who were in first few years as a K-12 teacher. Each team
were required to work in groups to create a technology-enhanced learning lesson. A total of 36 teachers with an
average age of 25.5 participated in the study, with 28 females and 8 males. All of them held a bachelor's degree
and had an average of 3.4 years of teaching experience.

Instruments
Background information questionnaire. This questionnaire was composed to collect demographic information,
including their gender, age, years in the profession, and subject taught.
       Teacher  attitudes   and  perceived competence   questionnaire.    There were   14 questions that    measured
teachers' attitudes toward designing, which was adapted from the Science Attitude Scale developed by Sumrall's
(2008). The second part of the questionnaire contained 6 questions measuring teachers' perceived competence in
designing, which was adapted from Voet and De Wever's (2017) questionnaire.
       Shared  mental     model   questionnaire. This questionnaire     was  adapted   from  team  assessment    and
diagnostic instrument by Johnson et al. (2007). All the items were 5-point Likert-scale questions, ranging from
"highly disagree" to "highly agree". It consisted of 15 items in five dimensions.

Procedure
The design project module underwent three successive days. In the first day, all teachers took the attitudes and
perceived competence   questionnaire.  Then   they received    lecture about design,   practiced related cases,  and
discussed issues about designing. In the second day, teachers were randomly assigned to 12 teams. Teams were

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                   971                                                    © ISLS
engaged into an authentic collaborative design task for creating inquiry activities on WISE (Web-based Inquiry
Science Environment) platform, with the purpose of enhancing their design competence by teamwork. The design
task was divided into three phases: 1) topic identification, 2) needs analysis, and 3) project development. The
three phases were made by consulting with other 2 teacher educators. The teachers' design talk was recorded as
important evidence for understanding their collaboration. Finally, participants completed the teacher attitudes and
competence questionnaire as posttest and SMM similarity questionnaire.

Results

Effects of collaborative design on teacher attitudes and perceived competence
The results showed that there was a significant increase in teacher perceived competence [t (35) = 2.49, p = .02]
from the pre-test to the post-test, but no significant difference was found in teacher attitudes [t (35) = .75, p = .46].

Teachers' use of collaborative actions during different phases
In phase 1, there was a significant difference in the percentages of the three types of collaborative actions [F (1.38,
48.30) = 8.73, p < .001]. Post hoc test revealed that the percentage of developing ideas was significantly lower
than those of the other two skills. In phase 2, there was also a significant difference in the percentages of the three
types of collaborative actions [F (1.57, 54.85) = 44.08, p < .001]. Post hoc test revealed that the percentage of
developing ideas was significantly lower than those of the other two skills, and the percentage of presenting ideas
was also lower than that of challenging ideas. In phase 3, there was no significant.

The relationship between collaborative actions and SMM similarity
It was revealed that SMM similarity differed significantly across the five dimensions [F (2.11, 23.16) = 5.32, p =
.012]. The value of SMM similarity of dimension 2 was significantly higher than that of dimension 4, suggesting
that teams reached greater consensus in the dimension of team dynamics than in the dimension of team skills.
Correlation test suggested that the more frequently the team members with different expertise challenged each
other's ideas, the more consistent understandings the team members formed. In contrast, the more frequently the
team members developed ideas, the less likely the team members to form common perception in dimension 5.

Discussion
The findings of this study have several implications. First, attitude change for teachers is not an easy process.
They may need more opportunities to examine the effectiveness of their design for improving the attitude. Second,
promoting teachers' collaborative actions of challenging ideas may lead to a greater team consensus. Therefore,
researchers or teacher instructors could   encourage  teachers in design teams  to    question or challenge team
members' ideas  to facilitate the  process of forming  consensus.   Finally, developing   ideas was found   to be
negatively correlated with team consensus, which suggest that more guidance is needed to help improve the idea
development and negotiation process among teachers with different expertise.
       As this study is limited for its duration, it is suggested that future research conduct multiple assessments
of SMM at different phases of collaborative process. It's also necessary to examine how the development of SMM
are influenced by teachers' collaborative actions.

References
Cannon-Bowers, J. A., Salas, E., & Converse, S. (1993). Shared mental models in expert team decision making.
       In N. J. Castellan (Ed.), Individual and group decision making: Current issues (pp. 221­246).
       Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Johnson, T. E., Lee, Y., Lee, M., O'Connor, D. L., Khalil, M. K., & Huang, X. (2007). Measuring Sharedness of
       Team-Related     Knowledge:   Design   and   Validation of a Shared   Mental   Model Instrument. Human
       Resource Development International, 10(4), 437-454.
Razzouk, R. , & Johnson, T. E. . (2013). Case studies' effect on undergraduates' achievement, attitudes, and team
       shared mental models in educational psychology.Educational Technology Research & Development,
       61(5), 751-766.
Sumrall, T. F. (2008). South Mississippi Public Elementary School Teachers' Implementation of and Attitudes
       Toward          Inquiry-Based       Science      (Doctoral      Dissertation).       Retrieved       from
       https://aquila.usm.edu/theses_dissertations/852/
Voet, M., & De Wever, B. (2017). Preparing pre-service history teachers for organizing inquiry-based learning:
       The effects of an introductory training program. Teaching and Teacher Education, 63, 206-217.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                   972                                                 © ISLS
