  RoomCast: Distributing Digital Resources in the Classroom of
                                                    Things
                         Tom Moher, University of Illinois at Chicago, moher@uic.edu
                    Alessandro Gnoli, University of Illinois at Chicago, tebemis@gmail.com

        Abstract: RoomCast is a web-based learning resource distribution tool designed to support
        whole-class    collective  inquiry   in multi-activity  instructional units   designs   enacted   on
        heterogeneous collections of personal and public devices in classrooms. As a design tool,
        RoomCast supports accommodation to local curricular adaptations and technology platform
        availability, enabling the configuration of curated learning and teaching resource collections
        over   a  broad  range    of classroom   contexts.   In the  classroom,   RoomCast     offers  rapid
        redistribution   of  resources   during   teacher-initiated  activity  transitions,   automatically
        distributing tailored sets of resources needed for the activity to heterogeneous client portals.
        While    informed   by research  in  technology  supports   for orchestration,   RoomCast     is not
        intended as a scripting tool for complex activity sequences. Rather, it is designed to support
        coarse-grained    activity   structures  involving   diverse   types   of   stakeholders,     placing
        responsibility for detailed activity management in the hands of teachers or custom scripts, in
        pursuit of a descriptive framework accessible to practitioners.

Introduction
In our research over the past several years we have developed and refined collections of digital resources that
provide access   to "room-sized"   simulated  objects of inquiry  and  tools  for the   collaborative construction of
knowledge  in  whole-class   investigations  (Moher,  2006).    The curriculum    units that utilize  these resources
involve multiple activity segments enacted over weeks or months requiring distinctive resources for different
activities and participant roles, delivered via coordinated suites of spatially distributed public and personal
devices positioning the "classroom of things" as a composite community user interface.
        Over time, we found ourselves reusing those resource collections in a variety of contexts--to support
different learning goals and instructional designs, to accommodate differences in available device inventories in
classrooms, and to construct contrastive research treatments. In order to reduce software redevelopment effort,
we began development of software that would allow our research team to define and implement declarative
resource distribution plans based on classroom activities and stakeholder types without the need for procedural
programming. The outgrowth of that effort is a web-based system, RoomCast, that offers customized portals to
multiple stakeholders--learners and teachers, but also designers, administrators, researchers, domain specialists,
and researchers--working collectively on a curriculum unit using a curated collection of interoperable digital
resources. We have used RoomCast to support the design and enactment of over a dozen curriculum units
involving multiple resource suites, divergent instructional designs, and equipment inventories.
        In  designing   RoomCast,     we  sought  a  descriptive  framework    that  would   be  accessible   to non-
programmers--ultimately, to practitioners--while still providing enough power to accommodate the variations
introduced and   encountered   in  different classroom   contexts.  It combines    orchestration  support,    allowing
teachers to define and enact primo-scripts, with orchestrable features enabling enactment-time introduction and
spontaneous   use   of resources  in  response   to emerging    classroom  activity   (Tchoukinine,    2013).  As  an
orchestration resource, RoomCast is best seen as an "arranging" tool (Kollar and Fischer, 2013), affording
adaptive configuration of reconfigurable learning and teaching resources. RoomCast draws from contemporary
research in scripting systems in its adoption of components including roles, resources, and activities (Kobbe, et
al., 2007) as basic structural elements, introducing a menu-based interface as an alternative to table-based view
(Wang, et al., 2018) to specify a three-dimensional configuration (portals, activities, and resources). RoomCast
is not designed to directly structure collaboration among learners at fine grains of activity found in systems such
as Collage (Hernández-Leo, et al., 2006), Common Knowledge (Fong & Slotta, 2018) or FROG (Håklev, et al.,
2017). While RoomCast affords the specification of resource distribution in a way that could support many
collaborative flow  learning patterns  (CFLP,    Hernández-Leo,    205) as in  Collage,   it does not    provide such
patterns as primitive elements, nor does it provide teachers with assistance in selecting patterns based on their
pedagogical benefits.
        In the   following, we   draw  on  examples   of the  use of   RoomCast   in  the design  and    enactment of
distribution plans that utilize of a set of coordinated resources supporting investigations of population dynamics
in simulated ecosystems. In WallCology (Moher, et al., 2008; Cober, et al., 2012), classroom communities

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                    981                                                    © ISLS
observe and manipulate distributed (simulated) ecosystems imaged to occupy the walls of their classrooms,
collectively uncovering energy exchange relationships and constructing community models that allow them to
predict the impact of biotic and abiotic perturbations of their ecosystems. The WallCology suite includes a rich
set of interoperating resources: animations of simulated flora and fauna, controls for manipulating ecosystem
properties, tools for capturing and representing population histories, forms for submitting evidence-based claims
about energy relationships, graphic tools for drawing and annotating food webs, computational models for
controlling the simulation, and many others. Below, we briefly describe how distributions plans are specified in
RoomCast, offer examples of distribution variants that we have implemented using RoomCast, and discuss
opportunities and limitations associated with our approach.

RoomCast overview
The specification of a RoomCast resource distribution plan begins with the specification of the digital web
resources to be used during the curriculum unit; these resources may include both components of a coordinated
suite and stand-alone web pages. In pursuit of simplicity, RoomCast adopts a "one page, one resource" strategy
rather than affording component-level design, and offers a uniform tab-based interface style to all stakeholders.
The next task is to name the activities comprising the unit and the portals reflecting the types of stakeholders
who involved in the design and enactment of the unit. Finally, the designer constructs a distribution design that
specifies the resources to be distributed for each portal-activity pair. Figure 1 (left) shows a (partial) resource
distribution plan for an eight-week enactment of a WallCology unit in fall 2018, specifying the resources that
will be distributed to 'group' portals (shared tablet computers) during the 'biotic experimentalist' activity.

                 Figure 1. Partial distribution plan for a WallCology (population dynamics) unit.

         Because RoomCast is designed to support synchronized, whole-class work rather than independent
individual progression through an activity sequence, at any given time all clients are operating under the same
activity rubric. RoomCast  activities are not (necessarily)   enacted in consecutive fashion;     they represent

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                  982                                                      © ISLS
modalities of activity rather than steps in a pre-defined sequence. Figure 1, for example, includes a 'summit'
activity used at multiple points during enactment of the curriculum unit. Control over activity selection is in the
hands of the teacher rather than an underlying sequencing engine.
         Participation in a RoomCast begins with the acquisition or selection of an available device and an
intention to use that device to serve as a particular kind of portal into the enactment. This defers the binding of a
specific device to the immediate moment of enactment, and readily accommodates device swapping necessitated
by  device failures  or serial sharing  between   class  sections. The    recruitment of a   device serving  a  public
roomCast portal may be selectively initiated by any of the stakeholders, providing an opportunity for teachers to
enlist students as collaborative managers of community technologies. This recruitment mechanism also invites
concurrent portals of the same type. In roomCast, all portals of the same type share access to copies of the same
set  of  resources, but  interact  as  individual  instances   of  that portal within    the roomQuake      enactment
environment, and may contribute instance-attributable data to an enactment's shared data collection. There are
no restrictions on the number of instances of each portal type; this is well suited to the use of participant (e.g.,
students) and public (e.g., seismographs) portals, although it requires social mediation to impose serial regimens
with administrative tools whose use might create database "race" conditions, with concurrent administrative
portals overwriting an enactment's "global" environment parameters.

Supporting local adaptation
In the earliest enactments of WallCology, prior to the development of RoomCast, the determination of species
population  estimates   played an  important  role   in community    work.  Students   were  challenged  to    estimate
populations  by   observing    and actively  counting    individuals   in dynamic     animations  of   small   window
(wallscopes) into a classroom wall, and then estimating the populations within the whole wall by multiplying
those counts by the ratio of the wall-to-window area ratio, and document those estimates through incremental
additions to population graphs drawn on large poster sheets on the classroom wall. No individual or group
devices  were  used. Groups    developed   different strategies for counting--dividing    the screen   into  quadrants
assigned to team members and merging results, or assigning different team members to different species--that
became the subject of class discussions. Perturbations of the ecosystems were effected externally, in the form of
global changes to abiotic (e.g., an increase in moisture due to leaking pipes) and biotic (e.g., the introduction of
new,  invasive  species)  conditions.   The  culminating   activity  involved  the development      of a whole-class
consensus around an abiotic intervention--performed by researchers--to mitigate the impact of the invasive
species, and  an  evaluation   of  the effectiveness  of that   manipulation.  A  RoomCast-based       version of  this
instructional design could simply assign the animation resource to wallscopes, and provide the teacher's portal
with the abiotic and biotic control resources for effecting the perturbations.
         More recent WallCology enactments have focused on population dynamics and the determination of
energy exchange relationships among species, with the goal of constructing a "master food web" depicting
direct relationships among the community of species found in the collective ecosystems. In these units, students
observe  and  directly  manipulate  local  ecosystems,   developing  and   submitting  evidence-based    claims  about
relationships to a shared database. Because of the change in learning goals, populations are no longer counted
by students, but rather provided "automatically" through longitudinal graphs. A RoomCast configuration to
support these enactments moves the ecosystem control and claims construction resources to workgroup portals
hosted on tablet computers, and adds the `population graphs' resource to the wallscopes to complement the
ecosystem animation. For classrooms with fewer devices, the wallscope portals could be provided with all of
these resources, eliminating the need for tablets altogether.
         RoomCast has also proven useful as a tool for investigating contrastive research treatments. In a recent
project, we restricted access to peer group claims in one classroom to periods when the full class was engaged in
"summits" in which they evaluated peer group claims and updated the emergent community model. The goal in
that treatment  was  to  ensure   that all peer group    claims   were  considered within    the context  of   the full
community.   In that classroom,    we  assigned the  "master   food web"   to the teacher  portal only.  In  the other
classroom, a read-only version of the master food web was made available on work group tablets, affording
groups with access to peer claims when students were working in groups around their local ecosystems.

Opportunities and limitations
We   believe that   RoomCast   strikes  a  promising    middle  ground  between   usability  and  expressive   power.
RoomCast imposes a demand to construct a three-dimensional specification. It would, of course, be possible to
condition resource availability on criteria beyond portal type and the current class activity. Variables such as a
user's location (e.g., physical proximity to a Bluetooth beacon), state (e.g., earned badges), or time of day (e.g.,

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                     983                                                   © ISLS
before or after lunch) could all be included as determinants, but at a combinatorial cost in the complexity of
distribution plans, as each variable introduces a new dimension to the specification.
         Who   authors distribution  plans? The     adaptability we  seek   to offer  requires   that teachers  become
involved in developing and modifying distribution plans. While ambitious teachers might eventually create
plans "from scratch" around resource collections, we envision the availability of indexed databases of reusable
distribution plans, developed by curriculum designers (or other teachers), that teachers could use modify to
adapt to local contexts. We have recently begun to design a RoomCast professional development program that
would focus initially on frequently occurring enactment scenarios (e.g., adding new students, responding to
device breakdowns), and the move through a progression of configuration resources (defining new activities,
introducing new portal types) to build expertise. In addition to instructional designers and teachers, RoomCast is
also intended for researchers; in our work, we have leveraged RoomCast to facilitate resource reuse across
design revisions and to introduce and enact design variants for experimental research.
         RoomCast is designed to reduce the costs in class time associated with activity and class transitions
(Dillenbourg, 2013). The 'educator' portal includes the 'activity' resource that can be used to change the activity
at any time, causing each client portal to be updated to reflect the resource set appropriate for the new activity.
This obviates reconfiguration of public devices, and allows learners to transition among activities without the
need to close and open applications.
         RoomCast hints at a development strategy focusing on the growth of multiple instructional designs
around curated disciplinary resource sets. In our work, we have partnered with scientific experts in developing
resource suites embodying   disciplinary  practices    and epistemic   forms   that we   have been    able to "mix  and
match" using RoomCast, allowing us to support multiple curricular designs without the need for extensive re-
programming. This represents a more limited domain of reuse than that afforded by crosscutting tools such as
the Concord   Consortium's  SageModeler     and  SmartGraph      resources,  but one   that  allows   a tight focus  on
disciplinary forms and facilitates the construction of interoperable resource suites.

References
Cober, R., Fong, C., Gnoli, A., López Silva, B., Lui, M., Madeira, C., McCann C., Moher, T., Slotta, J., &
         Tissenbaum,   T.  (2012). Embedded     Phenomena    for  Knowledge      Communities:    Supporting     complex
         practices and interactions  within   a community    of  inquiry in  the    elementary science   classroom.  In
         Proceedings of the 10th International Conference of the Learning Sciences, Volume 2, pp. 64-71.
Dillenbourg, P. (2013). Design for classroom orchestration. Computers & Education, 69, 485-92.
Fong, C. and Slotta, J.D. (2018). Supporting communities of learners in the elementary classroom: the common
         knowledge learning environment. Instructional Science, 46 (4), 533-561.
Håklev, S. & Faucon, L. & Hadzilacos, T. & Dillenbourg, P. (2017). FROG: rapid prototyping of collaborative
         learning FROG: rapid prototyping of collaborative learning scenarios.
Hernández-Leo, D., Dimitriadis, Y., Asensio-Perez, J., Villasclaras-Fernández, E., Jorrín-Abellán, I., et al.,
         Collage, a Collaborative Learning Design Editor Based on Patterns Special Issue on Learning Design.
         Journal of Educational Technology and Society 9(1), 58-71.
Kobbe, L., Weinberger, A., Dillenbourg, P., Harrer, A., Hämäläinen, R., Häkkinen, P., & Fischer, F. (2007).
         Specifying  computer-supported   collaboration    scripts. International   Journal   of Computer-Supported
         Collaborative Learning, 2(2-3), 211-224.
Kollar, I., & Fischer, F.  (2013).  Orchestration   is nothing   without conducting    ­  but  arranging   ties the two
         together! A response to Dillenbourg (2011). Computers & Education. 69, 507­509.
Moher,   T.  (2006). Embedded     phenomena:     Supporting   science   learning    with classroom-sized      distributed
         simulations. In Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing System, 691-
         700.
Moher,   T., Uphoff,  B.,  Bhatt,  D., Silva,   B., &  Malcolm,     P. (2008).   WallCology:     designing    interaction
         affordances for learner engagement in authentic science inquiry. In Proceeding of the ACM conference
         on Human Factors in Computing Systems, 163-172.
Tchounikine, P. (2013). Clarifying design for orchestration: orchestration and orchestrable technology, scripting
         and conducting. Computers & Education, 69, 500-503.
Wang, P., Tchounikine, P., & Quignard, M. (2018). Chao: a framework for the development of orchestration
         technologies  for technology-enhanced      learning activities using  tablets   in classrooms.    International
         Journal of Technology Enhanced Learning, 10 (1/2), 1-21.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by Grant Nos. 1065275 and 1324977 from the U.S. National Science Foundation.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                    984                                                      © ISLS
