          Bridging Concepts as Intermediary Knowledge in Design:
         Productive Dialogues and the Talkwall Microblogging Tool

               Ole Smørdal, Department of Education, University of Oslo, ole.smordal@uv.uio.no
         Ingvill Rasmussen, Department of Education, University of Oslo, ingvill.rasmussen@iped.uio.no

          Abstract: Talkwall is a freely available browser-based tool designed to support classroom
          dialogue  and    interaction. When   aligned   to an  appropriate    pedagogy,  it is intended  that
          Talkwall can encourage students to engage and share their developing ideas, and promote
          positive dialogic interactions. Research-practice partnerships and design-based research with
          teachers as co-designers is a key theme in this research programme. We argue the bridging
          concepts facilitate exchange both ways between theory and practice, and that the material
          outcome of the design incorporates and displays the ideas for future practice, and as such it
          contains the embryonic starting point of what `might be'.

Introduction
Contemporary technologies such as microblogging can be integrated into, and are potentially transformative of,
pedagogical practices that develop the `complex competencies' today's students need (for instance, critically
thinking about one's own ideas and how they relate to ideas of others through elaboration and reasoning).
          Sociocultural  perspectives    on social  and  cognitive   development   (Vygotsky,   1962,  1978)   consider
language a central cultural tool for learning and a clear trajectory in academic discourse has been to consider
dialogue as a particularly important tool for learning within classrooms (Barnes, 1976; Alexander, 2008; Howe
& Abedin, 2013; Mercer & Dawes, 2014; Schwarz & Baker, 2016). Dialogue is `more than just talk'; rather,
there is  a specific focus   on sharing    and evaluating   ideas, building ideas  collectively, reasoning,  providing
justifications and elaborations, and using evidence to support arguments.
          The  notion   of `bridging concepts',   initially proposed   by research on  Human     Computer   Interaction
(Dalsgaard & Dindler, 2014), is used to address the problem of translating theoretical understanding to the
design of technology intended to support a specific classroom practice. This form of concept-driven design
research is explorative in nature, aiming at manifesting visionary theoretical ideas in concrete designs. The
intention is to `bridge the gap' between generalized theories and design instances with intermediary forms of
knowledge in the form of conceptual constructs. Building intermediary forms of knowledge is also an essential
part  of  our DBR    approach.   This   is  because insights    into pedagogically appropriate    uses of educational
technology for representative teachers in school settings can be limited. Further, there is often a problematic gap
between what could be effective technology-enhanced learning (TEL) in theory, and what can be effective TEL
in practice (McKenney, 2013).
          A   long term    research programme     have  been    developed,  highlighting  the importance  of    material
artefacts and  material    enactments   based  on  tools such   as   Talkwall. Design  in this   view  continue  in the
classrooms as teachers are rehearsing future practices (Binder et al., 2011) integrating microblogging in their
dialogic teaching.

A research programme for practice development
DBR   is  a   practice-centered research    method    grounded   in  a  collaborative partnership  between     teachers,
researchers and technology developers (Roschelle & Penuel, 2006; Lund et al., 2012; Lund & Rasmussen, 2008;
Rasmussen & Hagen, 2015).         This systematic approach informs the developments of `products', employing
theory and research findings in combination with iterative use in real settings; data collection; analysis and
evaluation; re-design and adaptation. Based on collaboration between researchers and practitioners, DBR leads
to design principles, models and the adaptation of theory (Anderson & Shattuck, 2012).
          During   this research,   all interventions  (both  dialogic  and technology-based)     are  situated in  real
educational contexts with collaborating teachers taking part as co-researchers. This methodological approach
bridges theoretical research and educational practice by (i) recognizing the lived experiences of teachers and
students (ii) integrating their perspectives into the design of Talkwall.
          Designing Talkwall has involved the alignment of three `modes' of DBR (see Bell 2004): theories
related to productive talk, a cultural-historical approach to understanding mediating technologies, and a situated
understanding of limitations and opportunities in the classroom (articulated by teachers during the development
process). Teachers have worked as co-researchers to tailor pedagogic approaches to subject discourses, trying,

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                       993                                                  © ISLS
exploring and developing new classroom practices, forming new tasks and activities, and adapting Talkwall and
resources to  their own  needs. Theorizing  thus strongly  relates to real-life classroom contexts,       and design
principles and models `reflect the conditions in which they operate' (Anderson & Shattuck, 2012, p. 17).

Bridging concepts

                 Figure 1. Talkwall with a feed (to the left), and a wall with contributions (centre).

The tool design is based on epistemological positions regarding learning and collaboration, and bridging
concepts emerged during the research practice partnerships:
         A contribution is a microblog, a digital representation of an idea. In Talkwall, a contribution is short,
chosen to enhance oral interaction, and not substitute it. To allow the users more interactional control than what
is often the case in other microblogging environments (e.g. Twitter) contributions are implemented by a card
design. A contribution can be built on by someone else (e.g. extended, made more precise, etc.).
         A feed provides mutual awareness of ideas. The blend of oral and digital contributions is central to
Talkwall, and the feed provides awareness of participants' thinking, rather than a thread or sequence of ideas.
The feed in Talkwall is shared on all participants' devices, as well as the teachers' screen, and offers means for
students to effectively share their contributions with their peers. The feed is an awareness mechanism that may
be used by students to acquire ideas from others and for the teacher to acquire both detailed information about
how students are formulating their ideas, the sequence and emergence of ideas, and an overall idea of the
dialogue in the classroom as a whole.
         A wall   allows for contributions to be promoted     from the feed  and  be  represented      in a spatially
organized surface. The feed and the wall are two different lenses to the contributions, the feed focuses on the
temporal  and emergent   nature of ideas, while the wall   is a means  for selecting relevant contributions,    and
allowing spatial arrangement by means of direct manipulation of contributions in order to make connections, to
aggregate and classify contributions, and to amplify means for synthesizing.
         The bridging concepts can be regarded as a realization of a dialogic space (Wegerif 2015), as dialogue
is mutually constructed by oral and digital contributions in the classroom. This hybridity, or combination of the
oral and the written, poses new challenges both in how we understand the roles of technology in the digitalized
classroom, but also in terms of how technology can be designed. By means of Talkwall, diverse voices are
represented, made accessible over time, enabling the class to invoke and combine ideas, and to keep them alive
in the dialogue.
         Finally, a space for the teacher is a bridging concept that embody the empowerment of the teachers
and has emerged from collaboration with teachers, and their own formulations of how they cope with new
digital tools and materials in the classroom (Rasmussen & Lund, 2015). In Talkwall, the role of the teacher has
been a key point in the design, and has promoted some privileges in the tool for teachers, such as access to all
the participants' walls and ability to show any one of them on the shared screen in from of the class. Further,
there are features that support the teacher as a leader of the dialogue, such as means to formulate tasks and to
manage Talkwall sessions.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                  994                                                     © ISLS
        What the notion of bridging concepts enable is exactly the communicative work that is needed in the
design work   that aims   to tailor a material    product to a  specific educational  practice  and  drawing  also  on
theoretical insights from this field of practice.
        We argue the bridging concepts facilitate exchange both ways between theory and practice, and that the
material outcome of the design incorporates and displays the ideas for future practice, and as such it contains the
embryonic starting point of what `might be' (Lund et al., 2012). Since ideas of what `might be' are often volatile
and hence hard to hold on to, teachers may find valuable a tool that inscribes significant aspects of dialogic
theory and may be a `digital companion' with potentially transformative impact for emergent dialogic practices.
        Our   translations   of bridging    concepts, into   design  articulations and  a  range    of exemplars that
demonstrate the scope and potential of their application (Dalsgaard & Dindler, 2014, p. 1635) have considered
technology such as microblogging within a diverse set of educational context over many years. Thus, we draw
from particulars   to form   more   generalizable  concepts  for pedagogical  practices   that develop   the `complex
competencies' today's students need.

Findings based on a theory and design-based research program
Talkwall is a result of longitudinal DBR involving collaboration with a total of nine schools over a period of
five years. We have recorded 65+ sessions with Talkwall and analysed how teachers have aligned and enacted
the tool with their intended dialogic teaching. The shared goals for this research program have their origin both
in such situated experiences by teachers and in research, and can be summarized as follows:
        x     The technology should provide means for students to build on each other's thinking, as this is
              crucial for a dialogue that is characterized by elaboration and reasoning.
        x     There should be means provided for broad participation in the classroom to make sure a diverse set
              of voices are participating in the dialogue.
        x     Diverse means should be offered beyond the oral for contributing to a dialogue, such as allowing
              for multimodal interactions.
A key empirical finding was the importance of moves between individual, group, and whole class interactions,
and designs that address such shifts. This is a particular feature with Talkwall, based on dialogic theory and
experiences teachers bring to the design process. Central in the design for shifts between individual, group and
whole class interactions are the specific design articulation based on the bridging concepts of the feed and the
wall. We will present findings suggesting that frequent shifts of participant structures are beneficial for broad
participation in the classroom.
        Our   research    program   clearly demonstrates     how  an alignment     of a tool's  development    with a
theoretical approach   is valuable  as intermediary    knowledge    emerge,  in our   case in   the form  of  bridging
concepts. These stimulates and guides the exchange between theory, design and classroom practices, and may
be essential to bridge the gap between generalized theories, design instances and situated classroom practices.
        As mentioned, the tool is enacted by competent teachers that will construct meaning of the artefact in a
given and situated classroom context. The tool is designed for this meaning making to happen (Krippendorff
2005), and we associate some agency with the tool in this respect. In this perspective it is not productive to
regard tools as theory free.

References
Alexander, R.J. (2008) Essays on Pedagogy, Routledge.
Anderson, T., & Shattuck, J. (2012). Design-Based Research: A Decade of Progress in Education Research?
        Educational Researcher, 41(1), 16­25.
Barnes, D. (1976). From Communication to Curriculum. Harmondsworth: Penguin.
Bell, P. (2004). On the theoretical breadth of design-based research in education. Educational Psychologist.
Binder, T., De Michelis, G., Ehn, P., Giulio, J., Linde, P., & Wagner, I. (2011). Design Things. (K. Friedman &
        E. Stolterman, Eds.). MIT Press.
Dalsgaard, P., & Dindler, C. (2014). Between theory and practice: Bridging concepts in HCI research (pp.
        1635­1644). Presented at the Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems - Proceedings,
        New York, New York, USA: ACM Press.
Howe,  C.   & Abedin,   M    (2013) Classroom     dialogue:  a systematic review   across  four decades   of research,
        Cambridge Journal of Education, 43:3, 325-356.
Krippendorff, K. (2005) The Semantic Turn: A New Foundation for Design. CRC Press.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                     995                                                    © ISLS
Lund, A., & Rasmussen, I. (2008). The right tool for the wrong task? Match and mismatch between first and
       second stimulus in double stimulation. International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative
       Learning, 3(4), 387­412.
Lund, A., & Smørdal, O. (2006). Is there a space for the teacher in a WIKI? the 2006 international symposium
       (pp. 37­46). New York, New York, USA: ACM.
Lund, A., Rasmussen, I., & Smørdal, O. (2012). Visualisation of Trajectories of Participation in a Wiki: A Basis
       for Feedback and Assessment? Nordic Journal of Digital Literacy, 7(01), 20­35.
McKenney, S. (2013).   Designing and    researching technology-enhanced learning for  the zone of proximal
       implementation. Research in Learning Technology, 21(0), 67.
Mercer, N. & Dawes, L. (2014) The study of talk between teachers and students, from the 1970s until the 2010s,
       Oxford Review of Education, 40:4, 430-445.
Rasmussen, I., & Hagen, Å. (2015). Facilitating students' individual and collective knowledge construction
       through microblogs, 72, 149­161.
Rasmussen, I., & Lund, A. (2015). Læringsressurser og lærerrollen ­ et partnerskap i endring? Acta Didactica
       Norge, 9(1), Art. 18, 20 sider.
Roschelle, J., & Penuel, W. R. (2006). Co-design of innovations with teachers: definition and dynamics (pp.
       606­612). International Society of the Learning Sciences.
Schwarz, B. B. & Baker, M. J. (2016) Dialogue, Argumentation and Education: History, Theory and Practice.
       Cambridge University Press
Vygotsky, L. S. (1962). Thought and language. Cambridge MA: MIT Press.
Vygotsky, L. S. (1978). Mind in society: The development of higher psychological processes. Cambridge, MA:
       Harvard University Press.
Wegerif, R. (2015). Technology and teaching thinking: Why a dialogic approach is needed for the twenty-first
       century. In The Routledge International Handbook of Research on Teaching Thinking (pp. 427­440).
       Routledge.

Acknowledgements
This research is part of the DiDiAC project and funded by the Norwegian research council under grant no.
254761/FINNUT.

CSCL 2019 Proceedings                                 996                                                 © ISLS
