                                                 ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

 Arts and Learning: A Review of the Impact of Arts and Aesthetics
             on Learning and Opportunities for Further Research
      Kylie A. Peppler, Heidi J. Davis, Indiana University, 201 N Rose Avenue, Bloomington, IN, 47405
                                 Email: kpeppler@indiana.edu, hdavis2@indiana.edu

         Abstract: Traditionally, learning scientists have paid little attention to the discipline of the
         arts as the more prominent focus has been on science and mathematics. Despite this, the
         learning    sciences could  benefit from   further  understanding     how   the  arts  offer alternative
         methods of inquiry, representation, and understanding.        At the same time, leaders in the field
         of  arts education   are  calling for  more  research   in    areas that  intersect with    the learning
         sciences,   pointing  to the  mutually synergistic    ways    that  the two fields  could    inform one
         another. Guided by feminist communitarian methodology, this paper brings together a review
         of a wide body of research in the field of arts education, spanning affective, cognitive, social,
         and transformative effects of the arts. Insights are shared for how the arts as a discipline can
         inform the study of learning and, conversely, point to ways in which learning scientists can
         contribute to the field of arts education research.

The arts and aesthetic traditions have long since been a crucial part of the education experience. Scholars, such
as John Dewey, have written extensively on the role of the arts in education (1934/1980), conceiving of the art
object, the process of engaging in art making, and the resulting aesthetic sensory experience as theoretically
independent entities. According to Dewey, the activity of art making is important because it engages learners in
the process  of   building, designing, and   constructing    artifacts and   provides  a  tool  by which    we search  for
meaning. Both of these notions lie at the heart of a great deal of learning sciences research. Despite this history,
learning scientists have paid little attention to the discipline of the arts as the more prominent focus has been on
science and mathematics. There are few art educators found in the learning sciences literatures and there are few
scholars identified with the learning sciences community who deal with the arts in an explicit way. Despite this,
there are many aspects of learning that could benefit from further research into how the arts and aesthetics play
a role in our current conceptions, including the study of representations (Latour, 1987; Lynch, 1988), the design
of new experiences, environments and technologies (Brown, 1992), and visual research methodologies (Pink,
2001), among many other areas of learning sciences research. One example that seems particularly ripe for
exploration  is   the study   of  representations,  particularly  how    children   engage   in  drawing,    dramatic   re-
enactments, and role-play when representing their ideas in simulations or models (c.f., Danish, 2009). Artistic
and aesthetic facets are innate in all of this work, while their role in the learning process is seldom explored.
         Historically, cognitive views of learning have prevailed in arts education (Deasy, 2002; Gardner, 1991)
but more recently views have expanded to take on increasingly diverse theoretical frames and areas of study
related to  learning  (Alexander   &  Day,  1992;   Eisner,  2002).    Taken   together,  these bodies   of research   have
contributed to our understanding of the role of the arts in (1) the methods of data collection and analytical
techniques (Barone, 2008; Sullivan, 2005); (2) the healing, therapeutic, and restorative processes (Eisner, 2002;
Malchiodi, 1999; McNiff, 2004); (3) the discovery of the self, the group, the community or diverse cultures
(Greene, 1995; Dewey, 1934/1980; Heath & Soep, 1998); and (4) in expression and communication as well as
the particular habits of mind that are cultivated through the arts (Hetland et. al, 2007). More recent studies point
to the long-term impacts of the arts on learning and development that outweigh other extracurricular activities
(Catterall, 2009).   These  bodies  of research  are summarized        more  fully  in this  article  but, taken  together,
represent a robust body of knowledge that is rarely built upon in learning sciences research. At the same time,
leaders in the field of arts education are calling for more research on learning and artistic expression as well as
more research on the arts and the transfer of learning (Arts Education Partnership, 2004). This points to the
mutually synergistic ways that the two fields could inform one another. With this community bond in mind, we
adopt the feminist communitarian model as our guiding methodological framework. This framework celebrates
community ties and conceives understanding as inseparable from community (Friedman, 1989).
         The focus of this paper is to turn our attention to the arts as an understudied area and examine how the
field can expand as well as open new avenues of research in the learning sciences. This paper brings together a
review of a wide body of research in the field of arts education, spanning affective, cognitive, social, and
transformative effects of the arts. In addition, insights are shared for how the arts as a discipline can inform the
study of    learning  in educational  settings and,  conversely,  point     to ways    in which  learning   scientists can
contribute to the field of arts education research.

History of Arts Education

                                                    1000   ·   © ISLS
                                                ICLS 2010     ·  Volume 1

The study of the arts in education has a long history arcing back to the Greek and Roman eras. Plato and
Aristotle wrote of the importance of the arts, "for their didactic impact as instruments of cultural maintenance,"
(Efland, 1990, p. 8), alluding to the earliest function of the arts as visual public curricula to convey cultural
values and  encourage   public  discourse.  In his   influential   book,  A History  of  Art  Education,  Efland  (1990)
depicts the ways in which the social status of the artist contributed significantly to how art education has been
conceptualized throughout time. For example, while art objects were seen as important for the education of
Greek and Roman societies, the rich did not participate in art making, for artists were not deemed important in
society. Conceptions changed in the Middle Ages, when learning in the arts became a form of religious penance
for many monks, thus shifting the status of learning in the arts from low-status to highly esteemed. The next big
shift occurred during the Renaissance, when academies were created to educate learners on the philosophy of
art, which separated art making, traditionally done by lower status individuals, from theorizing about art, now
part of the newly formed academies. As these two learning contexts developed, separate identities emerged:
craft and fine art. No longer appropriate only for the working class and clergy, the concept of fine art brought
high status to learning in the arts and opened the door to public art education.
          In the United States, art education began with emphasis on drawing in Benjamin Franklin's academy in
Philadelphia (1739/1931). The Industrial Revolution also encouraged drawing as a technical skill that should be
included in the general education setting. Similarly, art at the university level began in other departments such
as science and anthropology. For example, drawing was a subject taught in the School of Science at Yale long
before the School of Fine Arts was established. At the turn of the twentieth-century, as fine art schools emerged
across the country, technical skill and art history dominated learning in the arts. At the same time, Dewey's work
on aesthetics entered   the educational    discourse,  linking   all learning  to   aesthetic experiences and   aesthetic
experiences to art in his seminal work, Art as Experience (1934/1980). As aesthetic awareness entered the stage
of learning in the arts, somatic and intuitive understanding began to get the attention of much research. Research
on the imagination and creative expression emerged from this pool of research, as well.
          In more recent years, these discussions have been eclipsed in some of the current day educational
policy imperatives that place central the role of science, math, and literacy in 21st century education. Often
missing from these conversations is the enduring role that the arts and aesthetic knowing plays in education.
Aesthetic awareness concerns the heightening of sensory perception (Greene, 1995), enabling learners to discern
and demarcate something temporal as rare, unexpected, or beautiful. Arts researchers often point out that art-
centered experiences are not automatically aesthetic in nature, but rather meaning is developed through the
reflective and critical eye (Dewey, 1934; Freedman, 2003). Desantis and Housen (2000) developed a theory of
aesthetic development    that  outlines    patterns of  thinking   that   correlate with  the   amount   of art-centered
experiences a learner has had. The theory presents a continuum in which lower levels of aesthetic connection
align with fewer exposures to art. This work points to the importance of art education for aesthetic growth,
which is of central importance to studies of arts learning, as well as in other domains.

Methodology
What follows is a brief review of the vast body of research that has taken place in the field of arts education. At
its outset, four guiding questions framed our review and helped to organize our writing, consisting of: (1) What
counts as learning in the arts? (2) How has learning been historically studied in the arts? (3) As an understudied
area in the learning sciences, what implications do the arts hold for future research? By contrast, (4) how can the
field of learning sciences expand the efforts of arts education?
          Our intent for this  review   is to precipitate   dialogue   that bridges  the educational    discourse in two
communities of research. In that regard, we selected a methodology anchored in communitarian epistemology
apropos for building community ties and mutual interest. Our research methodology emanates from the feminist
communitarian    model,  which   puts  forward  that   "the   community   is ontologically    and axiologically   prior to
persons" (Christians, 2005, p. 152). This model provides three key foundations for this paper: where to look,
what is important to look at, and how to use this information. First, this model provides a sociocultural lens,
which suggests that meaning is mediated through social dialogue. From this perspective, we began the literature
review by  looking   to key    portals of  dialogue  in the   arts community.     As such,    we  bring together  several
landmark   studies found    in books   and  major    journals   published   by leading   arts  education  organizations,
including the National Arts Education Association (NAEA) and the Arts Education Partnership (AEP).
          Second, our methodological framework guided the process of selecting key themes for the paper. The
feminist communitarian model holds that rules situated within a community are understood by valuing the
multiplicity of voices as opposed to formal consensus. Within this framework, we looked to multiple voices in
the social dialogue that provided themes that are unique to the arts. Taken together, this body of research can be
summarized    in four unique    properties  of arts   learning   that  have  broader  implications   for  learning more
generally, which are summarized in Table 1. In the following sections of the paper, we go into each of these
four themes in further depth, highlighting some prior landmark studies as well as pointing to ways that the work
can inform our understanding in the learning sciences.

                                                     1001   ·   © ISLS
                                                   ICLS 2010        ·  Volume 1

Art as Inquiry

Arts-based researchers look to aesthetic response within the disciplines of art in order to develop meaning.
Arts-based research is a methodology, which includes art making into any of the phases of research from
inquiry and data collection to sharing findings and conclusions (Deasy, 2009). Poetry, narrative, film, drawing,
collage, painting, performance, dance, music, and sculpture are a few of the mediums used in the creative
research process. Arts-based research can be used to explore questions in any discipline, not just inquiries about
art. Arts-based research critically investigates learning based on the belief that there are multiple ways to
develop meaning. Here, we focus on arts-based research in education, though it exists in other disciplines, such
as engineering (Penny, 2000), and anthropology (Pink, 2001).

                      Table 1: Summary of the current research organized into four key themes.

    Properties of Learning in the                          Definition                         Implications for the Learning Sciences
                 Arts
 Art as Inquiry                       The methods and mediums used by artists offer          Qualitative research methods.
                                      tools for art as a way of research.
 Art as Transformative Experience     Art-centered experiences offer therapeutic and         Affective understanding.
                                      restorative properties.                                Self-efficacy.
                                                                                             Learner readiness.
                                                                                             Restorative experience.
                                                                                             Healing.
 Art as a Means of Discovery          The arts provide opportunities for multiple            Community Building.
                                      solutions, which allow individual differences to       Collaboration.
                                      emerge and allow individuals to be reflexive about     Cross-Cultural Awareness.
                                      the self, the group, the community, and diverse        Sociocultural Theory.
                                      cultures located across space and time.
 Art as Literacy                      Engaging in the arts requires specific habits of       Habits of Mind.
                                      mind and knowledge-in-action to be able to read        Literacy.
                                      and write the arts.                                    Critique.
                                                                                             Representations.
                                                                                             Transfer.
          There are many definitions and labels for inquiring about the world through artistic practice. Most
descriptions include the notion of viewing education through the artistic lens. But that means slightly different
things to   different    researchers.  Sullivan (2005)        summarizes      four     ways  that education      research    has   been
interpreted through       the arts: 1) educational  connoisseurship,          2)  Arts-based    Educational      Research,     3)  arts-
informed research, and 4) a/r/tography. A fifth group is added to Sullivan's list by including the scholARTists
mentioned in Cahnmann-Taylor and Siegesmund's collection of arts based research (2008).
          Sullivan's first group, Eisner's educational connoisseurship, is based on seeing and sensing educational
phenomenon through the expertise of an educational critic, modeled upon the concept of the expertise of an art
critic, who makes judgments based on having exposure to many images Similarly the educational critic makes
judgments based on exposure to many educational experiences. Eisner continued to push the idea of art practice
informing research by creating the Arts-Based Research Institute in 1993. In 1997, with his colleague Barone,
the concept     and   the term,   Art-based  Educational       Research     (ABER),     emerged.   ABER       points   to  the unique
insights and ways of expressing that can be found only in the arts..
          While ABER celebrates the distinctly different approaches available through the arts, other researchers
maintain the traditional research framework for using the arts in research. For example, arts-informed research
seeks to integrate scientific inquiry with artful and imaginative inquiry (Cole & Knowles, 2001). From this
view, the arts are relied upon to represent understanding developed through more traditional research methods.
To  distinguish   between     ABER     and  arts-informed       research,   the   results of an   arts-informed       study  might  be
generalizable, while ABER would not seek generalizability, but instead value aesthetic resonance --that is, the
research is recognized as holding meaning for a specific community (Eisner, 2008). Other researchers refer to
themselves as a/r/tographers, who inquire about the world within the identity of being an artist who is also a
researcher and a teacher. A/r/tographers approach research through living inquiry embodied within the daily
roles  of  an    artist-researcher-teacher.  As such,         a/r/tographers   use     multiple artforms      and    writing   to build
understanding by knowing, doing, and making (Irwin, 2004). In addition to these four interpretations of art as
inquiry depicted by Sullivan, another key group includes ScholARTists, practicing artists who create stand-
alone artwork developed from their research. Their artwork develops from fieldwork, such as collected and
analyzed data, but the final piece is relayed through art. For example, Saldana (2008) created an ethnodrama
about  the  nature    of  qualitative  data based on      field  notes    and  25  years   worth  of    experience    in   the theater.
ScholARTists use art practices for scholarships' sake (Irwin, 2004).
          All arts-based research aims to establish research questions, share findings, and mine data in evocative
and   meaningful    ways   (Cahnmann-Taylor       &       Siegesmund,      2008;  Irwin   &  de   Cosson,     2004).   For   example,

                                                           1002   ·   © ISLS
                                                   ICLS 2010    ·  Volume 1

Springgay's  (2004)    dissertation  research   on   tactile epistemologies     employs     the   methods   of a/r/tography   to
examine student perceptions of thinking through the body. The paper version of the dissertation is accompanied
by a DVD of seven videos. Aligning with the tactile epistemological content of the work, the paper version is
hand stitched with fabrics and thread, and is augmented by the author's original photography and poetry.
          Ultimately, research is a tool for making sense of learning in order to positively impact the lives of
learners.  Human   understanding     advances   through      exploration,   interpretation,  and    representation, which    are
qualities of both the arts and sciences (Leavy, 2009). Arts-based research is beneficial for the learning sciences
in myriad ways, but we have highlighted three of the most significant: 1) to provide the learning sciences with
an expanded toolkit for developing meaning, 2) to acknowledge and clarify assumptions about what it means to
know for the researcher, and 3) to include voices previously left out of the discourse on learning. In addition to
the benefits  of  embracing    aesthetic  awareness   as  a   useful    component     of  research,  arts based  research  also
challenges other traditional notions. Embracing post-modern theories that state there is no one truth, arts-based
research encourages research that opens the conversation--it is not the researcher telling the reader, but rather
the researcher    invites the  reader  to be   an  active    part of  the   process   in  making    meaning    (Siegesmund    &
Cahnmann-Tayor, 2008). Barone also sees the wider readership potentially available through arts-based research
as an opportunity to encourage social change (2008).

Art as Transformative Experience
Throughout    history,   humanity    has  responded   to  tragedy     with    art, as represented    by   the  9/11 memorial,
Reflecting Absence or Picasso's Guernica, among countless others. Just as a nation uses art to heal and move
forward, art as a transformative experience is important for education, as well. As Maslow's hierarchy of needs
suggests,   basic needs   such as    feeling safe and  valued     must     be met  before   learning  can   occur  (1943).   The
transformative nature of learning in the arts is well poised to meet this educative need.
          Long acknowledged in the fields of art, psychology, and aesthetic education, the process of creating
and responding    to  art offers  therapeutic   and  restorative     properties    (e.g., Eisner, 2002).   The  transformative
impact of art can be seen in studies like Malchioldi's (1999) work with children, which found stress relief and
healing effects when art-making was used with hospitalized children. Kaplan et al. (1993) found that visits to a
museum had a restorative effect on visitors. A number of self-proclaimed transformative art experiences exist in
the literature, as well.  For example, Hill (1951) professes that art making was instrumental in his recovery from
tuberculosis and Allen (1995) shares how art helped her confront harmful beliefs and transformed her life.
          The transformative impact of art provides insight for research in the areas of affective knowledge,
restorative experiences, and self-efficacy. Art therapy is a branch of psychology that has greatly contributed to
this range of research. Art therapy research has shown that healing and transformation comes from a place of
affect that is beyond words (Malchioldi, 1999). Research has also shown that the affective benefits of learning
in the arts act as a gatekeeper for positive self-identity in adolescents (Catterall, 2004). Similarly, in Critical
Links, several    research  projects   found    that the     affective  properties    of   the  arts contributed    to  positive
transformations in the areas of motivation, cognitive development, school culture, academic performance, and
attitudes  toward  reading  (Catterall,   2002).   Self-efficacy     is also   strengthened    through    experiences   with art
(Catterall, 2004;  Catterall   &  Peppler,   2007).  Eisner     summarizes     that   self-efficacy  is developed   during   the
creative act as learners engage in a medium and bring their concepts into reality (2002). Kennedy's (2002) study
found that learning in the arts increased the self-efficacy of at-risk youth, promoting positive self-esteem. In this
way, experiences with art enhance individual, social, and cultural health. By readying the psychological state,
learning in the arts reaches across disciplines and offers unique opportunities to restore health, which clears
pathways to new knowledge.

Arts as a Means of Discovery
Another key contribution of the arts is that it provides opportunities for multiple solutions. As Eisner states,
"...Standardization of solution and uniformity of response is no virtue in the arts. While the teacher of spelling
is not particularly interested in promoting the student's ingenuity, the art teacher seeks it" (2002, p. 1). The
diversity of solutions and the space that is afforded for creative solutions to a problem is at the heart of what it
means  to   engage  in   learning in  the arts. We   see  the   valuing    of  multiple   solutions  as  essential to  allowing
individual differences to emerge and engender a discovery learning process that engages the learner in learning
about the self, the group, the community, and diverse cultures, which are outlined in the four sections below.
    Arts and Learning about the Self. While self-discovery may happen in all disciplines, the arts seem to be a
particularly fruitful  context    to cultivate  solutions    unique     to the  self, imagination,    and   creativity. Further
discovering these areas in terms of their relationship to learning seems ripe for exploration into the role of
creativity  and imagination    in learning   and  seems   to    also be    an understudied     area  of the learning   sciences.
Imagination seems to play a role in self-discovery. Greene's seminal work, Releasing the Imagination, stresses
that when a young person's imagination is not released, that young person may have difficulty situating the self
as well as the role of the self in a larger community (1995). Heath and Soep expand on this to elaborate that the

                                                      1003    ·   © ISLS
                                                ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

arts allows individuals to be reflexive about the self as they hone the ability to make things of value to their
surrounding communities (Heath & Soep, 1998). Similarly, Dewey alerts us to the transformative nature of the
arts and aesthetics in challenging the status quo and the dominant elite in order to meet the needs of democratic
society (1934/1980). This is particularly relevant to youth in marginalized communities because they have an
opportunity to write their own narratives and insert themselves into the dominant discourse through the arts.
This potentially sets the stage for higher levels of engagement in other arenas, like school. Catterall and Peppler
also discuss the impact that the arts have on general self-efficacy in disadvantaged groups--the positive and
authentic view of one's capabilities and achievements--developed in mastering an art form, and the critical and
reflective dispositions that accompany its development (2007). Taken together, these strands of research call for
future investigations into the differing effects of an arts experience for the audience and the artist, which are
areas of inquiry that learning scientists are particularly poised to answer.
     The Arts and Group Learning. As aforementioned, when young people engage in art making they explore a
variety of disciplines and are learning at multiple levels, including learning about the larger group or classroom
community   as  well as  their place   in it. Arts experiences     frequently   involve   more   than one    learner. The
performing arts, in particular, are steeped in this tradition as actors find their place in the production, musicians
learn about their part in the orchestral work, visual artists work on large murals together, and dancers in their
role in the dance. While the arts are not the only discipline to have group learning experiences, they offer rich
opportunities to gain skills in a group setting and also to display final products. Research on collaboration would
benefit from exploring the arts further to better understand the role of the collective in the arts. Researchers
might also inquire into the specific qualities the arts bring to group learning processes as well as the qualities of
the individual art forms that contribute to efficacious group learning and contrast this with what is known more
generally about group learning and collaboration. Other areas that are ripe for exploration include investigating
whether  arts collaborations exhibit   general  tendencies    to enhance  equity  in   learning  for  larger numbers    of
learners in the group and particularly whether this is inclusive of already disenfranchised groups. Preliminary
observations indicate that the arts can create more equitable learning opportunities for at-risk youth (Catterall &
Peppler, 2007). Additionally, it would be interesting to explore whether the arts can serve as a training ground
for learning to be part of a group outside of the arts and the conditions for such group learning to occur.
         In a related manner, current and historical research points to the arts as the foundations of a democratic
society, including  effects of the arts   on  positive social    interactions, tolerance, and   consideration  to  moral
dilemmas. For instance, studies suggest that the arts promote empathy, tolerance, and solution finding through
taking multiple perspectives (Catterall, 2002). These effects may not just extend to students involved in the arts,
they may well impact participating teachers and school identity. For example, Noblit and Corbett (2001), noted
in their evaluation of the A+ Schools program in North Carolina that school faculty developed a positive school
culture despite typical administrative challenges and lack of resources. This work suggests that engagement in
arts activities fosters democratic values. Further inquiry may advance notions of democratic public schooling.
         The Arts and Cross-Cultural Learning. Because artifacts are a reflection of the values held by a group
of people in a particular space and time, they allow us to learn about diverse cultures through their study. This
type of  learning happens   even when     we  travel across   space  and  time.  Anthropologists      and historians,  for
example, help us to understand diverse cultures through the study of their art, which is the foundation of fields
like art history and music history. Moreover, the arts are rooted in cultural traditions. Engaging youth to identify
more deeply with their own culture and share this understanding with others may also be a key contribution of
the arts, especially as classrooms encourage this type of sharing with peers and teaching faculty. Moreover,
youth from diverse backgrounds can develop deeper understandings around issues of race, culture, and class
systems  (Deasy,  2002). Drama,    for example,    has  been   found  to engage   youth     in social change   and    build
understanding  among   diverse  groups    (Rohd, 1998).     This  may  be because      drama   allows youth   to explore
multiple roles and perspectives through role-play (Deasy, 2002). In doing so, drama helps youth to understand
character motivation, complex problems and emotions, and social relationships, promotes conflict resolution,
engagement,   and  positive  self-concept  (Catterall, 2002).    This ongoing    body    of research   demonstrates    the
efficacy of the arts of communicating meaning across cultures through complex semiotic systems.

Arts as Literacy
Literacy is now known to be both multimodal in nature (Kress & van Leeuwen, 1996) and mediated through
shared social and culturally situated activity (Vygotsky, 1935/1978). As theories of semiotics are advanced,
prior work has focused on monomodal domains of the various art forms and articulated the associated grammars
of each  individual  system  of  communication     (i.e., visual,  auditory,    etc.). More    recently,  researchers  are
promoting a multimodal view of literacy that is key to understanding newer art forms (Kress & van Leeuwen,
2001). These efforts broaden our conceptions to include a theory of "multimodal literacy" and what it might
mean to "make meaning" across a range of modalities. Jewitt and Kress (2003) argue for two central practices in
their theory of multimodal literacy, including "design thinking" as encapsulating the intentions of a designer in
absentia of the materials and the "production thinking" emanating from those ideas in the materials. In sum,

                                                   1004   ·   © ISLS
                                                ICLS 2010     ·    Volume 1

artists make   sense of   individual modalities   with  the   ultimate  goal   of  making    connections  between    several
different types of modalities. Arts engagement fosters the ability to translate one type of literacy to another.
          Further,  current research  on   language   and   literacy   point to  the   ways   in which   various  modes   of
communication have value in the larger social and cultural context. For example, each of the major art forms
(e.g., dance, drama, music, and visual arts) can be seen as its own symbolic system of language, one capable of
expressing a range of emotionality and communicating a rich set of ideas and understandings that is oftentimes
unattainable through speech alone. Not surprisingly, this realization allows us to view the meaning making of
disenfranchised   groups   in new  ways  (Baum,    Owen,    &   Oreck,    1997;   Catterall  &   Waldorf,  2000),   which  is
especially true for young children and those with disabilities that were previously seen as illiterate or pre-
literate. Young children's drawings, for example, can now be seen as efforts at meaning making and expression
and can be used for thinking and reflection (Kress & van Leeuwen, 1996). Through seeing these acts as art in
their own   right  (Gardner,  1980),  we   begin   to recognize     these   acts as literate  activities and can    begin to
understand how young children as well as all learners begin to read and write the world through artistic acts.
          Moreover, artists shape and convey intellectual and emotional content in their artwork as well as to
evoke intellectual and emotional responses in the viewer (Greene, 2001). As such, we begin to see that learning
in the arts transcends the benefits for the artists and includes the audience in the learning process as well. This is
because the art object presents opportunities for the audience to engage in learning. The arts naturally afford
inclusive  learning  opportunities   because  arts tradition    is deeply   rooted  in performance,   ,which   is a  natural
culmination of dance, drama, and music. Also, displaying the final product in the visual arts is a common
culmination, which positions the audience as a primary motivating force in the arts (Sefton-Green, 1998).
          As theories of constructionism would explain (Papert, 1980; Kafai, 2006), the process of producing a
work of art engages the artist in an iterative exploration of ideas and emotions as the work proceeds in a meta-
cognitive manner. During this process, the artist learns to refine aesthetic sensibilities and build knowledge
about materials, while connecting to other disciplines. For example, figurative drawing engages an artist in
further understanding human anatomy. The fact that the arts give use new ways to read and write the world, has
spurred a flurry of research aimed at the arts and the transfer of learning to other traditional academic areas such
as mathematics, spatial reasoning, and oral and written language acquisition (Winner & Hetland, 2000; Deasy,
2002). Studies and commentaries in the publication, Critical Links (Deasy, 2002), have accumulated support
that  the arts and   oral and written language     share   interrelated physical    and symbolic    processes,   an area  of
research that could be further explored in the learning and cognitive sciences.
          Relationships between the arts and literacy and language development are found across all of the visual
and performing art forms, though the research is currently most robust in music and drama. For example, music
features a symbol system that shares fundamental characteristics with language. At its core, music can be seen
as decoding and encoding procedures that have syntactic and expressive structures (Scripp, 2002). In a similar
manner,   Catterall  found  that dramatic  enactments      enhance     youths'   abilities to comprehend     texts, identify
characters, and understand character motivations (2002). Studies also indicate that dramatic activities promote
both  writing  proficiency  and  prolixity in generating    written    material.  Further   research is  needed   into other
artistic forms, particular dance and the visual arts, as very little current research exists in this area. Additionally,
learning  scientists could  help to  unpack   the  mechanisms       at work   in  the  connections   between  the   arts and
literacy. For example, math educators call for more research on learning and aesthetics in order to develop a
mathematics aesthetic, which evokes awareness of the beauty in mathematical ideas (e.g., Sinclair & Crespo,
2006). Across these studies, we see that the arts set the stage for learning a unique language and communicating
with others in the world at large. Further inquiry into theorizing such literacies is needed, with the learning
sciences uniquely poised to contribute knowledge on design-based research, assessment, and situated learning.

Discussion & Conclusion
          We have pointed to ways the field of arts education could benefit from research in the learning sciences
as well as the ways in which the arts alert us to an understanding that is under-represented in the learning
sciences. There are a range of cognitive, social, and cultural capacities engaged by learning in the arts. The
following summarizes five opportunities for future research. First, research is needed to examine how youth
develop such knowledge-in-action as well as the disposition to see the world through the lens of aesthetics, as
we unravel how youth wrestle with ideas, materials, and meanings in the arts (Fiske, 2000). Second, there is a
need to better understand how the various art forms uniquely impact the learning experience. For example, in
what ways is learning in music distinct from other ways of representing ideas, such as dance or visual arts?
Deasy adds that "finding alignment among the ways in which the study of different artistic forms demands and
nurtures complex thinking has significance for the development of comprehensive arts programs and for our
understanding of the nature of thought in arts learning" (2002, p. 6). Third, further research is needed on the
design of learning environments in the arts. Better understanding of the pedagogical approaches and classroom
contexts that support learning in the arts is needed (Horowitz & Webb-Dempsey, 2002). Fourth, there is also a
need to define and measure "arts learning" (Catterall, 2002). Current studies do not unpack the extent and

                                                      1005  ·   © ISLS
                                              ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

quality of the learning experience in the arts. Consequently, we know little about the specific qualities of arts
learning that contribute to the gains aforementioned in this paper. As a result, it is difficult to qualitatively
compare arts programs and there is an assumption that all arts education is of similar quality. This does not
contribute to our understanding of how    variations  in  learning   in the arts account for   variations in learning
outcomes. Lastly, further research is needed in traditional areas of the learning sciences to explore the role of
arts and aesthetics in our understanding of design, representations, and research methodologies, among a host of
other domains in the learning sciences.

References
Alexander, K., & Day, M. (Eds.). (1992). Discipline-based art education: A curriculum sampler. Los Angeles:
        Getty Trust Publications.
Allen, P. B. (1995). Art is a way of knowing. New York: Shambhala Publications, Inc.
Arts Education Partnership. (2004). The arts and education: New opportunities for research. Washington, DC:
        Author.
Barone, T. (2008). How arts-based research can change minds. In M. Cahnmann-Taylor             &      R.
Baum, S., Owen, S., & Oreck, B. (1997). Transferring individual self-regulation process from arts to academics.
        Arts Education Policy Reveiw, 98(4), 32-39.
Brown,  A.  (1992). Design  experiments:   Theoretical    and    methodological   challenges   in creating   complex
        interventions in classroom settings. The Journal of Learning Sciences, 2(2), 141-178.
Cahnmann-Taylor, M., and Siegesmund, R. (Eds.). (2008). Arts-based research in education: Foundations for
        practice. New York, NY: Routledge.
Catterall, J. S. (2002). Critical links: Learning in the arts and social development. Washington, DC: The Arts
        Education Partnership.
Catterall, J. S. (2009). Doing well and doing good by doing art. Los Angeles: I-Group Books.
Catterall, J. S. (2004). The arts and education: New opportunities for research. Washington, DC: The Arts
        Education Partnership.
Catterall, J. S. and Peppler, K. A. (2007). Learning in the visual arts and the worldviews of young children.
        Cambridge Journal of Education, 37(4):543­560.
Catterall, J. S., & Waldorf, L. (2000). Chicago arts partnerships in education summary evaluation. In E. B. Fiske
        (Ed.), Champions   of change:    The impact   of    the arts on  learning  (47-62).  Washington,     DC: The
        President's Committee on the Arts and the Humanities, Arts Education Partnership.
Christians, C. G. (2005). Ethics and politics in qualitative research. In N.K. Denzin & Y. S. Lincoln (Eds.), The
        Sage handbook of qualitative research (3rd ed.).(139-164). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications,
        Inc.
Cole, A. L., & Knowles, J. G. (Eds.). (2001). Lives in context: The art of life history research. Walnut Creek,
        CA: Alta Mira Press.
Danish, J. A.  (2009). BeeSign: A  design  experiment     to teach   Kindergarten  and   first grade students  about
        honeybees from a complex systems perspective. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the American
        Educational Research Association, San Diego, CA.
Deasy, R. (Ed.). (2002). Critical links: Learning in the arts and student academic and social development.
        Washington, DC: Arts Education Partnership.
Desantis, K. and Housen, A. (2000). A brief guide to developmental theory and aesthetic development. Visual
        Understanding in Education. New York, NY.
Dewey, J. (1980). Art as experience. New York: The Penguin Putnam Inc. (Original work published 1934)
Efland, A. D. (1990). A history of art education: Intellectual and social currents in teaching the visual arts.
        New York, NY: Teachers College Press.
Eisner, E. W. (2002). The Arts and the Creation of Mind. New Haven: Yale University Press.
Eisner, E. (2008). Persistent tensions in arts-based research, chapter 2, pp. 16­27. New York, NY: Routledge.
Fiske, E. B. (Ed.). (2000). Champions of change: The impact of the arts on learning. Washington, DC: The
        President's Committee on the Arts and the Humanities, Arts Education Partnership.
Franklin, B. (1931). Proposed hints for an academy. In J. Woody (Ed.), The educational views of Benjamin
        Franklin. New York: McGraw Hill. (Original work published 1749)
Friedman, M. (1989). Feminism and modern friendship. Ethics, 99(2), 275-290.
Freedman, K. (2003). Teaching visual culture: Curriculum, aesthetics,and the social life of art. New York, NY:
        Teachers College Press.
Gardner, H. (1980). Artful scribbles. New York: Basic Books.
Gardner, H. (1991). The unschooled mind. New York: Basic Books.
Greene, M. (1995). Art and imagination. San Francisco, CA: John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Greene, M. (1995). Releasing the Imagination: Essays on education, the arts, and social change. San Francisco:
        Jossey-Bass.

                                                 1006   ·   © ISLS
                                                ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

Greene, M. (2001). Variations on a blue guitar: The Lincoln Center lectures on aesthetic education. New York:
          Teachers College.
Heath,  S.  B., &   Soep,   E. (1998).  Living  the arts    through   language+  learning. Americans    for the  Arts
          Monographs (Novemenber), 2.7, 1-18.
Hetland, L., Winner, E., Veenema, S., and Sheridan, K. M. (2007). Studio thinking: The real benefits of visual
          arts education. New York, NY: Teachers College, Columbia University.
Hill, A. (1951). Painting out illness. London: Williams and Norgate
Horowitz, R. & Webb-Dempsey, J. (2002). Promising signs of positive effects: Lessons from              the multi-arts
          studies, in R. Deasy (Ed.), Critical links: Learning in the arts and        student academic and social
          development. Washington, DC: Arts Education              Partnership.
Irwin, R. L. (2004). A/r/tography: A metonymic metissage. In R.L. Irwin & A. de Cosson (Eds.), a/r/tography:
          Rendering self through arts-based living inquiry. Vancouver, Canada: Pacific Educational Press.
Irwin, R. L. and de Cosson, A. (2004). a/r/tography: Rendering through arts-based living inquiry. Vancouver,
          Canada: Pacific Educational Press.
Jewitt, C. & Kress, G. (2003). Multimodal literacy. New York: Peter Lang.
Kafai,  Y.B.  (2006).  Constructionism.   In K. Sawyer      (Ed.), Cambridge    handbook   of the learning  sciences.
          Cambridge, MA: Cambridge University Press.
Kaplan, S. Bardwell, L. V., & Slakter, D. A. (1993). The museum as a restorative experience. Environment and
          Behavior, 25, 725-742.
Katz, L. G. and Chard, S. C. (1997). Documentation: the Reggio Emilia approach. Principal, 76:16­17.
Kennedy, J.R. (2002). The effects of musical performance, rational emotive therapy and vicarious experiences
          on the self-efficacy and self-esteem or juvenile delinquents and disadvantaged children. In R. Deasy
          (Ed.), Critical links: Learning in the arts. Washington, DC: Arts Education Partnership.
Kress, G. , & van Leeuwen, T. (1996). Reading images: The grammar of visual design. London: Reutledge.
Kress,  G.  &   van  Leeuwen,    T. (2001).  Multimodal       discourse:  The  modes  and  media   of contemporary
          communication. London: Arnold.
Lave, J. (1987). Cognition in practice. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Latour, B. (1987). Science in Action: How to Follow Scientists and Engineers through Society. Cambridge, MA:
          Harvard University Press.
Leavy, P. (2009). Method meets art: Arts-based research practice. New York, NY: The Guilford Press.
Lynch, M. (1988). The Externalized Retina: Selection and Mathematization in the Visual Documentation of
          Objects in the Life Sciences. Human Studies, 11, 201-234.
Malchioldi, (1999). Medical art therapy with children. London: Jessica Kingsley Publishers, Ltd.
Maslow, A.H. (1943). A theory of human motivation. Psychology Review, 50(4), 370-396.
Mcniff, S. (2004). Art heals: How creativity cures the soul. Boston, MA: Shambhala Publications, Inc.
Noblit, G.  W.,  &  Corbet,  D.  (2001).  North Carolina      charter school  evaluation report. Evaluation  Section,
          Division of Accountablity Services, North Carolina Department of Public Instruction. Submitted to
          State Board of Education.
Papert, S. (1980). Mindstorms: Children, computers, and powerful ideas. New York: Basic Books.
Penny, S. (2000). Agents as artworks and agent design as artistic practice. In K.     Dautenhahn  (Ed.), Human
          cognition and social agent technology (pp.395-414).      Philadelphia: John Benjaminis Publishing.
Pink, S. (2001). Doing visual ethnography: Images, media, and representation in research. London: Sage.
Rohd, M. (1998).Theatre for community, conflict & dialogue: The hope is vital training manual. Portsmouth,
          NH: Heinemann.
Saldana, J. (2008). The drama and poetry of qualitative method. In M. Cahnmann-Taylor & R. Siegesmund
          (Eds.). Arts-based research in education: Foundations for Practice (pp. 220-227). New York, NY:
          Routledge.
Scripp, L. (2002). An overview of research on music and learning. In R. Deasy (Ed.), Critical links: Learning in
          the arts and student academic and social development. Washington, DC: Arts Education Partnership,
          132-136
Sefton-Green, J. (Ed.). (1998). Digital diversions: Youth culture in the age of multimedia. London: UCL Press.
Sinclair, N., & Crespo, S. (2006). What makes a good problem: An aesthetic lens. International Group for
          Psychology of Mathematics Education, 5, 129-136.
Springgay, S. (2004). Inside the visible: Youth understandings of body knowledge through touch. Unpublished
          doctoral dissertation, University of British Columbia, Vancouver.
Sullivan,  G.  (2005).  Art practice   as research:  Inquiry    in   the visual arts. Thousand    Oaks, CA:   SAGE
          Publications.
Vygotsky, L. (1935/1978). Mind in society. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Winner,   E., &  Hetland, L.   (Eds.). (2000). Special  Issue:  The    Arts and  Academic   Achievement:    What  the
          evidence shows. Journal of Aesthetic Education, 34(3-4), 1-307.

                                                   1007   ·   © ISLS
