                                                 ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

                 SPACE AND TIME IN CLASSROOM NETWORKS:
    MAPPING CONCEPTUAL DOMAINS IN MATHEMATICS THROUGH
                          COLLECTIVE ACTIVITY STRUCTURES

                                               Tobin White, UC Davis
                                          Corey Brady, University of Virginia

        Abstract:  This  paper    reports on a design-based    research  project  in which  we  are  developing
        collaborative  activities for classroom  networks.     Research    in generative  design  has  explored
        classroom activities that analogize the many participants in a classroom with an often-infinite
        family of mathematical objects. By contrast, our project focuses on classroom activity structures
        that support interactions among two to four students, each aligned with different components of a
        shared mathematical object. In each case, these network-based relationships among students are
        intended  to serve as  resources   to  support learners'   efforts to  jointly navigate the  conceptual
        territory delineated by their corresponding mathematical relationships in the space of the network.
        We compare the kinds of exploration of mathematical terrain respectively supported by whole-
        class and small group activities in classroom networks in order to examine the distinctive learning
        opportunities provided by each, and consider the potential of these different activity structures for
        providing mutually supportive instructional experiences.

Introduction
Simultaneously  accounting   for  the cognitive  and   situative  dimensions   of  learning remains    an important and
persistent challenge for contemporary mathematics education (Greeno, 1997; Sfard, 1998). Prior work along these
lines highlights the importance of attending to intersections between discipline-specific content and practices in
mathematics on the one hand, and social norms and interactions across different classroom activity structures on the
other. For example, in a seminal account of the links between classroom interactions and mathematical activity,
Yackel and Cobb (1996) observed that social structures, in the form of the collective, local norms for participating in
mathematical discourse, serve as resources for structuring classroom mathematical practices. Following a similar
insight in the reverse direction, research on generative design (e.g., Stroup, Ares and Hurford, 2005) has pointed to
ways that mathematical structures can serve as resources for structuring social activity through a classroom network
of handheld calculators. The intersection between individual students' engagement with mathematical objects in the
private space of their respective devices and the collectively constructed artifacts visible in classroom networks
provides rich possibilities for exploring this dynamic between conceptual and social.
        In a similar vein, this paper reports on a design-based project in which we develop collaborative activities
for  classroom  networks  in  order   to  investigate intersections   between    conceptual and   social  dimensions   of
mathematics learning. As in generative design, our own approach uses the mapping between student participants in a
classroom group and mathematical objects in a shared virtual space to make important mathematical relationships
and properties of these objects salient. Generative designs analogize the many participants in a whole-class activity
with an often-infinite family of mathematical objects. For example, each student might be associated with a different
function in a family of functions; a different point in a locus of points; or a different expression among a class of
equivalent expressions (Stroup, Ares, Hurford & Lesh, 2007). By contrast, our project focuses on network designs
and classroom activity structures that support collaborative interactions and investigations among groups of two to
four students. These  designs  align  each   student  participant  in a  small group   with one   of a small  number   of
components of a single shared mathematical object, such as different representations of a common function (White,
2006).
        In each  case, these  network-based    relationships   among    students are intended  to serve   as resources to
support learners' efforts to jointly navigate the conceptual territory delineated by their corresponding mathematical
relationships in the space of the network. We see the forms of virtual exploration of interrelated graphical and
symbolic terrain afforded by these designs as offering a visual example of Greeno's (1991) proposal that knowledge
of a domain is analogous to familiarity with an environment. Our aim in this paper is to consider the ways these
different activity structures for classroom networks (at whole-class and small group levels) might collectively map a
corresponding  conceptual  territory  in  mathematics.    In other words,   we   compare   the  kinds  of exploration  of
mathematical terrain respectively supported by whole-class and small group activities in classroom networks in

                                                     1008  ·   © ISLS
                                                  ICLS 2010    ·  Volume 1

order to examine the distinctive learning opportunities provided by each, and to consider the potential of these
different activity structures for providing mutually supportive instructional experiences.

Collective Activity in Classroom Networks
A rich body of prior research has explored ways of using of classroom networks to support whole-class interactions
(Hegedus   &  Kaput,  2004;  Stroup,  Ares  &    Hurford,   2005).  A   major strand  of this work   emphasizes     using the
sociocultural diversity of the class group as an engine for exploring the possible variation among families and other
collections of mathematical objects (Stroup, Ares, Hurford & Lesh, 2007). For instance, in studying the notion of
algebraic equivalence, students might be asked to invent and contribute expressions equivalent to a given expression
(e.g., 4x). The resulting collection of expressions that are the same as 4x indicates the breadth of the space of this
equivalence class of expressions (Stroup, Ares & Hurford, 2005). Students make use of key algebraic skills as they
work to populate this space, "unsimplifying" the given expression. Because of the diversity of ideas present in
virtually any classroom-sized group of participants, the range of student contributions will reliably instantiate key
concepts such as the distributive law and identity and inverse properties of multiplication and addition (see, e.g.,
Davis, 2007).
        Thus, this strand of research taps into the protean sea of the classroom group, confident that it contains
sufficient variability and diversity to represent the mathematical universe adequately for pedagogical purposes. The
size of the classroom group appears as a critical asset in these classrooms, as it serves as the effective guarantee that
the  hypothesis of  sufficient-diversity will    hold. We    interpret  activities that rely  on the   diversity of  student
contributions in this way to be using the size and diversity of the classroom group to concretize the concept of one of
several kinds of infinity. Indeed, the representative activities of this genre tend to focus on aggregate mathematical
objects such as families of functions, loci of points, or instances of geometrical relationships--all consisting of an
infinite set of constituent objects. In each case, a critical learning objective is the appreciation of the nature of this
infinity and of structures within it. The design of the activities allows the student to grasp the infinite family, locus,
or range of figures without losing contact with the specificity of the examples--her own and those of her peers--
that serve to embody the infinite aggregate.
        While these instances of infinity represent a rich and varied set of mathematical topics, they do not span the
full array of ideas  central to the  discipline.  Indeed,   many    core mathematical    objects under  study    in the k-12
curriculum are composed of sets of just a few coordinated sub-objects: lines are uniquely determined by two points,
quadratic expressions are comprised of three distinct monomial terms, equations compare two distinct algebraic
expressions,  functions  are commonly     represented     through   one  of   three  modes--symbols,    graphs    or  tables.
Additionally, many of the conceptual challenges that face students as they grapple with these concepts consist of
difficulties with the coordinated significance of these sub-objects: how to determine the slope of a line, to combine
polynomial terms and simplify expressions, to solve equations, to interpret relations among representations.
        With these concepts and challenges in mind, our own approach uses network links among student devices
in order to align pairs or small groups of students with correspondingly small sets of mathematical objects. As in the
case of analogizing the many students in a whole class to infinitely many related mathematical objects, these small
group  designs  likewise  seek   to  capitalize   on   network-defined     social  relationships to  make     corresponding
mathematical relationships salient in learners' activity. To that end, our designs focus on collaborative learning tasks
that are centered on collective mathematical objects that participants in a pair or small group must jointly manipulate
through their networked devices. Such objects are collective to the extent that they or their attributes appear--and
change--simultaneously    on  the  devices    of multiple   students,   and that   they appear  in a   shared display   as a
consequence of contributions from multiple students. These designs map the students in a small group to sub-objects
in a coordinated set: each learner manipulates a linked point to collectively form a curve in a Cartesian plane, or
transforms  a respective side   of an algebraic   equation,    or combines    different-ordered  terms  or enacts   different
binomial operations among polynomial expressions, or examines a different representation of the same function.
Broadly, we aim to structure tasks around these collective mathematical objects in order to make the successful
solving of problems dependent on contributions from and coordination between all participants in a small group.
Below,  we   describe one such   design  in   detail,  and  present  an  analysis  of the  kinds of  student  mathematical
exploration supported by this environment.

The Graphing in Groups Design
The  collaborative  mathematics    activities described     in this paper   were   created using   the NetLogo      modeling
environment (Wilensky, 1999) and HubNet architecture (Wilensky & Stroup, 1999) in concert with classroom sets
of Texas Instruments graphing calculators connected through a TI-NavigatorTM network. In the activity design called

                                                       1009  ·   © ISLS
                                                 ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

Graphing in Groups, teams of two or more students share collective responsibility for jointly manipulating the graph
of a function (for two students, a linear function; for three students, a quadratic). Each calculator displays a graphing
window and allows the student to adjust the coordinates of a point graphed within that window using directional
arrow keys on the calculator (Figure 1). The coordinate points inputted through the calculators of each member in a
student pair, along with the line uniquely determined by those respective points, are displayed together in a single
graphing window on the classroom server, creating a shared mathematical space for the members of a group (Figure
2). A grid composed of several groups' graphing windows and projected at the front of the classroom provides a
collective display of all these small group-level graphs (Figure 3).
         In the activities for the present study, each student's point was paired with that of a single partner so that
their respective coordinates collectively defined a line. As students moved the individual point controlled by their
respective graphing   calculators, they could choose to    "mark"     the current  coordinate location of that point by
pressing a calculator key. Once both students in a pair marked points, the corresponding line appeared in their
group's graphing window, along with an equation for that line in slope-intercept form (i.e., y=mx+b). Students could
continue to move their respective points freely, and any time either student in a pair pressed the "mark" key again,
the graph  and equation  automatically   changed accordingly     in   the public  display. In other words, the students
controlled both an individual object, in the form of their respective points, and a collective object in the form of a
line.

                                      Figure 1. Two student calculator screens.

                               Figure 2. Two student points in a group-level graph.

Method
The Graphing in Groups design served as the basis for a three-week unit on linear graphing implemented in three
ninth grade Algebra I classes, each taught by a different teacher. Over a series of several class sessions, students
participated in a variety of Graphing in Groups activities intended to complement more conventional lessons on
linear equations and their graphs. The topics addressed during this unit included slope, x- and y-intercepts, the point-
slope and slope-intercept forms of linear equations, and parallel and perpendicular lines. Some of the Graphing in
Groups   activities conducted during  the unit were  teacher-led      explorations and whole-class   discussions of  the
relations among lines generated by different pairs. Other activities were problem-solving challenges assigned to
student pairs. These problem-solving tasks generally involved asking student pairs to move their respective points so
as to create a line with a certain characteristic or set of characteristics: a slope of three, a y-intercept of four, a

                                                    1010   ·   © ISLS
                                                ICLS 2010     ·  Volume 1

negative slope, a line parallel to a teacher-generated line, etc. Such tasks were typically closed in the sense that each
pair worked toward a single solution, but open with regard to the coordinates each student might assume and the
process by which they identified that solution. In each case, the instructional focus was on framing these challenges
in terms of pairs' collective lines, so that completing that task required students to consider that line and its equation
in relation to the coordinates of their respective points.

                                Figure 3. Graphing in Groups whole-class display.

         Students were assigned to pairs by the teacher, and remained in the same pair throughout the unit. Two to
three student pairs in each class were selected, on the basis of informed consent, as focus groups and videotaped
during all collaborative activities throughout the unit. An additional camera captured the projected server display at
the front of the room, as well as whole-class discussions and other instructional interactions. Server logs captured
coordinates entered by the students as they manipulated their respective points to complete the collaborative tasks.
Analysis of these data focused on the ways students individually and collectively interpreted the mathematical
objects (i.e. points, lines and equations) and on their relations in this environment as they developed approaches to
solving problem-solving tasks. Video segments of six student pairs working on between 13 and 19 tasks each were
transcribed and examined alongside time-synched video of each group's shared graphing window from the server
display. Students typically worked  three  to four minutes       before completing  or stopping each   task; the longest
sessions ran approximately 10 minutes and the shortest lasted about 30 seconds. Each transcript was then annotated
with detailed descriptions  of the ways   students moved        and marked  their points. The first author   and another
researcher developed two different coding schemes for analyzing these annotated transcripts for each task episode:
one focused on problem-solving strategies and the other on interactions between students.
         Below, we analyze an episode from the video data in order to illustrate the ways learners engaged with
mathematical  objects and   relationships in the context      of this  network-supported  activity for student pairs. In
particular, we examine the ways students explored and interpreted the relations between their respective points and a
collective line, and between the graph and the equation of that line, over the course of a problem-solving task. This
episode is typical of the broader data set relative to the analytic coding scheme; both the problem-solving strategies
employed and kinds of student interactions occurred frequently in other tasks and among other pairs. We have
selected it for presentation in the current paper because it provides a clear example of students' explorations of this
mathematical domain as they undertook these problem-solving tasks, and because it features a task reminiscent of
the "make expressions that are the same as 4x" example of generative whole-group activity in classroom networks.

                                                   1011     ·   © ISLS
                                                  ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

Analysis
This  episode finds  two students, Priyana and    Kate,   in  the midst   of efforts to locate their respective points at
coordinates that would collectively form a line with equation y=4x-1. Just prior to the excerpt below, the students
had worked for a few minutes by moving each of their respective points before realizing that they could establish a
line with the correct y-intercept by having Kate position her point at -1 on the y-axis. In the moments that followed,
Kate kept her point stationary at the y-intercept, watching and offering commentary and suggestions as Priyana
moved her own point in a series of attempts to construct a line with slope 4. To do so, she began taking a series of
paired horizontal and vertical unitary steps, marking and examining the results of each move:

1.   [Kate has just marked at (0,-1) to make y=(5/3)x-1. From (3,4), Priyana moves up and right to (4,5), marks to
     form y=(3/2)x-1.]
2.   Kate: That slope has to be the same, so...what was the slope before, a 4?
3.   Priyana: [Moves up and right again to (5,6)] A negative 4. [Presses mark to form y=(7/5)x-1]. I mean a 4.
     Ok...[moves up and right again to (6,7)]
4.   Kate: Ok, so...
5.   Priyana: [Presses mark at (6,7) to form y=(4/3)x-1. Moves right and up to (7,8) and presses mark to form
     y=(9/7)x-1. Moves up and right again to (8,9), where the label of her point partially covers the pair's equation]
6.   Kate: [Trying to read the obscured equation] What does it say? [Priyana now marks at (8,9) to form y=(5/4)x-1]
     Can you go down more?
7.   Priyana: Yeah, maybe I should go down. [Moves down five units and left five to (3,4), then back one unit right
     to (4,4), presses mark. Equation does not change. Looks down at her calculator and then up at the screen again,
     moves down and left to (3,3) and marks to form y=(4/3)x-1. Moves down and left again to (2,2) and marks to
     form y=(3/2)x-1. Moves down and left again to (1,1) and marks to form y=2x-1.] Oh, there it is.

        This segment illustrates the kind of incremental movements in a graphical space that students often used in
order to investigate variations in a corresponding algebraic expression in this environment. Priyana began with five
successive moves up one unit and over one (Figure 4a), marking and observing the resulting slope each time (lines
1-6). She used  these  paired unitary vertical   and horizontal   steps--one   up and   one over--to   make incremental
adjustments to the slope of the line, watching the resulting changes in the collective display and reacting to each
with soft vocalizations (e.g. "Ok" in line 3) or pursed lips before adjusting again. In each case, she used minor
adjustments to the graph as a means of gradually adjusting the value of the linear coefficient in the equation.
Importantly, though, she did not simply make the smallest possible adjustment in her position--one unit up or one
over. Rather, taking an incremental step in each dimension before marking to form a new line allowed her to make
the smallest possible adjustment to their line.
        The next short series of movements further highlights the students' careful efforts to alternately maintain or
only minimally rotate the current line. As Priyana's point moved toward the upper right corner of the graphing
window, the label on her point actually obscured part of the pair's equation (line 5). Kate, who was closely watching
each move, asked Priyana to "go down more" so that she could read the equation clearly (line 6). Priyana, who was
quickly running out of screen room, agreed that "maybe (she) should go down" (line 7). She retraced her steps in
reverse, moving down five units and left five and then briefly pausing as though to consider returning to (3,4), the
point at which she had started the sequence of moves that opened this episode. Instead, she moved one unit back to
the right to position herself on the same line before marking at (4,4), and so leaving the current line unchanged.
Again, these moves appeared carefully selected to make only minimal changes to the current line--to seek out the
correct parameter through incremental adjustments. Priyana thus abandoned her initial sequence of similar moves
only when display limitations interfered, and worked carefully to minimize changes in the line even as she adopted a
new line of exploration. Continuing to display the same preference for relatively small variations in slope, Priyana
began a new series of paired unitary horizontal and vertical steps, this time down and to the left from (4,4) (Figure
4b). Three such steps established a slope of two, at which point she noted the appearance of an integer slope value
(line 7). At this point, Kate and Priyana briefly disagreed about how to proceed:

8.   Kate: Go up like... go up a little bit. [Ignoring Kate's instruction, Priyana moves down to x-axis, left to origin,
     and up to (0,2), all without marking] It's supposed to be 4.
9.   Priyana: [Continues circling her point around her last mark--two units right to (2,2), then back to x-axis, then
     left toward origin] Yeah, maybe if I keep going down, like this... [briefly brings her point to rest on the origin,
     as if to mark there, one unit left and one down from her last mark, but then moves down again to sit on top of

                                                     1012   ·   © ISLS
                                                   ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

   Kate's point at (0,-1) and presses mark so that the pair's line disappears]. That's not right. [moves back up to
   (1,1) and marks to again form y=2x-1].
10. Kate: [As Priyana moves up and over one to (2,2), but does not mark, and instead moves back to (1,2)] Go up,
   like, little by little.
11. Priyana: [marks at (1,2), forming y=3x-1]. There you go. Oh, hold on, I'll just do one more. [Moves up to (1,3)]
12. Kate: [reading the y-intercept from the equation] That's a negative 1 though.
13. Priyana: [Marks at (1,3) to form y=4x-1] There you go.

       This excerpt highlights an important contrast between Priyana's continuing incremental exploration and
Kate's recognition of a more direct path toward the desired line. Reacting to the newly established slope of two,
Kate prompted Priyana to "go up a little bit" (line 8). Ignoring the instruction, Priyana wavered, appearing to
consider movement in all possible directions as she traced a square path around her last mark at (1,1) (Figure 4c).
Wondering aloud, "maybe if I keep going down, like this," she briefly came to a stop at the origin and directly above
Kate's point, where a mark would have continued her previous pattern of paired unitary steps down and left, but also
formed a line with undefined slope (line 9). While Kate now recognized that moving Priyana's point up would bring
about the desired increase in the value of the slope, Priyana had to this point continued relying on incremental steps
in the graphical space in order to feel her way about in search of a solution. However, the fact that she chose not to
mark here at the origin indicates that she recognized she was reaching the limits of this approach. Indeed, as she
instead moved down to mark on top of Kate's point and briefly erase the line, she immediately realized that her new
location was "not right" and returned to her previous mark at (1,1) (line 9). Kate again urged her to "go up...little by
little" (line 10). Finally acquiescing, Priyana marked one unit up at (1,2). When the slope changed from two to three,
Priyana clearly recognized that they were now moving toward a line with the correct slope, and that she needed to
"just do one more" similar step, quickly marking at (3,1) to form the target slope and line (Figure 4d).

                           Figure 4a.                                                Figure 4b.

                           Figure 4c.                                                Figure 4d.

       Throughout this sequence, Priyana moved from incrementally adjusting the slope downward and away
from the correct value using paired unitary horizontal and vertical steps, to adjusting the slope in the same manner
but upward and toward the correct value, to increasing the slope from two to the target value of four by making
unitary vertical steps upward. In the first two instances, neither she nor Kate appeared to recognize the relationship
between the steepness of the line and the value of the slope. In the absence of a clear target toward which to adjust

                                                      1013   ·   © ISLS
                                                 ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

the line, Priyana focused on making small and systematic changes away from the current state, first in one direction
and then in another, until she established a parameter value she and Kate were better able to interpret. That moment
arrived when the slope went from a series of fractions to an integer; at that point Kate urged her to "go up a little bit"
because "it's supposed to be four" (line 8), clearly associating upward vertical change in Priyana's point location
with increases in the slope. By contrast, Priyana initially appeared to interpret the achievement of an integer close to
the target as an indication of the fruitfulness of her unitary moves down and left. When applying this interpretation
proved unsuccessful, she instead followed Kate's advice, and appeared to quickly come to the same insight about the
relations between her vertical moves and the slope of the line.
         Priyana's  transition from  movements  that indicate    some    confusion about   the  relationship between    the
graphical and the symbolic to those that reflect a clearer and more correct interpretation of that relationship suggest
ways that successive, iterative movements in this space serve as resources for making meaning about slope. Both
students appeared to be coming to clearer understanding of the relations between graphical movements and linear
equations  through  real-time  incremental  adjustments    over  the  course  of the   episode. Indeed,   this episode  in
particular and our analysis of students' strategic engagement with these tasks generally suggests that patterned,
iterative sequences of incremental movements like Priyana's here are particularly important resources for students'
efforts to navigate this mathematical terrain. Though these movements are sometimes exploratory and ad hoc, much
of the time they indicate students' clear expectation that these particular changes will bring about particular results.
For example, students often articulated specific directions ("go up, like, little by little," line 10) to one another or
narrated their own moves ("I'll just do one more," line 11), suggesting that they were beginning to anticipate certain
outcomes from these moves.

Discussion
In the episode above, moving points in a graphical display allowed students to explore the mathematical space of
linear functions with rational-number slopes. By systematically and incrementally varying coordinates, Priyana and
Kate were able to feel their way about in the unfamiliar territory of fractionally-sloped lines, and to make use of a
more familiar landmark when they encountered an integer value for slope. These kinds of exploratory movement
typical of students' engagement with the Graphing in Groups interface illustrate the ways that developing strategies
for moving points and manipulating functions in these classroom network activities might be understood as learning
to navigate a conceptual environment. In this sense, we see students' joint exploration of virtual mathematical
terrain as a productive alternative interpretation of the physical metaphor for a conceptual domain proposed by
Greeno (1991).
         From the standpoint of this analogy to conceptual environments, whole- and small-group activity structures
may form    complementary      dimensions of a complex       mathematical  domain.     The episode   above   suggests   an
illustrative contrast between the whole-class activity to "provide different expressions that are equivalent to 4x" and
the Graphing in Groups challenge to "make a line with a slope of 4" from the raw materials of the two students'
respective coordinate locations. In the whole-class activity, the equivalent expressions are manifested as objects that
fill out a conceptual space; in the Graphing in Groups activity, the small group's solution is experienced as a
process in time through a sequence of individual explorations and collaborative interactions. In Graphing in Groups,
student movements of their individual points generate fluctuations and modifications of the collective graph, as the
group moves incrementally towards a goal. Each student moves freely, but those movements shape and constrain the
emergent activity of the group as teams explore the impact of incremental changes in their constituent sub-objects
upon the nature and attributes of the collective, composite object. That collective activity is characterized not so
much by attention to the family of objects that fill out a function space but rather by the manipulation over time of a
single function through small perturbations--the exploration of infinitesimal modification rather than the unfolding
of an infinite parameterization.
         In generative  designs  for whole-group  classroom     network   activity structures,  diversity and   individual
expression in the classroom group serve as surrogates for infinity. In contrast, in the approach for small groups
presented above, distinctive student actions take the form of infinitesimal variations in the group's collective object.
Because students are identified with complex or compound mathematical objects, with each group member given
the role of a component sub-object, these variations demonstrate the dependence of the collective object on the
characteristics of its components.   Moreover,  while    the   whole-class activity  highlights  the infinite   variety of
expressions equivalent to 4x, the pairs task emphasizes infinitesimal variations among linear terms increasingly
close to 4x. In these ways, we see designs for whole- and small-group activity as respectively and jointly mapping
spatial and temporal   dimensions    in a conceptual environment      central to   the broader  curricular   landscape  of
secondary mathematics.

                                                    1014   ·   © ISLS
                                                  ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

Conclusion
        The relationship between the conceptual dimensions spanned by these small-group and (generative) whole-
group activity  structures suggests   corresponding   ways    that they might   be combined     to form   a complementary
instructional sequence. While the analytic focus of this paper and the early phases of this design-based research
project have been on mathematics learning opportunities afforded by small-group interactions, the Graphing in
Groups  collective   display  (Figure 3) also   explicitly supports  an   additional  layer of  artifacts and instructional
possibilities oriented toward the larger classroom group. For example, in a different Graphing in Groups task from
the one depicted here, each pair of students creates a line with the same slope. While the activity at the level of each
pair might unfold along the lines of the episode presented in this paper, the collection of groups in the class would
typically together produce several representative members of a family of parallel lines. When the small-group phase
of the activity is complete, each of the groups has produced a distinct solution to the challenge, and the aggregate
begins to fill out the mathematical space of possibility defined by that challenge. This sequence aims to use the
classroom   network   to integrate  two  levels of  classroom    activity, one  in which    the small  group   focus is  on
understanding the interrelations of points and lines through strategies of infinitesimal variation, and another in which
the classroom group as a whole can see the infinite variety of possible lines that meet the activity's challenge
criterion. Our  current  classroom  research  focus is on   jointly  examining   these small-and    whole-group   levels of
mathematical activity and instructional interaction in this hybrid environment. In these ways, we see small-group
designs of the kind outlined in this paper as expanding the map of the social and mathematical terrain in classroom
networks charted by prior research, and broadening the pedagogical modes across which those networks might
support mathematics teaching and learning. Collectively, these whole and small-group activity structures highlight
the rich potential of the social space of networks for mapping conceptual spaces in mathematics.

References
Ares, N.   (2008).   Cultural practices  in networked   classroom      learning environments.   International  Journal   of
        Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 3(3), 301-326.
Ares, N. & Stroup, W. (2004). Drawing on diverse social, cultural, and academic resources in technology-mediated
        classrooms. Proceedings of the 26th annual meeting of the North American Chapter of the International
        Group for the Psychology of Mathematics Education, 2, 837­844.
Davis, S. (2007). Generative Activities in Singapore: A Beginning. Paper presented at the International Conference
        on the Teaching of Mathematical Modeling and Applications, Bloomington, IN.
Greeno, J. (1991). Number sense as situated knowing in a conceptual domain. Journal for Research in Mathematics
        Education, 22(3), 170-218.
Greeno, J. (1997). On claims that answer the wrong questions. Educational Researcher, 26(1), 5-17.
Hegedus, S. & Kaput, J. (2004). An introduction to the profound potential of connected algebra activities: Issues of
        representation, engagement and pedagogy. Proceedings of the 28th Conference of the International Group
        for the Psychology of Mathematics Education, 3, 129­136.
Sfard, A. (1998). On Two Metaphors for Learning and the Dangers of Choosing Just One. Educational Researcher,
        27(2), 4-13.
Stroup, W., Ares,  N., & Hurford, A. (2005). A dialectic analysis of generativity:    Issues of network-supported design
        in mathematics and science. Mathematical Thinking and Learning, 7(3), 181-206.
Stroup, W.,    Ares, N.,   Hurford, A.  &   Lesh,  R.  (2007).   Diversity-by-Design:    The   What,  Why,    and How    of
        Generativity    in Next-Generation    Classroom    Networks.    In R.   Lesh, E. Hamilton,    &   J. Kaput   (Eds.),
        Foundations for the Future in Mathematics Education (pp. 367-394). Routledge.
White, T. (2006). Code talk: Student discourse and participation with networked handhelds. International Journal of
        Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 1(3), 359-382.
Wilensky, U. 1999. NetLogo. http://ccl.northwestern.edu/netlogo/. Center for Connected Learning and Computer-
        Based Modeling, Northwestern University. Evanston, IL.
Wilensky, U. & Stroup, W. (1999). HubNet. http://ccl.northwestern.edu/netlogo/hubnet.html. Center for Connected
        Learning and Computer-Based Modeling, Northwestern University. Evanston, IL.
Yackel, E. & Cobb, P. (1996). Sociomathematical norms, argumentation, and autonomy in mathematics. Journal for
        Research in Mathematics Education, 27(4), 458-477.

Acknowledgements
Support for this work was provided by an NSF Early Career Development Award, DRL-0747536, granted to the
first author.

                                                     1015   ·   © ISLS
