                                                 ICLS 2010  ·   Volume 2

      Symposium: Internationalizing the Learning Sciences from
                      Formal to Informal Learning Environments
                                                       Co-Chairs:
           Carolyn Penstein Rosé & Matthew Kam, Carnegie Mellon University, 5000 Forbes Avenue,
                               Pittsburgh, PA 15213, {cprose,mattkam}@cs.cmu.edu

                                                      Discussant:
      Christopher Hoadley, New York University, 239 Greene St. Suite 300, New York City, NY 10003,
                                                   tophe@nyu.edu

         Abstract:    This  symposium      brings  together   researchers     at the   frontier of  an  emerging
         subcommunity      of  the learning   sciences that   looks  toward      developing methodologies    and
         infrastructures with the potential to lead towards an integrated agenda of global research in the
         learning sciences, spanning both the developed and the developing world, in both formal and
         informal learning environments.      It explores how emerging technologies and methodologies
         could be further developed to this important end, building on work already in progress.

Overview
In recent years there has been a growing awareness that research in the Learning Sciences community could be
significantly strengthened by intensifying the extent to which it draws in researchers from underrepresented
regions. While the methodologies we have developed and applied in our own backyards and the yards of our
close colleagues  have  served     to build  up a  substantial  body    of  knowledge     that  we  can  be  proud of, we
understand as a community that we stand to gain tremendous insights from diversifying our target student
populations from those that are primarily in Europe and North America to regions such as East Asia, South Asia
(including India), as well as Africa.
         Currently, and unfortunately, there is surprisingly little exchange between the educational research
communities of the US and Western Europe and other parts of the world such as Asia where substantial bodies
of educational research are conducted but not well known in the West.            Other countries such as India have less
well  developed   traditions   of  formal   research in  education,     but   nevertheless  have    much  to  add  to  this
international exchange.     In India, for example, achievement in mathematics ranks among the top worldwide,
which suggests that they have something to teach us while learning about areas where they rank less well in
comparison to the West, such as innovation (Steinbock, 2008; de Haan & Narayan, 2008).                 We hypothesize that
systemic   differences in  the   educational  systems  between     countries   (Ma,   1999) introduce   unknown    random
factors that interact with key independent variables and thus make it unclear the extent to which results from
experimental studies within Asia, for example, generalize to the West, and vice versa.              Recent evaluations of
Western  teaching   practices    within  Asia cast   doubt  that   findings   can   be transported    wholesale  from  one
community to the other without an understanding of what these variables are and how they interact with key
educational interventions (Chang et al., 2006; Chang & Tsai, 2005; Chang, 2001).
         While we fully appreciate that the concerns of the Learning Sciences community are much broader
than  international comparisons       of  standardized tests,   it cannot    be   denied  that   large scale international
comparison    studies  such   as  TIMSS    (http://nces.ed.gov/timss/)     and   PISA  (http://www.pisa.oecd.org/)  have
revealed significant   differences    in achievement   between     countries   that raise  questions   we much   consider.
Despite the well known limitations of such standardized measures of achievement, differences between national
educational systems undoubtedly exist and raise questions for learning science researchers to address in order to
understand these differences.     Corresponding large-scale comparisons of teaching practices, such as the well-
known TIMSS video study (Stigler & Hiebert, 1999), reveal systematic differences in teaching style across
countries.  Nevertheless, due to the impracticality in controlling for differences in these comparisons in past
studies, work to date investigating the reasons for these differences may be considered limited.              Thus, while
differences in teaching    practices  between   countries   are  known     to  exist,  what is  not   known  is how these
differences in individual teaching practices interact with systemic differences between countries that lay the
foundations for learning within individual countries.       And thus, policy makers who would seek to raise scores
on standardized tests within their home countries are left with more questions than answers. Culture and its
implications  for learning    is one  example   of a   concern   that   is orthogonal   to  what   is  captured by typical
international comparison    studies   based  on standardized     tests.    Thus,  we   benefit  from   acknowledging   that
controlled cross-cultural studies within the Learning Sciences (e.g. Vatrapu, 2008) help us identify gaps in our
current understanding of cognition, learning, and the use of technology in service of learning and instruction.
Deeper understanding arising from this kind of work holds the potential to help us reach towards insightful ways
to appropriate lessons learned from international comparison studies.

                                                     101  ·  © ISLS
                                                ICLS 2010    ·  Volume 2

         In some regions, such as India, research in the learning sciences as we know it within our international
Society is less well developed, and thus an effort to build up collaborations and infrastructure will require a
lengthier, concerted effort. The field of Information Communication Technology for Development (ICT4D) has
already made strides towards developing technologies and methodologies for technology-supported education
and education research within these contexts, which was featured in a CSCL 2009 symposium (Evans et al.,
2009), although the focus of this work has been distinct from that of the core Learning Sciences community. We
see this earlier symposium as a welcome and synergistic effort to build a bridge from the ICT4D community
into the Learning Sciences community. In this proposal, we respond by continuing the conversation by inviting
both Learning Sciences researchers and ICT4D researchers to discuss together how to build effective bridges
between   communities   and   learn from    one another.   We   believe  that this conversation   will extend  Learning
Sciences research to address the challenges of education in the developing world, and in turn identify new
research challenges in this space while providing valuable opportunities to challenge our thinking about learning
in the developed world at the same time.

Symposium Themes
Recent research in the Learning Sciences community and the ICTD community works towards reaching beyond
past limitations, in a wide spectrum of learning contexts, from the "traditional" classroom context, all the way to
informal  learning   environments.     This symposium      brings  together   researchers  who   are   working  towards
internationalizing the Learning Sciences across this spectrum, from formal learning contexts (Rosé and Kam;
Laferriere and Law) to informal learning (Moraveji; Kam), or spanning the gap in between (Vatrapu). Each talk
argues in a different way that sharing of educational tools and resources internationally would provide an
infrastructure that could be used to broaden our understanding of cognition and learning.
         One crosscutting theme throughout this symposium is the potential role of educational technology in
raising new questions about cognition and learning, adding new insights to our storehouse of knowledge about
international education. The presenters have been chosen from a range of backgrounds, such that the symposium
will explore the tensions between the cognitivist and sociocultural traditions of learning, design research vs.
controlled studies, and local relativisms vs. global universals, as they pertain to the internationalization of the
Learning Sciences. The diversity of perspectives is intended to facilitate a lively discussion that re-examines the
ideological assumptions behind our methods and theoretical constructs, as well as the historical and cultural
processes that shaped them. Finally, presenters will articulate their conceptualizations of culture and its relation
to learning.
         We have included 5 talk abstracts for this panel style discussion.        Each presenter will have 10 minutes
to present an overview of their work.   The discussant will then conduct      an extended panel discussion, which will
include questions from the audience.

LearnLab India: Towards "In Vivo" International Comparative Education
Research

          Carolyn Penstein Rosé & Matthew Kam, Carnegie Mellon University, 5000 Forbes Avenue,
                              Pittsburgh, PA 15213, {cprose,mattkam}@cs.cmu.edu

LearnLab India is a recent effort in the Pittsburgh Science of Learning Center (PSLC, http://www.learnlab.org),
which is devoted to studying human learning in realistic contexts using state-of-the-art technology.          This effort
represents one endpoint on the formal learning to informal learning spectrum in that it is specifically focused on
highly controlled classroom studies, which have been termed "in vivo" studies because they occur within "live"
classrooms   rather  than laboratories,  with   a strong   emphasis   on balancing   high   internal validity with  high
external validity.
         The PSLC LearnLab model has been         successful in over 50  schools in  the United States.  It brings state-
of-the-art intelligent tutoring technology such as Cognitive Tutors (Koedinger et al., 1997) and Collaborative
Learning  environments    that trigger  context   sensitive    support  into  realistic contexts (Kumar    et al., 2007;
Chaudhuri et al., 2009).   Furthermore, it brings the ability to study human learning in a rigorous way through
analysis of logged data related to student interactions with and through the technology on a moment by moment
basis through application of datamining, text mining, and speech mining technology (Prata et al., 2009; Gweon
et al., 2009; Rosé   et al., 2008). LearnLab      India is   a partnership between      PSLC and  the  larger School  of
Computer     Science community      at Carnegie    Mellon    University  with  the  Indian   Institute for  Information
Technologies in Hyderabad (IIIT-H). LearnLab India will be housed at the three campuses of Rajiv Gandhi
University of Knowledge Technologies (RGUKT, http://www.rgukt.in), which is an educational outreach by
IIIT-H to the rural youth of Andhra Pradesh, India. The goal of LearnLab India is to help RGUKT students,
most of whom attended non-English-medium schools prior to college, to succeed in English-medium university
coursework at RGUKT.

                                                     102   ·   © ISLS
                                               ICLS 2010    ·  Volume 2

         As planned outreach in connection with this effort, the PSLC is sponsoring an Internship Program in
Technology Supported Education (http://www.cs.cmu.edu/~cprose/winterschool/index.html), with the goal of
building bridges between institutions of higher learning in India and top ranking universities in the United
States, beginning with but not limited to Carnegie Mellon University.         This program will begin in December
2009 with a Winter School in which 130 undergraduates from around India will come together for an intensive
two-week program to learn about research in the Learning Sciences and participate in short-term projects related
to the LearnLab India effort.
         As  an example    of planned    research,   drawing   both   from cognitivist  and   socioculturalist learning
traditions, we propose to use language technologies to study the learning process itself as well as important
social processes connected with that, which play a key role in second language learning, identity formation and
commitment   to a  lifelong learning   path. We    will  build   on our prior work,    where  text mining and    speech
processing technologies are developed and used to track key patterns in the interaction between students in
learning groups (Gweon et al., 2009; Joshi & Rosé, 2007).          We will target patterns that are predictive of how
much students are learning from the interaction or how well or poorly project teams are functioning together.
The research  will  also draw     on earlier research    on how     videogames   can   create more  engaging   learning
experiences. Currently an effort is in progress to deploy a collaborative vocabulary building game built on top
of the Basilica framework (Kumar et al., 2009).
         A current comparative effort in progress is focused on an information literacy unit that will be shared
by students at RGUKT and students at Carnegie Mellon University.              Two initial pilot studies, one with 10
students and the other with 300 have already begun to reveal differences in information seeking behaviors
between students from highly developed areas in India and those of the target user population that suggest
principles for needed scaffolding support, which differ from those previously proposed within the mainstream
information retrieval literature.
         The RGUKT campuses have an annual intake of 6,000 students. The magnitude of the size of the
student population available in the research partnership with RGUKT would provide invaluable insights to
inform continued research on the effective use of language technologies to support instruction. This partnership
would not only greatly accelerate the effort to develop highly effective computer supported instruction because
of that magnitude.  It would also allow fine grained and finely controlled international comparison studies such
as has never before been possible, which holds the potential to transform the field of international comparative
education research.

Knowledge Building International Project (KBIP): a Nested Network of
Learning and Knowledge Creation

Therese Laferriere, Laval University, 2325 rue de l'Université, Quebec, G1V 0A6, Canada, tlaf@fse.ulaval.ca
              Nancy Law, University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam Road, Hong Kong, nlaw@hku.hk

The Knowledge      Building International    Project (KBIP     2007-2009)   operates   on the  basis of  locally based
networks of innovation distributed around the globe. Catalunya (Comconèixer), Hong Kong (KBTN), Quebec
(RNS), and Toronto (IKIT) are currently the four main sites.        Similar to the Rosé and Kam abstract above, this
work represents work primarily within a formal, classroom learning context.          Nevertheless, while this work is
connected with classroom learning, this work is unique in that it reaches beyond activity within individual
classrooms or campus communities to build digital bridges between classrooms in different countries.
         Pedagogical   and  research   activities  within   this   international effort  are  conducted  within   local
university-school-government partnerships connected to one another. Much autonomy is left to the participants
(students, teachers, graduate students, and researchers) for the designs of what works within their respective
socio-cultural contexts, but they come together as they share a common understanding of knowledge building,
and use the suite of tools available (knowledge building principles, Knowledge Forum® software, applets for
specific analysis measures to be taken on the fly by researchers, teachers, and students).
         As part of the applied cognitive sciences, Knowledge Building (KB) has its own epistemology, and it
has become a pedagogical approach focusing on developing classrooms as communities for progressive problem
solving  and knowledge   creation    (Scardamalia    &   Bereiter,  2006). Unlike  learning    organized in traditional
classrooms, the KB process is necessarily an intentional community effort, and is simply not possible as an
individual enterprise. Learning takes place as a "by-product" of the knowledge creation process as learners
tackle significant problems of understanding. Designing curriculum units for implementation as knowledge
building experiences   for  school   age children    that   can, at the  same    time, satisfy  mandatory   curriculum
requirements is a challenge that has to be tackled to realize the vision of Education for Knowledge Creation in
schools.
         Agents (students, teachers, school principals, school district personnel, ministry personnel, university
teacher  educators and researchers)   use Knowledge       Forum    as a "collaboration  space"   (asynchronous   online

                                                     103  ·  © ISLS
                                               ICLS 2010   ·   Volume 2

discourse). For synchronous discourse, a multi-user web-based videoconferencing system is used. The focus of
the students' KB activities in KBIP has been on understanding and tackling issues related to climate change,
energy and sustainable development. Typically collaboration at the classroom level is organized in clusters of 2
to 3 classes of students from different countries. Students from these classes engage in KB around a common
theme and identify questions and problems. Working on them over a period of several months they contribute
hundreds of notes on Knowledge Forum®. In 2008-2009, over twenty videoconferences were held among
collaborating classrooms. Additional videoconferences for professional development among teachers from the
different sites are also organized throughout the year. School personnel and ministry officers provided guidance
and encouragement regarding curricular requirements, university teacher educators and researchers conducted
onsite and online professional development workshops. One highlight of the year was the three-day onsite
summer   institute  conducted   in Mallorca  (Spain),   which  provided    an opportunity  for the 30+   participating
teachers, teacher educators and researchers to collaborate on designing, facilitating, analyzing and reflecting on
the  KB  work   of  the 45   primary   and  secondary   students  who   attended  to  work  on  the  problem   of  the
sustainability of caves (e.g. tourism effect, cave ecology, installing light in the caves and its impact) as well as
visited two famous Mallorcan limestone caves.
         Despite the challenges of differences in language, culture and time zone, there have been high levels of
motivation shown by teachers and students to participate in KBIP. Implementing KB as a pedagogical approach
is an innovation and a challenge, both for teachers and learners. Curricula and facilitation design, as well as
classroom practices and culture are necessarily different in the different sites. KBIP forces teachers, learners as
well as teacher educators and researchers to make explicit their ideas and assumptions and to learn from each
other during the process of collaboration and knowledge building. We will report on specific research results
obtained in Hong Kong and Quebec regarding student motivation, online discourse patterns, and students' depth
of understanding of critical questions facing our world today.

Supporting and Measuring Global Information Literacy Through Cross-cultural
Studies of Web Search

               Neema Moraveji, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA, neema@moraveji.org

In contrast to the earlier two abstracts, this work takes us into an informal learning environment within the
developing world.    Nevertheless, it is connected with the work in progress discussed in connection with Rosé
and Kam's abstract above in its focus on information literacy skills.    It connects also with the work discussed in
the Laferriere and Law abstract in its focus on the internet as an environment to support knowledge sharing and
knowledge construction.
         Web   search   is a timely  and imperative   skill  for citizens  in information  economies  or  those   who
participate in interconnected knowledge work regardless of their country.          Moving   beyond   the  traversal of
digital libraries and into general knowledge acquisition it is a skill that crosses the boundaries between formal
and informal learning environments and the developed and developing worlds. While we tend to think of web
search as information retrieval rather than learning, much of lifelong learning in modern societies takes place
during information seeking on the web, and increasingly internet penetration, and web based technologies, are
growing into less developed regions.
         Unlike  many   traditional  school disciplines,   the topic of  web   search (part of the   broader topic  of
information literacy) does not belong to any one country or tradition.        The technologies involved are culture-
agnostic and there is little historical precedence of curricula, learning mechanisms, or best practices.   We argue
that  these factors conspire  to   make  web   search an   ideal topic  to study as   a means  of  integrating global
perspectives and expertise in the learning sciences.
         Among the sub-skills involved in being information and media literate (i.e. as discussed in Jenkins et
al., 2006; Enochsson 2005), the ability to effectively and efficiently find, assess, and synthesize credible and
authoritative information on the Internet combine to transcend cultural boundaries.         We discuss reasons why
Web   search  (herein referred  to as  `search') is an  ideal  topic of study  and  alongside  planned and   ongoing
research in a global context.
         Academics, instructors, and policy makers have worked to study how search practices are learned in
recent years, but much remains unknown.        Computer experience, developmental stage, exposure to experts,
formal instruction, accurate mental models of search engines and the Internet, and peer interaction each play a
role.  We   plan to  focus   on social factors in particular   and study   them  across  cultures as they emerge    in
distributed and collocated environments.
         We have designed and developed tools to support search learning and plan on giving them to schools in
different areas in exchange for anonymous usage data that will provide us with the ability to take the global
`pulse' on global information literacy expertise.

                                                    104  ·  © ISLS
                                              ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 2

          To deploy  such  technologies   in classrooms   within  different countries,   we  plan to build  upon   the
existing base of dozens of schools worldwide using the Mouse Mischief platform by the authors (Moraveji et
al., 2008).  Complemented with interviews and classroom observations, this work will illustrate the distribution
of expertise in search across the world and how such skills spread socially.        These findings will inform the
redesign of the tools and design guidelines for systems and curricula aimed at improving information literacy.
We anticipate that search expertise may follow a distribution quite different from those in traditional school
topics and performance on standardized tests, revealing trends on expertise in the global information economy,
helping all countries prepare accordingly.
          Information-processing theory posits that the formal mental operations required to conduct purposeful
and effective searches (e.g. as required to define abstract keywords) emerge at the corresponding developmental
stage.  We view the logical steps in search as a partial and abstracted representation of the user's cognitive
process.    Used  as such, the  data  collected  from   our systems   (or  through  large-scale studies  done   using
Mechanical Turk) will help us conduct comparisons between users and aggregate them to make comparisons
across  cultures regarding  expertise  in Web   search.   By  representing  such   processes  we  allow  them   to be
transferred between participants via cognitive apprenticeship, a process by which learners can model accurate
problem-solving skills by inspecting the transparent processes of instructors (Collins 1987).
          At this symposium, we will present results from work on studying the social factors involved in the
learning  of search  and   information literacy  skills on  the  Internet.  The   results will  incorporate or  have
implications for learning across cultural boundaries.   We advance that studying search is an ideal platform for a
global agenda on research in the learning sciences.

Comparative Informatics: Investigating Cultural and Linguistic Influences in
Computer Supported Collaborative Learning

Ravi Vatrapu, Center for Applied ICT, Copenhagen Business School, Frederiksberg, Denmark,vatrapu@cbs.dk

Similar to the previous two abstracts, this work focuses on technology enhanced learning.       However, this work
takes its point of departure in the human computer interactional (HCI) aspects of informal and formal learning
settings. Currently, the Internet is undergoing a profound shift towards social interaction, participation and
collaboration. Many, if not all, of the informal and formal learning settings are situated within this transforming
socio-technical landscape. Within this context, the Comparative Informatics (CI) research program studies how
participants interact with  technology enhanced learning environments in systematically varied experimental
contexts of group composition (intra- vs. inter- cultural; same vs. mixed gender) and linguistic mediums (e.g.,
Danish, Chinese, English). The rest of this abstract is organized into two parts. The first part presents the design
of and findings from a laboratory study of an intra- and inter-cultural CSCL system. The second part discusses
conceptual and methodological challenges in conducting controlled studies of technology enhanced learning.
          Technology enhanced informal and formal learning environments are characterized by socio-technical
interactions. Socio-technical interactions involve individuals interacting with (a) technologies, and (b) other
individuals through technologies. These two interactional aspects are theoretically conceived as (a) perception
and  appropriation   of  socio-technical   affordances    and   (b)  structures  and   functions   of  technological
intersubjectivity (Vatrapu, 2009). Affordances are action-taking possibilities and meaning-making opportunities
in an actor-technology system relative to the competencies of the actor and the capabilities of the system.
Technological intersubjectivity (TI) refers to how participants interact with, relate to, form impressions of, and
have   empathetic experiences   with  each   other in  technology   enhanced   settings.  The  basic premise  of   the
Comparative Informatics research program is that the perception and appropriation of affordances as well as the
structures and functions of technological intersubjectivity vary across cultures and languages.
          The CulturalReps research project investigated two specific research questions related to the effects of
culture  on  appropriation  of affordances   and   on   technological intersubjectivity   in a  computer   supported
collaborative learning environment with external representations. The experimental study design consisted of
three independent groups of dyads from similar or different cultures (American-American, American-Chinese,
Chinese-Chinese)     doing collaborative   problem-solving    in  a   knowledge-mapping       learning environment.
Participants interacted through an asynchronous computer interface providing multiple tools for interaction
(diagrammatic    workspace,  embedded     notes,   threaded  discussion)    as they  worked    on  an   intellectually
challenging problem of identifying the cause of a disease outbreak. Based on empirical findings documenting
cross-cultural variations in behavior, communication and cognition, several research hypotheses were advanced.
Empirical   data  were  collected using   demographic,    culture   and usability  instruments;   participants' self-
perception and collaborative peer-perception instruments; screen recordings and software logs of experimental
sessions.
          Statistical results showed that members of different cultures appropriated the resources of the interface
differently in their interaction, and formed differential impressions of each other. For example, on average,

                                                   105  ·  © ISLS
                                                   ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 2

American participants of the experimental study created more evidential relation links, made more individual
contributions  and   were more   likely     to explicitly  discuss    information  sharing   and knowledge     organization
strategies than   their Chinese  counterparts.      Despite    statistically significant  differences  between    the  three
experimental groups on (a) how they used the tools and resources of the learning environment and (b) how they
related to each other during and after their collaborative learning interactions, individual learning outcomes
analysis of the essays indicated no significant differences (Vatrapu, 2008).
One interpretation of the individual learning outcomes result is that participants utilized the "alternates for
action" incorporated    into the learning      environment     effectively   and  appropriately  from  their   own  cultural
standpoints. The results of the experimental study indicate the existence of multiple interactional pathways to
learning outcomes in intra- and inter-cultural CSCL. However, more systematic empirical work is needed to (a)
establish the existence of and (b) evaluate the efficacy of multiple cultural interactional pathways.
         Several   theoretical and    methodological   challenges     remain   in the design   and  analysis   of controlled
studies of   cross-cultural  and    cross-lingual    technology    enhanced      learning    systems. Interacting   through
technology is not unproblematic. First, it makes interaction more difficult. Second, it may not mean, feel, and
afford same thing to everyone. With respect to computer supported collaboration, there is a productive tension
between    the future   possibilities envisioned     and   the   present realities documented     by   empirical   research.
Information    and  communication     technologies   (ICT)    are often   designed  under    the implicit  assumption  that
members of different cultures using different languages equally view a given functionality as appropriate for
carrying out a given, or that another member observing a given act in an ICT environment interprets it as
originally intended by the actor. Given that culture, language, cognition, and action (Aydede, 2004; Gibson,
1979;  Gumperz     &  Levinson,  1996;      Kramsch,   1998;   Nisbett   &   Norenzayan,  2002;   Noë,  2004;   Vatrapu  &
Suthers, 2007) are intricately intertwined, in a technology driven multi-cultural and multi-lingual world, it is an
open empirical research problem that the human computer interaction (HCI) design and development aspects of
ICT and    collaboration  systems     still permeate   with    unexamined     assumptions.    As  can  be  seen   from   this
symposium    submission,   learning   sciences    researchers    have begun   to  critically engage   with these  issues by
employing a rich mix of theories and methods across a diverse set of informal and formal learning settings.
         At  this  symposium,    an   outline  of  the conceptual     and  methodological     framework    for comparative
informatics will be presented. Comparative informatics is the application of the comparative method to the
study of information and communication technologies across a diverse set of contexts. According to Ragin
(1987,  p. x),  the comparative   method       is "especially    well suited  for addressing   questions   about  outcomes
resulting from multiple and conjectural causes where different conditions combine in different and sometimes
contradictory ways to produce the same or similar outcomes." Prior and emerging findings from experimental
studies will   be presented. Implications      for design  and   evaluation   of  technology   enhanced    learning will be
discussed.

Language and Literacy Learning in Developing Communities via Cellphones

Matthew Kam, Carnegie Mellon University, 5000 Forbes Avenue, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, mattkam@cs.cmu.edu

This final abstract builds on the earlier four by studying mobile learning across multiple cultural contexts in the
developing world. Now in its 6th year, the Mobile and Immersive Learning for Literacy in Emerging Economies
(MILLEE, http://www.millee.org) research project aims to leverage the increasing ubiquity of the cellphone ­
the fastest growing technology in developing regions such as South Asia and Africa ­ to make language and
literacy learning more accessible to children in rural areas and the urban slums. The educational intervention
involves the design of educational game software that runs on the cellphone. The e-learning games target global
languages such as English as a Second Language and Mandarin, so as to empower low-income children from
minority-language backgrounds to integrate into the mainstream, global economy.
         In the last five years, we have performed 10 rounds of fieldwork in India spanning about 12 months on
the ground. We observed that rural Indian children found our earlier game designs ­ which were subconsciously
influenced by our prior experiences with Western videogames ­ to be non-intuitive. This observation forced us
to examine the traditional village games that rural Indian children play everyday, and to perform a cross-cultural
analysis of the systematic differences between these games and contemporary Western videogames (Kam et al.,
2009a). The results from this analysis have been used to inform subsequent game designs. A semester-long
evaluation of the games in an after-school program at a village school site in Northern India demonstrated
significant learning gains on spelling skills (Kam et al, 2009b). We are making preparations to conduct a larger-
scale evaluation in the form of a controlled experiment with 800 rural children in 40 schools in India. While the
project in India targets ESL, we are working with new partners to expand the project into backward regions in
Africa (ESL literacy) and China (Mandarin literacy). The longer-term goal is to build a research infrastructure
that will collect data for us to engage in cross-cultural comparative studies, so as to explore how we can more
effectively perform cross-cultural design and reuse/localize learning objects across multiple cultural settings.

                                                       106  ·  © ISLS
                                          ICLS 2010     ·  Volume 2

       In spite of the above (early) successes so far, the greatest opportunity for mobile learning is to put
language and literacy learning within reach of the low-income children who cannot attend school regularly due
to child labor challenges such as the need to work for the family in the agricultural fields or households. This
informal learning approach calls for the cellphone-based games to be embedded within the social fabric of the
children's everyday lives, to be used in times and places such as their homes and fields that are far more
convenient than schools. This new phase of the project calls for methodological and conceptual innovations. We
have conducted participation-observations to uncover the scenarios in the everyday lives of rural Indian children
that are promising for mobile learning, and have ran a semester-long in-situ study in which children in the same
village used the games under naturalistic conditions. We will continue to refine our data logging procedures to
allow us to study how participants play and learn with the mobile games when researchers are not present.
       The challenges with designing technology-supported learning interventions for out-of-school settings
are not only logistical, but also theoretical. Our results suggest that our current instructional designs are more
effective for improving learning among children who have more years of schooling, vis-à-vis children with less
schooling. This implication is hardly surprising; drawing on sociocultural theories of learning which posit that
the development of higher-order mental functions occurs through social interaction mediated by signs including
language, a landmark study by Scribner and Cole (1981) found that the social practices associated with the
institution of schooling led to new ways of deploying their cognitive resources. While most published research
in education and the Learning Sciences has centered around learners with access to schooling, if we are indeed
to design technologies that truly promote learning among out-of-school children, it follows that more research is
needed to understand and account for the cognitive processes employed by the latter.
       In this symposium, we will present an overview of our results and an initial conceptual framework on
instructional design for out-of-school children. This framework will not only aim to help us design educational
applications that improve lives for child laborers, but also inform the design of "bridge programs" that help out-
of-school children reintegrate into formal schooling as well as better design adult literacy programs. By working
with out-of-school learners in multiple cultural settings that include sub-Saharan Africa to South Asia ­ two
regions on the lowest end of most human development indices, our long-term vision is to establish a research
agenda whose intellectual merit is to arrive at a more holistic understanding of human learning and cognition ­
which will fill the gaps in existing research that is largely rooted in Western traditions and societies.

References
Aydede, M. (2004). The Language of Thought Hypothesis. In E. N. Zalta (Ed.), The Stanford Encyclopedia of
       Philosophy (Winter 2005 ed., pp. http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/language-thought/).
Chang, C. Y., Hsiao, C. H., & Barufaldi, J. (2006). Preferred-Actual Learning Environment "Spaces" and Earth
       Science Outcomes in Taiwan, Science Education, 90(3), 420-433.
Chang, C. Y. (2005). Taiwanese science and life technology curriculum standards and earth systems education.
       International Journal of Science Education, 27, 625-638.
Chang, C. Y. & Tsai, C. -C. (2005). The interplay between different forms of CAI and students' preferences of
       learning environment in the secondary science class. Science Education, 89, 707-724.
Chaudhuri, S., Kumar, R., Howley, I., Rosé, C. P. (2009).       Engaging Collaborative Learners with Helping
       Agents, Proceedings of Artificial Intelligence in Education
Collins, A., Brown, J. S., & Newman, S. E. (1987). Cognitive apprenticeship: Teaching the craft of reading,
       writing and mathematics (Technical Report No. 403). BBN Laboratories, Cambridge, MA. Centre for
       the Study of Reading, University of Illinois. January, 1987.
DeHaan, R. L. & Venkat Narayan, K. M. (2008). Education for Innovation: Implications for India, China, and
       America, Sense Publishers.
Enochsson,  A.  2005.   The   development    of     children's  Web   searching  skills---a  non-linear       model.
       http://informationr.net/ir/11-1/paper240.htm
Evans, M., Cagiltay, K., Pal, J., & Sorcar, P. (2009).  ICT4D and the Learning Sciences, Proceedings of the
       Computer Supported Collaborative Learning Conference, Rhodes, Greece.
Gibson, J. J. (1979). The ecological approach to visual perception. Boston: Houghton Mifflin.
Gumperz, J. J., & Levinson, S. C. (1996). Rethinking Linguistic Relativity: Cambridge University Press.
Gweon, G., Kumar,   R., Rosé, C.  P. (2009).   Towards     Automatic  Assessment  for Project  Based        Learning
       Groups, Proceedings of Artificial Intelligence in Education
Jenkins, H., Clinton, K., Purushotma, R., Robison, A. J. & Weigel, M. (2006). Confronting the Challenges of
       Participatory Culture: Media Education For the 21st Century. Chicago: The MacArthur Foundation.
Joshi, M. & Rosé, C. P. (2007). Using Transactivity in Conversation Summarization in Educational Dialog.
       Proceedings of the SLaTE Workshop on Speech and Language Technology in Education
Kam, M., Mathur, A., Kumar, A., and Canny, J. (2009a). Designing digital games for rural children: A study of
       traditional village games  in  India. In Proceedings      of ACM   Conference   on   Human         Factors in
       Computing Systems, Boston, Massachusetts, April 2009.

                                               107    ·  © ISLS
                                                  ICLS 2010  ·   Volume 2

Kam, M., Kumar, A., Jain, S., Mathur, A., and Canny, J. (2009b). Improving literacy in rural India: Cellphone
         games    in  an after-school  program.    In Proceedings     of IEEE/ACM     Conference   on   Information  and
         Communication Technology and Development, Doha, Qatar, April 2009.
Koedinger, K. R., Anderson, J.R., Hadley, W.H., & Mark, M . A. (1997).             Intelligent tutoring goes to school in
         the big city. International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education, 8, 30-43.
Kramsch, C. (1998). Language and culture: Oxford University Press.
Kumar,   R.,    Rosé, C. P.,   Wang,   Y.  C., Joshi,  M.,   Robinson,   A. (2007).     Tutorial Dialogue  as  Adaptive
         Collaborative Learning Support, Proceedings of Artificial Intelligence in Education
Kumar,   R.,    Chaudhuri,  S.,   Howley,  I., Rosé,   C. P.   (2009).   VMT-Basilica:     An  Environment    for   Rapid
         Prototyping     of Collaborative   Learning    Environments     with  Dynamic     Support,  Community      Event
         Proceedings of Computer Supported Collaborative Learning
Ma, L. P. (1999). Knowing and Teaching Elementary Mathematics: Teachers' Understanding of Fundamental
         Mathematics in China and the United States, Lawrence Earlbaum
Moraveji,   N.,  Kim,   T.,  Pawar,  U.,   Ge, J., Inkpen,   K.  (2008).  Mischief:   Supporting   Remote  Teaching    in
         Developing Regions. Proceedings of ACM CHI, Florence, Italy.
Nisbett, R., & Norenzayan, A. (2002). Culture and Cognition. In D. L. Medin (Ed.), Stevens' Handbook of
         Experimental Psychology (3rd ed., pp. 561­597).
Noë, A. (2004). Action In Perception: Bradford Book.
Prata, D. N., Baker, R. S., Costa, E., Rosé, C. P., Cui, Y., de Carvalho, A. (2009).       Detecting and Understanding
         the Impact of Cognitive and Interpersonal Conflict in Computer Supported Collaborative Learning
         Environments, Proceedings of the 2nd International Conference on Educational Data Mining
Ragin,   C.  (1987).    The  Comparative    Method:     Moving    Beyond    Qualitative    and Quantitative   Strategies:
         University of California Press.
Rosé, C. P., Wang, Y.C., Cui, Y., Arguello, J., Stegmann, K., Weinberger, A., Fischer, F., (2008).            Analyzing
         Collaborative      Learning   Processes    Automatically:    Exploiting    the  Advances    of  Computational
         Linguistics    in  Computer-Supported        Collaborative   Learning,  International   Journal   of Computer
         Supported Collaborative Learning 3(3), pp237-271.
Scardamalia,    M.,   &  Bereiter, C. (2006).   Knowledge      building: Theory,   pedagogy,   and technology.  In  R.K.
         Sawyer     (Ed.),  Cambridge     Handbook     of the   Learning   Sciences   (pp. 97-118).   New     York, NY:
         Cambridge University Press.
Scribner, S., & Cole, M. (1981). The psychology of literacy. Harvard University Press.
Steinbock,   D.  (2008).   Higher    Education    and Innovation  and    Competitive    Advantages,  in DeHaan,     R. &
         Narayan,     K. (Eds)    Education for    Innovation:  Implications  for  India,  China,  and  America,    Sense
         Publishers
Stigler, J. &   Hiebert, J.  (1999).   The Teaching Gap: Best Ideas from the World's Teachers for Improving
         Education in the Classroom, The Free Press.
Vatrapu,    R., &   Suthers,   D.  (2007). Culture    and Computers:     A  Review    of  the  Concept  of Culture   and
         Implications for Intercultural Collaborative Online Learning. In T. Ishida, S. R. Fussell & P. T. J. M.
         Vossen     (Eds.), Intercultural  Collaboration    I: Lecture   Notes  in  Computer   Science   (pp. 260-275):
         Springer-Verlag
Vatrapu,  R.    (2008). Cultural   Considerations  in  Computer   Supported    Collaborative   Learning. Research    and
         Practice in Technology Enhanced Learning, 3(2), 159-201.
Vatrapu,  R.    (2009).  Toward    a Theory    of Socio-Technical     Interactions in Technology    Enhanced   Learning
         Environments.      In U.  Cress,  V.  Dimitrova    &  M.   Specht  (Eds.), EC-TEL     2009,  Lecture  Notes   in
         Computer Science (LNCS) 5794 (pp. 694-699). Berlin Heidelberg              Springer-Verlag.

                                                      108  ·   © ISLS
