                                                 ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

         Dynamics of disciplinary understandings and practices of
     attending to student thinking in elementary teacher education

                                  Janet Coffey, Ann R. Edwards, Carla Finkelstein
          University of Maryland, Department of Curriculum and Instruction, College Park, MD, 20742
                        Email: jecoffey@umd.edu, aedwards@umd.edu, cfinkels@umd.edu

          Abstract: This paper presents case studies of three elementary teacher candidates in a one-
          year master's certification program, focusing on their participation in science and mathematics
          methods   courses.  Through    one  primary case     and two    contrasting cases, we    examine    the
          interplay among     a  teacher candidate's  orientation  to  each   discipline   (math  and science),
          orientation towards    discipline-specific teaching,    and  emerging    practices   of  attending  to
          student thinking    in disciplinary  domains.      This  study  is  of  interest because    it reveals
          significant differences between learning to teach science and math, suggesting that practices
          of  attending  have   disciplinary grounding   and   therefore  do  not  necessarily  transfer  across
          disciplinary contexts. We argue that better understanding these dynamics becomes important
          for teacher education, particularly for elementary teachers, who are responsible for teaching
          across disciplines.

Background & Motivation
High  quality  teacher   education  programs   emphasize     student-centered    curriculum  and   instruction  (Darling-
Hammond, Hammerness, et al, 2007). The importance of attending to the substance of student thinking is
grounded in research on how people learn and construct understanding (National Research Council, 1999) and
in the role practices of attending can play in shaping teachers' instructional moves and supporting students'
learning  (Ball,  1993;  Black   &  Wiliam,   1998;  Hammer,      1997).  Little  research  addresses    the role teacher
education can play in facilitating the development of teachers' practices of attending to student thinking.
          A recurring theme in elementary teacher education research literature concerns teachers' subject matter
background    and preparation;   in math   and  science, specifically,    research shows   that  prospective  elementary
school teachers often lack a strong disciplinary foundation (Ball, 1990; Lewis, Parsad, et al, 1999; National
Research Council, 2007). While we know that the subject matters for instruction (Stodolsky, 1988), and that
content knowledge plays a role in effective teaching practices (Hill, Rowan & Ball, 2005), the ways in which a
subject matters for learning to teach is less clear. Since student thinking occurs in discipline-based contexts,
better understanding how practices of attending to student thinking across the disciplines develop is a pressing
issue for elementary teacher education.      To that end, this study asks: How do elementary pre-service teachers
(learn to) attend to student thinking and how is that process similar or different across disciplines, specifically
mathematics and science?
          We situate this study in elementary teacher education because of the dynamics that arise in elementary
classrooms:   the same teacher is typically responsible for teaching the same group of students all of the school
subject areas. This poses a unique challenge for teacher education, as elementary teacher candidates must learn
about content,    pedagogy,   student  thinking  and  student   learning   in multiple   disciplines.    Furthermore, we
specifically chose to study elementary mathematics and science teacher preparation for two reasons. First, as
pressure for improving mathematics and science achievement and calls for accelerating coverage reaches into
the elementary grades, high quality elementary mathematics and science teaching is critical. Second, elementary
teacher candidates often have had difficult experiences with mathematics and science and come to teacher
preparation with negative orientations to the two disciplines and anxiety about teaching them (Sowder, 2007).
Therefore,   coming   to understand   the ways   in  which   their discipline-relevant   experiences     and backgrounds
interplay with   learning to  be  responsive  to student   thinking   are key considerations    in effective  elementary
teacher preparation (Kilpatrick, Swafford, & Findell, 2001).

Our Study
Our  study   took place   during  the  2008-09   school  year   in the    context  of a  one-year  elementary     master's
certification program    at a   large public  university   located  in  the  mid-Atlantic    United   States.  The  study
specifically focuses on the math and science methods courses and associated field experiences. Two of the
authors were course instructors.
          Both courses framed teaching as responsiveness to students' ideas and reasoning.          With this emphasis,
the courses foregrounded everyday assessment as a driver for instructional decision-making (Atkin & Coffey,
2003; Erickson, 2007; Levin, Hammer & Coffey, 2009).            Coursework reflected this orientation: Both courses
asked students to engage in case studies of student thinking, and individual and collaborative reflection on
student work, among other field-based assignments. Both courses regularly engaged students in disciplinary

                                                    1040   ·   © ISLS
                                               ICLS 2010    ·   Volume 1

reasoning and problem solving; in other words, the pre-service teachers did math and science, and reflected on
what that doing entailed. Each course met weekly for three hours during the Fall semester. In addition to
university coursework, the pre-service teachers spent three days each week in field placements in large public
school districts with uniform curricular demands and diverse student populations.

Subjects
Our analysis draws on data from three of the 25 consenting pre-service teachers in the cohort. All three were
interning in  3rd grade classrooms.   Brief  profiles  of   the case  study teachers are  presented here; additional
information relevant to their teaching is provided below in the analysis and discussion.          Together the cases
capture the variation along the axes of disciplinary orientation and attending practices explored in this paper.
Kim, who serves as the primary case for this paper, is a white female in her mid-20s, with an undergraduate
degree in Communications. Natalia is a white, female in her mid-30s who received dual undergraduate degrees
in International Studies and Russian Studies.    She is a former attorney, and, just prior to the program, was a
stay-at-home mother.    Barbara, a white female in her late 40s, received an undergraduate degree in Psychology,
with a minor in Physics.

Data Collection & Analysis
Data is drawn from the semester-long math and science methods courses, taken concurrently, including artifacts
generated  in  participants' field placements.  Specifically,    we  analyzed  audio  and  video  records of  course
meetings as well as the course assignments, which include: written reflections and activities involving analyses
of students' scientific and mathematical thinking; field-based assignments involving instructional design and
implementation; an analytic case of their students' disciplinary thinking and leaning (for math and science); and
observations of teaching.
        Initial analysis entailed iterative coding and comparative review of pre-service candidates' work and
the nature and patterns of their class participation in both methods courses. An interplay of three dimensions
emerged that are particularly salient for understanding how the pre-service teachers were learning to teach in
math and science:
      1. Orientation to the discipline: Beliefs about nature of each discipline (math and science), discipline-
      related experiences,   epistemological  issues, attitudes  and  dispositions, content  area competency    (self-
      described and demonstrated).
      2. Orientation towards discipline-specific teaching: Visions of discipline-specific teaching, role of the
      teacher, ideas about student learning, goals and priorities within the discipline.
      3. Practices of attending to student thinking: The aspects of student thinking that participants notice,
      what sense they make of that, how they take that up in their analyses and recommendations for next steps
      for teaching and learning.
        Our analysis in this paper reflects case study methods used to capture variation in dynamics among
these dimensions.   We  selected   three cases that illuminate   important   distinctions across individuals as they
learned to teach science and math and reflect patterns of variation that we observed among the broader group of
25. Kim serves as a primary case study to organize data and discussion.        The other two cases presented here­
Barbara and Natalia­offer interesting contrasts, which we discuss at the end of this paper.       We are not arguing
that these are the only dynamics at play; however, across the pre-service teachers, these dimensions emerged as
fundamental   to understanding the variation in learning to teach  in discipline domains.  Of course, school context
played a role in shaping teachers' expectations and what they did in the classroom. While all three taught the
same grade in large public school systems in the same state (thus sharing state standards), Kim and Natalia
taught in a district that, overall, was higher performing than the district where Barbara taught.

A case study of elementary pre-service teachers' engagement in attending to
student thinking in math and science ­ a closer look at Kim
Like many of her peers, Kim demonstrated differences in her practices of attending to student thinking across
her math and science methods courses.     In her science methods   class, attending to student thinking afforded Kim
opportunities for deep engagement in disciplinary practices and in student reasoning. In math, while she clearly
demonstrated personal engagement in mathematical inquiry and problem-solving, the purposes Kim ascribed to
attending to student thinking--to assess students' progress toward successful problem solving--constrained
how she inquired into student thinking and what that attention made available for her.        We found that Kim's
differing views of the disciplines, as well as the differing ways in which the presses (e.g. curricular, external
testing demands) manifested in math and science teaching in her field placement setting, contributed to marked
differences in her abilities to attend to students' thinking in mathematics as opposed to in science. Before we
take a closer look at the ways in which she attended to student thinking, we briefly describe her orientations to
the disciplines of math and science and towards teaching in these disciplines.

                                                   1041   ·   © ISLS
                                                 ICLS 2010   ·   Volume 1

Orientation to the discipline
In science   methods,   Kim    initially portrayed   science   as wonderment     and   exploration   on  one hand   and
"knowledge" on the other, without a clear articulation of the relationship.          Her work over the semester in
attending  to students    triggered her  own   episodes   of   engagement   in  scientific reasoning.    Kim  began  to
appreciate  scientific reasoning    as a way  to get   from  wonderment     and exploration  to knowledge.    Scientific
reasoning took on dimensions of instrumentality--she began to see it as a useful "tool" for asking questions
about the world.
         During the semester in her math methods class, Kim's orientation to mathematics shifted from a belief
that mathematics is primarily about getting a "right answer" and a focus on its instrumentality to the centrality
of conceptual understanding and sense-making. At the start of the semester, Kim reflected that her experiences
learning mathematics fostered a view of school mathematics as concrete, straightforward exercises that "are
either right  or wrong"    and  a   view  of  mathematics    learning  as  primarily mastery   through   repetition and
memorization. She recognized the instrumentality of mathematics outside of school and felt that the usefulness
of mathematics was a key motivation for students, including herself, to learn mathematics.         Through the course
of the semester, doing math became about achieving deep conceptual understanding and the satisfaction of
"getting it" through "successful" problem solving. She approached mathematical explorations and problematic
tasks in the methods class as puzzles to be pursued. Despite her clear enthusiasm and competency in pursuing
these personal mathematical challenges, her central goal, however, remained "getting" or mastering them as
opposed to the processes of conjecturing or inquiry.
         In  both disciplinary  areas,   Kim  demonstrated     a curiosity  toward puzzling   situations and  problems
(including self-initiated questions) that support deep engagement in disciplinary practices. However, in math her
primary  focus   was   on understanding     achieved   through successful   problem-solving,  whereas    in science she
demonstrated a value on the processes of questioning and reasoning unto themselves.

Orientation to discipline-specific teaching
During the science methods course, Kim's focus shifted from student ownership through topic relevance to
creating opportunities    for students   to articulate and   question their scientific reasoning.    Her  primary   goal
involved helping students engage in questioning and sustained reasoning of everyday phenomena to which they
may or may not bring prior knowledge, or even see as relevant.            To help students engage with each other's
ideas, Kim regularly asked, "Do you understand what he is saying?" and "Does that make sense?" Science
content goals became secondary in practice to her facilitation of and responsiveness to reasoning, although she
did not drop them all together.   For her, one would lead to the other.
         Teaching math for Kim involved providing students with opportunities to explore and make sense of
rich problems in order to achieve "success" on the problem and, thus, develop understandings of mathematical
concepts.  Her   role was  to  reveal  students' strategies  and  reasoning  by  asking    questions and then  use  that
information to pose guiding questions to support students' movement toward successful solutions.             During the
math methods course, she also began to value students' sharing of their strategies with one another to make
multiple solutions available to students.

Practices of attending to disciplinary thinking: Kim's science teaching
Over the course of the semester in her science methods coursework, the focus of Kim's analysis of classroom
activity was on the substance (beyond canonical correctness) of students' ideas and reasoning. In her classroom
teaching experiences, attending to student thinking served as a way for Kim to help her students clarify their
reasoning and engage with each other's ideas. Kim's written analyses show that she began to see her role as a
science teacher as one of facilitating students' articulation of reasoning as a bridge to scientific understanding.
The analysis below helps illuminate this positioning.
         The following excerpt comes from Kim's transcript of her 3rd grade class discussing why days were
longer in summer than in winter. This segment begins with an explanation set forth by one of the students, that
"the sun goes around the Earth slower and the Earth spins faster." On first consideration, what may jump out in
the student's statement are the inaccuracies of the students' ideas.      Kim's treatment of those ideas­both in her
subsequent moves in the classroom and her written reflection--demonstrates a commitment to helping students
clarify their reasoning and engage with each other's ideas.       Despite the fact that Kurt's and Rye's ideas were
wrong, Kim sought clarification, in a way that indicates she was trying to understand the reasoning behind the
explanations.

         Kurt:    I was thinking that the sun...that the sun goes around the Earth slower and the Earth
                  spins faster. So, so, it's um, so the sun goes to the other side of the Earth, um it goes
                  to the other side of the Earth cause because the Earth is rotating around...(trying to
                  show what he is saying with his hands)

                                                     1042  ·   © ISLS
                                               ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

         Kim:     Can you draw me a picture of what you mean up here? Can you draw a picture? I'll
                  erase some space. Can you draw a picture you think?
         Kurt:    Yup.
         Kim:     Ok draw us a picture. Let's see if we agree on understanding Kurt.
         Kurt:    So this (drawing suns orbit around Earth), so the sun is going around and this the
                  Earth is spinning fast. So this is the, hold on, this is the Northern Hemisphere and
                  this is the Southern. So now it's so, so, and then it turns like it turns really fast like,
                  and if you, its night time and the sun is here and...
         Kim:     Ok. Guys, look up here at what Kurt did. He said, here's the sun, he said the sun is
                  going around the Earth like this. And the Earth is spinning like that. Does anyone
                  agree or disagree with what Kurt is saying. Think about what we know about the
                  Earth, and day and night, and the sun...Rye?
         Rye:     I agree.
         Kim:     You agree with him? Why do you agree with him?
         Rye:     Because the sun does go around fast, and the Earth, but I disagree a little bit because
                  the Earth goes slow around.
         Kim:     Explain it, say it again. What do you mean the Earth goes faster and what do you
                  mean it goes slower?
         Rye:     It goes slower because if it went faster it would be the year 3000 tomorrow.
         Kim:     So you're saying if it went too fast then time would pass?

         In her analysis of this conversation Kim wrote, "Some students said that the Earth can speed up and
slow down, and that's why we have longer or shorter days...They do get that the Earth rotates on its axis and
that is what causes day and night. So it must seem natural that the speed of the rotation must change to explain
the change in the length of day. We can't feel the Earth moving anyway, so we probably wouldn't feel a change
in speed...Looking back I could have followed up with asking them what causes the Earth to spin slower or
faster." We see her pushing students to consider the ideas in light of other things they "know" ­ "think about
what we already know about the Earth, and day, and night, and the sun." Her analysis indicated that she was
also able to identify instances where she could have pressed students on their reasoning, and in particular push
for a causal explanation.
         Kim   appeared   to allow the specifics of    her   conceptual understanding goals to emerge          from the
discussion. For example, although she is expressed concern about the inaccuracy of the statement that "the sun
goes around the Earth slower and the Earth spins faster," Kim addressed students' conceptual understandings
not by "correcting" their statements but by encouraging students to examine the logic of their reasoning. In any
given moment of interaction, she primarily attended to students' clarity of articulation and reasoning, allowing
students to engage meaningfully with each other ideas.
         Following the exchange in the transcript above, Kim offered students a globe and differently sized balls
"to allow them to model what they knew."      She explained, "I had hoped that if we established some things we
all agreed to be true, we would be able to reason that the Earth always rotates on its axis at a constant speed
once every twenty-four hours."     A student then challenged the idea that the sun orbits the Earth, offering as
explanation that "the Earth spins so slow that the side facing the sun is in the summer and it stays that way until
it moves  out  of the light, and then  it becomes   winter."   Kim   noted, "Her response was  right   in      so many
ways...she knew that the Earth orbits around the sun and that the relationship somehow caused the different
seasons to happen on different sides of the earth. She also knew that the Earth was rotating on its axis while it
was orbiting. However, it was hard for me to let it go there because we just established that the day/night cycle
happens every twenty-four hours..."
         Kim   held students  accountable for their scientific  reasoning.  Recognizing the inconsistency in the
student's reasoning, Kim explained: "I brought the discussion back to that idea and sure enough a student was
able to challenge her on her idea.  Dan responded, `I have to disagree with Verna because...if it was summer
over here, if it was summer over here, then like how could it move because its summer over here and its winter
over here. I don't get it. Because if it was summer over here, it would have to be summer there for, like, a
season and if was, um, winter over here it would have to be winter for a season. And then they would never
have day, well it would never be night.'" As this brief snippet exemplifies, over the semester Kim began to see
reasoning as the bridge to scientific knowledge, and her role as teacher as one of facilitating this connection.
For Kim, the end point of any particular science lesson was less important than the process by which students
got there, which she came to see as the primary work for learners doing science. While this was the case within
a particular lesson, at the end of a several lessons, Kim expected to see conceptual progress towards canonically
accepted explanations. Yet, she was able to let this end goal go in most moments of interaction.

Practices of attending to disciplinary thinking: Kim's mathematics teaching

                                                  1043   ·   © ISLS
                                             ICLS 2010    ·  Volume 1

Kim's attending practices looked different in the math methods course.    Her analyses of students' mathematical
thinking addressed conceptual and procedural understandings as she attended to the details of students' talk,
inscription and gesture to make her judgments.  She increasingly saw the value of revealing student thinking,
but viewed attention to student thinking in math as a teaching strategy for assessment of student understanding
and readiness.  In  her practice, Kim questioned  her     students  primarily  to determine their problem-solving
strategies and, if necessary, to steer them toward a successful solution (while honoring and building upon the
particular direction each student had attempted to take).
       The following example comes from Kim's instruction with a small group on the task: "Greg climbed
2,600 meters up the side of a mountain. His brother Harry climbed half as far. How far did Harry climb?"
Before starting the task, Kim focused the students on problem-solving strategies ("What are some important
steps when you are problem solving?" "What are some possibilities for solving problems that maybe you've
tried before, some strategies you used?") as well as the multiplicity of strategies that could be used to solve a
problem ("Are there different ways to solve problems?" "Do you agree that there are multiple ways to solve a
problem not just one correct way?"). Her interactions with the students on this task reflected how she uses
questions to reveal students' understandings  and then      "guide"   students to "success" on  the problem. The
following excerpt is typical of the kind of revealing and guiding questions she asks as well as her emphasis on
"making sense."

       Kim:      What if we separate these two numbers [2000 and 600], Mish.
                 What if we separate them by what their place value is?
       Mish:     What do you mean separate them?
       Kim:      What does the two really mean there?
       Mish:     Two thousand.
       Kim:      Ok, so if we do 2000, then what's the rest? Do you remember when we did expanded
                 notation?
       Mish:     Yes...
       Kim:      So, how can we divide all these numbers in half? What is half of zero?
       Mish:     Zero.
       Kim:      Yup, half of zero is zero. What is half of 600?
       Mish:     300.
       Kim:      You're right. How do you know that it's half of 600?
       Mish:     Because 300 plus 300 is 600...[Mish completes the problem.]
       Kim:      You're right, now tell me why.
       Mish:     Because that's in the thousands, that's in the hundreds, that's in the tens and ones, so
                 and I don't have anything to add up to these so they stay in, these two I don't change.
       Kim:      And you're going to add these two numbers together?
       Mish:     Yes
       Kim:      So we've figured out half and you're going to add the halves together. Does that
                 make sense to you?
       Mish:     No.
       Kim:      No? Well why doesn't it make sense. Think about it. You know you're right and I
                 just want you to think about why that's true.

       For Kim, teaching math involved questioning strategies that guide the students down solution paths:
"By [this] task, I felt really comfortable with my questioning strategy and I think I was able to do less work and
let the students do more work. Some of my favorite questions were: Where are you going next? How will you
know when you have your answer? What does that mean? When I was watching video, I think that these
questions turned the work back on the students and made them think about what it was that they were doing and
trying to accomplish. It also helped me understand them."
       Kim's    analyses   of  her  students'  mathematical     thinking   address   conceptual   and  procedural
understanding, though not mathematical processes such as explanation and justification. In her analysis of the
excerpt above, she wrote: "He was unable to come up with the correct answer, but the process he was using told
me he understands a few things; what half means, how division and subtraction work together, and place value.
He knew that half meant dividing something into two equal parts.     He told me right away that half of 600 is 300.
He also was using the division symbol and attempting to divide the large number by two. Later when I prompted
him to check his answer he did so by subtraction and subtracted his answer from the whole number.      When the
answer was not equal after subtraction he knew it was the wrong answer...I know he understands place value
because after attempting to divide 3,600 by 2, he broke the number down into 3,000 and 600.           He still got
confused because he kept putting the number back together before he knew he had found half of each."

                                                 1044  ·    © ISLS
                                               ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

        Kim viewed attending to student thinking in math as a teaching strategy for assessment of student
readiness:  "I have learned that this [analyzing student thinking] is all a very important process in teaching. I
have tried to incorporate this into each math class. I have found that I am able to assess student progress easier.
I can tell what they might need more work on and when they are ready to move on. It also helps in giving me
ideas for lessons."
        In  summary,    in  math,  Kim    focuses on   students'   problem-solving    as a  means   of  providing   her
information about progress and uses questioning to "guide" them toward the correct answer.             In science, she
attends to the nature and clarity of reasoning and ideas, largely so students can begin doing the same. In the
moment, she does not appear to be concerned about the specific directionality of the reasoning (although in
retrospective reflection, she comments on progress toward conceptual knowledge).
        Overall, for Kim, teaching science was about fostering sense-making and teaching math was about
guiding students in making sense. In math she valued reasoning toward a particular end--the problem solution.
In science the particulars of the end depended, in large part, on the emergent lines of student reasoning.         The
differences we  saw   in her   math and   science  attending   practices   with   students seem   to   coordinate with
differences we  see  in her  orientations to, and  relationships   with, the  disciplines  of science  and  math,  and
teaching in the disciplines. Kim identified science as one of her favorite subjects growing up, in part because
she said it was a "break" from other academic subject matters; she wrote of it as "a chance to explore, and have
fun doing it." Not unlike some of her peers, she drew on experiences outside of the classroom to inform her
views about science.  When asked to describe a positive learning experience in science, she wrote of exploring
the woods and streams around her house, and about excursions with her father.         The theme of exploration ­ of
things and ideas ­ is echoed in her own teaching. In mathematics, Kim's orientation shifted from a belief that
mathematical activity entails getting right or wrong answers and a focus on its instrumentality, and she began to
recognize and embrace the sense-making nature of the discipline. This was reflected in her practice and in her
practices of attending, which focused on fostering sense-making with her students while still retaining a strong
focus on successful problem-solving.
        In  both  disciplines,  Kim's practices   of  attending    to student  thinking  further  facilitated her own
conceptual knowledge and exploration. For example, in the science methods course, discussion of video clips of
elementary students doing science presented opportunities for engagement in disciplinary reasoning practices.
An example occurred during a conversation the pre-service teacher candidates were having about a transcript of
2nd graders were talking about whether a cup full of water and ice will overflow when the ice melts. Two
competing ideas were under consideration by the elementary-aged students: "Ice gets smaller when it melts so it
would be less water;" and "So the water holds the ice up and then when it melts it sinks to the bottom and
pushes the water out." (Restated as, "It sinks. It melts. And makes more water...and pushes the rest out."). Kim
asked her classmates, "Why does ice expand when it freezes?           What's happening?"    She made several moves
similar in nature over the semester. In both methods courses, she took up opportunities to analyze student
thinking as invitations to engage deeply in the conceptual content. As she attends to and explores student
thinking, she is making sense of student ideas and the phenomena about which they are reasoning, as though
they are part and parcel of the same thing.

Learning From Other Cases ­ Barbara and Natalia
Kim's trajectories in learning to teach math and learning to teach science were different than some of her peers.
Broadly speaking, Barbara's orientation to teaching math was a strong response to her own negative experiences
as a student in "traditional" math. She articulated that math teaching should be engaging and hands-on in order
to motivate students and support understanding. Barbara also articulated the importance of students learning that
there is more than one way to solve a problem. In her own mathematical activity, she was willing to engage the
tasks and discussions about the mathematics, but displayed a lack of confidence, deferring to others and joking
about her   competence.  Her   analyses   of students'  mathematical    thinking  attended    to both  conceptual  and
procedural  understandings   in a  detailed   manner,   and  her   lessons  provided  opportunities    for students to
cooperatively engage in tasks. However, in practice, she focused on getting students to a "right answer" through
leading questioning (which she described as "guided invention"); also, her teaching reflection revealed that she
was primarily concerned with students being "on-task" and enthusiastic and their arriving at correct answers.
        On the other hand, Barbara reported to "love science" and to want to "inspire" that same sentiment in
her students. Barbara minored in physics as an undergraduate and was the only student in the program who had
significant undergraduate education in science or math. In her methods class, she positioned herself, and was
positioned by others, as an expert in science. Peers often (physically) looked to her for explanations or to
confirm the (in)correctness of an idea. Her disciplinary view of science revolved around canonical knowledge.
Barbara believed    background  knowledge     was  a  precursor    to doing   the work   of   science, which   entailed
controlled  experimentation.   She saw    science as  a  difficult  subject to  learn because    students  "often lack
background knowledge" and were coming from homes where "parents are not comfortable with their level of
knowledge." On multiple occasions in the methods class, Barbara chose not to engage in scientific activity ­ in

                                                   1045  ·   © ISLS
                                                 ICLS 2010     ·  Volume 1

the sense making - because she didn't "know enough about people's background knowledge" and didn't want
"to give away answers". In attending to student thinking in her field placement, she focused on correctness of
knowledge, as articulated through use of appropriate terminology.
          The case of Barbara highlights that disciplinary background ­ and confidence - alone is not enough to
precipitate robust practices of attending to the substance of student thinking. Unlike many elementary school
teachers, Barbara   was     neither math    nor science     phobic.  In   science,  her academic    background       and  self-
proclaimed expertise influenced her (dis)engagement in scientific sense making and her focus in attending to
student thinking, or more aptly stated, student knowledge; knowledge was paramount to reasoning. In contrast,
in math, while comfortable, Barbara was not as confident. While she aspired to reform-based teaching and
learning, her teaching looked more traditional, with a focus on correctness.
          Natalia, our   final case  presented  here,   articulated    that math    should be    taught "as  inquiry   not  as
conclusion"   and  that  "discussion  and   experimentation      are   essential   with each   student  exploring    different
strategies and sharing..." Rich tasks and appropriate manipulatives are also important for "helping students to
understand and conceptualize abstract math concepts." She demonstrated strong mathematical competence and a
disposition toward inquiry in her own math activity. During the course, she began to situate her understandings
of math teaching and learning in her developing role as a teacher in a real school context, accountable to and for
her  students'  learning.   She was  concerned    with    allowing   students    to harbor   misconceptions     and  felt  that
exploration  should  be   followed   by   "closure"    in which    concepts   are   made   explicit through     a teacher-led
discussion of student-generated problem solutions. She was explicit about the need to address "efficiency" in a
climate of accountability and strived to find "balance" between exploration and direct instruction.
          Natalia wrote of science as "a process of discovery and developing knowledge and understanding about
the world," which entailed systematic observation and exploration.           At the start of the semester, she highlighted
as a hurdle that "students are not used to following the scientific method to create their own answers." Initially,
teacher  content   knowledge    was   important   for   "answering     questions",     fostering  "intelligent  debate",   and
identifying appropriate content goals. Substantive analyses of student thinking came easy to her. While her
analysis foregrounded students' conceptual ideas, she also noticed reasoning that strung the ideas together. She
viewed   her responsiveness     to  student thinking   as   a  necessary    means   to  help   students reason    in order  to
appropriate conceptual knowledge and achieve conceptual understanding. She valued ambiguity and "wrong
ideas" for information she could glean and as opportunities for students to reconcile competing ideas. Student
reasoning, thus, served as a pedagogical role to inform her teaching, and not necessary as a vehicle for her
students to do science.
          This case highlights the dynamics for a candidate who entered the teacher preparation program with
sophisticated   notions  of  disciplinary teaching  and     strong analytic  skills.   Natalia saw  immediate     benefits  of
attending to student thinking to further align disciplines and disciplinary teaching. This initial position allowed
her to meaningfully tackle both understanding and negotiating how these threads come together in the broader
context of schooling.     Over the semester, the alignment between her orientation towards the discipline and
disciplinary teaching became more refined. Contrasts in science and math teaching that emerged were rooted
in different contextual presses, such as high-stakes testing and degrees of prescription of the county curriculum.

Conclusions
This work    has begun    to explore  the  role of disciplines     (i.e., disciplinary  understandings,   beliefs    about the
disciplines, dispositions toward the disciplines) in learning to teach within and across the disciplines at the
elementary grade levels. As the cases of Kim, Barbara and Natalia reveal, practices of attending to student
thinking have disciplinary grounding and therefore should not be expected to share generic characteristics across
disciplinary contexts. The role that discipline plays in learning to attend to student thinking, and thus, learning to
teach, is important to understand, particularly for work with elementary school teachers. To support prospective
teachers' learning to conceptualize and enact attending to student thinking as central to teaching, we need to
better understand   how   their disciplinary    understandings     and    orientations  toward   teaching specific   to  those
disciplines interact with practices of attending to student thinking, including how, to what, and for what ends.
We have begun to identify dimensions that seem salient and dynamic. Our work suggests that teacher education,
particularly for elementary teacher candidates, should consider how the interactions amongst these dimensions
of teacher knowledge and practice can be leveraged to foster deep reconsideration of discipline and disciplinary
teaching. We see promise in better understanding these dynamics for informing teacher education.
          This work also closely relates to notions of teacher identity and problematizes the uni-dimensional
treatments   of  teacher  identity, particularly  with    respect   to    elementary   teachers.   While,    on   some   level,
prospective teachers are constructing identities as `teacher', as discussed in literature (Cohen, 2008), our work
suggests  that  elementary   school  teachers   may    be navigating      multiple  identities as `teacher'  (Smith,    2007),
specifically ones that reflect the disciplinary groundings of school subject matters. Policies geared to math and
science  teaching  and   common     "wisdom"    (i.e., constructs   of    "science  and math"    person   or strong   analytic
thinker) often assume close alignment between notions of mathematics and science; however, experiences with

                                                       1046  ·   © ISLS
                                                ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

and analyses of our cohort of pre-service teachers challenge this assumption, as the cases above demonstrate
significant differences across these disciplinary contexts.
         We situate this work in elementary teacher education and learning practices of attending to disciplinary
thinking. A criticism of elementary school teaching is that teachers often lack disciplinary expertise (Ball, 2000;
NRC, 2007; Seaman & Szydlik, 2007), which in the case of math and science, is often judged by the number of
completed math and science courses. We do not intend to argue ­ even implicitly ­ for subject matter specialists
at the elementary grade levels. While we agree that teachers often come into teaching with negative views and
varied success, we question the metric of course completion as an indicator of the depth and usefulness of
knowledge that can be reworked for understanding and supporting students' thinking (Ma, 1999).          Moreover, we
see promise     in  teacher education  helping  prospective      teachers establish a   stance towards   practices of
disciplinary attending that could contribute to more robust notions of disciplinary learning and understanding
and deeper conceptual understandings ­ for themselves as well as for their students. We see value in teaching
across multiple school matters and contexts. Knowing the student in multiple contexts, including across subject
areas, could provide useful insights for identifying resources students' bring to their subject matter learning. We
hope to pursue these connections in the future.

References
Atkin, J.M. & Coffey, J.E. Eds. (2003). Everyday Assessment in the Science Classroom.          Arlington, VA: NSTA
         Press.
Ball, D.    (1993). With    an eye  on  the  mathematical     horizon:  Dilemmas    of  teaching  elementary  school
         mathematics. Elementary School Journal, 93(4), 373-397.
Ball, D.    (1990). The  mathematical   understandings      that prospective   teachers bring  to teacher  education.
         Elementary School Journal, 90,     449-466.
Ball, D. L. (2000). Bridging practices: Intertwining content and pedagogy in teaching and learning to teach.
         Journal of Teacher Education, 51, 241-247.
Black, P. & Wiliam, D. (1998). Assessment and Classroom Learning. Assessment in Education, March, 1988, 7-
         74.
Cohen,   J. (2008).  "That's not  treating you  as a professional":     Teachers  constructing complex   professional
         identities through talk. Teachers & Teaching, 14(2), 79-93.
Darling-Hammond, L, Hammerness, K., Duffy, H., Lepage, P., Bransford (Eds.) 2007.             Preparing Teachers for
         a Changing World: What Teachers Should Learn and Be Able to Do. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass
         Inc Publisher.
Hammer, D. (1997). Discovery learning and discovery teaching. Cognition & Instruction, 15(4), 485-529.
Hill, H., Rowan, B. & Ball, D. (2005). Effects of Teachers' Mathematical Knowledge for Teaching on Student
         Achievement. American Educational Research Journal, 42(2), 371-406.
Erickson, F. (2007). Some thoughts on "proximal" formative assessment of student learning. Yearbook of the
         National Society for the Study of Education. G. D. Fenstermacher, National Society for the Study of
         Education. 186-216.
Kilpatrick,  J., Swafford,   J., &  Findell, B.  (2001).    Adding   it up:   Helping   children  learn mathematics.
         Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
Lewis, L. Parsad, B., Careym, N., Bartfai, N., Farris, E. and Smerdon, B. (1999). Teacher Quality: A Report on
         the Preparation and Qualifications of Public School Teachers. Washington DC:             National Center for
         Education Statistics.
Levin, D.M., Hammer, D, & Coffey, J.E. (2009).       Novice Teachers' Attention to Student Thinking. Journal of
         Teacher Education, 60(20), 142-154.
Ma,   L. (1999).    Knowing  and   teaching  elementary   mathematics:    Teachers'  understanding   of  fundamental
         mathematics in China and the United States. Mahwah, N.J.: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
National Research Council. (2007). Taking Science To School: Learning and Teaching Science in Grades K-8.
         Washington DC: National Academics Press.
National Research Council. (1999). How People Learn: Brain, Mind, Experience and School. Washington DC:
         National Academies Press.
Seaman, C., & Szydlik. J. (2007) Mathematical sophistication among preservice elementary teachers. Journal of
         Mathematics Teacher Education 10(3), 167-182
Smith, R. (2007). Developing professional identities and knowledge: Becoming primary teachers. Teachers &
         Teaching, 13(4), 377-397.
Sowder, J. T. (2007). Mathematics teaching and classroom practice. In F. Lester (Ed.), Second handbook of
         research   on   mathematics   teaching and  learning     (pp.  157-223).  Charlotte,  NC: Information   Age
         Publishing.
Stodolsky,   S.  (1988). The   subject matters: Classroom      activity   in math and   social studies. Chicago,   IL:
         University of Chicago Press.

                                                   1047   ·   © ISLS
