                                                   ICLS 2010    ·  Volume 1

                                   The use of a digital dance mat
 for training kindergarten children in a magnitude comparison task

             Ulrike Cress, Knowledge Media Research Center, Tuebingen, u.cress@iwm-kmrc.de
                             Ursula Fischer, Knowledge Media Research Center, Tuebingen
                         Korbinian Moeller, Psychological Institute, University of Tuebingen
                             Claudia Sauter, Knowledge Media Research Center, Tuebingen
                      Hans-Christoph Nuerk, Psychological Institute, University of Tuebingen

         Abstract: Previous studies demonstrated that basic numerical skills reliably predict children's
         future   mathematical       performance.    The   spatial   representation   of    numerical   magnitude,
         represented in the form of a mental number line, seems to be of particular importance. Our
         training   program    for kindergarten    children   used   a digital  dance   mat  as  input  device that
         required children to move their whole body to respond in a magnitude comparison task. By
         employing       such a spatial  embodied     training  method,   in  a  parallel randomized     cross-over
         design,    our  study  with  19 kindergarten    children    revealed  a significant  interaction  between
         training   condition   and  repeated   exposure   to   items,  implying   that  children  improved   more
         strongly in the dance mat than in the control condition. These results suggest that the use of
         digital media     to  train embodied    spatial  numerical    skills  may  be   more   effective  in basic
         numerical tasks such as magnitude comparison. We suggest that the involvement of embodied
         spatial codes, shared by the representation addressed by the task at hand, aids acquisition of
         task-relevant basic numerical skills.

Basic numerical skills
Arithmetic competencies are important cultural skills, comparable to reading and writing being a fundamental
requirement not only for school success, but also for coping with everyday life. At the beginning of their first
year of schooling, children's arithmetic skills already differ markedly, and these differences do have long term
consequences.    It has  been   repeatedly   demonstrated    that preschool   numerical   skills are  a good  predictor  of a
child's later arithmetic performance (e.g., Duncan et al., 2007). Findings so far suggest that arithmetic skills and
processing of    numbers     involve  various   basic numerical      competencies   that  are based   on   specific types  of
representations. For instance, the Triple Code Model by Dehaene (Dehaene & Cohen, 1995; Dehaene, Piazza,
Pinel, & Cohen,     2003)    suggested  three  types  of number    representations:   (1) the visual   Arabic  number   form
(written digits); (2) a verbal representation (written or spoken number words); and (3) an analogue or semantic
representation  of  number    magnitude     (representing  the  quantitative  meaning    of numbers).   Over  the years,  the
Triple Code  Model       has  been revised   several  times,  adding   among    other changes    a spatial representation   of
number magnitude in the form of a mental number line that is activated whenever a number is encountered
(Dehaene et al., 2003; Nuerk, Graf, & Willmes, 2006). This is illustrated best by the so-called SNARC (Spatial
Numerical  Association     of  Response     Codes)  effect that   is usually   observed   in  parity  judgement   tasks as  a
systematic interaction between the side of response and number magnitude. In a large number of studies (e.g.,
Dehaene, Bossini, & Giraux, 1993; Nuerk, Iversen, & Willmes, 2004a; Nuerk, Wood, & Willmes, 2005; see
Wood, Willmes, Nuerk & Fischer, 2008 for a meta analysis), subjects have been found to respond faster to small
numbers  by  the    left hand  and   faster to larger numbers     by the right  hand. Note    that in parity  judgement,  the
magnitude of the numbers as such is irrelevant to solving the task. Nevertheless, response patterns suggest that
perception of a number automatically activates a spatial mental representation of its magnitude, which cannot be
suppressed willingly. The development of the mental number line (as indicated by the presence of a SNARC
effect) is regarded as a key requirement for later arithmetic achievement (e.g., Bachot, Gevers, Fias, & Roeyers,
2005) and a precise spatial representation of number magnitude was found to be associated with better actual
mathematics achievement and a better ability to learn unknown arithmetical problems (Booth & Siegler, 2008).
Therefore, training   of   such basic  numerical    representations    may  be   a promising    approach.  However,   before
turning to the embodied spatial training program developed for the current study previous approaches on how to
train arithmetic capabilities shall be reviewed briefly.

Training arithmetic skills
Griffin, Case, and Siegler (1994) developed Rightstart, an intervention program for kindergartens. They were
motivated by their observation that children from low-income families enter school with less understanding of
mathematical concepts than their middle-class peers. In order to counteract this discrepancy and the resulting
disadvantage  in    these children's  later  school   career, the  authors  also   developed  versions  of Rightstart   (later
renamed Number Worlds) for older age groups (Griffin, 2003). The program consists of game-like exercises on

                                                       105    ·  © ISLS
                                                   ICLS 2010     ·  Volume 1

number   lines, number   comparison    and   the   semantic    representation    of numbers.    It also  contains   specifically
developed board games that children can play in pairs or small groups (see also Ramani & Siegler, 2008). These
board games train skills related to counting and visualizing the distance travelled by the figures, thus connecting
the semantic and spatial representation of number magnitude. Evaluation studies confirmed a positive effect of
the program on arithmetic capabilities of preschoolers (Griffin et al., 1994).
         In   2003,  Samara   and   Clements    developed      a   computer  program,    Building   Blocks,  for    children of
kindergarten  age   (see also   Clements,  Battista,   Samara,     &   Swaminathan,    1997;   Clements    &   Battista, 1989;
Clements    &   Meredith,    1993).  The     underlying    instructional     approach    is  genuinely    constructivist     and
constructionist (cf. Papert,  1980):   Children    are  expected     to  understand  numerosity     by  manipulating     objects
systematically.  The    computer   program    allows    a  variety    of manipulations    and   visualizations   that   support
children's  understanding    of numbers.   They    can  move       objects ­ comparable     to  the board    game    ­ and   this
movement leaves traces that visualize distances and thus the spatial and semantic meaning of numbers (see also
the  training program    number     race; Wilson     et al.,   2006a;    Wilson,    Revkin,    Cohen,  &  Dehaene,     2006b).
Summative evaluation of this program confirmed that the children's numeric achievement improved by almost 1
standard deviation (Clements & Sarama, 2007).

Embodied cognition
One  hypothesis  of  the present   study  is that  the  development      of  the spatial magnitude     representation    can be
supported  by   motor   processes.  This  assumption    is based     on  findings   on embodied     cognition.   In  traditional
theories of cognitive    science, perception   and   action    planning  were    regarded   as two  separate   processes,   and
cognitive  processes    were thought   to  be  exclusively     based    on  mental  representations.    The  possibility    of a
connection between cognition and action was largely ignored for a long time and thus, influences of action-
related processes on the perception of information, and the influence of perception processes on motor action
were highly underestimated. However, more recent embodied cognition approaches specifically address these
possible connections. For instance, Hommel, Müsseler, Aschersleben, and Prinz (2001) propose a framework
that is based   on  the assumption   that  the  contents   of    cognition  and  action  plans  are   encoded    in a  common
architecture of representation, and integrated in a joint task-oriented network.
         The   most  basic   elements  of  this  Theory    of  Event    Coding   (TEC)   are   so-called  feature   codes   that
represent all features of an event. These refer to different aspects or phenomena of a specific task which they
represent. Certain features do not refer specifically and exclusively to one stimulus or response, but process
sensory  input  from    various different  sensory   systems       and  modulate    activities of  different  motor    systems.
According to TEC, an event will activate several different feature codes, each of which modulates one specific
aspect of perception and action. Processes of perception and action interact in the jointly shared representational
medium of encoding when features of perception and motor functions overlap. Feature codes of both perceived
information and action plans are then integrated in the same representational medium when they become part of
an event code. Hommel and colleagues assume that event codes are accumulations of feature codes and that their
temporary   integration  will   depend    on  the  respective      context  and  task.  Many    features   of  events    in  the
environment exist in different sensory modalities, so restrictions of one modality may be compensated by taking
into account and integrating information from another modality. A task is thus solved more easily the more
features stimulus and response have in common. On this basis, we can make assumptions about the supportive
role of  motor   skills  in  learning.  We    expect    target-oriented    motor    movements,     combined      with  external
representations of stimuli (in this case: of numerical magnitude) to lead to an integration of the respective feature
codes. Thus, a joint representational architecture for number perception and motion will be built. While Hommel
and  colleagues  inferred   evidence   for   their theory    from    various   empirical  studies   they   did   not   take into
consideration   the specific connection    between   number        magnitude   processing   and   motor  skills, or   embodied
numerosity. However, various empirical findings do suggest that such a connection exists. In many cultures,
parts of the body ­ mostly hands and fingers ­ are used to represent numbers (cf. Menninger & Broneer, 1992).
Furthermore,    even adult   number  processing    appears     to  be  closely linked  to   finger  counting   (e.g.,  Domahs,
Krinzinger, & Willmes, 2008; Noël, 2005; Wood, Willmes, Nuerk, & Fischer, 2008; Fischer, 2008) and the
motor system of grasping (e.g., Badets, Andres, Di Luca, & Pesenti, 2007; Moretto & DiPellegrino, 2008).This
indicates that numerosity is not only represented mentally, but also bodily, and that a corresponding connection
between motor skills and number processing exists.

Media for embodied cognition
Different  new   digital media    provide  input   formats     that  enable  an  embodied      interaction   (Romero,    Good,
Robertson, du Boulay, Reid, & Howland, 2007; Dourish, 2001). Such interfaces have been developed in recent
years mainly for computer games. For example, digital dance mats require subjects to move their whole body by
stepping  on  different  fields  of the   mat  in  a   specific    succession.   Games   using     dance mats    have  become
widespread as part of the Sony Playstation® 2 (PS2) or Microsoft XBOX. Low-price versions of dance mats are
now available in supermarkets, and can be connected to any computer via USB. In addition, the so-called Wii hit
the market in 2006. This gaming console includes a handheld pointing device that does not work by activating

                                                       106   ·   © ISLS
                                                ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

defined fields,  but by  moving   a controller  which  contains sensors  detecting  movements,     thus registering the
player's position and actions. More recent systems of the same type detect movements and gestures via web
cams (Hoysniemi, 2006; Moeslund & Hilton, 2006; Fitzgerald et al., 2006).
         Comparable interfaces for embodied interaction have already been applied for games involving motion
(e.g., Reidsma, Nijholt, Poppe, Rienks, & Hondorp, 2006), but also for training of physical fitness (e.g., Hartnett,
Lin, Ortiz, & Tabas, 2006) and health education programs (e.g., Watters et al., 2006). In the U.S. dance mats
were used in more than 760 schools in the context of physical education, hoping to achieve a long-term effect on
the students' health behavior (Business Wire, 2006). To our knowledge, dance mats have never been used in a
specifically instructional context before. We believe, though, that this input device that is including spatial and
motor input components has potential for training the spatial representation of numbers. Additionally, digital
dance mats have a high motivational potential. Children have fun training and moving with them, and they are
thus particularly suitable for use in kindergarten and primary school.

The current study
Based on the considerations described above, we expected that an embodied spatial-numerical training realizing
shared  features in  both  presentation   and  response  format  should  be  more   effective   in leading to  a  more
pronounced   decrease   in  error  rates and  response  latencies.  The  specificities of   the training  program   we
developed will be described below.
         We trained children on a magnitude comparison task in two conditions using different presentation and
response formats. In the experimental (dance mat) condition, additional presentation of a number line and a
spatial response format that required motor input supported children's performance. We designed the control
(tablet PC) condition so that neither presentation nor response format involved explicit spatial information. In
both conditions, we used two types of presentation material: Arabic numerals and assemblies of squares, which
were presented inside a larger square to be perceived as an entity. Prior to the task, children were instructed not
to count the  squares  in  the assemblies  but  to estimate   how  many   there were.  To   avoid  giving  the children
perceptual cues, non-numeric factors of the assemblies were kept constant (as proposed by Xu & Spelke, 2000).
For example,    the  white surface  covered  by  black  squares and  thus,  the luminosity   of the   stimuli was held
constant in all items of the assembly variation.

Experimental condition: Dance mat
At the beginning of each trial, children stood on the central field of the dance mat. Tasks were projected onto the
floor with a data projector directly in front of them (see Figure 1). The presented tasks consisted of lines that had
either numbers   (0  and  10  or 0  and  20) or square  assemblies  (0  and 10   or 0  and  20  squares)  marking   the
endpoints. Between the endpoints, one number/square assembly was marked as a standard for comparison. The
children had to compare the magnitude of a second number/assembly that was presented above the line with the
magnitude  of   the  standard  and  to judge  whether  its position on  the line was   left or  right of the  standard.
Responses were given by stepping on the left field of the mat with both feet when the number's/assembly's
location was to the left and on the right field when it was to the right of the standard.

                              Figure 1: Experimental set-up in the dance mat condition.

                                                    107  ·  © ISLS
                                                ICLS 2010    ·  Volume 1

Control condition: Tablet PC
In the control condition, the same magnitude comparison task was administered in a different setup. The control
condition's function was to provide a comparable task that involved new media as well, but did not provide as
much   of a strong  connection  between     action and   perception.   Children   were  shown    two  numbers   that  were
vertically aligned on the monitor of a tablet PC. In contrast to the dance mat condition, children merely had to
touch the bigger number with an electronic pen. The same stimuli in pseudo-randomized order were used in the
control and experimental condition. Figure 2 shows the stimulus formats used in both conditions (separated by
type of presentation material) on the example of the comparison between 3 and 7.

                                             3                    A                        C
                                                                                  3

                      0                               7                10         7

                                                                  B                        D

Figure 2: Examples of stimuli in both types of presentation material in the dance mat condition (withA. Arabic
   numbers and B. square assemblies) and in the tablet PC condition (with C. Arabic numbers and D. square
                                                     assemblies).

Procedure and Design
We chose a parallel randomized cross-over design to provide all children with the possibility of training with the
dance mat, meaning that half of the children first received dance mat and then tablet PC training, while for the
other half the order of training conditions was reversed.
          The data presented in this paper were part of a large scale study. For reasons of brevity, the current
article will address the results of the magnitude comparison task only. In this large-scale study, we also varied
whether numbers/square assemblies had to be compared to a variable or fixed standard (with fixed standard
magnitudes being either 5 or 10). In the scope of this paper, we will focus on items on which magnitudes had to
be compared to a variable standard, because these items ­ unlike items with a fixed standard ­ were presented
twice each and allowed for an evaluation of children's improvement from the first to the second time of an
item's presentation. This  way,   we  could  analyze  whether     children  improved    similarly over training  in  either
condition or whether one condition yielded a higher improvement than the other.
          Each child received three training sessions with the dance mat and three sessions with the tablet PC,
which consisted of 64 to 72 items each. The items of the first training session of either condition consisted of
magnitudes  ranging  from   0  to   10, the items  of the   second   session   from  0  to 20,  and  every  third session
comprised half of the items of the first and half of the items of the second session (i.e., comparisons to a variable
standard  only). The six   training sessions were    carried out  individually    with  each  child on six different  days
within  a period of  three weeks.   Training   sessions  took  approximately      10 to 15 minutes    per child and   were
administered before  noon   in rooms    of  the kindergarten.     When    a child missed   or could  not  participate in a
training session, the missed session was ­ if possible ­ carried out on some other day.

Participants
Preschool  children  from  two kindergartens    participated   in  the study.  The   parents  of  27  children  gave  their
written consent. Because of prolonged illness or absence, 5 children dropped out of the study. Children were
randomly assigned to the two conditions, 11 children were first trained on the dance mat and 11 started with the
tablet PC.  Subsequently,  3 children's   data  sets had to    be excluded   from  the  analysis  due  to absence in  one
training session that could not be carried out at a later point or poor understanding of task instructions, leaving
the complete data sets of 19 children ­ 8 girls, 11 boys ­, aged between 60 and 79 months, for analyses. Mean
age of the children included in the analysis was M = 70.74 (SD = 6.06) months and did not differ between the
two experimental conditions.

                                                     108  ·  © ISLS
                                              ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

Results
To analyze the learning effects of training with the dance mat as compared to training with the tablet PC, we
compared  children's improvement   in accuracy (rates    of correctly solved     items) and   reaction times  between
conditions on items that were presented twice. Improvement was computed by subtracting performance of all
children at the first time of presentation from their performance at the second time of presentation separately for
each item. Since means of reaction times differed between the two conditions due to the very different response
formats, z-standardized reaction times were used to ensure comparability of conditions. Reaction times were
only computed for correct trials. Children's rates of correctly solved items were arcsine transformed prior to all
analyses to approximate normal distribution. We then conducted Analyses of Variance comparing each child's
improvement in accuracy and reaction time between the two conditions (F1). Furthermore, we analyzed the data
across items (F2). Where it was necessary, one-sided t-tests (i.e., t1 and t2, respectively) were used to evaluate our
directed hypotheses.

Children's Performance
First, we conducted ANOVAs on children's improvement in accuracy and on their decrease in reaction time with
condition and material (digits or square assemblies) as within subject factors. We further tested for the predicted
differences between the two conditions by means of one-sided t-tests. As expected, we found that children's z-
standardized reaction times decreased significantly more in the dance mat than in the tablet PC condition [t1(18)
= 6.19, p < .001, tested one-sided; ANOVA: F1(18) = 24.14]. Likewise, there was a significant main effect of
condition on rates of correctly solved trials [t1(18) = 2.14, p < .05; F1(18) = 2.94], indicating that children's
increase of accuracy from the first to the second time of presentation was larger in the dance mat than in the
tablet PC condition  (see Figure 3). We  found a  marginally     significant main     effect of material on   accuracy
[F1(18)  = 3.18, p = .08] that would have reached significance if tested one-sided, but no significant effect of
material on reaction times [F1(18) = 2.32, p = .14]; and there was no significant interaction between material and
condition in either accuracy or reaction times [both F1(18) < 1]. This lack of significant interactions implies that
the differences between   the conditions were not mainly     caused   by one     type of material, but   that children
improved similarly on items consisting of both digits and square assemblies.

Figure 3: Comparison of children's improvement in A. accuracy and B. reaction time in the dance mat and tablet
                                               PC condition.

Item analysis
For the Item analysis, repeated measures ANOVAs were conducted, this time with condition as the repeated
measures factor and material as the between subject factor. Again, hypothesized differences were examined by
use of one-sided t-tests. We found a significant main effect of condition on rates of correctly solved trials [t2(67)
= 2.66, p < .01; ANOVA: F2(1,67) = 5.54], as well as on       reaction times [t2(67) = 4.20, p < .001; F2(1,67) =
16.03]. Material was found to have a marginally significant main effect on accuracy [F2(1,67) = 3.48, p = .06]
and no significant main effect on reaction times [F2(1,67) = 1.74, p = .19]. Again, material and condition did not
interact significantly in either accuracy or reaction times [both F2(1,67) < 1].

Subjective evaluation
At the end of the study, we interviewed parents and kindergarten staff on their impression of the training. Both
groups agreed that the children enjoyed both the dance mat and tablet PC training, but that children had more fun
on the dance mat. Most children talked about the project at home and in the kindergarten; some of them spent

                                                  109  ·  © ISLS
                                                     ICLS 2010    ·  Volume 1

more time on mathematical tasks than before. Parents and kindergarten teachers had the impression that the level
of difficulty was adequate for the children's age and abilities, and the kindergarten staff approved of the idea of
using the dance mat for future projects.

Discussion
The present study showed that the magnitude comparison task can be trained in kindergarten children and that
improvement in the magnitude comparison task is larger when this task is trained using an embodied spatial-
numerical approach. Performance of children improved significantly more in the dance mat condition than in the
tablet PC condition on both reaction times and accuracy. This superiority of the dance mat training was found in
analysis of  children's   performance       and also  persisted     when  an  item    analysis   was conducted.    These   results
provide further support for Hommel et al.'s (2001) theory of event coding, indicating that the mental number line
representation is indeed more strongly activated when presentation and response format share more features. In
the present case mainly spatial attributes are enforced by motor movements and the presentation of the to-be-
compared numbers on a number line. Thus, in accordance with Hommel et al., features of stimulus and response
seem  to be   processed    as   parts of   the  same event    code.  Also,   the   lack  of  a  significant interaction    between
condition and material (digits or square assemblies) speaks for a generalizability of the positive effects of the
dance mat training across different types of stimulus material.
         It should also be noted that our computations yielded marginally significant main effects for material
(digits or square assemblies) on accuracy that would have reached significance had we employed a one-sided
test. However, we did not have any expectations as to which material would produce higher training effects than
the other. A trend was found for means of improvement to be higher on items consisting of digits than on items
consisting   of square  assemblies.      This  might  be due     to  the  distinct nature    of Arabic   digits that allowed     for
children to remember them more accurately than square assemblies, which children were instructed to process
only in an approximate manner. Thus, children might have remembered Arabic digits, but not patterns of square
assemblies.
         One    might  argue    that  the   tasks we  used    were   too  demanding      for  kindergarten  children,   since    the
German curriculum for the last year of kindergarten states that children should be able to recognize the regular
dice patterns. At the time they enter school, the children are thus expected to be familiar with the numbers from
1 to 6. The tasks used in the training program of the current study presenting magnitudes from 0-20 exceeded
this level by   far. However,      since chance   level  of   success   was  50   percent    on all the  tasks, children   did not
experience failure too often keeping their motivation at a very high level. Furthermore, the fact that significant
differences  in  learning  outcome      were   observed  between     the  two  conditions    when    items  were  presented    only
twice argues for the high potential of the dance mat as a training medium for basic numerical skills.
         A differentiation of which processes precisely differentiate the two training conditions should be the
aim  of  further studies.  In   the present    experiment,    the dance   mat  and    tablet PC   condition  differed   in various
features of  both  perception     and   action. The  dance    mat   condition  was    combined    with   presenting  the   tasks in
number line form, and children had to respond by using motor skills to move their whole body to one side or the
other. In the tablet PC condition, items were presented without external representation of the number line, and
the response format did not ask for any movement to the left or right. So, from the present study, the question
remains whether it were either differences of perception or action that led to the performance difference between
dance mat and tablet PC condition, or if it was the combination of these two features.
         Furthermore,     it would      be of  interest whether      the  improvements       in children's  performance    on    the
magnitude    comparison    tasks    may    be  transferable   to  other  domains   of    numerical   knowledge.    We   examined
children's   performance     in pre-  and   posttest transfer    measures,   namely      a number    line estimation  task  and   a
standardized    arithmetic   test  battery.  These   results, however,    will be     published  separately  and   will therefore
receive  no  further  discussion    in  this  paper. Seeing   as  children   improved      significantly  more  in both    transfer
measures in the dance mat than in the tablet PC condition, these transfer effects do enforce the assumption that
children profit more from the dance mat than training.
         Taken together, the present study showed that a digital dance mat can be used effectively for training of
the  spatial representation     of  number    magnitude.     Bearing   in mind     that  the spatial representation   of   number
magnitude    is an   important    basic  competence     that  reliably   predicts  later mathematics     achievement    (Booth   &
Siegler, 2008),    training   of   this  competency     would     be desirable     in preschool     education.  Moreover,    since
subjective ratings clearly favoured the dance mat over the tablet PC as well, we conclude that exercise with the
dance mat presents a possibility of such training that children experience as a highly motivating game.
         On a general level, this study indicates that the theory-guided use of modern media improves learning
even in basic tasks and thus supports the idea that multi-media tools can be an important mediator of learning
success even in kindergarten children. Moreover, this study lends support to the idea that the inclusion of bodily
experiences to represent abstract concepts may not only be helpful to represent those abstract concepts but that
embodied cognition also aids their acquisition.

                                                         110   ·   © ISLS
                                                    ICLS 2010   ·   Volume 1

References
Bachot, J., Gevers, W., Fias, W., & Roeyers, H. (2005). Number sense in children with visuospatial disabilities:
          orientation of the mental number line. Psychology Science 47, 172-183.
Booth, J. L., & Siegler, R. S. (2008). Numerical magnitude representations influence arithmetic learning. Child
          Development, 79, 1016-1031.
Business Wire (2006). Abgerufen am 11. August 2009. Konami Digital Entertainment and the State of West
          Virginia develop groundbreaking program that brings the health benefits of Dance Dance Revolution to
          every school in the State: http://findarticles.com/p/articles/mi_m0EIN/is_2006_Jan_25/ai_n26735500.
Clements, D. H., & Battista, M.T. (1989). Learning of geometric concepts in a logo environment. Journal for
          Research in Mathematics Education, 20, 450-467.
Clements,   D.  H.,   Battista, M.   T., Samara,    J., &  Swaminathan,      S. (1997).   Students'  development    of length
          concepts in a logo-based unit on geometric paths. Journal for Research in Mathematics Education, 28
          (2), 70-95.
Clements, D. H., & Meredith, J.S. (1993). Research on logo: Effects and efficacy. Journal of Computing in
          Childhood Education, 4, 263-290.
Clements, D. H., & Samara, J. (2007). Effects of a preschool mathematics curriculum: Summative research on
          the Building Blocks project. Journal for Research in Mathematics Education, 38, 136-163.
Dehaene,    S., &   Cohen,   L.   (1995).  Toward       an anatomical    and    functional   model  of  number    processing.
          Mathematical Cognition, 1, 83-120.
Dehaene,  S.,   Bossini, S., &    Giraux,  P. (1993).    The    mental  representation    of parity and number    magnitude.
          Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 122, 371-396.
Dehaene, S., Piazza, M., Pinel, P., & Cohen, L. (2003). Three parietal circuits for number processing. Cognitive
          Neuropsychology, 20, 487-506.
Dourish, P. (2001). Where the Action is: The Foundations of Embodied Interaction. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Duncan, G. J., Dowsett, C. J., Claessens, A., Magnuson, K., Huston, A. C., Klebanov, P., Pagani, L., Feinstein,
          L.,  Engel, M., &     Brooks-Gunn,     J. (2007).   School   readiness  and   later achievement.  Developmental
          Psychology, 43, 1428­1446.
Fischer, M. H. (2008). Finger counting habits modulate spatial-numerical associations. Cortex, 44, 386-392.
Fitzgerald, D., Foody, J., Kumar, D., Kelly, D., Ward, T., Markham C., & Caulfield B. (2006). Integration of
          kinematic   Analysis    into   Computer    Games      for Exercise.    In  CGAMES       2006  - 9th  International
          Conference on Computer Games: AI, Animation, Mobile, Educational and Serious Games (pp. 24-28).
Griffin, S.   (2003). Number      Worlds:  A   research-based     mathematics    program     for  young   children. In  D. H.
          Clements,   &  A.  DiBiase     (Eds.), Engaging     Young    Children   in Mathematics:    Findings   of  the 2000
          National Conference on Standards for Preschool and Kindergarten Mathematics Education (pp. 325-
          342). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum Associates, Inc.
Griffin, S., Case, R., & Siegler, R. S. (1994). Rightstart: Providing the central conceptual prerequisites for first
          formal learning   of  arithmetic  to   students  at risk  for school   failure. In  K.  McGilly  (Ed.), Classroom
          Lessons:  Integrating    Cognitive   Theory    and    Classroom    Practice (pp.   1-50).  Cambridge,   MA:    MIT
          Press/Bradford Books.
Hartnett, J.,  Lin, P., Ortiz,   L., &   Tabas,  L.  (2006).    A responsive    and  persuasive   audio device  to  stimulate
          exercise and fitness in children. CHI '06 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems.
          New York: ACM.
Hommel,   B.,   Müsseler,   J.,  Aschersleben,   G.,    &  Prinz,   W.  (2001).  The  theory   of   event coding    (TEC): A
          framework for perception and action planning. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 24, 849-937.
Hoysniemi, J. (2006). International survey on the dance revolution game. ACM Computers in Entertainment, 4
          (2).
Menninger, K., & Broneer, P. (1992). Number Words and Number Symbols: A Cultural History of Numbers.
          London:   MIT Press.
Moeslund, T. B., & Hilton, A. (2006). A survey of advances in vision-based human motion capture and analysis.
          Computer Vision and Image Understanding, 90-126.
Moretto, G., & di Pellegrino, G. (2008). Grasping numbers. Experimental Brain Research, 188, 505­515.
Noël, M. P. (2005). Finger gnosia: A predictor of numerical abilities in children? Child Neuropsychology, 11,
          413-430.
Nuerk,   H.-C.,  Graf,   M.,    & Willmes,    K.    (2006).   Grundlagen     der Zahlenverarbeitung     und   des   Rechnens
          [Foundations    of    number   processing     and   calculation].  Sprache,     Stimme,   Gehör:   Zeitschrift   für
          Kommunikationsstörungen, Schwerpunktthema Dyskalkulie, 30, 147-153.
Nuerk,   H.-C.,  Iversen, W.,    &   Willmes,    K. (2004).   Notational   modulation     of  the SNARC     and   the  MARC
          (linguistic markedness     association    of   response   codes)   effect. Quarterly    Journal  of Experimental
          Psychology, 57, 835-863.
Nuerk, H.-C., Wood, G., & Willmes, K. (2005). The universal SNARC effect: The association between number
          magnitude and space is amodal. Experimental Psychology, 52, 187-194.

                                                         111  ·  © ISLS
                                                ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

Papert, S. (1980). Mindstorms: Children, Computers, and Powerful ideas. New York: Basic Books.
Ramani, B. G., & Siegler, R. S. (2008). Promoting broad and stable improvements in low-income children's
         numerical knowledge through playing number board Games. Child Development, 79 (2), 375-394.
Reidsma, D., Nijholt, A., Poppe, R., Rienks, R., & Hondorp, H. (2006). Virtual rap dancer: Invitation to dance.
         In CHI '06 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems (pp. 63­266). New York:
         ACM.
Romero, P., Good, J., Robertson, J., du Boulay, B., Reid, H., & Howland, K. (2007). Embodied interaction in
         authoring environments. In D. Ramduny-Ellis, J. Hare, S. Gill, & A. Dix (Eds.), Proceedings of the
         Second Workshop on Physicality (pp. 43-46). Lancaster, UK: UWIC Press.
Samara,  J., &    Clements,   D. (2003). Building  blocks    of early  childhood  mathematics.     Teaching Children
         Mathematics, 9 (8), 480-484.
Watters, C., Oore,   S.,  Shepherd, M.,  Abouzied, A.,    Cox,  A., Kellar, M.,  Kharrazi,  H., Liu, F.,  & Otley, A.
         (2006).  Extending   the Use  of  Games  in   Health   Care. In  Proceedings  of  the  Hawaii   International
         Conference on System Science (HICSS '06), Kauai, HI. (CD-ROM Proceedings)
Wilson, A. J., Dehaene, S., Pinel, P., Revkin, S., Cohen, L., & Cohen, D. (2006a). Principles underlying the
         design of The Number Race, an adaptive computer game for remediation of dyscalculia. Behavioral
         and Brain Functions, 2:19.
Wilson,  A.  J.,  Revkin, S., Cohen, D.,   Cohen, L.,  &  Dehaene,    S. (2006b). An   open  trial assessment  of The
         Number    Race,   an adaptive  computer  game    for   remediation of  dyscalculia. Behavioral    and Brain
         Functions, 2:20.
Wood, G.,    Willmes,  K., Nuerk,   H.-C., & Fischer,  M.    H. (2008).  On  the  cognitive link   between  space and
         number: a meta-analysis of the SNARC effect. Psychology Science Quarterly, 50, 489-525.
Xu, F. & Spelke, E. S. (2000). Large number discrimination in 6-month-old infants. Cognition 74, B1-B11.

Acknowledgments
We would     like to thank Martina  Bientzle for  her  help  in this study, especially concerning    data acquisition.
Furthermore, we wish to thank the kindergartens Stuttgart-Birkach and St. Martin in Tuebingen-Hirschau for
their helpful and constructive cooperation in this study.

                                                   112  ·   © ISLS
