                                                  ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

   Software-Based Scaffolding: Supporting the Development of Knowledge
                              Building Discourse in Online Courses

                                       Nobuko Fujita, Christopher Teplovs
                   OISE/University of Toronto, 252 Bloor Street West, Toronto, ON, M5S 1V6,
                            nobuko.fujita@gmail.com, christopher.teplovs@gmail.com

         Abstract:    This  design-based       research  study   investigated    instructional  scaffolding    for
         knowledge    building   discourse     among participants    (n=17,  n=20)     in two  online   graduate
         courses.  In   particular, designs     of software-based      scaffolding  as    found   in  web-based
         Knowledge Forum's scaffold support feature were refined. Analyses of the student discourse
         data suggests that Knowledge Forum's scaffold supports offer a promising avenue for future
         design innovations to encourage knowledge building discourse. Results show that students
         increasingly used the scaffolds to focus their reading and writing of notes over iterations of
         the study. The proportion of scaffolds for knowledge building discourse increased during each
         iteration with   a corresponding      decrease in  the  proportion    of scaffolds   for expressing   an
         opinion   in the second    iteration. Finally, notes   with   scaffolds  contained   significantly more
         words   than  notes  without    scaffolds,  suggesting      that scaffolds  promoted     more   student
         reflectivity. Implications for formative assessment of student learning and knowledge building
         are discussed.

Introduction
In recent years, opportunities to enroll in online courses have grown substantially. During the fall 2004 term, 2.3
million higher education students were taking at least one online course in the United States; one year later,
during the fall 2005 term, this figure increased to nearly 3.2 million students (Allen & Seaman, 2006). The
primary mode of online course delivery at nearly 90% of U.S. higher education institutions is asynchronous
computer-mediated communication (CMC) (Greene, 2005). Asynchronous CMC typically uses a web-based
computer  conferencing    technology  (e.g.,   Blackboard,    Drupal,  Knowledge     Forum,    Moodle,   etc.) to  connect
distributed participants in a networked learning environment. Like distance education, CMC frees students from
time and space constraints; like face-to-face instruction, CMC affords interactivity (Kaye, 1989). Ideally, CMC
is used to create a "the kind of learning community that can arise in a good graduate seminar" (Hiltz, 1998). In
such educational settings, students may be able to engage in complex learning where they share, question and
revise their ideas to deepen understanding and build knowledge.
       Yet CMC is a lean medium for social presence crucial to perceptions of cooperation and trust necessary
to build a learning community (Palloff & Pratt, 1999; Preece, 2000). Thus, widely accepted models for teaching
in online learning communities focus first on establishing social connections between participants. For example,
Salmon's  (2000)   five-stage model   for  "e-moderating"       describes  the  progression   of  students  as they  move
through  the beginning    stages of  access    and motivation,    to online  socialization,   information   exchange   and
knowledge    construction,  and  ultimately     to development.      This  model    highlights    the importance    of   the
instructor's role in the earlier stages of creating an online learning community. Once a sense of community is
established, the instructor shifts the locus of control to the students, who are then able to engage in active
learning and collaboration (Palloff & Pratt, 1999).
        This study departs from previous studies by focusing on higher goals for social interaction in online
learning communities. Research indicates that critical thinking and knowledge construction rarely occur in these
educational settings (Garrison, Anderson & Archer, 2001; Gunawardena, Lowe, & Anderson, 1997; Kanuka &
Anderson, 1998). Previous studies on scaffolding dialogue for knowledge building have explored how certain
critical thinking types increase or decrease the length of discussion threads (e.g., Sorenson & Takle, 2005).
However this study takes an approach consistent with a knowledge building pedagogy (Scardamalia & Bereiter,
2003, 2006), rather than one informed by a critical thinking model. While many online studies have examined
social interaction and collaboration, less is known about how instructors may move students to the next step and
foster knowledge   building   discourse. Therefore,     the   purpose  of  this  study is  to investigate   what   kinds of
scaffolding embedded in the software and course activity structures can support the development of knowledge
building discourse in online graduate courses. As well, we argue that scaffolding is closely linked to formative
assessment (c.f., Shepard, 2005) and that can activate students to take ownership over their learning (Black &
Wiliam, 2009) in a way that is aligned with the knowledge building pedagogy.

                                                     1056   ·   © ISLS
                                               ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

Theoretical Framework
Social constructivist pedagogy emphasizes the importance of discourse in fostering deep learning, and the
importance of tools in mediating knowledge construction (Hmelo-Silver, 2003; Palincsar, 1998). Knowledge
building is defined as "the production and continual improvement of ideas of value to a community"
(Scardamalia & Bereiter, 2003, p. 1370). It is a constructivist approach that centers the curriculum on big ideas
and accords students with high levels of agency in working with those ideas (Scardamalia & Bereiter, 2008).
       Knowledge Forum, an extension of CSILE (Computer Supported Intentional Learning Environment)
software, is designed to support knowledge building. Students work in virtual spaces or "views" to develop their
ideas, represented as "notes." Knowledge Forum offers sophisticated features not available in other
conferencing technologies including "scaffold supports" (labels of thinking types), "rise above" (summary
note), and a capacity to connect ideas through links between notes in different views. These features provide
means to overcome the chronological sequence of threaded discussion, in which important ideas may be lost. In
addition, Knowledge Forum facilitates the collection of data that are amenable to analysis with a variety of
assessment tools.   These include behavioral and interaction  analyses (Burtis, 1998),  traces of vocabulary
development (Hewitt, 1999), social network analysis (Teplovs, Donoahue, Scardamalia, & Philip, 2007), and
semantic analysis (Fujita & Teplovs, 2009). Such assessments provide feedback to help students make progress
in their discourse.
         Many studies on knowledge building discourse have examined elementary science classrooms (e.g.,
Hakkarainen & Palonen, 2003; Bereiter, Scardamalia, Cassells, & Hewitt, 1997). These show that
CSILE/Knowledge Forum can support improved learning and knowledge building over time (Scardamalia &
Bereiter, 1994; Zhang, Scardamalia, Reeve & Messina, 2009). However, few studies have explored how to
support the development of knowledge building discourse in exclusively online higher education courses where
the participants are distributed across time and space and instructional scaffolding for knowledge building is not
provided off-line. The knowledge building teacher's role in this setting is one that helps students move beyond
the formation of social ties to the creation of knowledge.   This study offers a unique perspective by refining
designs of software-based scaffolding as found in Knowledge Forum's scaffold support feature to foster
knowledge building discourse in online graduate courses.

Methods
         Using a design research methodology (Collins, Joseph, & Bielaczyc, 2004), modifications to the
selection of Knowledge Forum's (KF) scaffolds were made within and across two 13-week online graduate
courses, which comprised two iterations of the study (Table 1).

Table 1: Design Changes to Knowledge Forum's Scaffold Across Two Online Graduate Courses

                                        Iteration 1                                    Iteration 2
Modification                Educational Applications of                Constructive Learning and Design of
                            Computer-Mediated Communication            Online Learning Environments

Knowledge Forum             Theory Building                            Theory Building
Scaffolds                   Opinion                                    Opinion
                            Idea Improvement                           Idea Advancement
                            Feedback

         KF scaffold supports are typically used as sentence openers that students use while composing notes in
the database. They function in similar ways as prompts in social networking applications like Facebook (What's
on your mind?) or Twitter (What are you doing?) by placing yellow highlights of thinking types into the text
that bracket segments of body text in notes. Scaffold supports go further than just prompting users at a generic
level. They are customizable by facilitators and, in some cases, students.  The two sets of scaffold supports that
are supplied by default ("Theory Building" and "Opinion") are more specific to knowledge building discourse
and argument than the more generic  prompts from Facebook and Twitter.      Scaffold supports are not dissimilar
to "tags" that are common in other Web 2.0 environments such as the collaborative bookmarking application
known as "delicious".  An important difference between the simple tagging available      through such sites and the
scaffold supports in Knowledge Forum is the ability to tag specific parts of posts and thereby indicate with
relatively high specificity and accuracy that part of the text that is being tagged. Moreover, advanced search
capabilities in Knowledge Forum allow users to search for specified text within a specified scaffold support

                                                  1057   ·   © ISLS
                                              ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

(e.g. find all the "My Theory" supports that contain the word "constructivism").
        In Iteration 1, only Theory Building and Opinion scaffolds built in to Knowledge Forum were available
to students at the beginning of the course. Later, in week 9 of 13 weeks, students took on the responsibility for
designing the customized Idea Improvement scaffolds as part of their discussion leadership (Table 2). These
scaffolds emphasize the knowledge building principle of improvable ideas key to knowledge building discourse.
In addition the researcher introduced the customized Feedback scaffolds in week 10 to help students provide
constructive feedback to each other.
        Changes to the scaffolds from Iteration 1 to 2 resulted from analysis of the students' learning journals.
The design researcher and the instructor addressed students' concerns for the constraint scaffolds imposed on
creative thinking and interpersonal relationships were addressed by combining the Idea Improvement and
Feedback scaffolds into Idea Advancement scaffolds in Iteration 2.

Table 2: Knowledge Forum Scaffolds and Scaffold Supports Used in Iteration 1 and 2

                                                             Scaffolds
 Scaffold   Theory Building          Opinion            IDEA IMPROVEMENT                   Idea Advancement
 Supports                                               (all caps in original)
            My Theory                Opinion            IDEA ADVANCEMENT                   Current statement of idea
            I need to understand     Different          WHAT DO WE NEED THIS               How idea is useful
                                     opinion            IDEA FOR

            New information          Reason             PROBLEM/QUESTION                   How idea could be
                                                                                           advanced
            This theory cannot       Elaboration                                           Problems/limitations
            explain
            A better theory          Evidence                                              How could we test X?

            Putting our              Example                                               This idea fits with
            knowledge together

                                               Data sources
Student discourse, online questionnaire responses, pre- and post-course assignments, and learning journals were
collected from participants (n=17, n=20) in two 13-week graduate courses taught entirely online using
Knowledge Forum (version 4.5.3). This study focuses on findings from the analysis of KF scaffold use in the
discourse data.

Results
Using log file data accessed via the Analytic Toolkit built in to Knowledge Forum, this study found patterns in
the students' use of KF scaffolds that affected the development of knowledge building discourse. First, there
was an overall increase in the total number of scaffolds used from Iteration 1 to Iteration 2, as shown in Table 3:

Table 3: Frequencies of Knowledge Forum Scaffolds Used in two Online Graduate Courses

 Course          Theory          Opinion          IDEA                         Total Number of    Total Number of
                 Building                         IMPROVEMENT/                 Scaffolds          Student Notes
                                                  Idea Advancement
                 f       %       f       %        f           %                f      %           f      %
 Course 1        128     42%     91      30%      87          28%              306    100%        907    100%

 Course 2        167     36%     200     43%      98          21%              465    100%        1058   100%

                                                 1058   ·   © ISLS
                                              ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

       Course 2 students used more total scaffolds than Course 1 students. Course 2 students also used more
Opinion than the Theory Building or Idea Improvement scaffolds than Course 1 students. A Pearson chi square
test showed a statistically significant difference between the two Iterations, !2 (2, N=771) = 14.46, p<.001.

Relationship Between Use of Scaffolds and Types of Scaffolds Used
To understand whether the types of scaffolds used in student notes changed over time within each course, the
frequencies of different types of KF scaffolds used were calculated for the first third and last third of the course,
excepting the first week and last week. These weeks were omitted because they were used as introductory and
evaluation sessions. When calculated, this analysis showed that Course 1 students used all of the scaffold types
more frequently in the last third of the course compared to the first third (Figure 1).

                 Figure 1. Types of Knowledge Forum scaffolds used by students in Course 1.

     In comparison, all three types of scaffolds were available from the beginning of Course 2. Promisingly,
the students' use of Theory Building and Progressive Discourse (Idea Improvement and Idea Advancement)
scaffolds increased and their use of Opinion scaffolds decreased from the first third to the last third of the course
(Figure 2).

                 Figure 2. Types of Knowledge Forum scaffolds used by students in Course 2.

                                                 1059   ·   © ISLS
                                              ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

Relationship Between Use of Scaffolds and Length of Notes
To understand the relationship between the use of KF scaffolds and length of notes, the mean word counts of
student notes with scaffolds and without scaffolds were compared. A paired samples t-test found that notes with
scaffolds contained significantly more words than notes without scaffolds, t (33)=3.626, p<.001.

Discussion
This design-based research study refined designs of software-based scaffolding as found in Knowledge Forum's
scaffold support feature to foster knowledge building discourse in two online graduate courses. KF scaffolds not
only metacognitively prompt students to focus their reading and writing of notes, but also allow them to tag
relevant parts of notes and search for ideas to improve them. Such a feature offers students, not just teachers, the
opportunity to take responsibility for accessing support as needed, customizing supports for local needs, and
obtaining some formative assessment of the progress of the unfolding discourse to deepen their learning.
Analyses of the student discourse data suggest that KF scaffold supports offer a promising avenue for future
design innovations to encourage knowledge building discourse.
       Finding that students used scaffolds for expressing opinions aimed at argument rather than scaffolds to
support knowledge building discourse aimed at explanation was disappointing, but not surprising given the
challenge of engaging students in this kind of discourse to promote complex learning online. Scaffolds can
guide students in complex learning by structuring tasks, but they can also problematize tasks by making them
more complex in the short term (Reiser, 2005).
       Over time within course discussion spaces, however, students increasingly used customized scaffolds to
support development of knowledge building discourse. In Iteration 2, students not only increased their use of
scaffolds for knowledge building, but they also decreased their use of scaffolds for expressing opinions. This is
a positive finding since using the Theory Building and Progressive Discourse scaffolds require students to take a
more active role in regulating their own learning as well as providing constructive feedback to peers.
       From a knowledge building perspective, a characteristic of a mature producer of knowledge is
"disciplined creativity" (Scardamalia & Bereiter, 2003). KF scaffolds help students to organize their own
thinking, writing, and reading of other's notes. This may promote disciplined practices for knowledge building
discourse. Unfortunately, some students in this study (35% in Iteration 1; 25% in Iteration 2) did not like the
"disciplined" aspect of creative knowledge work that scaffolds were designed to support and identified
constraints scaffolds posed for creative thinking and identified usability issues.
       Previous researchers (e.g., Hara, Bonk, & Angeli, 2000; Schrire, 2006) have suggested that the length of
messages is one sign of the depth of online student interaction and reflection on course readings. This study
found that student notes with KF scaffolds are longer than notes without them. Students might be reflecting
more when they compose longer notes with scaffolds and thus more effectively engage in knowledge building
discourse to advance knowledge in their online learning community.

Conclusion
In this paper, we explored designs of software-based scaffolds and course activity structures that encourage their
use to support the development of knowledge building discourse in online graduate courses. Through analyses
of students' scaffold use, this study found the following trends in the students' use of the Knowledge Forum's
scaffold support feature:
        ·   an increase in the use of scaffolds over iterations of the study
        ·   the proportion of scaffolds for knowledge building discourse increased during each iteration
        ·   the proportion of Opinion scaffolds for argument decreased during the final iteration
        ·   notes with scaffolds contained significantly more words than notes without scaffolds
       The students appear to be taking greater responsibility for their own learning by customizing and using
the KF scaffolds to make their online course contributions more meaningful. Qualitative analyses reveal that the
graduate students use KF scaffolds to work towards common understanding in discourse, but need
encouragement to expand the factual base and to test ideas to build knowledge (Fujita, 2009). Formative
assessment that is embedded in the software and tightly coupled to the learning (Collins & Halverson, 2009)
may help students overcome such barriers in knowledge building discourse. To this end, Knowledge Forum's
assessment tools offer ongoing and formative feedback to students as well as teachers and researchers to enable
them to deepen understanding of the unfolding discourse in the online learning community (Teplovs et al.,
2007).

                                                  1060  ·   © ISLS
                                                ICLS 2010    ·  Volume 1

References
Allen, I. E., & Seaman, J. (2006). Making the grade: Online education in the United States. Needham, MA:
        Alfred P. Sloan Foundation
Bereiter, C., Scardamalia, M., Cassells, C., & Hewitt, J. G. (1997). Postmodernism, knowledge building, and
        elementary science. Elementary School Journal, 97(4), 329-340.
Black,  P., &  Wiliam,   D. (2009).  Developing    the  theory   of   formative assessment.    Educational    Assessment,
        Evaluation and Accountability, 21, 5-31.
Burtis, J. (1998). Analytic Toolkit for Knowledge Forum. Centre for Applied Cognitive Science, The Ontario Institute
        for Studies in Education/University of Toronto.
Collins, A., Joseph, D., & Bielaczyc, K. (2004). Design research: Theoretical and methodological issues. The
        Journal of the Learning Sciences, 13(1), 15-42
Collins, A., & Halverson, R. (2009). Rethinking education in the age of technology. New York, NY: Teachers
        College Press.
Fujita, N. (2009). Group processes supporting the development of progressive discourse in online graduate
        courses. Unpublished Doctoral Dissertation, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON.
Fujita, N. & Teplovs, C. (2009, June). Automating analysis of collaborative discourse: Identifying idea clusters.
        In C. O'Malley, D. Suthers, P. Reimann & A. Dimitracopoulou (Eds.), Proceedings of the Computer
        Supported Collaborative Learning 2009 ­ Volume 2 (pp.162-169). Rhodes, Greece: International Society
        of the Learning Sciences, Inc.
Garrison,   D. R.,  Anderson,  T.,  &  Archer,  W.  (2001).    Critical   thinking, cognitive     presence and computer
        conferencing in distance education. The American Journal of Distance Education, 15(1), 7-23.
Greene, B. R. (2005). Distance education at higher education institutions 2000-01 (PEQIS 13) (No. 2005118).
        Washington, DC: National Center for Education Statistics.
Gunawardena,    C.  N.,  Lowe,   C. A., &  Anderson,     T.    (1997). Analysis   of    a global  online debate  and  the
        development   of an  interaction analysis   model      for examining    social    construction of  knowledge   in
        computer conferencing. Journal of Educational Computing Research, 17(4), 397-431.
Hakkarainen, K., & Palonen, T. (2003). Patterns of female and male students' participation in peer interaction in
        computer-supported learning. Computers & Education, 40(4), 327-342.
Hara, N., Bonk, C. J., & Angeli, C. (2000). Content analysis of online discussion in an applied educational
        psychology course. Instructional Science, 28, 115-152.
Hewitt, J.  (1999). The  Vocabulary  Analyser  for Knowledge       Forum.  Centre   for   Applied Cognitive Science,  The
        Ontario Institute for Studies in Education/University of Toronto.
Hiltz, S. R. Hiltz, S. R. (1998). Collaborative learning in asynchronous learning networks: Building learning
        communities   [Electronic   Version]. Invited   address    at "Web98".    Retrieved    February   27, 2010 from
        http://web.njit.edu/~hiltz/collaborative_learning_in_asynch.htm.
Hmelo-Silver, C. E. (2003). Analyzing collaborative knowledge construction: Multiple methods for integrated
        understanding. Computers & Education, 41(4), 397-420.
Kanuka, H., & Anderson, T. (1998). Online social interchange, discord, and knowledge construction. Journal of
        Distance Education, 13(1), 57-74.
Kaye, A. (1989). Computer-mediated communication and distance education. In R. Mason & A. Kaye (Eds.),
        Mindweave: Communication, computers and distance education (pp. 3-21). Oxford: Pergamon Press.
Palincsar,  A.  S.  (1998). Social  constructivist  perspectives      on  teaching  and    learning. Annual    Review  of
        Psychology, 49, 345-375.
Palloff, R. M., & Pratt, K. (1999). Building learning communities in cyberspace: Effective strategies for the
        online classroom. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass Publishers.
Preece, J. (2000). Online communities: Designing usability, supporting sociability. Chicester: John Wiley &
        Sons, Ltd.
Reiser, B. J. (2004). Scaffolding complex learning: The mechanisms of structuring and problematizing problem
        work. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 13(3), 273-304.
Salmon, G. (2000). E-Moderating: The key to teaching and learning online. London, UK: Kogan Page.
Scardamalia, M., & Bereiter, C. (2003). Knowledge Building. In Encyclopedia of Education (2nd ed.). New
        York: Macmillan Reference, USA.
Scardamalia, M., & Bereiter, C. (2006). Knowledge building: Theory, pedagogy, and technology. In K. Sawyer
        (Ed.), Cambridge Handbook of the Learning Sciences. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Scardamalia,   M.,  &  Bereiter, C.  (2007).  Fostering   communities      of learners    and  knowledge    building: An
        interrupted dialogue. In J. C. Campione, K. E. Metz & A. S. Palincsar (Eds.), Children's learning in
        laboratory  and  classroom   contexts:  Essays    in   honor   of Ann   Brown     (pp. 197-212).   Mahwah,    NJ:
        Erlbaum.
Schrire, S. (2006). Knowledge building in asynchronous discussion groups: Going beyond quantitative analysis.
        Computers & Education, 46, 49-70.

                                                   1061   ·    © ISLS
                                             ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

Shepard, L. A. (2005). Linking formative assessment to scaffolding. Educational Leadership, 63(3), 66-70.
Sorensen, E. K., & Takle, E. K. (2005). Investigating knowledge building dialogues in networked communities
     of practice. A collaborative learning endeavor across cultures. Interactive Educational Multimedia, 10,
     50-60.
Teplovs, C., Donoahue, Z., Scardamalia, M.,  and     Philip, D.   (2007). Tools for concurrent, embedded, and
     transformative assessment of knowledge building processes and progress. In C. A. Chinn, G. Erkens, and
     S.   Puntambekar  (Eds.) Proceedings of the       8th  International Conference  on Computer   Supported
     Collaborative Learning. New Brunswick, New Jersey: International Society of the Learning Sciences,
     721-723.
Zhang, J., Scardamalia, M., Reeve, R., & Messina, R. (2009). Designs for collective cognitive responsibility in
     knowledge building communities. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 18(1), 7-44.

                                                1062   ·   © ISLS
