                                             ICLS 2010     Volume 1

 Seeing Algebraic Thinking in the Classroom: A Study of Teachers'
                               Conceptualizations of Algebra

             Janet Walkoe, Northwestern University, 2010 Campus Drive, Evanston, IL, 60208,
                                          Walkoe@northwestern.edu

         Abstract: Ideas about how students learn algebra have shifted over the years. Reform
         curricula have been developed to address these changes. Teachers' conceptualizations of
         algebra play a large role in how they view and implement reform curricula. This paper
         explores teachers' conceptualizations of algebra and investigates how they draw on their
         conceptualizations in the moments of instruction through the use of new methods that
         incorporate teacher-selected classroom video clips. Data revealed that teachers' verbal
         descriptions  of   student algebraic  thinking    did  not  always   align  with  moments    of
         instruction they selected as providing evidence of student algebraic thinking.

Introduction
Algebra is seen as a critical subject matter for students. In particular, algebra has been identified as the
"gatekeeper" to advanced mathematics. Students need to have taken algebra in order to have access to
upper-level mathematics courses. Such courses can then lead to further opportunities such as admissions to
colleges and universities. Despite its importance, many students struggle in algebra classes (Kieran, 1992).
This has prompted inquiry into the question of how to effectively support student learning of algebra.
         Ideas about how students best learn algebra have recently shifted. Up until the last decade or so,
algebra  classes   emphasized procedural    activities such  as   symbol manipulation      over  more   conceptual
activities. In addition, procedural activities were generally separated from the conceptual sense-making
activities (Kieran,  2004).  This   was  in line with  the  "symbol   precedence"     view  of  algebra that most
textbooks presented. According to Nathan and Koedinger (2000a) the belief underlying this view is that
"arithmetic reasoning strictly precedes algebraic reasoning, and symbolic problem-solving develops prior
to verbal reasoning" (Nathan & Koedinger, 2000a, p. 209). In contrast to the symbol precedence view,
more popular today is an emphasis on the conceptual nature of algebra and of the importance of connecting
symbolic   and conceptual   learning (Kaput,  2008).   In  response  to this  shift, reform curricula   have been
developed that are more in line with current views of algebra and algebraic thinking. However, research has
shown that it can be difficult for teachers to teach reform curricula in the ways that they were intended
(Cohen, 1990). One reason is that teachers' ideas about algebra may not align with the goals of reform. In
this project, I investigate new methods for exploring teachers' conceptualizations of algebra and algebraic
thinking and how these conceptualizations can inform practice.

Teachers' Conceptualizations of Algebra
There is much discussion in the literature about what constitutes algebra and algebraic activity (Battista and
Borrow, 1998; Kaput, 1998; Kieran, 1996; NCTM, 1989; Usiskin, 1988). Kieran (1996) identified three
forms of algebraic activity: generational, transformational, and global/meta-level. Generational activities
include  generating  equations and    expressions   from   data,  situations, patterns  of numbers,   or  number
sequences. Transformational activity includes manipulating symbols following the rules of algebra. This
includes   typical classroom  activities such as   simplifying   an expression,  expanding     a polynomial,  and
solving  equations.  Global/ meta-level   activity includes  using   algebra  to solve  problems.  This  includes
modeling, problem solving, providing evidence, and generalizing.
         Traditionally, mathematics classes tend to give precedence to transformational activities. Such
classrooms rely on highly procedural activities such as symbolic manipulation and focus little attention on
more conceptual understanding that includes global/meta-level activities (Kieran, 2004). Recent shifts in
the teaching of algebra recommend that transformational activities no longer be distinct from conceptual
understandings. Therefore reform curricula have moved toward a balance among the forms of algebraic
activity, emphasizing conceptual activities such as generalization, argumentation, and justification (Kaput,
1998; Carpenter, Franke & Levi, 2003; Kieran, 2004).

                                                 1063      ISLS
                                               ICLS 2010     Volume 1

         Teaching algebra from a more balanced perspective can be difficult for teachers for a number of
reasons.   First, while  learning   algebra themselves,    most teachers  experienced      classes  that emphasized
procedures and symbol manipulation. As a result of this "dilemma of experience" (Doerr, 2004), teachers
tend to hold on to this view and focus on procedural knowledge in their classrooms (Menzel & Clarke,
1998; Nathan  &    Koedinger, 2000b; Stephens,   2008).    Second, because traditional methods are what we        find
in most algebra textbooks today, many teachers have not had the opportunity to explore a more conceptual
approach to teaching algebra. Even when given reform materials, teachers are often asked to implement
them without much guidance and they may end up interpreting the new materials in terms of their familiar
approaches to the topic (Sherin, 2002). This is reminiscent of Cohen's (1990) description of Ms. Oublier,
who interprets a reform curriculum in light of her traditional teaching methods.

Conceptualizations of Algebra in Practice
This paper seeks to understand teachers' conceptualizations of algebra and the relationship between these
conceptualizations    and teachers'   instructional  practices.  In    particular, the  goal  is to  investigate   the
conceptualizations that teachers draw on while teaching. This is somewhat of a challenge, however. One
way to explore a teacher's conceptualizations is through interviews where teachers are asked to explain
their ideas. We know, however, that a teacher's espoused beliefs do not always align with their teaching
practice (Cooney, 1985; Cohen, 1990). For example, Cooney (1985) describes an example of a teacher
who, when interviewed, said he believed problem solving was essential to mathematics learning yet, due to
a number of factors, did not incorporate much problem solving in his instruction. In order to explore the
relationship between teachers' conceptualizations of algebra and their practice, we need to look at both
espoused views and views as enacted.
         One way to gain information about a teacher's enacted views is to observe her class instruction.
However,    one   problem   with observing   a class  and    making  inferences    is that we do    not  know  if our
interpretation is the same as the teacher's. We might interview a teacher after class to try to access her
thinking during instruction, but she may not remember what she was thinking in the moment of instruction.
Many times teachers recall general things about a class based simply on overall feelings about how the
instruction took    place (Rosean,   Lundeberg,   Cooper,     Fritzen, Terpstra,   2008).   A  related   approach  to
exploring a teacher's practice is through the use of video.

Video to Explore Teacher Thinking in the Moments of Instruction
Video has been a valuable tool used to examine a teacher's practice (Lampert & Ball, 1998; Sherin & van
Es, 2005; Sherin, 2007). Video offers the advantage of allowing observers to watch events as they took
place instead of relying on memory or observation notes. This allows teachers the ability to "get back into"
the moment of instruction. However, while the use of classroom video gives us valuable insights, it raises
questions about whether a teacher's attention to student thinking after the fact is different from her attention
in the moment of instruction. Relying on classroom video may draw a teacher's attention to things that they
did not notice in the moments of instruction. Ainley and Luntley (2007) used video as a way to access
teachers' in-the-moment reasoning. As they observed, however, "in some interviews, the effect of watching
the video was to draw attention to aspects of the classroom that the teacher had previously been unaware of,
rather than to help recall their perceptions of the lesson" (p. 9). So we cannot always be sure an interview
based on classroom video taps into what a teacher was thinking while she was teaching.
         To address this issue, new methods have been explored that make use of a camera that allows a
teacher to record moments that catch her attention while she is teaching (Sherin, Russ, Sherin, & Colestock,
2008). This allows access to in-the-moment noticing that was not available before. Sherin, Russ, Sherin, &
Colestock (2008) piloted the Camwear 100 (Reich, Goldberg, Hudek, 2004) that allows teachers to capture
short video clips while they are teaching. It involves a small camera a teacher can wear on her person while
she is teaching. When the teacher presses the record button, the camera captures the previous 30 seconds
and saves it to a small digital video file to be viewed later. Using this technology allows me to study
teachers' in-the-moment thinking in a way that has only recently become possible. By asking a teacher to
press  the button   while teaching,   I can  identify moments    the   teacher was    attending  to in   the midst of
instruction and can save these moments to discuss later.
       One question that might arise with this method is whether using this technology actually allows
access to a teacher's in-the-moment noticing or whether it instead prompts an ad-hoc development of the
vision of  what    is going on   at the time.  Sherin, Russ,   and  Colestock   (in   press) provide    evidence  that

                                                  1064       ISLS
                                            ICLS 2010     Volume 1

interviewing a teacher about the clips they captured using this technology can in fact bring teachers back to
the moment and does help them talk about their thinking during instruction.
      In this study, I make use of this methodology to create a more complete picture of how teachers'
conceptualizations of algebra inform a teacher's practice. By using methods that allow access to teacher-
selected classroom video, I can identify the moments a teacher notices while teaching. I use information
about what teachers notice and how they reflect on these moments, in addition to classroom observations,
to help better explore their ideas about algebra and how they draw on these ideas in the moments of
instruction.

Methods
This study explored high school teachers' ideas about student algebraic thinking. Four high school algebra
teachers who teach in a local urban district volunteered to participate in this study. Two of the teachers,
Dana and Maggie, taught from a traditional curriculum. Maggie taught ninth grade algebra and Dana taught
eleventh grade algebra. Their teaching experience was four and nine years respectively. Nancy and Richard
taught from a reform curriculum. Similar to the other pair, Nancy taught ninth grade algebra and Richard
taught eleventh grade algebra. Their teaching experience was thirteen and seven years respectively. The
traditional curriculum espoused a symbol precedence view whereas the reform curriculum placed a focus
on student sense-making and emphasized the conceptual nature of algebra. The data consists of interviews,
class observations, and selected excerpts of instruction chosen by the teachers.

The study protocol and instrumentation

Pre-observation interview
Each teacher   participated in a pre-observation interview   designed   to investigate his or her ideas   about
algebra and algebraic thinking. The pre-interview had two sections, the general question section and the
concrete student response section. Each section of the interview lasted around 20 minutes. The general
question section consisted of questions about the teacher's ideas about algebra. I asked direct questions to
try to get a sense of the teacher's ideas about algebraic thinking. An example of a question from this phase
was, "What do you mean when you say that you want to get students to think algebraically?" In the student
response section, I showed the teacher sample student responses to problems and asked the teacher whether
he or she thought the student was thinking algebraically based on the solution presented.

Classroom observation
The Camwear 100 is a small, portable camera developed by Dejaview (Reich, Goldberg, & Hudek, 2004).
When the camera is on it continually records and erases footage in a loop mode until the "record" button is
pushed.  When the user presses the record button, the camera saves the preceding 30 seconds. These clips
can be downloaded, saved and viewed on a computer. I videotaped each classroom session from the back of
the room. During the session, I asked teachers to wear the camera while teaching. I asked the teachers to
press the record button whenever they saw evidence that their students were thinking algebraically.

Post-observation interview
After the classroom observation, I interviewed the teachers and asked them about each clip they captured
and why they thought their students were thinking algebraically in each clip. I wanted to understand the
nature of student thinking the teachers were paying attention to while they were teaching. Although I
cannot claim that the camera is a direct window into the teachers' thinking, I can use the clips the teacher
captured as  a slice of evidence  of  what they  were   paying   attention to while they were   teaching.  My
intention for the post-interview was to help clarify or provide additional insight into the moments the
teacher  captured   and why    those moments  stood     out to   the teacher.  Furthermore,  it would   permit
triangulation with the pre-interviews in order to gain a better understanding of the teachers' ideas about
algebraic thinking.

Data analysis
In the first stage the type of activity the students were engaged in during the clips was coded.    This was
done by viewing the clip in the context of the whole class video that had been taken from the back of the
room. This allowed me to see the context of each clip in the larger landscape of the class activities. There

                                                1065      ISLS
                                              ICLS 2010     Volume 1

were two broad codes, procedural manipulation and conceptual. The procedural manipulation code was
applied when the student or students in the clip were in the midst of solving a symbolic algebra problem or
discussing how they had solved the problem.        An example is when Maggie asked her students to compute
the side length of a triangle using the Law of Sines. The conceptual code was applied when the student or
students in the clip were involved in a larger sense-making activity. An example is when the students in
Richard's class extended a problem he asked them to do and discussed whether the procedures could be
generalized from two dimensions to three or more dimensions and if so, what it might look like.
         Then the post interview in which each teacher discussed the reasons for capturing each clip was
reviewed.  In  this first pass,  I was able   to distinguish between   the  clips  the  teachers had  a reason  for
capturing and those they did not.     It turned out that in a few cases, upon further reflection of the clip, the
teacher decided that he or she would not consider the thinking the students were engaged in during the clip
to be algebraic so those clips were removed from the next stage.
         In the third stage the moments the teacher captured and the reasons they gave for capturing that
moment were coded. The unit of analysis was the teacher's reason for capturing the clip. I was interested in
why the teacher thought the student or students in the moment they captured were thinking algebraically. I
engaged in the process of open coding where I looked at some of the teachers' responses and came up with
some categories.    I continued with these categories and the main reasons for identifying algebraic thinking
that emerged were students (1) making connections, (2) generalizing, (3) justifying, articulating or testing,
(4) understanding   rules  or   properties of algebraic   structures, (5)  manipulating   symbols    or solving  an
equation, and (6) knowing or following rules of algebra. The first four were considered conceptual reasons
and the last two were considered procedural reasons. Each teacher's response was assigned one code. After
coding the teachers' reasons for capturing clips, I made a table containing a summary of the information. I
looked for patterns in each teacher's responses. I also looked for patterns across teachers.
         In the fourth stage I reviewed the pre-interviews. I was curious about whether or how ideas that
emerged in the pre-interviews influenced the moments the teacher captured and how the teacher talked
about those moments.       I was   interested in each  teacher's   ideas   about algebra, goals  for students,  and
feelings about their curriculum that emerged in the interviews. The analysis of the pre-interviews took
place in three steps. In the first step, I segmented the transcripts and identified which portions dealt with
ideas about algebra, goals for students, and thoughts on the curriculum. In the second phase, I looked at all
the segments having to do with each of the three categories and I identified the central idea the teacher
discussed in those segments. I did this iteratively and came up with a set of central themes the teacher
discussed. In the last stage, I identified whether the themes corresponded with procedural or conceptual
ideas about algebra.
         Finally, I reviewed the class videos and created a summary. In the summary, I included three
aspects of  the class and    the structure of  the lesson.  They   were    the way  the class  was   organized, the
mathematical topic that was covered, and the types of problems the students were asked to work on.

Results and Discussion
I found  that  two  teachers'   espoused   ideas  about  algebra   aligned  with  the  clips they  captured in  the
classroom, therefore adding evidence to their conceptualizations of algebra as described in their interviews.
One of the teachers, Maggie, held a symbolic view of algebra and this was consistent in her pre-interview
and in the clips she captured and the way she discussed them in the post-interview. For example, in one
clip, while Maggie    was  presenting  a   problem  on  the  overhead    a student volunteered   a solution to  the
problem. Maggie captured the clip and when asked why she captured the clip in the post-interview she
responded, "(the student) was doing basic problem solving equations. They were solving for x. Solving for
the variable."
         Another teacher, Nancy held a conceptual view of algebra and this was consistent with the way
she discussed algebra in the pre-interview and in the clips she captured and discussed in the post-interview.
In one of Nancy's captured clips a student was explaining why he thought the quadratic function the class
was graphing would not "bounce" at zero. When asked about the clip in the post-interview said she thought
the student was thinking algebraically because he understood the properties of parabolic functions and
understood how the graph should look. He understood how symmetry was connected to the shape of the
graph and saw how the graph related to the equation.
         While  Maggie     and   Nancy  captured   clips  that supported    the  ideas  that emerge  in  their  pre-
interviews, the other two teachers were less consistent in the way they talked about algebra in the pre-
interview and the clips they captured while teaching.

                                                  1066      ISLS
                                             ICLS 2010     Volume 1

Dana
Dana taught eleventh grade algebra from a traditional curriculum. She talked about algebra from both a
symbol manipulation and conceptual point of view in the pre- interview. When she discussed the clips she
captured in class, however, she discussed 8 of the 11 clips with a focus on symbol manipulation.
         The aspect of student thinking that stood out to Dana was the students' facility with the symbols
and rules. Even though this would appear to be evidence that Dana's conceptualizations of algebra are
dominated by algebraic procedures and symbol manipulation, her pre-interview told a different story.
         The primary theme that emerged in Dana's pre-interview was that she believed there were two
types of algebra,  school  algebra and more   "sophisticated   algebra"  that  is not taught  in schools. When
presented with a student's less traditional, more conceptual solution in the pre-interview, she commented,
"(it's) logical reasoning. And it's algebra but it isn't the kind of thing that gets taught... explicitly taught."
In response  to  another student's similar  solution   she  said, "(the solution) is  more logic  than...official
algebra. But I still think they're a thinking person's approach to the problem... yeah, I think that's algebra.
It's just not the rote algebra we have taught." She continued, "We teach them algorithms so they can
develop that. I think (the solution the student had is) really sophisticated. But this (pointing to a more
symbolic answer) is what I teach."    So Dana is capable of recognizing two types of algebraic thinking-
procedural   and conceptual  algebraic thinking.  In   the  classroom,   however,  she  tends to  focus   on the
procedural aspects of algebraic thinking. For example, she captured a moment in her class in which a
couple of students were trying to explain why negative numbers are not in the domain of the log function.
In the post-interview she said that she thought the students were thinking algebraically because they were
"defining how you do algebra" and they were discussing the rules of the game. Instead of focusing on the
conceptual aspects of the conversation, she focused on the students' knowledge of the rules. In another clip
she captured a student answering a problem she posed on the overhead projector. The problem had more
variables than the previous problems had. Dana said the student was thinking algebraically because she was
able to manipulate the symbols to solve the more difficult type of problem. She commented:

         ...(some students) may have said `... there are so many pieces here, how do I plug this
         into where it goes and this into where it goes? I've got four pieces and I've only got three
         slots, what am I going to do?' So I was relieved to see that most of (the students in this
         class) just looked at it and went, `oh', and just did it. And saw that it was actually a
         simple problem. It's a little bit rote, I mean I've got- here's this equation and here's this
         equation and here's how you transform them. It may not be super meaningful, but... but
         it's algebra (laughs).

Her focus was primarily on the students' realization that they could manipulate this problem as they had
done with others in the past. She did not focus on the student's conceptual understanding of the problem.
Overall, Dana tended to focus on students' knowledge and manipulation of the rules of algebra during
instruction.
         Dana exhibited dual views of algebraic thinking in the pre-interview. One is more conceptual and
she believes is not the type they explicitly teach in schools. The other is more procedural and is emphasized
in her curriculum. Even though she is capable of recognizing the more conceptual algebraic thinking she
did not use that to inform the moments she captured in class or the way she discussed those moments. She
could have discussed the same clips she captured in a more conceptual way. In the next case, we will see an
example  of  a  teacher who,  similar to Dana,  primarily    captured   clips where  students were  engaged   in
procedural activity but who discussed them in a more conceptual way.

Richard
Richard taught eleventh grade algebra from a reform curriculum. The students' desks were arranged in
groups and they spent a large part of the class working in their groups. The class started with a set of five
problems that involved factoring and expanding polynomials, a highly symbolic type of problem. For the
first 30 minutes of class the students worked on these opening problems in groups and then five students
presented their solution to one of the problems to the class on a whiteboard. For the remainder of the class
period, the  topic shifted to   probability and students    discussed   more   open-ended  problems   from   the
curriculum in groups. Occasionally groups would present their solutions to the problems.

                                                1067       ISLS
                                               ICLS 2010     Volume 1

         Richard captured a total of 10 clips in which he saw his students thinking algebraically. All but
three of the clips were captured during the first 30 minutes of class when the class was working on the
symbolic algebra problems. Richard's ideas about algebra and the symbolic nature of algebra prompted him
to capture most of the clips where students were working through problems with symbols and manipulating
expressions or equations using algebraic structures. For example, he captured one clip while listening to a
groups' presentation of their solution to one of the symbolic problems he posed at the beginning of class.
However, when asked why he thought he saw his students thinking algebraically in the clips, he discussed
nine of  the ten   clips in terms of  students'   sense-making    and  only one   of  them was   discussed  from  a
procedural standpoint. For example, Richard captured the clip of students symbolically solving a problem,
yet when he discussed the clip further, he said that the student was thinking algebraically, not because of
symbol use, but because of the students' "high-level understanding of exponents". Richard's focus went
beyond mere knowledge of the rules to a concern with students' understanding and sense-making. When he
discussed the clip, he did not mention the symbol manipulation or procedures but focused on the depth of
the student's understanding.
         I found it interesting that most of the clips were captured during the very symbolic algebraic part
of the lesson yet he discussed most of them from a conceptual standpoint. I would have thought that if he
limited his attention to the traditional algebra problems, he might focus on the symbolic or procedural
nature of the  students'    thinking, as Dana   and Maggie     did.  Why   did  Richard   discuss procedural   clips
differently than the other two teachers? What lead to his focus on the conceptual nature of his students'
thinking? I turn to Richard's pre-interview to answer some of these questions.
         The  theme   that  emerged    from  Richard's     pre-interview   was  the  dual nature  of his goals  for
students. Because his goals were influenced by both his pre-teaching experiences and his curriculum, he
had  two  distinct goals  for his students.  He   described   one   of his goals  for student learning   as helping
students master as much of the content as they could. This idea seemed to drive many of the clips he
captured. This idea of mastery of the concepts seems to me to be in line with a more procedural idea of
algebra and algebraic thinking.
         Richard's learning goals for students seemed to be influenced equally by his ideas about algebra
and the reform curriculum he uses. When I asked him about his goals for students, he answered, "I think
that I'm probably a product of this curriculum. I'm not saying I know what they were thinking but I know
my opinion is highly influenced by what I taught over the past five years." His curriculum emphasizes the
conceptual nature of student thinking. The dual nature of Richard's goals for students becomes apparent
when he talks about his experiences.
         Richard's ideas about algebra and the curriculum influenced each other, however they were also in
conflict with each other.   There was kind of a trade-off, back-and-forth kind of interaction between the two
and how they would affect his learning goals for students.        His preconceived ideas about algebra affected
the way he viewed the curriculum. He appreciated the conceptual nature of the curriculum but also believed
it needed to be supplemented with more procedural material. On the other hand, the curriculum affected his
ideas about algebra. The dual nature of his influences was apparent again when he said, "I also think that,
however...that (the curriculum) is much more on the `it's really important to conceptualize and understand
end of the spectrum' than `let's do these equations and understand'.        You know? So I feel like I'm kind of
trying to bridge the two." So his ideas about algebra before he started teaching influenced how he worked
with the curriculum and the curriculum he uses influenced his preconceived ideas about algebra. Both
factors were influential in his goals for students. This dichotomy might explain the fact that even though
Richard tended to record clips in which students were involved in procedural activities, he focused on the
deeper, conceptual understanding the students exhibited.
         Richard's preconceived ideas about algebra were focused on procedures and skills and he believed
that the probability lesson might not provide many instances of this type of thinking. The fact that all but
one of the clips he captured was from the part of class where students were engaged in manipulating
symbols might illustrate his need for symbols and equations as signifiers of algebraic thinking. On the other
hand,  influenced  by    curriculum   he teaches, when     he discussed    the clips he captured,  he did   so in a
conceptual way, meaning that he did not discuss the symbol manipulation. Instead he discussed the deeper,
conceptual thinking his students were engaged in. Dana also captured clips where students were engaged in
manipulating symbols, but when she talked about them, she discussed symbol manipulation and following
procedures as the primary reason for identifying the students' thinking as algebraic.

                                                  1068       ISLS
                                             ICLS 2010     Volume 1

Conclusion
Using a variety of methods allows us to draw a more complete picture of teachers' conceptualizations of
algebra. In particular by using a video camera that allows teachers to capture footage in the moments of
instruction, I was able to go beyond what is typically available through interviews and classroom video
alone. Classroom activity is complex and watching video of an entire class does not necessarily give us
insight into what a teacher was attending to while they were teaching. However, allowing a teacher the
ability to capture and save video clips in the moments of instruction has the potential to give us this insight.
Furthermore, interviewing the teacher about the clips they captured allows us access to the teacher's insight
about the moment they captured and why that moment stood out to them.
         I also extended   prior  research by exploring    the  relationship  between teachers'  professed and
enacted views about algebra in particular. In line with previous research that has noted how difficult it can
be to balance procedural and conceptual views I found that teachers continue to struggle with this dilemma.
         In this study I showed that teachers can hold more than one idea about algebra and it is difficult to
predict which   aspects of  their conceptualizations   they   will draw   on  from  moment  to  moment   while
teaching. If we continue to explore teachers' ideas using methods described in this study we may be better
able to understand their conceptualizations- where teachers' ideas come from and how they drive what a
teacher notices in the classroom. This, in turn will help us facilitate teachers' transitions to a more balanced
approach to algebra teaching that includes conceptual as well as procedural activity.

References
Ainley, J., Luntley, M. (2007). The role of attention in expert classroom practice. Journal of Mathematics
         Teacher Education, 10, 3-22.
Battista, M, & Borrow, C. (1998). Using spreadsheets to promote algebraic thinking. Teaching Children
         Mathematics, 4(8), 470-478.
Carpenter, T.P., Franke, M.L., & Levi, L. (2003). Thinking mathematically: Integrating arithmetic and
         algebra in the elementary school. Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann.
Cohen, D. K. (1990). A revolution in one classroom: The case of Mrs. Oublier. Educational Evaluation and
         Policy Analysis, 12, 311-329.
Cooney, T. J. (1985). A beginning teacher's view of problem solving. Journal for Research in Mathematics
         Education, 16, 324 - 336.
Doerr, H.M. (2004). Teachers' knowledge and the teaching of algebra. In K. Stacey, H. Chick, & M.
        Kendal (Eds.), The future of the teaching and learning of algebra, the 12th ICMI study (pp. 267-
        290). Boston: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Kaput, J. (1998). Transforming algebra from an engine of inequity to an engine of mathematical power by
         "algebrafing" the K-12 curriculum. In S. Fennel (Ed.), The nature and role of algebra in the K-14
         curriculum:  Proceedings    of  a  national   symposium     (pp. 25-26).   Washington,  DC:  National
         Research Council, National Academy Press.
Kaput, J.J. (2008). What is algebra? What is algebraic reasoning? In J.J. Kaput, D.W. Carraher, & M.L.
         Blanton (Eds.), Algebra in the early grades. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Kieran, C.  (1992).  The   learning and teaching  of   school  algebra.   In D.A.  Grouws (Ed.), Handbook   of
         research on mathematics teaching and learning (pp. 390-419). New York: Macmillan.
Kieran, C. (1996). The changing face of school algebra. In C. Alsina, J. Alvarez, B. Hodgson, C. Laborde,
         & A. Perez (Eds.), 8th International Congress on Mathematical Education: Selected lectures (pp.
         271-290). Sevilla, Spain: S.A.E.M. Thales.
Kieran, C. (2004). The core of algebra: Reflections on its main activities. In K. Stacey, H. Chick, & M.
         Kendal (Eds.), The future of the teaching and learning of algebra, the 12th ICMI study (pp. 21-33).
         Boston: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Lampert, M., & Ball, D.L. (1998). Teaching, multimedia and mathematics: Investigations of real practice.
         Journal of Mathematics Teacher Education, 2(3), 311-319.
Menzel,  B., &  Clarke,  D.  (1998).   Teachers interpreting   algebra;   Teachers' views about  the nature of
         algebra. In C.    Kanes,   M. Goos,  &  E.    Warren   (Eds.),   Teaching  mathematics  in  new times
         (Proceedings   of the 21st annual  conference     of the  Mathematics  Education Research   Group  of
         Australasia, pp. 365-372). Gold Coast, Australia: MERGA.
Nathan, M.J., & Koedinger, K.R. (2000a). Teacher's and researcher's beliefs about the development of
         algebraic reasoning. Journal for Research in Mathematics Education, 31(2), 168-190.

                                                1069       ISLS
                                           ICLS 2010     Volume 1

Nathan, M.J., &  Koedinger, K.R.   (2000b).  An    investigation   of teachers' beliefs of students' algebra
        development. Cognition and Instruction, 18(2), 209-237.
National Council of Teachers of Mathematics. (1989). Curriculum and evaluation standards for school
        mathematics. Reston, VA: Author.
Reich, S., Goldberg, L., & Hudek, S. (October, 2004). Deja View Camewear Model 100. Paper presented at
        the First ACM workshop on Continuous Archival and Retrieval of Personal Experiences. New
        York.
Rosean, C.L., Lundeberg, M., Cooper, M., Fritzen, A., & Terpstra, M. (2008). Noticing noticing. Journal of
        Teacher Education, 59(4), 347-360.
Sherin, M. G. (2002). When teaching becomes learning. Cognition and Instruction. 20(2), 119-150.
Sherin, M.G. (2007). The development of teachers' professional vision in video clubs. In R. Goldman, R.
        Pea,  B. Barron, &  S.  Derry (Eds.)    Video    research  in the learning  sciences (pp. 383-395).
        Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Sherin, M. G., Russ, R. S., Colestock, A. A. (in preparation). Accessing mathematics teachers' in-the-
        moment noticing. In M. G. Sherin, V. R. Jacobs, & R. A. Philipp (Eds.) Mathematics teacher
        noticing: Seeing through teachers' eyes. New York: Routledge.
Sherin, M. G., Russ, R., Sherin, B., & Colestock, A. (2008). Professional vision in action: An exploratory
        study. Issues in Teacher Education.
Sherin, M. G., & van Es, E. A. (2005). Using video to support teachers' ability to notice
     classroom interactions. Journal of Technology and Teacher Education, 13(3), 475-491.
Stephens, A. (2008). What "counts" as algebra in the eyes of preservice elementary teachers? Journal of
        Mathematical Behavior, 27, 33-47.
Usiskn, Z. (1988). Conceptions of school algebra and uses of variables. In A. Coxford (Ed.), The ideas of
        algebra,  K-12 (1988    yearbook,   pp. 8-19).    Reston,   VA:   National Council   of Techers  of
        Mathematics.

                                              1070       ISLS
