                                                  ICLS 2010    ·   Volume 1

    Talking with your mouth full: The role of a mediating tool in
                             shaping collective positioning

           Kate T. Anderson, National Institute of Education, 1 Nanyang Walk, Singapore 637616,
                                          katherine.anderson@nie.edu.sg
    Melissa S. Gresalfi, Indiana University, 1900 E. 10th St., Eigenmann 532, Bloomington, IN 47405,
                                              mgresalf@indiana.edu

         Abstract: Research on classroom discourse has long underscored the integral role of
         social interaction  in  learning,   yet  designing    for  and  supporting    meaningful   classroom
         interaction  often  remains   a  challenge.   This  paper   examines      the ways  that elementary
         school   students   are  positioned    and   position   themselves     during   activities  aimed    at
         promoting   reflexivity  about    small-group   math      discussions.  We    examine    one  student
         group's participation in three such activities over eight months' time and specifically
         highlight the role of a mediating tool that was designed to support participation-centered
         rather than ability-centered conceptions of learning. Our aim is to examine how one focal
         group's    math  discussions   were   or   were not     shaped   by   the tool  in  ways   that  were
         consequential for productive collaborative engagement.

Introduction
The role of small group discussion in shaping mathematics learning has received much attention in the last
decade   and  has been   promoted  as   an   important   element    of   effective teaching  and    learning  (Boaler   &
Staples,  2008;   Gresalfi, 2009;  Horn,     2005;  Staples,   2008).    Specifically,  authors   have   pointed    to the
potential of collaborative interactions in promoting deep conceptual understanding, and more specifically,
in  supporting  the high    functioning   of heterogeneous     groups    (Ben-Ari,     1997; Cohen    &   Lotan,    1995).
However, how to foster students' learning through small group discussions that require exploring multiple
perspectives, negotiating tensions, and probing disagreements continues to be studied; doing so entails
changing many of the traditional practices of mathematics classrooms.
         This paper considers the affordances and constraints of a particular mediating tool!conversation
rubric!that was used to support small group discussions about mathematics. Specifically, we examine how
the conversation    rubric  was   taken   up by   one  student     group  across   multiple  events   in  a   fifth grade
classroom.   We   analyze   their discussions     for  evidence     of   whether   the  mediating    tool a)  supported
collaborative engagement in math activities, and b) shaped students` reflection about their understanding
and their positions in discussions in ways that might not have occurred without this particular tool. By
systematically examining interactions across a suite of math activities focused on student discussion, we
interrogate ways that particular activity designs can afford productive tensions between students that lead to
positioning in light of math and each other. The analysis we present constitutes both evidence for how
artifacts can shape the texture of learning across math discussions as well as a methodological lens by
which to examine math learning discursively across cases and time.
         The   aim  of our   analysis  is to  examine    the   role of   an instructional   scaffold as   a mediator    of
collaborative activity. In particular, we consider whether and how students' positioning relative to one
another and relative to the subject matter, elementary mathematics, is shaped by externally structured group
reflection on  recently  completed    activities.  In so doing,     this study   has   both theoretical   and pragmatic
implications. With respect to theory, we seek to extend positioning theory to consider how tools can serve
to mediate interaction. Thus, rather than considering positioning to be an interactive accomplishment of
interlocutors alone,   we   demonstrate   how    an artifact   can  serve   as a resource    and  an  authority  for   co-
positioning.  With  respect  to  practice,   we  demonstrate     how    instructional  scaffolds  structure   interaction
processes among learners (Kobbe et al., 2007), although not always in intended ways.

Positioning Theory
Our analysis draws on positioning theory as a means of tracking changes in student collaboration. We
consider positioning as moment-by-moment interaction, which involves the kinds of opportunities that
interlocutors create for one another to participate in particular ways (Davies & Harré, 1999). This can be
seen most easily in talk as participants speak to and about each other (van Langenhove & Harré, 1999).
Positioning concerns the fluid arrangements that people make available for themselves and others through
their talk and refers to participants' fluctuating status relative to one another. For example, students are
positioned relative to each other as smart vs. slow, or cooperative vs. competitive. Positioning can include
students'  relative academic    status  but  can  also reference     students'   positions   outside of   the classroom

                                                      1079   ·   © ISLS
                                               ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

(Cohen & Lotan, 1995). Interpersonal positioning can also be accomplished though implicit and explicit
comparisons between students. Students' ideas might be positioned as equally valuable (even if they are not
both accurate, c.f. Lampert, 1990), or one idea might be positioned as less important than another--for
example, in a classroom that is more competitive. In some classrooms, distinctions between who is "smart"
and who is not may become a particularly dominant form of positioning, while in others such distinctions
are rarely made. The effects of positioning can begin to endure as students become associated with specific
ways of participating in classroom settings (e.g., Anderson, 2009; Holland, Skinner, Lachicotte, & Cain,
1998; O'Connor & Michaels, 1996; Wortham, 2004).

The Importance of Math Talk
Significant attention has been given to the challenge of promoting robust mathematical conversation in
classrooms. In particular, the goal of such initiatives has been to shift mathematics away from a procedural,
didactic activity to an active process that involves strategic thinking, problem solving, decision-making,
and talking about math. The challenges of organizing mathematics classrooms in this way have been well
documented and include teachers' own histories and experiences with mathematics, their vision of the
nature of mathematical thinking and learning, and students' previous histories with mathematics and their
resulting expectations for activity in the classroom.
          It is clear that classrooms cannot promote problem solving, discussion, and justification without
supporting students to learn how to talk with and work with each other. Productive collaboration has been
notoriously difficult to facilitate, particularly in classrooms that are organized heterogeneously. However,
examples of successful collaboration in such classrooms paint a picture of the possible and a vision of what
to strive for (Boaler & Staples, 2008; Staples, 2008). This research has led to recommendations for practice
that are likely to support collaboration, including assigning students roles (Ben-Ari, 1997; Cohen & Lotan,
1995), structuring students' interaction (Kobbe et al., 2007), posing complex problems (Staples, 2008), and
being consistent about expectations and accountability (Gresalfi, Martin, Hand, & Greeno, 2009). What is
clear is that successfully supporting collaboration is no mean feat and requires facility with content and
with orchestrating student practice. In this paper, we consider the role of a small intervention that targeted
only student group work (as opposed to teacher practice) as a resource for organizing collaborative activity.
         Our perspective on the role of discourse in mathematics classrooms aims to make visible the ways
that what we say, how we say it, and how we implicate others' engagement in such interactions all shape
participation in  ways   that affect  students' opportunities   to   learn. Supporting   productive  modes    of
interaction and awareness of the crucial role of discursive exploration of math topics is central to views of
language and learning as inherently social processes (Barwell, 2005). Implications of such sociocultural
views on positioning within mathematical learning point to a need to foster and examine discourse that
supports learning how to navigate both ways of being (social selves) in relation to ways of knowing (math
learners) that are viewed as relevant, expected, or valued in certain classrooms.
         In this paper we build on our understanding of student positioning with the goal of investigating
how an external artifact mediated student interaction. Considering one group's interactions over the course
of the academic year, we track students' patterns of participation over time and examine micro-interactional
details of their conversations across three days spanning the ten activity days we conducted throughout the
school year. We view such small-group math discourse and the meta-discourse through which students
evaluate their participation as evidence of their positioning relative to each other and the math at hand. We
thus consider how the tool afforded or constrained interpersonal and perhaps disciplinary positioning.

Context of the Study
The data we consider draws from the second of a three-year, U.S. National Science Foundation-funded
research  project that examined   the role of discourse    in supporting mathematics     learning in fifth grade
classrooms (Hickey, Lewison, & Mewborn, 2005). The overarching project aimed to examine the impact of
regularly occurring,   collaborative  math activities  aligned  to  specific  state and  national  mathematics
standards on the development of student learning. The project's goals were to support teachers' facilitation
of mathematics activities and to refine activities and related assessment materials to promote conversation
and collaboration, which was not normative for the schools with whom we partnered. In this study, we
conduct a fine-grained interactional analysis of the how certain aspects of the designed activity structure
afforded participation in math discussions in ways that differ from traditional math classrooms, which are
often modeled after learning-as-acquisition models (Sfard, 2001).
         We partnered with four classrooms in two midwestern primary schools for the second year of this
project. Teachers of these classrooms taught all subjects, including mathematics. We worked with these
four classroom teachers for the duration of the school year, throughout which we participated in monthly
interventions during   math class time  as well  as   monthly  meetings  with  all  four teachers in  which  we
reviewed data, activities, and discussed and planned upcoming activities.

                                                  1080   ·   © ISLS
                                                 ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

Activities
The interactions that we had with the four classrooms entailed: (1) monthly, small-group math activities in
which small groups of students completed and discussed pencil-and-paper problem sets that the research
team  designed   (three to  four  questions each); (2)  whole    class  discussions led by   the  teacher in  which
representatives  of  each   group presented   problem    solutions  on   transparencies  projected   overhead:  (3)
conversation rubric discussions in which groups reflected on the quality of their group discussions (the
focus of our analysis, discussed below); and (4) bi-yearly pre-post formative assessments that covered
similar topics to the monthly problem sets and were completed individually, were not graded, and were
discussed in similar fashion to the activities already described. In addition, we also administered bi-yearly
pre-post tests that served as a proxy for state and nationally administered achievement tests. The design of
both the monthly activities and formative assessments included small-group feedback conversations that
were meant to foster discussion of math reasoning and reflection on math discourse. We focus here on an
interactional analysis of one group's participation in three of the ten monthly, small-group activities.
           The problem sets in the monthly activities dealt with recently covered concepts from students'
regular math curriculum, such as determining the area of polygons, prime factorization, interpreting graphic
representations of data, multiplication and division of fractions, and order of operations. The sets often
prioritized  open-ended    problems   with  multiple solution     paths  and  were  intended   to  foster extended
discourse within groups. These activities were not graded, but students did receive "hints" sheets (named
"Dori's Hints" after a fictional cartoon sixth grader) partway through their discussions. These "hints" were
intended to scaffold possible procedures to solve the problems and to move group conversation forward.

Conversation Rubric
In addition to the problem sets themselves and "Dori's Hints," the main focus of our analysis is the role of
the Conversation Rubric (CR) as a mediating tool that shaped students' participation in math discussions.
The CR was designed to foster groups' reflection on their math discussions about the problem sets and their
positions as engaged learners within those activities (see Figure 1 below for the CR). The CR (and teacher
and research team's scaffolding of groups' use of it) focused students' attention on what are considered
important elements of "productive" math discourse--listening, explaining, challenging, and reflecting on
understanding.
           Groups worked on the CR collaboratively after discussing their reasoning and completing whole-
class discussion of the problem sets. Additionally, prior to completing the problem sets on each activity
day, teachers   organized   a whole-class   discussion   around   the  prior month's    CR  to encourage   groups'
reflection on points for improvement from last time, which usually took five to ten minutes. Our interest in
highlighting the CR for examining small group discourse lies in its potential for provoking reflection on
students' participation in groups. In these reflections, students were no longer talking just about math, but
also talking   about  their talk  about  math  (and  sometimes     taking  a  personal  stake  therein).  This talk
effectively  created  a context   for students to  contest   the  accuracy   and   quality of  their groups'   math
discussions, when students actually engaged the CR, which was not always the case. We argue that this
affordance   of the  CR  evoked   different ways   that  students  could  orient to their  own    and each   other's
positions with regard to the math activity, their participation in it, and what social elements were relevant to
distinguish "productive" and "unproductive" engagement in math talk (Gresalfi, 2009). We argue that the
traditional classroom space of received mathematical learning (Boaler & Greeno, 2000) and classroom
mathematical practice was mediated by this affordance of the CR in that it prompted students to think about
the ways they talk about math together--not only the mathematical procedures used, reasoning employed,
or   their  own  individual   understanding,   but   also    how   productively    they  engaged     discourse  and
understanding as a group.
           The CR was thus a pivotal artifact (Jurow, 2005) in that it provided a shifting frame that was
outside that of received mathematical knowledge, which characterizes the traditional, individualistic math
instruction  these  students  were  accustomed    to engaging     in,  because  it  focuses  on   group   work  and
discussion. The CR was also outside the frame of the group math activities themselves, because it fostered
reflection  on  those activities. Despite   both the activity's    and  CR's   distance  from   "traditional"  math
instruction, it is not entirely separate, as it shares some features such as pencil-and-paper format and is
easily adoptable by teachers without an actual change in classroom practice. The ways that interactions
afford meaning making in classrooms vary widely but are never neutral. Theoretical views on classroom
talk range    from   characterizing   it as  dissemination     of  information   to  a  tool   for   problematizing
understanding,   creating   meaning,  and   positioning  identity. We    view  interaction  around    the CR   as a
reflective meta-tool for learning on two levels--understanding how to position one's self as a type of
person, and understanding ways to reason about math with others.

                                                    1081   ·   © ISLS
                                               ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

                                           Conversation Rubric
 Active Listening                                                    How did your group do on listening?
 Definition:
  · Hear what everyone has to say
  · Try to understand everyone's explanation
  · Ask questions when you don't understand                          What will your group work on to improve this?
  · Make sure everyone     has a chance to express his or her
   position (not necessarily in order)

 Explaining                                                          How did your group do on explaining?
 Definition:
  · Describe your way of thinking about the problems
  · Take a stance                                                    What will your group work on to improve this?
  · Try out new ideas by explaining to others
  · Use math reasoning to support your answer

 Challenging each other                                              How did your group do on challenging?
 Definition:
  · Be sure to voice different reasoning and solutions
  · Draw out others' explanations with questions
  · Agree to disagree, if necessary                                  What will your group work on to improve this?
  · Everyone  has something   important to add
  · Different solutions are a good thing
                                                   Group Reflection
How did your group's understanding evolve?
How did your group use Dori?
In what ways did she help?

                                        Figure 1: Conversation Rubric

Methods
The small groups in which students completed and discussed the problem sets were comprised of three to
five students each, which we organized with the teacher at the beginning of the school year based on mixed
student math ability and parity across male and female students. In each of the four classes with whom we
partnered we video-recorded two focal groups (limited due to equipment and personnel constraints), which
we  selected based    on teachers'  recommendations      about  likely    talkativeness (a positive   thing when
examining discourse), consent to be video-recorded, and diversity of socioeconomic status, race, and math
ability across the eight groups.
        The data for this study include three, hour-long video-recorded activities of a four-student focal
group comprised    of  two  boys  (Trey  and Adam)     and   two    girls (Christy and   Mandy;   all names   are
pseudonyms). We chose this group because they remained intact for all but the first activity day of the year,
and they often talked at length about the CR. We chose these three activity days!day 2, day 4, and day
10!out  of   the total ten because  they included  complete    video   records of  the  CR  discussion  that also
represents a range across the entire group trajectory throughout the year. Our analysis examines the types of
positioning and learning that the CR fostered, both in the discussions around the problem sets and in the CR
discussions themselves. Since the CR was discussed at the start of each activity in a whole-class discussion
led by the teacher, we found that it shaped elements of discussion throughout each activity day. We use
discourse analysis  informed  by   sociocultural and   sociolinguistic    commitments    (e.g., Anderson,   2009;
Bucholtz & Hall, 2005; Mercer, 2004), including the immediate details of talk (pauses, pronoun usage,
indexicals, content) as they relate to social positioning as well as categorizations of the group's trajectory of
participation across the ten months of the intervention.

Findings
We present the overall findings in terms of the elements of the CR for each episode. Our analysis includes
both verbatim snippets from the group's CR discussion and our commentary on how that aligned with what
we saw actually happening in the video recordings of their math discussions preceding the CR discussions.
We first present an account of how the students used the conversation rubric and the alignment between
their reflections on their participation and our observations of their participation. We then consider the
episodes in terms of positioning.

                                                  1082   ·   © ISLS
                                                ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

Day 2
The group's reflections on their activity from the second day in the CR discussion was generally positive;
for the most part, the group stated that they had collaborated quite productively as a group, at least with
respect to the items to which they responded. Specifically, they claimed that: "we tried to listen to [the
explanations]"; "[we] heard what everyone had to say," and "`sort of'" asked questions when we didn't
understand each other." Likewise, the group claimed that they had offered productive explanations, stating
that they had "half and half tried to describe our way of thinking about the problems." "We said `I don't
think that's right' if we didn't understand each other," and "did not just sit there and nod our head." "We
used math reasoning." In contrast however, they noted that they did not robustly challenge one another
when working on the problems, stating: "We didn't really voice different reasoning and solutions except at
the very end (after Dori)." Although one student claimed that their performance at challenging one another
was only mediocre, others argued they did well because "we actually tried and did our best."
          These  reflections were generally   not  aligned    with our  observations   of students' actual math
discussions on Day 2: although students did at times listen to each other to the extent that they shared
answers or procedures, they did not work collaboratively beyond "reporting out." As an example, after the
students had finished the first problem on their worksheet, they were asked to share their answers with their
group. The following exchange ensued:1

          Christy: Um, I did drawings like 12.5 plus 5, you just add. You just, like, add. So I just added 5 to
           that one. And then if you do, um, 12.5 times 5, you'd be doubling, the number over and over
           again. So, like that's why I thought it would be greater. Because with this you only add 5 and
           you'd be doubled.
          Trey: I didn't get anything.
          Christy: Well, how far did you get?
          Trey: I didn't get any [inaudible] [has covered his face with his paper]
          Christy: I thought you had something wrote down.
          Trey: But then I erased it.
          Christy: [looks at Adam who is concentrating on his paper] Well, what did you think? [looks back
           at Trey]
          Trey: [closes the paper closer over his mouth] My mind is blank.
          Mandy: Wait, what?
          Trey: [turns head to Mandy] My mind's blank.
          Christy: OK. Adam, what did you get?

          This exchange represents an "explanation relevant" moment; one of the members of the group
expressed confusion about the problem but did not receive an explanation or assistance from the rest of the
group. In this way, Trey was positioned as both off task and unworthy of assistance, as his confusion did
not merit discussion or explanation from any of the other group members.

Day 4
The group began this day prepared to listen actively to each other, because they decided that "we weren't
listening to each other's    problems  last time; We're     gonna  try  to listen to each other more,"  in their
discussion about what to improve upon this day (based on last months' CR). Importantly, the group left
their goal at this relatively unspecified level; they did not detail what listening actively looked like, or what
specific steps they would take to ensure that they were realizing their goal. In reflecting on their discussion
of the problem set (completed in two pairs this time) using the conversation rubric, the students did not
evaluate their listening very positively; Christy said that she and Trey "did really good listening to each
other and asked questions and communicating," but Mandy reported that she and Adam were only "sort of"
listening to each other at the end a little bit. Interestingly, the students did not refer back to their stated goal
for the day. With respect to explaining, Adam said (of he and Mandy), that "we did good because at least
we explained. It may have been wrong but at least we challenged with respect and stuff." However, as a
whole the group concluded that they could have done more to challenge each other because they didn't talk
or listen all the way through.
          Again, our observations  of   the group's work      did not  conform closely  with the students'  own
characterization of their work. The group broke into pairs (as instructed by the teacher). Christy and Trey
worked mostly independently next to each other; they listened to each other's answers and reviewed their
procedures, but mostly they did not engage each other beyond stating their answers and reasoning. They
did not actually work on the problem together. Mandy and Adam, however, did not even discuss what they

1 Transcription conventions: [text] = description of non-verbal action; TEXT = stressed speech.

                                                   1083   ·   © ISLS
                                                ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

had written with each other and required extensive intervention from one researcher to even comparing
their answers.

Day 10
Adam was absent this day, and although the teacher and research team encouraged the rest to work as a
threesome on the problems, Trey resisted (and Mandy immediately said that was fine with her and Christy).
This final day of our analysis illustrates the extent to which the group's interaction came to a head; whereas
in the previous two episodes, reflection about their work was generally not contentious and only
tangentially related to the group's work, in this final episode the CR became an explicit tool for positioning
each other in relation to the group's work. Specifically, although Christy and Mandy claimed that they had
worked well together, Trey argued vociferously that they had neither listened nor explained to him. In our
observations of the video data, although Christy and Mandy worked together without conflict, their
collaboration was rather one-sided with Christy leading the work and Mandy writing answers and neither
asking for, nor receiving, explanations. Trey worked independently, initially by his own desire, and later
when the three were meant to discuss what they had written because he could not get the attention of the
rest of the group.
         In their discussion of their collaborative work, the CR became a mediating tool that Trey
leveraged to successfully note his dissatisfaction with the group's discussion (or lack thereof). Although he
had previously attempted to get the attention of the two girls, it wasn't until the CR became a topic of
discussion that he was able to engage his group mates productively.

         Christy: Listening? We listened to each other.
         Mandy: What, where?
         Christy: We listened to each other [points to CR].
         Trey: No we're not done yet. We're not done yet [meaning not ready to discuss the CR].
         Christy: Too bad.
         Trey: You can't do it [CR], we all have to do this together [discuss their work].
         Christy: [to Trey] Do you think we listened good?
         Trey: [pauses] No.
         Mandy: Yes.
         Trey: NO, we haven't listened at all to each other.
         Christy: That's because you didn't want to work with us, so too bad. We listened to each other!
         Trey: But you cut- we all have to agree!
         Mandy: But you said you didn't want to work with us.
         Christy: No, you just don't want to work with us, so it's [inaudible]
         Trey: No but we all have to agree. She said when you're done after we discuss this [lifts up
             activity sheet. Christy keeps writing on CR with Mandy looking on. 16 sec pass. Trey picks up
             their written work and examines it].

         As the excerpts and descriptions above illustrate, the group did not really engage the CR in deep
and meaningful ways, which was the case across the 10 activity days throughout the school year. For this
reason, we argue that although they clearly used the CR for interpersonal positioning, especially on day ten,
they did not engage in disciplinary positioning around the CR discussion (one of our hopes in designing it).

Conclusions and Implications
To revisit our earlier stated aims, in this paper we considered one small student group's discourse across
three monthly, collaborative math activities as evidence of the extent to which the Conversation Rubric was
a mediating tool that supported collaborative engagement in math activities and shaped students` reflection
about their understanding and their positions in discussions in ways that might not have occurred without
the CR. With respect to these two points, we conclude from our interactional analysis of the three activity
days that the CR supported competitive rather than collaborative engagement for this group, and that it
failed to shape actual reflection on math understandings. We base this claim on observance that the group
tended to focus on procedural display, task completion, and compliance with teacher formulations of the
CR discussion as well as arbitrary group-dictated rules rather than considering how they might learn from
each other or reflect on changes in understanding about the math from beginning to end of each activity day
(or between activity days!another goal of the CR that was not realized for this group.
         Clearly the CR had affordances for shaping group discussion, but how these affordances were
realized as  compared   to how   they  were envisioned    by  the research  team,  at least with respect  to the
evidence  supported  in this   case study,  begs  the question   of  whether the   CR  in fact does not   afford
reflexivity, or whether    its use  in this classroom     with  this  particular group  simply   thwarted these

                                                   1084   ·   © ISLS
                                              ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

affordances. In terms of design, we feel that if the group had taken up the CR as an actual platform for
considering their math discussion, it could have worked. However, this group became fixated on either
getting it done quickly and complying as if it were a set of boxes to tick, or using it to enforce compliance
with dominant group members' whims (as seemed to be the case on day 10 with Christy and Mandy). As
we stated above, activity designs can afford productive tensions between students that lead to positioning of
each other. In this case, we observed tensions, but they unfortunately were not productive in terms of
pushing understanding and learning from difference. Instances of different mathematical representations for
this group were either glossed over as the same representations (so they could move more quickly through
the activity) or became arguments about who was "right." As a result, the group never moved beyond initial
understandings of the math activities, and they never reflected on these differences in the CR discussions.
To further explore the design implications of the CR, we will be analyzing all eight groups' discourse and
positioning in a future paper, of which this analysis will serve as a model for the analytic methods. In
addition, we will also compare the second year iteration with that of the first year's groups' work on the
CR, which was slightly different in form and enactment (see Anderson, 2009 for an in-depth analysis of
one group's positioning relative to the CR in the first year).
        Our methodological contribution from this analysis includes considering how a mediating tool
shaped the texture of learning across small-group discussions, which we examined across time. In this
student group's case, the CR-as-artifact shaped math discussions but not in ways we had intended or hoped.
The CR-as-methodological lens, however, provides us with useful implications for considering the role of
math discourse in supporting opportunities to learn, as we can learn considerably from negative cases. We
examined the CR discussions as discrete points along the group's trajectory where values became explicitly
associated with participation  explicitly in light of  intervening    math discussions. In  this way,  the CR
foregrounds   how     participation   in  small    group    discussion     highlights  tensions   surrounding
accountability!especially when such practice is not the norm for a classroom.
        This analytic lens on the surfacing and navigation of tensions surrounding group participation is
useful for understanding how interpersonal positioning can afford or thwart deep math discussions. For this
group, their trajectory across the ten activity days spanning ten months illuminated a practice that did not
change--their explicit attention was always focused on listening, but they never really changed how they
listened to each other much beyond the second day. In terms of learning, it is unclear whether the math
discussions or the CR aided this group's collective or individual understanding. We argue that these lacks
stem from a failure on the group's part to get beyond the notion of their math work as their own, in other
words something to which they alone were individually accountable. The group treated the math activities
as their own work for which they would eventually be evaluated and the CR as a rote activity in which to
give the appearance that they were doing things as a group. However, because the CR was not pushed or
taken up in this classroom in a meaningful way, it thus failed to be meaningful. From these conclusions we
summarize that interpersonal positioning must be navigated so that it does not get in the way of engaging
the math, as it did for this group because vulnerability and righteousness clouded their ability to see the
math  for the spats. Instead, interpersonal  positioning  must   lead into an  appreciation for  the variety of
different ways there are to approach the representation and solving of math problems. In this way, the
group we   considered  here   "talked with  their mouths    full"  of the  CR, in that  they interpreted   their
participation through its lens. However, that mediating tool only shaped participation after mathematical
activity was completed, and thus the CR served more as a snack than a meal.

References
Anderson, K.T. (2009). Applying positioning theory to analysis of classroom interactions: Mediating
        micro-identities, macro-kinds, and ideologies of knowing. Linguistics and Education, 20(4), 291-
        310.
Barwell, R. (2005). Ambiguity in the mathematics classroom. Language and Education, 19, 118-126.
Ben-Ari, R. (1997). Complex instruction and cognitive development. In E. G. Cohen & R. A. Lotan (Eds.),
        Working for equity in classrooms: Sociological theory in practice. New York: Teachers College
        Press.
Boaler, J. & Greeno, J. (2000). Identity, agency, and knowing in mathematics worlds. In Boaler, J. (Ed.).
        Multiple perspectives on mathematics teaching and learning (pp. 171-200). Westport, CT: Ablex.
Boaler, J., & Staples, M. (2008). Creating mathematical futures through an equitable teaching approach:
        The case of Railside school. Teachers College Record, 110, 608-645.
Bucholtz, M., & Hall, K. (2005). Identity and interaction: A Sociocultural linguistic approach. Discourse
        Studies, 7, 585-614.
Cohen, E. G., & Lotan, R. A. (1995). Producing equal status interactions in the heterogeneous classroom.
        American Educational Research Journal, 32(1), 99-120.

                                                  1085  ·   © ISLS
                                             ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

Davies, B., & Harré, R. (1999). Positioning and personhood. In R. Harre & L. V. Langenhove (Eds.),
       Positioning theory: Moral contexts of intentional action (pp. 32-52). Oxford: Blackwell.
Gresalfi, M. S. (2009). Taking up opportunities to learn: Constructing dispositions in mathematics
       classrooms. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 18, 327-369.
Gresalfi, M. S., Martin, T., Hand, V., & Greeno, J. G. (2009). Constructing competence: An analysis of
       students' participation in the activity system of mathematics classrooms. Educational Studies in
       Mathematics, 70, 49-70.
Hickey, D. T., Lewison, M., & Mewborn, D. (2005). Multi-level assessment for enhancing mathematical
       discourse, curriculum, and achievement in diverse elementary school classrooms. National
       Science Foundation Grant (REC 0440261).
Holland, D., Skinner, D., Lachicotte, W., Jr., & Cain, C. (1998). Identity and agency in cultural worlds.
       Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Horn, I. S. (2005). Learning on the job: A situated account of teacher learning in high school mathematics
       departments. Cognition & Instruction, 23, 207-236.
Jurow, A. S. (2005). Shifting engagements in figured worlds: Middle school mathematics' students'
       participation in an architectural design project. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 14, 35-67.
Kobbe, L., Weinberger, A., Dillenbourg, P., Harrer, A., Hämäläinen, R., Häkkinen, P., et al. (2007).
       Specifying computer-supported collaboration scripts. Computer-Supported Collaborative
       Learning, 2, 211-224.
Lampert, M. (1990). When the problem is not the question and the solution is not the answer: Mathematical
       knowing and teaching. American Educational Research Journal, 27, 29-63.
Mercer, N. (2004). Sociocultural discourse analysis: Analysing classroom talk as a social mode of thinking.
       Journal of Applied Linguistics, 1, 137-168.
O'Connor, M. C., & Michaels, S. (1996). Shifting participant frameworks: Orchestrating thinking practices
       in group discussions. In D. Hicks (Ed.), Discourse, learning, and schooling (pp. 63-103). New
       York: Cambridge University Press.
Sfard, A. (2001). There is more to discourse than meets the ears: Looking at thinking as communicating to
       learn more about mathematical learning. Educational Studies in Mathematics, 46, 13-57.
Staples, M. (2008). Promoting student collaboration in a detracked, heterogeneous secondary mathematics
       classroom. Journal of Mathematics Teacher Education, 11, 349-371.
van Langenhove, L., & Harré, R. (1999). Introducing positioning theory. In R. Harre & L. van Langenhove
       (Eds.), Positioning theory: Moral contexts of intentional action (pp. 14-31). Oxford: Blackwell.
Wortham, S. (2004). The interdependence of social identification and learning. American Educational
       Research Journal, 41, 715-750.

Acknowledgments
We would like to thank the PIs on the grant that supported this work, Dan Hickey, Mitzi Lewison, and
Denise Mewborn as well as the National Science Foundation without which this data could not have been
collected. We are also grateful to other members of the research team!Dionne Cross, Asli Ersoz, Peiwei
Li, Ingrid Graves, Lenny Sanchez, and Erik Winarski.

                                                1086   ·   © ISLS
