                                           ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 2

        Increasing Rigor and Generativity in Learning:
               Connections Between the Disciplines,
     Children's Lived Experience and Everyday Knowledge
                                  A Symposium

   Megan Bang, TERC, American Indian Center of Chicago, megan_bang@terc.edu
                        Christopher Wright, Tufts University
                            Eli Tucker-Raymond, TERC
    Folashade Cromwell-Solomon, Harvard Graduate School of Education, TERC
                                 Beth Warren, TERC

Introduction
      Improving school achievement for students from non-dominant backgrounds is
increasingly requiring researchers to embrace the complexity of intersections between
identity, lived experience, knowledge developed in our everyday lives, and target
disciplinary knowledge and practices. The          stances    towards, understandings of, and
engagement with the practices and knowledge children develop in their everyday life are
central to engaging in this complexity (Warren et. al, 2001; Lee, 2001; Nasir et. al, 2006).
Typically ­ although not theoretically aligned with notions of constructivist learning
theories ­ many education researchers tend to explicitly or implicitly view children's
lives and knowledge developed in everyday life from deficit perspectives that assume a
lack of connection or potential alignment with expert disciplinary understandings
(Warren et. al, 2001). We argue that a deeper understanding of the disciplines and the
associated practices combined with an orientation towards children's practices and
knowledge as resources to mobilized can increase the rigor and depth of learning
environments for all children (i.e. Hudicourt-Barnes, 2003; Bang et. al, 2007).
      This symposium presents three studies by junior scholars who have been trained,
in part, at the Chèche Konnen Center (CKC) at TERC. CKC has been engaged in
studying the ways in which children's linguistic, intellectual, and cultural strengths can
be recognized and mobilized towards more rigorous science teaching and learning. These
three studies expand the empirical work conducted from this perspective into new
disciplinary domains. The first paper explores representational competence of elementary
age Black boys as they interpret and produce architectural diagrams. The paper compares
the criteria and dimensions of representations produced by the boys in the study as
compared to experts. This paper expands the             empirical  evidence of the benefit of
engaging both a disciplinary perspective as well as a resource framework into the field of
engineering and design. The second paper presents a design study of a history classroom
that engages students' own local histories and personal identities and works to extend
these localized place based identities and narratives to global conflicts and narratives.
This work demonstrates the ways in which engagement of students' identities transforms
learning in the domain of history for students both by engaging them in more expert
forms of historical scholarship as well as positioning them as historical actors and
scholars with agency and choice.
      The third paper compliments the first two presented by shifting focus from close
study of student thinking to teacher thinking. The opportunity to expand learning
environments by engaging disciplinary perspectives and viewing students' intellectual

                                               109  ·  © ISLS
                                           ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 2

strengths at any large scale will require the field to more deeply understand the ways in
which to improve the capacity of teachers to more effectively teach children from
communities historically placed at risk. This requires professional development
opportunities in which teachers can delve more deeply into their own views about
students from diverse backgrounds, themselves as cultured and raced individuals, and
their understandings of the ways in which race and white privilege are embedded in the
historic fibers and institutional structures within the United States (Ladson-Billings &
Tate, 1995; Bell, 1992; Harris, 1993). The third paper does just this by presenting a case
study of one teacher engaged in a five-year design based professional development
research study focused on learning to see and teach to the intellectual strengths of
students of color. The teacher in this case study learns to see the intellectual strengths of
the Black boy students' in her classroom in the domain of literature and writing.
This study demonstrates the ways in which structuring professional development to
embrace a disciplinary (in this case a literary perspective) and resource based lens, can
transform teacher practice to improve teaching and learning for students from non-
dominant communities. Each paper is presented in more depth following this
introduction.
      Collectively these papers provide domain specific insights into teaching and
learning and simultaneously demonstrate the generativity and potential benefit of deeply
engaging with children's everyday experiences and knowledge as strengths and resources
for designed learning environments across domains. Further, each study uses different
complimentary strands of research and theory to explore these dynamics. The work in
this symposium takes steps to more deeply understanding, supporting, and leveraging the
ways in which diversity ­ of people, practices, languages, meaning, knowing, histories,
goals, values, and the like...in learning environments are an asset and expand the
possibilities for human knowing and meaning (Gutierrez et al. 1999; Warren, Ballenger,
Ogonowski, Rosebery, and Hudicourt-Barnes, 2001).

Structure of the Symposium
      Megan Bang, Chèche Konnen Center at TERC & American Indian Center of
Chicago will serve as chair. We will open the session with a brief 5 minute introduction.
We will then present the three papers, each for 15 minutes. Beth Warren, Chèche Konnen
Center at TERC, will serve as the discussant. We will leave 25 minutes for questions and
open discussion with the audience.

                                     References
Bang, M., Medin, D., & Atran, S. (2007). Cultural Mosaics and Mental Models of
      Nature.Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. 104, 13868-13874.
Bell, D. (1992). Faces at the Bottom of the Well: The Permanence of Racism. New York:
      Basic Books
Gutierrez, K.D., Baquedano-López, P. Tejeda, C. (1999). Rethinking Diversity: Hybridity
      and Hybrid Language Practices in the Third Space. Mind, Culture, and Activity,
      6(4), 286-303.
Harris, Cheryl I. (1993). Whiteness as Property. Harvard Law Review 106:1721.
Hudicourt-Barnes, J. (2003). Argumentation in Haitian Creole classrooms. Harvard
      Educational Review.

                                               110  ·  © ISLS
                                           ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 2

Ladson-Billings, G and Tate, W. F. (1995). Toward a Critical Race Theory of Education.
       Teachers College Record, 97 (1), 47-68.
Lee, C. ( 2001). Is October Brown Chinese? A Cultural Modeling Activity System for
    Underachieving Students. American Educational Research Journal, 38(1), 97­141.
Nasir, N. S., Rosebery, A. S., Warren, B., & Lee, C. D. (2006). Learning as a cultural
       process: Achieving equity through diversity. The Cambridge handbook of the
       learning sciences, 489­504.
Warren, B., Ballenger, C., Ogonowski, M., Rosebery,               A., & Hudicourt-Barnes, J. (2001).
       Rethinking diversity in learning science: The logic of everyday sense-making.
       Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 38(5), 529-552.

    Paper 1: Learning to "see" sound: Meaning-making about sound through
            architectural diagrams among elementary school Black boys
                         Christopher G. Wright, Tufts University

       This work has to primary objectives: 1) To explore the representational criteria
that elementary school Black boys utilize in producing and interpreting architectural
diagrams; and 2) To identify the sense-making practices that elementary school Black
boys demonstrate while producing and interpreting architectural diagrams.
       Using meta-representational competence (MRC) as an analytic lens has proven
productive in uncovering children's representational competence (diSessa, 2004).             It has
been used to study how children invent new representations, critique and compare the
adequacy of representations, understand the purposes of representations in particular
contexts, explain representations, and learn new representations (Azevedo, 2000; diSessa,
Hammer, Sherin, & Kolpakowski, 1991; diSessa & Sherin, 2000; Enyedy, 2005; Sherin,
2000).
       When a MRC perspective is linked to a view of learning as cultural practice, as in
the work of Warren et al. (2001), new opportunities open up for understanding the
cultural, intellectual, and linguistic strengths that children from historically non-dominant
communities bring to disciplinary learning.           Taking this perspective on representational
competence as entailing cognitive and culturally-based practices, this study focused on
uncovering the knowledge and sense-making practices that Black boys used and
developed as they learned to "see sound from an architectural point of view" (Lymer,
2009).
       Through an ethnographic case study, I examined 4th grade Black boys' ideas and
sense-making practices as they produced and interpreted representations of sound through
architectural diagrams.  Data included field notes, video footage of the boys' design and
critique activities, video footage of individual interviews with the boys, and student-
developed representations of sound. Data analysis involved multiple stages of coding
based on Yin's (1984) classification of data according to various cross-case analyses.

Results
       The boys' representational criteria for the representations developed within
architectural diagrams included completeness (does the representation show all relevant
information), compactness (does the representation effectively utilize the space of the
architectural diagram), and precision (do the representations accurately depict the various

                                               111  ·  © ISLS
                                           ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 2

aspects of sound).  This finding agreed with diSessa's (2004) findings that suggest that
kids do similar things to what professionals do and some things that differ.         During the
production, interpretation, and critique of sound representations, the boys were found to
focus on similar aspects of sound as professional architects (White, 2004), such as sound
location, sound intensity, and sound generator.          The boys' representations differed from
those used by architects primarily through the category of           "sound type." Architects
(White, 2004) utilized conventional symbols for sound, despite the type of sound, while
the boys varied their symbols based on the type of the sound (i.e., notes for sounds
coming from a parade, letters/words for sounds coming from children playing, and sound
waves for the sounds coming from cars and airplanes).

Significance
        This study contributes to a broadening of perspective on "what counts" as
architectural and scientific knowledge and practices.             By investigating the ideas and
representational practices that children have, where they draw their experiences from, and
how they impact learning and development in social explorations of STEM disciplines
provides an in-depth picture of children's experiences and development in these areas.

                                        References
Azevedo, F.  (2000).  Designing representations of terrain: A study in meta
        representational competence.  Journal           of Mathematical Behavior,  19, 443-480.
diSessa, A., (2004).  Metarepresentation:          Native competence and targets for  instruction.
        Cognition and Instruction, 22(3), 293-331.
diSessa, A., Hammer, D., Sherin, B., &  Kolpakowski,              T. (1991). Inventing graphing:
        Meta-representational expertise in children. Journal of Mathematical Behavior,
        10, 117-160.
diSessa, A., & Sherin, B.   (2000). Meta-representation: An introduction.          Journal of
        Mathematical Behavior, 19, 385-398.
Lymer, G.   (2009).  Demonstrating professional           vision: The work of critique in
        architectural education. Mind, Culture, and Activity, 16(2), 145-171.
Sherin, B.  (2000). How do students invent representations            of motion: A genetic account.
        Journal of Mathematical Behavior, 19, 399-441.
Warren, B.,  Ballenger, C., Ogonowski, M., Rosebery,              A., & Hudicourt-Barnes, J. (2001).
        Rethinking diversity in learning science: The logic of everyday sense-making.
        Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 38(5), 529-552.
White,  E. (2004).  Site anlaysis: Diagramming information             for architectural design.
        Tallahassee, FL:  Architectural Media Limited.
Yin, R. (1994). Case study research: Design and methods ­ Volume 5.                London: Sage
        Publications.

   Paper 2: History in Schools, Teachers, and Students: Identities and Meaning
                         Making in Middle School Social Studies
           Eli Tucker-Raymond, TERC; Maria Rosario, Chicago Public Schools

        This paper uses qualitative data, including classroom conversations, from one
self-contained, multi-ethnic, 7th grade classroom in a public school in Chicago to argue

                                               112  ·  © ISLS
                                           ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 2

that history, as it is taught in schools, should be aimed at helping students create and
participate in democratic structures of everyday life. In doing so, we argue that school has
to engage the identities of students. Furthermore, we assert that dialogic approaches to
teaching and learning are well suited to accomplish this task (Wells, 1999). In supporting
our argument, we describe a collaborative study that investigated the ways in which
students engaged in dialogic conversations called "Socratic Seminars" (Adler, 2008).
      We draw on work by Holland and Lave (2001) that conceives international,
national, and institutional political and economic struggles as mediated by the struggles
lived out in the everyday actions of people. That is, history lives in and is created by
people, mediated by their everyday lives. For example, the local government in Chicago
supports an economic model of increased attention to skilled service sector jobs;
privatization of public institutions, including schools; and de-industrialization (e.g.
Lipman, 2004). Concurrently, land speculation and real estate development to feed the
growing service-oriented workforce has pushed westward, displacing working African
American and Latino families further and further from the city center. Students in the
school acutely feel the housing crunch as the school experienced a 30% mobility rate
during the school year in which the study took place.
      One of our goals for the overall classroom learning environment was to create
spaces for students to see themselves as "historical actors" (Gutierrez, 2005) and to help
them create pathways for participation in democratic life through community-based
action (Barton & Levstik, 2004). We believe that for students to author themselves as
historical actors, educators need to engage other aspects of students' identities, such as
their place-based, racial, and ethnic notions of self. Students' actions toward becoming
historical actors took many forms: exploratory conversations in Socratic Seminars,
presentation of student-made masks in a "Taino" art show at a local cultural center, a
"Culture Show" (dance and poetry) that focused on the African Diaspora in the
Caribbean for members of the school community, and peace marches. Students also
produced digital videos in which they interviewed other students, school staff, and people
in the neighborhood about racism, power, and gentrification in the community. In this
paper we focus on Socratic Seminars because they provide the clearest examples of the
dialogic character of students' exploration of and theorizing about their relationships to
history. In the full paper, we problematize the notion of identity in greater depth and its
relation to dialogic constructions of self (Bakhtin, 1981).
      The work was conducted through a model of collaborative action research in
which the external researcher and the classroom teacher-researcher together created the
curriculum, conceived of research questions, devised data collection methods, and
analyzed classroom data (Nodie Oja & Smulyan, 1988). We analyzed data from Socratic
Seminars, the main data source of this paper, through two iterations. First, constant
comparative analysis revealed a number of recurrent themes (Glaser & Strauss, 1967).
Themes included hate speech on the radio, attitudes about immigration, sexual activity
and its consequences in the teenage years, borders, gentrification, and the presidential
election, among others. Students also drew on a range of sources while participating in
Socratic Seminar, including articles given by the teacher; horror movies; television; and
experiences in the neighborhood, with family members, and at school.
      Second, we selected representative examples and conducted a critical discourse
analysis of the talk. Such examples have been omitted here for sake of space, but will be

                                               113  ·  © ISLS
                                           ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 2

presented in the longer paper. In that analysis, we sought to identify the commitments
students made to identities within fields of power in local and global contexts
(Fairclough, 2003). Particularly, how students mediated conversational topics on national
and global scales through reference to their own local histories and personal identities, as
well as how their accounts of their identities and the local history of their community
were rooted in global conflicts, such as colonization and international transmigration. We
further considered how conversations remade and disrupted those processes.
      We found that students were able to resist and disrupt discourses of domination,
such as realtors and outsiders to the neighborhood naming young people and their
neighborhood as "ghetto." They also recognized parallels between international forms of
colonization and the colonization of their neighborhood by "yuppies" and real estate
speculators. Furthermore, students positioned themselves as agents of change, capable of
resisting dominating forces at the intersection of economic, material, political and
cultural "fields of power" (Bourdieu, 1991). However, we also identified tensions
between disrupting and reifying dominating discourses as students confused and
conflated racial and ethnic categories, as well as class and ethnicity, disassociating Black
from Puerto Rican and associating White with "expensive."
      Implications include an argument for dialogic approaches to Social Studies
education that not only engages students in dialogue with each other, but also with the
world around them, through intentional efforts to understand local contentious practices,
such as struggles over gentrification and affordable housing. Dialogic approaches to
teaching and learning can engage students' identities to develop rigorous, engaging, and
expansive learning experiences.

                                     References
Adler, M. (2008). The Paeidia proposal: An educational manifesto. New York: Simon &
      Shuster.
Bakhtin, M. M. (1981). The dialogic imagination. Austin, TX: University of Texas.
Barton & Levstik (2004). Teaching history for the common good. Mahwah, NJ:
      Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Bourdieu, P. (1991). Language and symbolic power. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
      University Press.
Fairclough, N. (2003). Analysing discourse: Textual analysis for social research.
      London: Routledge.
Glaser, B. G. & Strauss, A. L. (1967). The discovery of grounded theory: Strategies for
      qualitative research. New York: Aldine.
Gutierrez, K. D. (2005). Sylvia Scribner Award Address. American Educational
      Research Association Annual Meeting. Montreal, Quebec, Canada
Holland, D. & Lave, J. (2001). History in person: Enduring struggles, contentious
      practice, intimate identities. Santa Fe, NM: School of American Research Press
Lipman, P. (2004). High-Stakes education: Inequality, globalization and urban school
      reform. New York: RoutledgeFalmer
Nodie Oja, S. & Smulyan, L. (1989). Collaborative action research: A developmental
      approach. New York: Falmer Press
Wells, G. (1999). Dialogic inquiry: towards a socio-cultural practice of theory and
      education. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.

                                               114  ·  © ISLS
                                           ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 2

                Paper 3: A Writer's Way: One Teacher's Experience
                Learning to See Her Students' Intellectual Strengths

          Folashade Cromwell Solomon, Harvard Graduate School of Education,
                              Cheche Konnen Center, TERC

       This study investigated how a teacher constructed and learned from the work of a
community of practice (COP) that focuses on seeing the intellectual strengths of students
of color. Looking in depth at one teacher's experience learning in such a COP, it seeks to
provide an understanding of how teachers, working together to study their classroom
practice can learn to see these students' strengths instead of looking through a deficit
lens. Working within a practice-oriented, situated learning frame (Brown & Duguid,
1989; Lave &Wenger, 1991), I aimed to investigate the teacher's orientation toward her
own learning, analyze how she engaged withthe resources used to structure practice
within the COP (e.g., ideas, cases, texts, classroom transcripts, other participants), and
understand whether and how her participation shaped and transformed her classroom
practice.
       The COP studied was a voluntary collaboration between 11 teachers at an
elementary school and 5 educational researchers in a small northeastern city. The
collaboration was a five-year design based research study focused on learning to see and
teach to the intellectual strengths of students of color. This study focused on one teacher,
Maryanne, a white teacher in her mid-fifties who has taught for 18 years. Specifically,
this study focused on the fourth year of the seminar and the question Maryanne brought
to this COP from her classroom practice which focused on how to understand the writing
of an African American boy.
       My study took the form of an exploratory case study to document and understand
how the teacher's participation shaped and transformed her practice, in particular her
relationship with students of color, her orientation to the subject matter, and her stance
toward herself as a learner?
       To address this question, I conducted three in-depth interviews, each focused on
one aspect of my research question. I also recorded and transcribed four full sessions of
the COP, during which the teachers presented their work. Transcribing the sessions
allowed me to document the teachers' experiences of the COP, both within the group
meetings and as they took their learning back to their classrooms. I used a grounded
approach (Strauss & Corbin, 1998) to code emerging themes as teachers described their
experiences in the data group. I wrote field notes and analytic memos and developed
inductive codes, which I then used to construct maps of each teacher's beliefs about
learning and how she learned to change her practice (Miles & Huberman, 1994).
       I found that her participation in the COP did contribute to Maryanne's work in at
least three ways: her relationship to students of color, her orientation to the subject
matter, and her stance toward herself as a learner. First, in her relationship, her focus on
writing (the subject matter) led her to look at her student's intellect through his use of
poetry and metaphor. Second, Maryanne's beliefs about teaching and learning through a
disciplinary lens (in this case writing) were at the root of all of her interactions. For
Maryanne, a core belief is that "You have to be a writer to teach writing."       This view

                                               115  ·  © ISLS
                                           ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 2

allowed her to build relationships with her African American male students. She began to
articulate what he could do, rather than just repeating his challenges. This learner stance
also allowed her to see similarities between herself as a writer and her student as a writer.
Surprisingly all these changes were possible in this COP even when she publicly, and
repeatedly, expressed her skepticism of learning about race, replacing class as the
explanation. However it was through her daily practices that she initiated questions
regarding the relationship to writing and race.         In essence it was through herwriting-
focused lens that she became interested in seeing race, as she started to inquire about how
it played a part in his writing.
      This study focuses on learning about race as a part of learning about teacher
practice, and not as a separate entity. Understanding these experiences has the potential to
offer more informed understanding of the ways to structure teacher learning to support
continuous learning in and from practice.

Bibliography
Brown, J. S. & Duguid, P. D. (1989). Situated Cognition and the Culture of Learning.
      Education Researcher, 18(1), 32-34.
Engestrom, Y., & Middleton, D. (Eds.). (1998). Cognition and Communicative Work.
      Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Grossman, P., Weinberg, S., &     Woolworth, A. S.            (2001). Toward a theory of teacher
      community. Teachers College Record, 103(6), 942-1012.
Lave, J. (1996). The practice of learning. In J. L. S. Chaiklin (Ed.), Understanding
      Practice: Perspectives on activity and context. Cambridge: Cambridge University
      Press.
Lave, J., & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated Learning: Legitimate Peripheral Participation.
      New York: Cambridge University Press.
Little, J. W. (2002). Locating learning in teachers' communities          of practice: Opening up
      problems of analysis in records of everyday work. Teaching and Teacher
      Education, 18(8), 917-946.
Miles, M. B. & Huberman, A. M. (1994).Qualitative data analysis (2nd ed.). Thousand
      Oaks, CA: Sage Publications, Inc.Putnam, R. & Borko, T. H. (2000). What do
      new views of knowledge and thinking have to say about research on teacher
      learning? Education Researcher, 29(1), 4-17.
Rogoff, B. (2003). The cultural nature of human development. New York: Oxford
      University Press.
Seidman, I.E. (1998). Interviewing as qualitative research (2nd ed.). New York: Teachers
      College Press.
Strauss, A. & Corbin, J. (1998). Basics of qualitative research. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage
      Publications.
Warren, B., & M., Ogonowski. (1998). From knowledge to knowing: An inquiry into
      teacher learning in science. Newton, MA: Center for the Development of
      Teaching, Education Development Center, Inc.
Wenger, E. (1998). Communities of Practice: Learning, meaning, and identity.
      Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

                                               116  ·  © ISLS
