                                                 ICLS 2010    ·  Volume 1
!

             Knowledge Transmission and Engineering Teaching

          Amy Zhang and Monica Cardella, Purdue University, 701 West Stadium Avenue, West Lafayette, IN,
                                                     47906, USA
                                     Email: zhang212@purdue.edu, cardella@purdue.edu
!
          Abstract: This paper explores the concept of knowledge as well as the process of knowledge
          transmission, both in general and specifically regarding engineering knowledge.              This study
          focuses on twenty-four parents who discussed the activities that they engage in to help their
          children   learn about    engineering  during    hour-long    interviews.      The     intergenerational
          transmission of knowledge that is described in the interviews is analyzed through 1) social
          structural and cultural analysis, and 2) a case study.     We find that parents teach children what
          they perceived as engineering knowledge, which is not necessarily true but rather subjective,
          and believed to be a fact based on the parent's other forms of knowledge learned in the past.
          Understanding this will help us look at engineering education from a new perspective, and the
          application  of  this understanding   could   be  used  to   help provide   non-engineering     parents
          alternative ways to support their wish to explore engineering knowledge with their children.

Introduction
This paper deals with pre-college students' engineering education within the backdrop of the current state of
pre-college engineering education in the United States: while engineering has traditionally not be explicitly
taught in the K-12 schools as a subject, there is growing interest in incorporating engineering in K-12 schools
(e.g. NAE    and  NRC   2009).     A  small  number  of  states  have   even begun    adopting    engineering   curriculum
standards.   However,   as this  is a recent  change    to K-12   education,    there is  little research on  engineering
pedagogical   content   knowledge     or the  impact    of engineering    instruction  on  students'    understanding     of
engineering. As such, rather than focus on expert teaching practices exhibited by K-12 teachers, this study
focuses   on the  teaching  practices of   engineering  parents.  While   this  expertise may     not  always   translate to
practices that classroom teachers can adopt, we believe that some of the parents' practices can inform classroom
instruction as well as the development of resources for non-engineer parents. Additional motivation for the
study  is based   in a  desire  to  increase  diversity in  engineering   at the   college-level   and  beyond   (i.e. post
baccalaureate studies and industry practice).
          In order to investigate the practices that parents with engineering backgrounds employ to help their
children learn about engineering, we interviewed 24 parents who self-identified as parents of children aged 2-18
who "help their children learn about engineering." As we selected our study participants, we were careful to
include   parents  from different   engineering  backgrounds      in   addition to academic      vs. industry vs.  mix-of-
industry-and-academic backgrounds, as well as parents of children of difference ages and sexes. Each parent
participated in a semi-structured interview that last approximately 60 minutes. We began by asking about their
children; their children's schools; their academic background. Then we asked them about how they helped their
children to learn about engineering, and asked follow-up questions based on their responses.
          The interviews   were    conducted  among     24 participants,  among    whom    there   are 12  males,  and    12
females.   14 parents out of 24 are faculty members, 2 are PhD students, and 8 are in industry.               Both of the
parents who are PhD students have had respectively 9 to 30 years working experience in industry prior to the
PhD program.     The parents' work and educational backgrounds touch on 20 specific engineering fields, such as
civil engineering, biomedical engineering, aerospace, electrical engineering, and industrial engineering.           Out of
their 50 children, 26 are girls and 24 are boys. Their ages range from 17 months to 29 years old. Besides 11
outliers, there are 39 children who age from 2 to 18. The interview questions have covered parents' background,
interactions  with   children (content   they teach their  children,   teaching  strategies, and     children's reactions),
parenting ideology, and parents' own understandings of engineering.
          In this  paper,  we   use  these  interviews  to explore     parents' roles  as teachers;    how knowledge      is
transmitted intergenerationally; and interplays of socio-cultural factors and parents' own history of learning that
impacted parents' activities. We do this by focusing on four participants: Laura, an Asian mother of one son and
one daughter and is pursuing a PhD in software engineering; Liz, a Professor teaching biomedical engineering
who has a four year old son; Tom, a father working in the industry with an engineering background covering
several fields (metallurgical engineering, material engineering, and process engineering) and who has a 2.5-
year-old daughter and a 5.5-year-old son; and Aaron who is a father of a 4.5-year-old son and is a professor with
an electrical engineering background.

                                                              !
!
                                                    1095    ·   © ISLS
                                                ICLS 2010     ·  Volume 1
!

          We begin this paper by discussing the concept of knowledge. By dividing knowledge into specific
knowledge and common sense knowledge, we are able to analyze interplays of the two during the process of the
intergenerational knowledge transmission­ how the former is based on and restrained by the latter which is
deeply embedded in and in turn reinforces the former.       The process of intergenerational knowledge transmission
is analyzed on two levels ­ social structural and cultural analysis and processual analysis. In order to understand
the meaning of parents' teaching activities, we have to look at the social structure and cultural environments in
which these practices are performed. Structural analysis as a methodology thus helps us understand 1) that
parents' educational practices are shaped by the basic principles of their common sense knowledge, 2) their
ideology of education functions as to ensure the common sense knowledge to be put in their daily practices and
obeyed, 3) how different social systems such as families, engineers, and different ethnic groups are integrated, 4)
how individual parents justify their practices through scrutiny, and 5) how through the interaction between
individual parents and the society, both the parents' goals and the social expectations become realized.

Knowledge transmission through teaching and learning
In a footnote of Foucult's  Archaeology of Knowledge (Foucult, 2002:16), his translator A. M. Sheridan Smith
wrote:

          "The   English   word   `knowledge'     translates     the   French    `connaissance'   and    `savoir'.
          `Connaissance' refers to a particular corpus of knowledge, a particular discipline ­ biology or
          economics,  for  example.   `savoir'  which  is   usually    defined   as knowledge    in  general, the
          totality of connaissance is used by Foucult in an underlying, rather than an overall, way. He
          has himself offered the following comment on his usage of the terms:
                  `By   connaissance   I mean   the  relation   of the   subject to the  object and  the
                  formal rules that govern it. Savior refers to the conditions that are necessary
                  in  a   particular period   for this or     that type    of object  to   be given  to
                  connaissance and for this and that enunciation to be formulated'
          Throughout this translation I have used the English word, flowed, where the meaning required
          it, the the appropriate French word in parentheses."

          There are two types of knowledge implied in the above message which are not mutually exclusive. One
is expertise or skills gained in a specific field through education or learning; the other is implied above by
Foucult, that is ­ different epistemologies we believe in and practice every day to know and make sense of the
world (i.e, common sense knowledge). However scientific the former might be, it is always limited by the latter
which    we  practice almost   unconsciously    in   everyday      life. However    encompassing     our  common     sense
knowledge might seem to be, our specific knowledge gained from systematic learning in turn reconstructs our
common sense knowledge by a series of rejections, confirmations, and readjustments. Therefore, as Hansen
states, "the transmission of knowledge is subject both to conservative forces and to tendencies toward continual
redefinition" (Hansen, 1982:26).
          In our case, the specific knowledge being transmitted from parents to children is more transparent. The
knowledge is everything that parents think is engineering related ­ fixing a household item, building an electric
circuit, practicing mathematics   skills, understanding     how    things  work,    etc. The  common   sense  knowledge,
however, is more complicated, pervasive, and taken for granted during most of our waking hours.
          According to Hansen (1982), common sense knowledge ­ which he calls cultural knowledge ­ is a set
of maxim, ideas about human nature, aesthetic preferences, values, affective patterns, beliefs, etc. (Hansen,
1982:25). According to Leiter (1980) and Schutz, common sense knowledge does not only include the "rules of
thumbs that are vague, contradictory, and self serving", but it can be studied from three dimensions ­ the stock
of knowledge, the natural attitude of everyday life, and the practices of common sense reasoning (Leiter, 1980).
Much of these dimensions hinges upon the various assumptions people make about each other and each other's
reasoning. In this study of parents' teaching experiences, we examine the process of knowledge transmission by
looking   at the interactions of  these   two  types  of  knowledge       and  how   parents  reorganize  these    types of
contradictory as well as mutually sustaining knowledge to selectively teach it to the next generation.

Structural & Cultural Analysis
Knowledge transmission reflects social structure. Social structure is viewed by Sewell (1992) as "dual", as
"both  the   medium   and the outcome    of the   practices   which  constitute   social  systems".  Social structure also
"differs in `depth' (how pervasive, invisible, and taken-for-granted their schemas are), and `power' (how great
the resources they generate from)" (Sewell, 1992:22-6). Practices are therefore enabled as well as constrained
by social  structure, and  these practices  in  turn make     the  transformation   as   well as the continuity of   social

                                                              !
!
                                                    1096    ·   © ISLS
                                              ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1
!

structure possible. Parents' everyday teaching practices such as the types of knowledge selected by parents, their
children's expected responsibilities and privileges, and the descriptions of children's "good" and "dissatisfying"
performances (which reflects their core values) are enabled and constrained by what facilities are around the
parents, what methods are favored by the mainstream culture (e.g., what they see from the mass media), what
parents can afford to do, what parents' peer groups are doing, and how parents cope with their children's school
curriculum.
        In our 24 interviews, there are two channels through which parents teach their children engineering
related knowledge: material resources and daily interactions. These two channels are not necessarily mutually
exclusive. The most commonly used material resources are manipulative toys, computer programs, websites,
books (either literature or science oriented), TV programs and DVDs, and trips to museums or exhibitions. The
use of these resources is largely determined by the manufacturing and consumption preferences of the society,
distribution of knowledge and skills, relationship between specific knowledge and its financial reward as well as
its social reward, access to the resources due to the parents' social class, parents' financial ability, household
locality, and the children's age, gender, birth order, and their assumed personality.
        For example, the parents' financial ability decides what types of toys are on the top of their hierarchy
and for what purpose the parents are buying the toys. Laura (1), one of our parents who participated in the study,
mentioned that she used Barbie dolls as tools to help her daughter practice counting when she was 2 years old.
In contrast, imagine a low-income family with many children. Here, the parents might use objects that are more
practical and affordable or objects that they already have in their possession. The purpose of buying a Barbie
doll is different, too. For a low-income family, parents may buy their children a Barbie doll based on their wish
to provide their children a toy that other children possess. In contrast, Laura might have multiple different
considerations. For example, a different Barbie doll would increase the variety of toys for her children, and the
toy itself can be used  as a teaching mechanism    (and     Barbie's  latest career   as  software engineer, though
announced after our study concluded, may provide yet another opportunity for parents to teach their children
engineering concepts) .
        Another channel through which parents teach their children engineering concepts is daily interactions.
Some parents take 10 to 20 minutes every night to answer some questions before their child goes to bed, usually
curious questions about nature. In doing so, they claim to encourage their children's curiosity, a characteristic
which is highly valued in a middle class American family with both parents systematically and well educated.
Some parents invented a mini project such as building an electric circuit or fixing an old computer to engage
their children in the problem solving process in a "natural" environment. Most parents have taken their children
to work, and some of them have exposed their children to specific objects they use at work. According to the
Neo-Marxist conflict theory (Collins, 1985), such a way to organize interactions reflects the social status group
of the parents. Additionally, through associations with members in the same group, the parents share common
status cultures such as language styles, parenting styles, requirements for education, interpersonal dynamics,
values, topics, etc (Collins, 1985). Such ways in which educational interactions take place make it possible for
the children  to become   technologically capable,     curious, creative, and  able    to fix problems.  These   are
expectations that overlap in both the macro American culture and the engineering culture specifically and are
constructed under these certain social structures. In meeting the expectations, the social structure in turn is
reinforced.
        The above analysis is not to imply that these parents ­ who share a similar social class status, academic
backgrounds, parenting styles, and expectations for children ­ as a group are homogenous. The knowledge these
parents choose to pass on to their children through selected strategies reflect the integrated core values of 1) the
mainstream   Anglo-American  culture, 2)  the microscopic     engineering    culture, 3)  various  subcultures (race,
gender, nationality, etc.), and 4) the parents' historical experiences. For example, students in American culture
are encouraged to take initiative and be motivated to learn. !Students are expected actively ask questions and
participate in class discussions and other activities; they are frequently rewarded for contributing to the class and
giving critical and constructive ideas"(Pai & Adler, 2001:221).     Self-motivation, independence, curiosity, and
creativeness are considered as desirable qualities (Pai & Adler, 2001).      Children are expected to reflect such
qualities as well. Liz, who is a professor teaching biomedical engineering, complained that her son doesn't have
initiative to learn. When we asked her to describe her son, she carefully said that her son is "different" from
other kids in the sense that he doesn't seem to have a lot curiosity, and he doesn't ask a lot questions. Liz's
worry came from the awareness that her son doesn't have some of those core values that are preferred by this
society: curiosity and initiative. While every other kid is praised for being curious, Liz is concerned that her
sons' passive learning characteristic will not help him succeed.
        As Swidler (2001) postulated, social structure depends on the mutual reproduction of schemas and
resources. Schemas are the semiotic codes shared by a group of people and used by them to make sense of the
world. A schema is what makes a resource meaningful as a resource (2001: 78). Take our parent study as an
example. These parents with engineering backgrounds are well educated by formal institutions with at least a
Masters degree while some have a Ph.D. The engineering schemas ­ such as solving an engineering problem ­

                                                          !
!
                                                  1097  ·   © ISLS
                                                 ICLS 2010   ·    Volume 1
!

that are deeply embedded in heavily scripted engineering classroom interactions are internalized. Thus when
parents who share the same engineering schemas see a child taking a toy apart, they think of the action as
initiating a problem which leads to the next step ­ putting the toy back together. However, parents who don't
share  the same   schemas   are more   likely to blame    their   children for  breaking the  toy  and possibly  causing
unnecessary financial repercussion. The schemas parents internalized during their own learning process became
their own rationale they use to interpret resources and interact with their children who in turn learn to interpret
things by using the same schemas. With the ongoing mutual reproduction of resources and schemas the social
structure is sustained.
         Different parenting styles may also be attributed to different sub-cultural backgrounds. Aaron, who is a
professor  described how    he  took  his son  down    to  their  basement     and explained  to  him  the structure and
functions of the water  pipes.  Laura, who is a Chinese woman pursuing her         Ph.D. in America says that she   is not
very satisfied with the mathematics education here. "There's too much play-work here in American elementary
schools", she said, "I still think the Chinese way is better". She gave her children math practices to do and
graded them like a teacher. Our interviews suggest that parents within engineering fields but with different
specializations have different understandings of what engineering is and therefore have different focuses on
teaching   what they think  is  engineering   related. Parents    who  see  engineering  as  problem   solving  are more
inclined to initiate a small project to get their children involved, and the focus is on how things work. One
parent  who  calls  herself a   "soft engineer"  (which    is   generally   associated  with  problem   solving, design,
communication skills, and teamwork) focuses more on the basic scientific and numeral skills which she thinks
are fundamental and crucial to engineering. Tom, who has worked in industry for a long period of time (as
opposed to other parents who are in academia) sees that engineering is not always problem solving but most of
the times is just maintaining, to "keep the machine running" as he said. However, his teaching strategies don't
seem to be too different.
         According to Durkheim's social order theory, the study of social structure focuses on the moral order,
the central value system that though created by people, has an independent and external existence and acts as a
constraining   and conditioning  force  upon   individual    people   (Meighan     and Sirah-Blatchford's,  2003:   252).
Parsons, like Durkheim, saw social order achieved through the operation of an integrating system common to all
members of society; yet he also emphasizes how individuals constantly adjust themselves through scrutinizing
the process of socialization (2003:256). Structural analysis as a methodology thus helps us understand 1) that
parents' educational practices are shaped by the basic principles of their common sense knowledge, 2) their
ideology of education functions as to ensure the common sense knowledge to be put in their daily practices and
obeyed, 3) how different social systems such as families, engineers, and different ethnic groups are integrated, 4)
how individual parents justify their practices through scrutiny, and 5) how through the interaction between
individual parents and the society, both the parents' goals and the social expectations become realized. Further,
the integration of structural analysis, cultural analysis, and Swindler's understanding of structure as the mutual
reproduction   of  schemas  and  resources    provides  us a   different   perspective that  gives meaning   to  parents'
teaching activities. Therefore, we not only focus on the relationship between individuals and society, but also
the meaning of individual practices under certain schemas constructed by the members of the society (e.g. a
child taking a toy apart is perceived by engineering parents as an aspect of curiosity and an initiative step to
problem fixing).   However, the study of social structure and culture focuses on the relatively stable features of
behavior   and  context and  the  patterned   arrangement    of   relationships  among   individuals  and  groups   while
leaving the problem of process untouched. We are also interested in the process of how these schemas came into
being and how parents reorganize the messy and conflicting knowledge from different levels of social systems
and transmit the knowledge to the next generation. In the following case study, we delve into these processes by
analyzing a specific interview with a female engineer who we think is particular in representing both conflicts
and integration of all kinds of knowledge she is trying to pass to her children.

Case Study
Our case study will center on an interview with a female engineer and parent. In order to better reveal the
process  of intergenerational   knowledge     transmission,    in which    the parent  tried to  put different pieces of
knowledge   (engineering    knowledge,    the parent's  own    cultural  background,    and  the  mainstream   American
culture perceived to be true by her) together, we follow Hansen's suggestion (Hansen, 1982, 1990) by dividing
the following analysis into several steps. These steps will allow us to see how the social structures are created,
maintained,  challenged,  and   modified  over   time  as  well   as process   an  individual's adaptation  necessary  to
his/her changing environment (Hansen, 1990: 192). The steps are: 1) the definition of the situation; 2) the
cultural significance associated with communication channels used to encode and decode communications; 3)
the interplay among channels of transmission; 4) the communicative-interpretive repertoires of participants,
including communicative competence in the codes being used, 5) the communicative strategies participants used
to realize their respective interests and purpose, and 6) the role and identity attributions.

                                                             !
!
                                                    1098   ·   © ISLS
                                                  ICLS 2010    ·  Volume 1
!

          Laura  is a  Chinese    woman      pursuing   her    Ph.D. degree   in  engineering,  specialized   in  software
programming, computer networks, and information security. Her husband is also an engineer and currently
working in industry.   Prior to pursuing her Ph.D., Laura had eight years of industry experience. Laura has two
children, a son and a daughter.    In the following conversation, you will see Laura trying to tell the interviewer
what kind   of  engineering     related knowledge    she taught   her   children. She  also stated that  she  was a  "soft
engineer"  and   that many   things     she had  to  do  at work   are   math related.  Therefore, she  viewed    math as
fundamental for engineering.

          Interviewer: so you started doing that after they have learned some math at school?

          Laura: yes . but actually , their math, uh-mostly, I uh taught them math because their math is
          more advanced than what they are learning at school?[ Interviewer: uh-hmm] so I uh, the-
          they learned their math at home, basically. ((chuckle))

          Interviewer: Oh, OK. So-

          Laura:                 [Schools, especially middle schools here are not too demanding here in
          America?    I would say American education here, eh- even in the best middle schools, in west
          Lafayette, I know a lot of parents, the way they teach math, I think it's not demanding enough,
          so that if I don't teach them at home, I feel like their talent will get wasted. So ((chuckle)),
          that's how I feel.

          Interviewer: So are there other ways in which you tried to explain math to them?

          Laura: um, see, uh-here in America, we like to say let's play games and do math. [Interviewer:
          uh-hmm]And we don't do it that way. I do it in the Chinese way. I came from china, and I,
          and I-learned my way there. Ah-I teach them Chinese way((laugh))

          Interviewer:                   [OK. So it's kinda like complementary-

          Laura:                                                                        [yeah  I thought it was
          very important. ((laugh)) [A: OK. That's interesting.] I actually think the Chinese way of
          teaching math is better? ((laugh))

          According to her description, her definition of the current        situation was that she is not satisfied with
both the  depth  of the math     education   in America     in general   and the  play-work  teaching  strategies she has
observed  from   other parents   and    schools. The   school    was wasting  her  children's  talent. She  expected  that
teaching her children math the Chinese way would stop her children from falling behind where they were
supposed to be, were they raised in China.
          Apparently there are two conflicting communicative channels that are associated with two different
cultures.  One   channel     is associated   with    mainstream   American    culture   and stresses   the importance  of
autonomous study, independence, initiative, and having fun, especially at the level of elementary school. The
other channel through which the knowledge is transmitted is associated with Chinese culture which values
cooperative  study,   passiveness  (e.g.    students are expected    to  follow   the guidance and   authority,  and learn
through   watching,   listening  and    emulating),  memorizing      the knowledge,    and  heavy  practices. In  general,
American school personnel see schooling as a process of developing the whole person (Pai &Adler, 2001:220-
223). Thus non-academic activities are considered an important part of schooling. Playing, for example, is
perceived as a strategy to initiate children's curiosity to learn as well as a way to develop the children's social
skills. As Spindler and Spindler (1990:37) generalized, one of the core values of the Anglo-American society is
a sociable, get-along-well orientation. The ideology of early children's education is also to explore and support
their own interests instead of pushing them to any one direction (which is almost a taboo in the interviews with
parents). However, in a Chinese mom's eyes, playing at school ­ where only academic related activities are
supposed to take place ­ can be a distraction to the child's intellectual training and cause anxiety for the mother.
Being a Chinese mom, Laura also expects her children to be among the top students in their classes. Even
though she claimed that she didn't intend to push her children, she was very proud when she told me that her
son had won several math competitions and her daughter ­ who didn't show very much enthusiasm in math ­
was a year ahead of her classmates. Facing this anxiety, Laura felt the impulse to change the situation. She then
went on to tell me how she achieved this change.

                                                               !
!
                                                      1099   ·   © ISLS
                                                ICLS 2010   ·   Volume 1
!

         Another channel through which Laura teaches her children engineering related knowledge is associated
with the history of her engineering learning process. Most of Laura's education was done in China where she
also had 8 years of experience working in engineering industrial practice. She is also currently studying for her
Ph.D. in engineering in an American institution from which she has internalized the core engineering values in
the U.S. through her learning practices.    Her perspective of what engineering is can be very different from the
mainstream perspectives as we shall see below:

         :: (My daughter)-she's very self sufficient,? She, she, she cooks her own pancakes,?((chuckle))
         [A:oh]  so we   think that  would   related  to  engineering.    you  wouldn't   think  cooking   and
         engineering (are related), but engineering, uh, you follow a direction, mix the eggs and flour
         together, ((laugh))[A: right]. I think that'll will be good-]

         Interviewer:
         [It's a, i-it's a process of production?

         Laura: Right.   Production.   And  also  you  know    the modern     grinder, the  mixer. So  `cause
         grandma has to do it by hands, she does it by hand. And with the mixer, they know this is the-
         because there is engineer.(ing).

         The above conversation shows that engineering is perceived by Laura as a symbol with two meanings:
1) engineering is to "follow a direction" or follow instructions, and 2) engineering is to design innovations
which improve our lives. The second meaning is a commonly shared meaning within the American engineering
culture, whereas the first one is gained from Laura's history of learning and working in China. While the second
meaning   is articulated frequently    and almost    throughout   the  entire  interview,  it is the first meaning    of
engineering ­ follow the instruction that Laura uses to construct her real parenting practices. For example,
feeling the anxiety that the school is not demanding enough at math teaching, Laura brought home many math
practice sheets for her children to work on, and "I grade them like a teacher", she said. If the children did the
problems wrong, she would circle the wrong answers and ask them to redo the questions. Laura also bought her
children the Stanford EPGY (Educational Program for Gifted Youth), a computer based program for math, and
asked them to practice by following the program's instructions at least half an hour each day. Both solutions
consist of two types of instruction following: one is to follow Laura's own instruction to finish the work she
gave to her children, the other one is to study math by following the instruction of the program.
         When asked about what she usually taught to her children, just like all of the other parents we have
interviewed, Laura felt the necessity to immediately claim that she didn't really teach her children anything
specific because she  wanted   her children   to  be free   to choose  what   they like to  do.  However,    in the later
description of how her daughter learned math, she first showed some dissatisfaction since her daughter wasn't
as motivated to learn math as her son; she then said she felt lucky because her daughter doesn't really hate math
even though she didn't show much enthusiasm; at last, she was proud to say that her daughter, although not as
successful as her son, was still doing very good at math and her level was one year more advanced than her
peers. Therefore, by articulating what is expected by mainstream society and then actually practicing under
completely opposite schemas, the social values are sustained and Laura's personal purpose is realized. Laura
also did not have to be fully conscious during the process of readjustment.
         As we have shown above, the interview with Laura was full of contradictories. As a self-selected
participant, she was attracted by our flyer looking for parents who transmit engineering knowledge to their next
generation and told us that this project was interesting. She might have been interested in our project for two
possible reasons: 1) our requirement of participants confirmed her self-presentation with multiple identities ­ a
mom, an engineer, and a responsible mom (for she gives "good" education to her children), and 2) she hopes our
research will provide  more  learning   opportunities.   Either  reason  implies  her  will to  expose her   children to
engineering  knowledge.   However,     she came   to us  and   claimed   that she had  never   intentionally taught  her
children anything specifically about engineering like almost every other participant does. She tried very hard to
leave us an impression that she is a good mom, and therefore will give her children enough freedom to explore
what their interests are and be supportive. However, this concept of a good mom is challenged when she saw her
children doing activities that are non-academic and thought such activities might hinder her children's potential
to become successful, for being a good mom also means having successful children. It is possible that she did
not teach her children engineering knowledge specifically as she stated, yet the fact that she was attracted to our
research was a self-presentation as an engineer who is self reflexive and aware of the many benefits our society
has credited to the engineering field.
         As shown above, when unfolding the process of knowledge transmission it is important to understand
the definition of the situation (what is happening, who is present, and what is expected to happen next), the

                                                            !
!
                                                    1100  ·    © ISLS
                                                ICLS 2010   ·   Volume 1
!

interactions among   different  channels through   which    the  knowledge     is transmitted, how   individuals  either
consciously or sub-consciously manipulate the meanings associated with different social groups, and the process
of role making within such situations. It is in people's interactions that we find things meaningful.

Summary
In our 24 interviews, parents discussed teaching their children engineering related knowledge: through two
primary channels: material resources and daily interactions. The most commonly used material resources are
manipulative toys, computer programs, websites, books (either literature or science oriented), TV programs and
DVDs,   and   trips to museums     or exhibitions.  The     use  of  these   resources is  largely determined    by  the
manufacturing and consumption preferences of the society, distribution of knowledge and skills, relationship
between specific knowledge and its financial reward as well as its social reward, access to the resources due to
the parents' social class, parents' financial ability, household locality, and the children's age, gender, birth order,
and their assumed personality.     The  daily  interactions through   which   parents  claimed  to teach  their children
engineering  knowledge     have revealed different  forms     of knowledge    that have   been transmitted   along  with
engineering knowledge. During the analysis of the process of knowledge transmission, we were able to see both
conflicts and integrations of different forms of knowledge, and how parents tried to put the pieces together in
order to achieve their goals of education.    Both channels showed that knowledge is messy and exists in many
different forms, and that when engineering is taught by parents to their children as one type of knowledge, other
forms of  knowledge    are also inevitably  active in this  process.   These   forms   of knowledge  (culture,  specific
knowledge, schema, practice, and etc) help in shaping and in turn reinforcing each other.
         Understanding the concept of knowledge and the process of knowledge transmission allows us to come
out of our own bubble and look at engineering education from a different perspective.              During the learning
process in general, we draw the information from our stock of knowledge, assume the existence of order and
pattern, and seek to organize our perceptions in such way to discern it (Hansen, 1990:4). We categorize the
information  by  using our  internalized hypotheses    learned    from   the past  and orient  our ways   to export  the
knowledge by reference to these hypotheses.     During the engineering education process within the household in
particular, parents teach children what they perceived as engineering knowledge, which is not necessarily true
but rather subjective, and believed to be a fact based on the parent's other forms of knowledge learned in the
past. In the future study, we intend to apply our understanding of knowledge transmission to k-12, and pre-
school engineering education. We intend to build on the study presented in this paper through further interviews
with parents  as well  as  observations  of parents   and   children at  play. We   also  plan to  extend the   work by
providing resources for non-engineer parents to use as well as using our research findings to develop activities
to use in formal (i.e. classroom) settings. The study described in this paper also shows us that increasing access
to engineering education for children who might not traditionally be exposed to engineering is not as simple as
providing ideas for activities that parents or teachers can engage in with children; instead the parents' and
teachers' prior engineering experiences and cultural experiences can deeply impact the way that they approach
engineering education. Thus these engineering and cultural beliefs must be understood in order to impact pre-
college engineering education.

Endnote
(1) All names have been replaced with pseudonyms.

References
Cole, M., Gay, J., Glick, J. A., and Sharp, D. W., (1971). The cultural context of learning and thinking. An
         exploration in experimental anthropology. London, Methuen & Co Ltd.
Collins, R. (1985). Functional and conflict theories of educational stratification. Schools and society: A reader
         in education and schooling. Palo Alto, CA: Mayfield, In J. H. Ballantine.
deMarrais, K. B. & LeCompte, M. D. (1999). The way schools work. A sociolological analysis of education.
         New York, Longman.
Dupuis,  A.M.  &    Gordon, R.  L. (1997).    Philosophy    of   education in  historical perspective. Second   edition.
         Lanham, University Press of America, Inc.
Foucault, M.  (2002).   The  archaeology    of knowledge.     Translated   by  A.  M.  Sheridan   Smith.  Park  Square,
         Routledge Classics.

                                                            !
!
                                                   1101   ·   © ISLS
                                              ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1
!

Hansen, J. F. (1990). Sociocultural perspectives on human learning. Prospect Heights, Illinois, Waveland Press,
         Inc.
              (1982). "From  background   to foreground:    toward  an anthropology    of learning."  Anthropology
         &Education Quarterly 12(2): 13.
Kunda,   G. (1922).  Engineering culture. Control and     commitment    in a high-tech  corporation.  Philadelphia,
         Temple University Press.
Leiter, K. (1980). A Primer in Ethnomethodology. New York, Oxford University Press.
Lincoln, Y. S., Guba, E. G., (1985), Naturalistic inquiry, Sage Publications, New Haven, CT.
Meighan Roland, S.-B. I. (2003). A Sociology of educating. London and New York, Continuum.
Montgomery, J. D. (1997),   Values in education. Social capital formation in Asia and the Pacific. Edited. Hollis,
         Hollis Publishing Company.
Moore, R. (2007). Sociology of Knowledge and Education.         New York, Continuum International Publishing
         Group.
(NAE and NRC) National Academy of Engineering and National Research Council (2009). Engineering in K-12
         Education:   Understanding  the  Status and    Improving     the  Prospects. Washington,    DC,  National
         Academies Press.
Pai, Y., and  Adler,  Susan A. (2001).  Cultural foundations    of  education. Upper   Saddle River,  New    Jersey,
         Columbus, Ohio, Merrill Prentice Hall.
Peak, L., (1991), Learning to go to school in Japan, University of California Press, Ypsilanti, MI, .
Spindler, G., Spindler, L., (1987), Interpretive Ethnography of Education: At Home and Abroad, Lawrence
         Erlbaum, Prospect Heights, IL.
      (1992), Cultural process and ethnography: an anthropological perspective, in M. Lecompte, W. Milroy, J.
         Preissle (Eds), Academic Press, Hillsdale, NJ.
Sewell, W. F, (1992). "A theory of structure: duality, agency, and transformation". The American Journal of
         Sociology, Volume 98, No. 1 (Jul., 1992), 1-29.
Swiddler, A.  (2001).  What  anchors cultural  practices.   The Practice   Turn in Contemporary      Theory. T. R.
         Schataki, Cetina Karin Knorr, and Savigny Eike von. London and New York, Routledge.

                                                          !
!
                                                 1102   ·   © ISLS
