                                             ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

 Made by Hand: Gestural Practices for the Building of Complex
Concepts in Face-to-Face, One-on-One Learning Arrangements

                 Stephanie Scopelitis, University of Washington, scope@u.washington.edu
                     Siri Mehus, University of Washington, smehus@u.washington.edu
                 Reed Stevens, Northwestern University, reed-stevens@northwestern.edu

         Abstract: Our study investigates how the hands and body can serve as communicative,
         cognitive   and  interactional  resources when     they  are  employed   in the  teaching    and
         learning of complex science and math concepts.        We consider how speakers and hearers
         produce, take up, and re-use gestures to support explanation and conceptual formation in
         expert-to-non-expert conversation. The study suggests that in face-to-face, one-on-one
         interaction gesturing plays an important role in facilitating the joint achievement of new
         conceptual understanding for novice learners. We believe that the gestural practices used
         to explain complex concepts in informal interactions can be profitably extended to the
         teaching  and   learning  of STEM    (science,    technology, engineering   and  mathematics)
         subjects in other learning arrangements such as the classroom.

Introduction
Language is an important resource for teaching and learning, but it is not the only one. The intent of this
study is to closely examine how both non-verbal and verbal modalities are employed together in face-to-
face, one-on-one interactions in which experts in the fields of math and science explain complex concepts
to non-experts. Paying attention to how multiple modalities are employed in informal face-to-face, one-on-
one explanations of complex concepts can offer valuable insight into how we design practices for teaching
and learning in other learning arrangements such as the classroom.
         Our study particularly investigates the coordination of gestures and body movement as we as
speakers and hearers jointly produce, take up, and re-use gestures to support explanation and concept
formation   in the context  of  conversation.  We     consider   gestures and   body posturing    as  participating
elements  in   communication    (Becvar,  Holland     &  Hutchins,    2005;  Goodwin,    2000;    Hutchins,  1996;
Kendon, 2001, 2004; Stevens & Hall, 1998; Streeck, 1994, 1996) as we also examine the hands and body
as explicit, tangible teaching tools.
         The   study   illustrates   how  gesture  facilitates   the  joint  achievement    of    new  conceptual
understanding for novice learners in face-to-face interaction. We believe that the gestural practices used to
explain  and   understand complex     concepts in  informal    interactions can  be  profitably   extended   to the
teaching and learning of STEM subjects across learning sites. Our study concludes with the suggestion
that as we create ever more sophisticated educational designs, we may need to pay more attention to the
potential of the most readily available resources ­ the hands and the body.

Theoretical Background and Perspective
Our   overarching  interest is  in   how  knowledge     is produced    in  interaction. We    see  learning  as  an
interactional  process that  is dynamically    constructed     through actions   and    inter-relationships among
resources (Hutchins, 1995; Stevens & Hall, 1998). These resources include participants, settings, multiple
modalities,  objects and  sequences    of activities. In   our analysis,  we  employ    the concept   of  learning
arrangements, which refers to social and material configurations that people arrange for learning, with the
question of   whether  learning   is actually achieved     being  an empirical  one  for  investigation  (Stevens,
Satwicz & McCarthy, 2007). This concept allows us to examine the resources made available in face-to-
face, one-on-one   learning arrangements    and   compare    them    with other learning  arrangements.     We  are
therefore able to treat gesture as both a technical resource and an interactional resource in the active and
collaborative  enterprise   of  teaching  and  learning.   We    consider   how  the    hands  act as  media    for
representations and how the hands and body participate in coordinating available, external representations
in interaction to achieve the end task of understanding.
         Our   study   concentrates   on  teaching    and   learning  in  STEM    fields  (science,   technology,
engineering and mathematics) and provides perspective on the view that teaching and learning in the
STEM fields involves the use of multiple representations such as graphs, models, and charts (Kress, 2001;

                                                1127   ·   © ISLS
                                              ICLS 2010   ·   Volume 1

Stevens & Hall, 1998). We consider how the hands act as flexible, manipulable, and literally "ready-to-
hand"   embodied    resources  for representation.  We    also    respond  to   recent literature that   looks at  how
professionals in science fields build theory in collaboration.         Studies suggest that idea construction and
knowledge communication in professional settings happen through an interactional exchange that employs
multiple  resources   that include   gestures (Becvar   et    al, 2005;   Hall, Stevens   &  Torralba,    2003; Ochs,
Gonzales & Jacoby, 1996; Stevens & Hall, 1998).
          Much of the recent work on the use of gestures in teaching and learning takes a psychological
orientation.  Such research has suggested that gestures in the classroom can be used to reinforce and
extend meaning provided in speech, can aid the gesturer in thought production, and can reveal cognitive
processes as a means for evaluating understanding and guiding instruction (McNeill, 1992, 2005; Singer &
Goldin-Meadow, 2005; Wagner, Alibali, Flevares & Goldin-Meadow, 1997; Ozyurek, 2002). We expand
upon  this psychological    orientation as  we  consider    not   just the   relationship between   gesture    use and
cognitive  processes,  but  also the role  that gestures    play   in  communication.     Attending   to both  aspects
simultaneously provides a more complete and realistic view of how gestures participate in teaching and
learning.

Methods
The  study   employs   the methodology    of  microanalysis       of videotaped   interaction, which   involves    fine-
grained, qualitative analysis of sequences of talk and action. This process of analysis allows for the close
investigation of  moment-to-moment,       turn-by-turn,   interactional    exchanges   giving   detailed  information
about what is happening in a particular instance.
          The database consists of video-recorded conversations in which experts in STEM fields explained
complex concepts to non-experts. Participants came from a pool of volunteers who responded to requests
for participation that were distributed via e-mail to STEM departments of a large university. Conversations
were  held   primarily  in the  offices and   labs  of  the   experts    and  lasted between    30 and    60  minutes.
Participants discussed topics of their choosing which they deemed as relevant concepts to their defined
discipline and/or   research. The  recorded   interactions    were    logged  and   transcribed   and the verbal   and
gestural techniques used to explain concepts were identified and analyzed.

Data Sources and Evidence
In this paper  we   analyze   segments  from   three  interactions     in which   experts (two    professors   and one
graduate   student) explain   concepts  in  microbiology,     mathematics       and  animal  biology   in one-on-one
conversations with a non-expert. These segments exemplify moments in our data in which the interactions
take a conversational format for exchange of knowledge, as opposed to a lecture-like format in which the
expert delivers information and the learner is relatively passive. Close examination of the use of gesture in
these exchanges     shows  that  the gestures   are not   merely     the  outward   manifestation  of    the speaker's
cognition,   but rather can   be   co-constructed   with    a recipient    in the   service of  building   conceptual
understanding.

Results
Through our analysis we demonstrate that gestures and posturing are not just the unconscious by-product
of a speaker's cognitive processes, but rather often are tactically employed for communicative purposes
that respond to particular contingencies of the situation and perceived learning needs of a recipient. As
evidence for this perspective we outline examples showing how gestures are (1) built step-by-step for and
with  the  recipient,  (2) positioned   and   adjusted  for   the    recipient, (3)  used   to correct   the  learner's
misunderstanding (in response to the learner's gesture), (4) used by both the speaker and the hearer to
drive the interaction toward the shared goal of achieving understanding, (5) treated as a communicative
artifact by speaker and hearer. Finally, we show how, in a single segment, gestures can be seen to support
both cognitive and communicative processes.

Example 1: Constructing a Gestured Object for the Learner
The first segment shows how an expert engages in the process of building, step by step, a gestured object.
Sakina is a graduate student in molecular biology. She is explaining the replication of DNA. She first
explains the basic architecture of DNA.       To do so, she constructs a model layer by layer, enlisting her
hands as the material for construction. Sakina begins the construction for the learner/hearer by saying,

                                                 1128   ·   © ISLS
                                           ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

"Then there are two strands," as she simultaneously lifts her two index fingers, positioned side-by-side,
and lowers them--drawing two lines in space (see Figure 1).

                                Figure 1. "Then there are two strands"

Sakina then raises her left index finger, pointing up, establishing it as a model of the DNA strand. As she
says, "One strand we call it the five prime end and the three prime end?" she lifts her right hand and points
to a spot toward the tip of her finger and then another spot towards the base of her finger. The right hand
thus takes on an indexical role as the left hand models the DNA strand (see Figure 2).

                           Figure 2. "Five prime end and the three prime end"

         Once this basic structure has been established, Sakina alters it to show the learner that the strands
go in opposite directions. She does this by straightening her right index finger and then flipping the hand
so that the finger is now parallel to the left index   finger,  but pointing downward.   She completes this
movement as she utters "anti-parallel" (see Figure 3).

                                        Figure 3. "Anti-parallel"

         The gestured object is sequentially constructed for the benefit of the hearer. This is evidenced by
1) the gaze direction of the participants, 2) the speaker's positioning of the gestured-object and 3) the
speaker's adjustment of the gesture.
         As she begins to set up the model, Sakina shifts her gaze to her hands. The hearer tilts her head to
see Sakina's hands (see figure 4). This move by the hearer displays her recognition that the built gestured-
object is for her, and that this information is consequential for her understanding.

                                              1129   ·   © ISLS
                                            ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

                                 Figure 4. The hearer tilts her head to see S's
                                    gesture; S repositions the gesture.

          Sakina immediately responds to the hearer's head tilt by repositioning the gestured-object so the
hearer can see it. Sakina's adjustment is a marker that the gestured-object is intentionally constructed and
placed  for the learner. The  speaker's  repositioning    also works  to outline   the interactional field.  The
speaker's body acts as frame, defining a field of action.    The speaker and hearer conjointly establish this
workspace: first the hearer tilts her head and then the speaker adjusts.

Example 2: Repairing Understanding through Gesture
In the following example, gestures participate in the repair of a misconception. After Sakina reaches a
completion point in her explanation, the learner initiates a turn by putting up two fingers, thus taking up
the previously constructed gesture-object.  As she does this she says, "Okay so you have the two strands."
The gestured-object she displays, however, shows the parallelism of the strands but fails to show the
opposing directionality (see Figure 5).

                               Figure 5. "Okay, so you have the two strands."

          Sakina moves to repair the misunderstanding, not through speech but through action. Sakina
demonstrates  the anti-parallelism with  her hand.      As she   does this, she   repeats the  learner's previous
phrase, "so  you  have   the two strands." The language     is  the same;   it is the  gesture that provides the
correction. In response, the learner flips her hand to mirror Sakina's and repeats "two strands" (see Figures
6 and 7).

          Figure 6. "So you have two strands."                    Figure 7. "Two strands."

                                               1130   ·   © ISLS
                                             ICLS 2010    ·  Volume 1

Example 3: Assuming the Perspective of the Learner
Another   indicator  that gestures  can be  intentional   teaching  tools  is when   a speaker shifts position to
assume the hearer's perspective on an already built gestured-object.
          Max, a professor of geometry, explains the concept of four-dimensionality. First, he explains a
more   basic  concept:  three-dimensionality. Max     creates  the  object  using  the fingers to represent  three
dimensions    (see Figure   8). Once   he settles on   this  construction,    he then  pauses  in the process  of
explanation. He holds the gesture in its established space and, as though detaching himself from his role of
maker  of  the gestured-object,    he steps out of    conversational  space,   crosses  the interaction field and
observes the built object from the learner/hearer's visual perspective (see figure 9).

                   Figure 8. Three dimensions                       Figure 9. Takes learner/hearer's perspective

Here is a clear embodied representation of recipient design (Sacks, Schegloff & Jefferson, 1974), as the
speaker   not only   constructs   and displays  the   gesture,  but   steps   into the physical   position of  the
learner/hearer in order to "check out" how the gesture looks from that perspective.

Example 4: Thinking through Gesture Together
A fourth segment shows gesture playing a major role in an extended process in which the expert and
learner work toward a shared understanding of a scientific concept. In this case, the expert, Mara, (a
biologist) is explaining how fish gills function. Mara, in response to the learner's question about the shape
of a fish's gills, moves the discussion away from the process of oxygenation and on to the relationship of
surface area to oxygen consumption. In this sequence we see several of the phenomena discussed so far.
For instance:
   ·      gestured-objects are constructed for the benefit of the learner;
   ·      gestures are used to repair and clarify the learner's misconceptions; and,
   ·      gestures participate in the moment-to-moment assessment of where the learner is in the process of
          understanding.
In addition, this segment also shows how the function of the gestured-object may shift as it is passed back
and forth by the expert and learner as it also reveals how the body organizes this exchange.
          There is a dynamic development of a single gesture that happens as the gesture is passed between
the interacting participants. The specific gesture that is the focus of this discussion is made up of an open
hand with the thumb pulled to the palm and four fingers loosely separated (see Figure 10). The gesture
refers to the  gills of   a fish. Mara  introduces    the   gestured-object   by placing it in the center  of  the
interactional space in the learner's sight line and asking, "But what does this give you when you are like
that?"  The central placement of the gesture and the use of deictic pronouns "this" and "that" direct the
learner's attention to Mara's gesturing hand. The learner, in the turn to follow, takes up the gesture and
reproduces it with her own hands (see Figure 10).

                                                 1131  ·    © ISLS
                                            ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

                      Figure 10. "But what does this give you when its like that?"
                           Speaker displays and hearer mimics "gill" gesture.

The learner's taking up of the gestured-object acts as a demonstration for the participants that the "hand-
as-gill" gesture has now been established as a shared object central to the explanation.
        When  Mara    presents the   hand-as-gill gesture   it is acting as  a representational model. When
picked up by the learner the gesture shifts to become a manipulable model used to work out an idea, i.e., a
thinking tool. This shift of function is evident from the learner's treatment of the gestured-object.     She
pulls the gesture from the center of the interactional space and to its periphery. She draws it closer to her
own body and performs actions on the gestured-object in an abbreviated manner. The gesture, now a
thinking tool in the hands of the learner, is used by the learner to explore various relationships between a
gill and water. As the learner's left hand maintains the hand-as-gill gesture, the right hand is used to
simulate various aspects of the movement of water over the gill such as pressure, impact and flow (see
Figure 11). For example, in one simulation the learner moves the fingers of her right hand (the right hand
representing water) between the fingers of the left hand (the left hand acting as gill) and utters "it [water]
can get through."

                           Figure 11. Learner uses gestured-object as a thinking tool.

        Other uses of the hand-as-gill gestured-object spin out of this interactional activity. In addition to
acting as an evaluative tool and a thinking tool, the gesturing also becomes an interactional tool used
specifically to organize and co-coordinate the teaching and learning. Mara and the learner use their hands
and body as mechanisms to steer the direction of the conversation toward the achievement of the shared
goal of understanding the concept in play. Mara uses the body positioning to direct the learning toward the
kind of investigation that will    get to conceptual    understanding,   and the learner making   use  of the
evaluative benefits of making her thinking visible, uses the hands and body to check in and assure that her
exploration is on the right track.
        As Mara presents the hand-as-gill gestured-object, her body remains on the very outside edge of
the interactional space (see figure 10) while the gestured object takes a central position. By remaining on
the periphery and foregrounding the built gestured-object, Mara's body positioning further signals for the
learner that she is now to step in and take over the learning. The learner responds by doing just that ­
picking up the gesture-object and exploring it. As she begins to act upon the gestured-object now in her
possession, Mara drops her gesturing hand out of the center of the field. The pass has thus been completed.
Mara steps out of explanation mode and allows the learner to slip into exploration mode.
        The learner's introspective focus, demonstrated not only by the abbreviated manner of her action
on the gesturing hand, but also suggested by the slight pulling inward of her body to create her own frame

                                                1132  ·   © ISLS
                                            ICLS 2010     ·  Volume 1

around the gesturing, marks the current function of the gesture as a thinking tool. But it is not just a
cognitive tool in use for the learner.  It is part of a documentation that is meant to be seen by Mara. The
learner's choice to  reveal her  thinking   to Mara    through   the  visibility of  the gestures and    the audible
"figuring out" talk suggests that the learner is seeking on-going guidance from the expert. The learner's
vacillating gaze from an inward focus on her hands to outward focus toward Mara also functions to keep
the expert "on deck" as a resource while the learner works through learner's questioning. Mara picks up
the learner's bid for approbation and/or clarification and shows this as she shifts her body back into the
space (see Figure 11) when the learner verbalizes an idea that may move her toward an understanding of
the concept. In just a few turns, we witness the intricate, multimodal work participants perform in this
interactional process of explaining and understanding.
          This final  segment    shows    the  importance     of   adopting   both   cognitive   and    interactionist
perspectives on the use of gesture. We see that gesture may be employed by the learner and the expert as a
(1) communicative tool, (2) a thinking tool to work out and organize knowledge, and (3) an interactional
tool to organize the trajectory for learning.    The various functions the hands and body can assume are
determined and negotiated through a complex interactive exchange between speaker and hearer, learner
and expert.

Conclusion
Our analysis   shows  that the  hands  and  body    do  something     important  in  the teaching  and     learning of
complex concepts in face-to-face, one-on-one learning arrangements made up of experts and novices. The
gesturing hands can be employed as tools to build a representational object that both the speaker and the
hearer act  upon in  order  to  achieve a  shared   understanding     of a  complex    concept.  The   examples     we
describe show that gestured-objects are constructed for the benefit of the learner, that gestures participate
in moment-to-moment ("formative") assessment in face-to-face, on-on-one interaction, and that gestures
are used to repair and clarify misunderstandings. Gestures can be used by both the speaker and the hearer
as proposals,   cues, and   requests   that   steer the   interaction    toward   the  shared   goal   of  achieving
understanding. These multiple roles that gestures take in interaction demonstrate that the hands and body
are prominent resources for learning in these types of learning arrangements.
          Our study also provides evidence that gestures in face-to-face, one-on-one interaction can have
both cognitive and communicative functions. Seeing gesture as both cognitive and communicative is an
improvement on the dominant cognitive view in that it (1) reveals an important way in which people
routinely  accomplish  teaching   and   learning    in informal    talk, and  (2)   clarifies how  both    the  artful
production  and  the  perceptive  recognition    of gesture   is a  critical interactional    activity achieved  and
negotiated by all participants.
          We believe that by examining the interactional activity that happens in face-to-face, one-on-one
learning arrangements between experts and novices we can come to better understand the material and
social resources used  in  the  explanation   of complex     concepts.   In  all three examples   from     our  study,
representations made by the hands and negotiated in interaction become vital aspects of the process of
explanation. We invite research that explores ways to extend the benefits of gesture activity for concept
learning from face-to-face, one-on-one interaction into the classroom. Certainly, by the very nature of the
classroom   arrangement,   the  available uses   and   functions   of gestures   are different  compared     to those
present in face-to-face, one-on-one arrangements. Particular gesture activities in co-present interaction
may be endogenous to that specific learning arrangement.           If so, what certain aspects of gesture use in
interaction can  be  organically  and   effectively    performed   within   current   arrangements     for classroom
learning? It is, for instance, certainly not possible for teachers to have their gestures respond to each and
every learner's displayed understanding but it does seem possible, and worthwhile, for at least some of this
to happen.
          Our  study  encourages   further  research    into  the  profitability  and  possibilities   of  extending
effective gesture practices that happen in face-to-face, one-on-one interaction into the classroom. We also
suggest that investigating gesture use in a variety of learning arrangements will offer more insight into
how gestures are shaped by and function within social and material configurations and thus further inform
educational design and practices.

                                                 1133   ·   © ISLS
                                          ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

References
Becvar, L. A., Holland, J., & Hutchins, E. (2005). Hands as molecules: Representational gestures used for
        developing theory in a scientific laboratory. Semiotica, 156, 89-112.
Church RB, & Goldin-Meadow S. (1986). The mismatch between gesture and speech as an index of
        transitional knowledge. Cognition, 23(1), 43-71.Garber, G., Alibali, M., & Goldin-Meadow, S.
        (1998). Knowledge conveyed in gesture is not tied to the hands. Child Development, 69(1), 75-
        84.
Goldin-Meadow, S., Alibali, M., & Church R.B. (1993). Transitions in concept acquisition: Using the
        hand to read the mind. Psychological Review, 100(2), 279-97.
Goldin-Meadow, S., Kim. S., & Singer, M. (1999).    What the teacher's  hands tell the student's mind about
        math. Journal of Educational Psychology, 91, 720-730.
Goodwin, C. (2000). Action and embodiment within situated human interaction. Journal of Pragmatics,
        32 (10),1489-1522.
Hall, R. Stevens, R. & Torralba, A. (2003). Disrupting representational infrastructure in conversations
        across disciplines. Mind, Culture, & Activity, 9(3), 179-210.
Hutchins, E. (1995 ). Cognition in the wild. Cambridge:   MIT Press.
Kress, G. R. (2001). Multimodal Teaching and Learning : The rhetorics of the science classroom.London;
        New York: Continuum. (Chapter 2 & 3).
Kendon, A. (2001). Gesture as communication strategy. Semiotica, 135(1), 191.
Kendon A. (2004). Gesture: Visible action as utterance. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Latour, B. (2005). Reassembling the social: An introduction to actor-network-theory. Clarendon lectures
        in management studies. Oxford; New York: Oxford University Press.
McNeill, D. (1992). Hand and mind: What gestures reveal about thought. Chicago: University of Chicago
        Press.
McNeill, D. (2005). Gesture and thought. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Ochs, E., Gonzales, P., & Jacoby, S. (1996). "When I come down I'm in the domain state" :grammar and
graphic representation in the interpretive activity of physicists. In Ochs, E.,Schegloff, E. & Thompson, S.
        (Eds.) Interaction and Grammar (pp.) Cambridge, Mass.:Cambridge University Press.
Ozyurek, A.  (2002). Do speakers   design their   cospeech  gestures  for their addressees? The  effects of
        addressee location on representational gestures. Journal of Memory and Language 46, 688-704.
Singer M., & Goldin-Meadow, S. (2005). Children learn when their teacher's gestures and speech differ.
        Psychological Science, 16(2), 85-9.
Sacks, Harvey,  Schegloff,  Emanuel   A.,  &  Jefferson,   Gail   (1974). A  simplest systematics for    the
        organization of turn-taking for conversation. Language, 50, 696-735.
Stevens, R., Satwicz, T., & McCarthy, L. (2007). In game, in room, in world: Reconnecting video game
        play to the rest of kids' lives. In Salen, K. (Ed.), Ecology of games: MacArthur Foundation series
        on digital media and learning. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Stevens, R. & Hall, R., (1998). Disciplined perception: Learning to see in technoscience. In Magdalene, L.
        &   Blunk, M.  L., (Eds.), Talking  mathematics    in   school: Studies of teaching  and learning.
        Cambridge, MA: Cambridge University Press.
Streeck, J. (1994). Gesture as communication II: The audience as co-author. Research on Language and
        Social Interaction, 27(3), 239­267.
Streeck, J. (1996) How to do things with things. Human Studies. 19(4) 365.
Wagner, Alibali, M., Flevares, L. M., & Goldin-Meadow, S. (1997). Assessing knowledge conveyed in
        gesture: Do teachers have the upper hand? Journal of Educational Psychology. 89(1), 183.

                                             1134   ·   © ISLS
