                                                    ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

Micros and Me: Leveraging home and community practices in formal
                                             science instruction
                      Carrie Tzou, University of Washington Bothell, 18115 Campus Way NE,
                                  Bothell, WA 98011-8246, tzouct@u.washington.edu
                           Philip Bell, University of Washington, 312 Miller Hall, Box 353600
                                  Seattle, Washington 98195, pbell@u.washington.edu

           Abstract: Critiques of school science from sociocultural perspectives focus on the narrow scope
           of the science that is presented to students in school, which in turn constrains how children should
           engage in scientific sense-making in classrooms. We have designed a seven-week instructional
           intervention, Micros and Me, which attempts to (a) make science more personally consequential to
           students' lives and cultural memberships, and (b) connect authentic scientific practices deeply
           with students' repertoires of practice. We report on two iterations of Micros and Me, focusing our
           analysis on two design issues: (1) how we attempted to broaden the definition of what counts as
           school science   through   a self-documentation      task, and   (2)  how  the  self-documentation    task
           problematized   the conception    of "culture"   in  each   of   the  classrooms.  We    end with  design
           implications for the design of science learning environments that take as their starting point deep
           knowledge of students' repertoires of practice.

Introduction
Research suggests that wanting to participate in science is influenced partly by whether students identify themselves
as people who can or cannot do science (Brickhouse, Lowery, & Shultz, 2000), yet unfortunately science as it is
traditionally taught in schools has little to do with the science done by scientists or science as it is practiced in
children's everyday lives. In traditional school science, there is usually one "right" answer, and one "right" process
to find that answer. Uncertainty and controversy are not part of the discourse of school science textbooks, and
laboratory exercises in which students attempt to approximate the "right" answer leave little room for discussion and
debate (Bell, 2004a, 2004b).
           Critiques of school science from sociocultural perspectives focus on the narrow scope of the science that is
presented to students (Warren, Ogonowski, & Pothier, 2003; Eisenhart, Finkel, & Marion, 1996), which constrains
how children should engage in scientific sense-making in classrooms (Ballenger & Carpenter, 2004). School science
is overwhelmingly Western science (Harding, 1998), with a narrow range of norms of practice (Aikenhead, 1996;
McIntyre, Rosebery, & Gonzalez, 2001). Furthermore, these norms of practice may not necessarily be consistent
with students'    cultural ways   of knowing.   The   literature  from   sociocultural perspectives   tells us   that there are
problematic ways in which science instruction (and school instruction in general) has attempted to leverage students'
repertoires of practice.    One   way   is essentializing students    according  to their presumed    membership      to certain
cultural   groups (Nasir,   Rosebery,   Warren,   &   Lee,  2007).    Cultural   essentialization leads to  "treating    cultural
differences as traits" (Gutierrez & Rogoff, 2003, p.19), unchanging over historical time and belonging to every
member of a cultural group. One danger in seeing cultural differences as traits instead of dynamic processes that
vary between individuals is the tendency to see these traits as explanations for underachievement, behavior, or other
academic problems that apply to all members of a cultural group--the deficit model of cultural differences. Instead,
Gutierrez & Rogoff argue that we need to see individual students as having their own experiences and histories that
are influenced rather than dictated by their membership in certain cultural groups.
           Another, related  way   in which   culture  is  treated   problematically  in  classrooms    is making    superficial
connections  between     specific cultural  practices (often   assumed     to be practiced   by all members    of  a  particular
cultural group) and classroom learning. Warren, Ogonowski, and Pothier (2003) cite the example of cooking rice
and beans as a way of demonstrating phase transitions. While it is fine to bring such examples in the classroom, we
need ways    to   connect   students'   culturally-based  ways    of  knowing    deeply   to scientific meaning    making    in
classrooms. Cultural practices need to be constructed as rich sites of complex reasoning that can be applied to
discipline-specific reasoning practices in classrooms.
           These  critiques underlie  the   importance   of expanding      what  normally    "counts"   as science   to  include
children's everyday expertise, or what Gutierrez and Rogoff (2003) call "repertoires of practice". Repertoires of
practice refer to the dynamic ways in which people engage in activities based on their background experiences,
interests, and  cultural   memberships.    Rather than   assuming     that certain instructional  contexts  will connect   with
students' lives and therefore be motivating contexts for learning, we take the perspective that others (Lee, 2007;
Warren, et al, 2001; Moll, 2004) have taken that the design of instruction should begin with deep knowledge of

                                                       1135   ·   © ISLS
                                                    ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

students' repertoires of practice and their corresponding areas of expertise and connecting that in meaningful ways
to authentic scientific practices. To this end, we have designed a seven-week instructional intervention, Micros and
Me (Tzou, Bricker, & Bell, 2007), that attempts to (a) make science more personally consequential to students' lives
and cultural memberships, and (b) connect authentic scientific practices deeply with students' repertoires of practice.
In this unit, we attempted to elicit and leverage students' repertoires of practice around health in order to motivate
the study of microbiology and the connection between microbiology and health. We assume that part of what goes in
to building   a student's  repertoires   of practice  around    health   is  their membership    in certain  cultural, family,
community, or peer groups.
         In this paper, we will describe the context for the science instruction at the study site, briefly describe the
design of Micros and Me, and present findings from analysis of two iterations of the curriculum, specifically around
a self-documentation task (Clark-Ibañez, 2004) in which students were asked to document their health practices and
connect those practices to a scientific research project. We end with dilemmas and design implications for applying
leveraging students' repertoires of practice in the design of discipline-specific science learning.

Research Questions
In this design, we asked three questions: (1) how can we elicit and make visible students' everyday expertise around
health in science instruction? (2) how can we deeply connect this expertise to disciplinary practices in science? (3)
what are implications    for  design  of science  learning  environments      that  start with deep    knowledge   of students'
repertoires of practice and connect disciplinary practices to that knowledge?

Context for science instruction at Granite Elementary
We conducted this design work in collaboration with three fifth-grade teachers at Granite Elementary, a school
located in the southern part of a large, urban city in the Pacific Northwest. The school is marked with significant
ethnic and  linguistic   diversity, with  a significant percentage     of   students on   free and  reduced  lunch,   and high
achievement on the state standardized tests. This design collaboration is part of an ongoing (5+ year) partnership
with the fifth grade teachers at Granite Elementary.

Design of Micros and Me: an overview
This work is tightly connected to a cross-setting team ethnography of thirteen children's activities in and out of
school in order to analyze several conceptual themes: personally consequential biology, argumentation, images of
science, diversity (cultural, gender, economic) and uses of technology (cf, Bricker & Bell, 2008). The team has
followed the    children and  their  families in school, at   their homes,    and   to a  wide  range  of settings in  order to
understand the everyday sensemaking practices of children across the settings of their lives. Of the thirteen focal
participants in the ethnography, four children were in the fifth grade classes in which the designed curriculum was
first enacted. The major goal in the design was to understand how to better architect learning pathways between
home and school through:
1.  meaningfully incorporating ethnographic findings and protocols into the design of the unit, and
2.  eliciting and  deeply    incorporating  students'   areas   of everyday   expertise   into the  science instruction   using
    ethnographic methods.
         Micros and Me is a re-design of an existing commercially-available kit called Microworlds (NSRC, 2002).
The  elementary   science    program   in   the  school district   to  which   Granite    belongs   is composed    entirely  of
commercially-based kits. Every year, three such kits are taught, and Microworlds is one of the three kits taught in
fifth grade in the district. The decision to re-design Microworlds as opposed to one of the other units in the fifth
grade science curriculum was the prevalence in the ethnographic data of chronic health problems such as asthma and
allergies. Granite Elementary, and many of the students who attend Granite, live in an area of Seattle that has a very
high incidence of hospitalization due to asthma--many times higher than the rest of the county. The area of the city
in which Granite is located--Granite Hills--is very industrialized, near ports, railroad tracks, and an airport--all of
which are major contributors of pollution. Therefore, we chose to re-work Microworlds to help students see the
connection between consequential health decisions and practices and scientific inquiry.

Methods and data
We situate this work under the umbrella of design-based research (Collins, 1992, Bell, 2004a), in that we are
attempting to understand how to design a personally consequential science curriculum that highlights children's
everyday  cognition  at   the same   time   that it engages   children    in systematic,   discipline-specific practices. The

                                                       1136   ·   © ISLS
                                                 ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

literature is thin on work that designs for students about whom we have thick descriptions from their everyday lives.
Seldom do designers have firsthand insight into lives of the children for whom they are designing.
         Micros and Me was enacted for the first time in the spring of 2007 and every year since in all three fifth
grade classrooms    at Granite Elementary.  A   variety   of   data sources   were collected during  this  effort: daily,
videotaped observations of every day of the enactment, artifacts the students produced (including science notebooks,
final reports and projects, pre/post assessments, and surveys of their everyday activities), and interviews with focus
groups of students after the enactment. For the purposes of this paper, we draw on videotaped observations of
students and teachers during the self-documentation lessons and the pictures and journals from 34 students across
the three fifth grade classrooms. Videotaped observations were content logged and key episodes were transcribed in
more detail.
         Journals and classroom talk were analyzed for evidence of repeated activity systems that pertained to health
and explanations for those activity systems that were rooted in family or cultural belief systems. We were especially
interested in understanding whether the self-documentation technique would give us enough insight into students'
everyday expertise around health that we could connect that expertise to the classroom scientific inquiry. Therefore,
the following analysis is not so much concerned with the particulars of what students took pictures of, but of the
potential for eliciting and making visible students' health practices in the context of classroom instruction. We use
as a theoretical basis for this analysis the Everyday Expertise framework (Bell, et al, 2006), that highlights three
dimensions of analysis: individual, social, and cultural, as well as the accompanying learning phenomena for each.
Cognitive ecology refers to the diverse terrain of influences on the way an individual cognitively makes sense of, or
assigns meaning   to,  the world. For example,   an  individual   may    have certain ideas  about herself as a    learner
(epistemological knowledge) based on cultural, gender, age, and class identities, and these ideas influence the way
she acts upon   the world   (diSessa [2002] for  his notion    of conceptual   ecology). Although   these  histories and
experiences are socially situated, they are considered here in relation to how they influence the perceptions and
actions of individuals as they engage in social activity.
         Situated activity systems refer to activity that takes place within the boundaries of a (socially constructed)
place (Goffman, 1961). Individuals can "boundary cross" (Phelan, Davidson, & Cao, 1991, p. 227) as they move
between activity systems, each of which contains culturally-based narratives. The social plane is the space where
individuals enact their personal epistemologies in social interactions and in situated activity systems. As individuals
enter places, they interact not only with each other but also with the cultural narratives and resources available in
those places. Cultural toolkits (Swidler, 1986) refer to the ideologies, technologies, and narratives that are uniquely
present at a given historical moment. We consider cultural activities and toolkits broadly, to include resources from
environmental education, environmentalism, school, ethnic group memberships, and religious participation. These
toolkits then shape activities and interact with an individual's own cognitive ecology.
         Taken together, these dimensions help us see the practices that students self-document and discuss in class
as situated within activity systems in specific socio-historical contexts. For example, when students self-documented
a narrow range of health practices relative to the variation that we knew existed based on our ethnographic work,
this framework allows us to interpret those findings in light of norms within the situated activity system of "doing
school science" that typically allow for only Western science practices to count as school science (Harding, 1998).

Findings and design implications
In this section we present findings from an initial analysis of the self-documentation task and design implications
from those findings for the next design iteration of Micros and Me. We present our findings by telling the design
story of the curriculum over the first two iterations, which occurred in the spring of 2007 and the spring of 2008.

Iteration    1: Making      visible   students'     everyday        expertise   around       health  through       self-
documentation
We  knew,  from  our   ethnographic  findings, that students   in this school  population engaged   in rich and    varied
repertoires of practice around health. Reeve (in preparation), using Chrisman & Kleinman's (1983) framework of
multiple domains of health care, reported that families in the ethnographic study utilized multiple domains (what
Chrisman & Kleinman call professional, popular, and folk) to manage their health care. This means that they went
outside of established Western medicine in the maintenance and treatment of health-related issues. In this population
of students, therefore, we were expecting to see similar varieties of health-related practices. Our first attempt to elicit
and make visible students' everyday expertise around health was through student self-documentation. This was a
photo-elicitation activity (Clark-Ibañez, 2004) in which students took pictures of practices they engaged in around
health and explained how those pictures related to health. We loaned each student a digital camera for one night and

                                                    1137   ·   © ISLS
                                                  ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

asked them to take pictures of activities that that they engaged in around health. We also gave students a worksheet
to document and explain the pictures they took. The intention was to gain a deeper understanding of students'
repertoires of practice around health in order to connect those practices with the scientific inquiry in the classroom.
We hoped that one of the activities documented during the task would be used as the basis for students' research
projects at the end of the unit.
        After we collected their pictures and their worksheets, we constructed what we called "maps" of their
everyday health expertise using     a commercially-available      comic-strip  making  software  program. These   maps
showed a subset of the pictures each student took (chosen by the researchers as the practices that had the most
potential to be research topics) and the explanations of those practices in the students' own words.

Construction of self-documentation activity as "school science" activity
In the first iteration of Micros and Me, there was wide variation in what the students documented as related to
staying healthy and preventing illness. However, most of these fell squarely into what we would categorize as
"mainstream" practices,  well-documented    in  Western     science as  linked to  health maintenance  (drinking water,
handwashing, eating vitamins, etc). We were at first disappointed in these results, since from the ethnographic data
we had conjectured that this population of youth would engage in more varied practices around health.        However,
we soon realized that the self-documentation task was capturing only a partial list of health practices in which
students engaged. When teachers conducted discussions with students about their self-documented pictures, we
found that the classroom discussions showed potential to be rich sites for further exploring students' repertoires of
practice around health. Consider the following brief discussion in one teacher's classroom:

1   Ms. E: One thing I'm always wondering about I think would be my topic is in my culture, in my family,
    everybody says I'll make you chicken soup, it'll make you feel good. And I always wonder is that just something
    to make  people feel good     because it's nice and   warm    and  shows  that people  care about them, or is there
    something in the chicken soup that helps you get healthy. So that's a cultural thing that I always wonder about
    that has to do with being healthy. I want you also to think about tonight is there anything in your culture that has
    to do with um staying healthy or that people say.     Some cultures have special things they wear, or put on their
    bodies to prevent them from getting sick or help them get healthy. Robbie
2   Robbie: You get a coin, and get this white or green ointment and put it on your back.
3   Ms. E: but is to help you get better or prevent you from getting sick?
4   Robbie: better
5   Ms. E: Ok so that's another cultural thing. Danielle
6   Danielle: there's this dance that you do
7   Ms. E: Ok so a dance. And is it supposed to help you get well?
8   Danielle: Yeah
9   Ms. E: Ok. So there's lots of things that we do in our culture, ethnicities that have to do with getting well. And
    I still have to find out if they always say I'll make you chicken soup is it going to help you feel better or is there
    something inside. So tonight as you're thinking about this, I want you to start thinking is there something in
    your pictures that you would like to research about staying healthy. (Transcript of Classroom observation,
    2007-05-29)
In the above example, Ms. E was able to elicit culturally-based health practices that had not been documented in
Robbie or Danielle's self-documentation tasks. By modeling the cultural practice of making chicken soup, she helps
students understand what "cultural practice" means in this context. This is evidenced by Robbie's and Danielle's
responses. However, she also says, "I always wonder is that just something to make people feel good because it's
nice and warm and shows that people care about them, or is there something in the chicken soup that helps you get
healthy", thus indicating a way in which a cultural practice could be leveraged in the context of a scientific research
project. She not only asks questions that would allow her to examine that cultural practice scientifically, but also
indicates ways in which it could be connected specifically to microbiology and health.
        The contrast between the practices documented in the self-documentation activity and the practices students
shared during the class discussion are evidence that the students were constructing this activity as a "school science"
activity--where a narrow range of practices usually "counts" as science. When the teachers explicitly inquired into
practices that were cultural, a different range of practices emerged. In the second iteration, we decided to more
explicitly address "cultural practices" in the self-documentation task, building in more formal structures to do so.

Iteration 2--Explicit     conversations         around        cultural    practices:  problematizing        "culture"
and the Costco incident

                                                     1138   ·   © ISLS
                                                  ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

In the next iteration of Micros and Me, we had the teachers make two substantial changes to the self-documentation
task. First, they presented their own self-documentation maps when they introduced the activity, giving students a
chance to see their teachers' repertoires of practice around health. We hoped this would prompt the students to think
about the self-documentation task more broadly, outside of the narrow confines of Western school science. The
second  change  was  instituting   a whole-class  discussion    in which    teachers  specifically  addressed practices  as
"cultural", in order to get a better idea of what Gutierrez & Rogoff (2003) call the "historied and varied practices"
that students engage in around health. What emerged was both a broadening of "what counts" as science and a
problematizing of what it means to talk about practices as "cultural".
         The whole-class  discussion   around   cultural  practices  was    preceded  by a discussion  in  which teachers
simply prompted students to share some of the practices that they had documented. In this discussion, the practices
that students chose to share all fell squarely within the confines of Western science: eating off of clean dishes, using
Clorox, drinking milk, washing hands, taking vitamins. In the next discussion, however, when the teachers addressed
practices explicitly as cultural, a very different list of practices emerged (see Table 2). We argue that Discussion 2
was able to somehow elicit a qualitatively different list of practices, most of which were documented on the self-
documentation   maps, but not    shared   in Discussion   1.  Many   school   science  activities  would have  stopped   at
Discussion 1, but would have missed the rich variation in practices that were elicited in Discussion 2. Because the
space was opened up in Discussion 2 to accept a broader range of acceptable practices in the context of science
class, students re-constructed  the  task as  something   different  from   a school  science task   (as illustrated in the
difference between the two lists).

Table 2: Comparison of elicited practices in Discussions 1 and 2 in the second iteration of Micros and Me
                     Discussion 1                             Discussion 2
                     · Eating off of clean dishes             · Mangosteen for allergies
                     · Taking showers                         · Pho: prevents illness
                     · Brushing teeth                         · Tea (black, cinnamon, brown)
                     · Drinking milk                          · Green oil on back, scratching with a
                     · Using a vacuum                         spoon: tells you how sick you are
                     · Washing hands                          and helps you get better
                     · Taking vitamins                        · Ginseng: clear face, helps make you
                     · Drinking water                           feel better
                     · Exercise
                     · Using Clorox

In the following example, we show a short excerpt from the beginning of Discussion 2 in Ms. Evans's class to
examine the pedagogical moves made during this discussion.
1   Ms. E: Allison and Kristin, because you both know it. How many others of you know what Mangosteen is?
2   Student: Can you show us an example?
3   Ms. E: I don't have one, I've never   seen it, I know nothing about it.   Can you  t--So yes, I can. Ok? (holds up a
4   student's self-doc with it)
5   Ms. E: This is mangosteen. Tell us what you do with it.
6   Allison: um, when you buy it I put it in a tablespoon and then I drink it.
7   Ms. E: and so what does m--what does mangosteen--why do you drink it? Does it taste good?
8   Alice: It gives you energy and then it keeps you from sneezing and allergies.
9   Ms. E: And so you just take one spoon and it, and it keeps you...
10  Alice: from sneezing and allergies.
11  T: Ok, so it keeps you from sneezing and allergies.
12  Ms. E: Amy, you say you use it as well? Do you use it for the same thing?
13  Amy: yeah
14  T: And do you take it when you're sick or do you take it to prevent sickness?
15  Amy: Every day
16  Ms. E: So you think it would prevent this.
17  Ms. E: Do you use it as well? Do you use it for the same thing?
18  Ms. E: Anybody else use Mangosteen?
19  Ms. E: So if you look at the jar, and if we look at the jar (gets a student's self-doc), I look at the jar and I've
20  never had Mangosteen, or used it, um, is this something that you think is part of your culture?

                                                     1139   ·   © ISLS
                                                   ICLS 2010    ·   Volume 1

21   Allison: No, you can just buy it at Costco.
22   Ms. E: You can buy it at Costco. I'm guessing that it's something that your parents or grandparents knew about
23   because as I look around the room, many of us from your culture don't know about it but all the people that do
24   know about it are of the Asian cultures. Does that make sense? And so will all who use it go home and talk to
25    your parents and find out how they knew to use Mangosteen.
In this example, Ms. E makes some pedagogical moves to scaffold the discussion around cultural practices. The first
move is a positioning move (Harre, et al, 1999) in which Ms. E positions herself, in lines 4 and 21, as someone who
knows nothing about the cultural practice in question, drinking Mangosteen. Simultaneously, she positions the two
students who documented this practice, Allison and Amy, as experts in this practice, thereby highlighting the value
of varied repertoires of practice and in this discussion. Another move Ms. E makes in this discussion is to not
assume that all students who might use this product would use it for the same purpose. She asks, in lines 13 and 20,
"do you use it for the same thing?", thereby avoiding essentializing the practice to one purpose or one cultural
group. We note that this pedagogical move represents a sharp diversion from the "traits" model of cultural practices
(see Introduction) towards a model of practice--to "bring the multiple dimensions of students' lived experiences to
life in the classroom" (Rosebery, McIntyre, & Gonzalez, 2001).

Defining "culture"
Across all three classrooms, varied definitions of "culture" emerged through this discussion. In the above example,
when Allison says that Mangosteen is not part of her culture because "you can just buy it at Costco", it brings up the
question for us of what it means to talk about culture with students, how one defines it, and how one leverages
"cultural" practices in the context of science instruction. In this section we briefly present the varied definitions of
culture that emerged through the discussions around the self-documentation activity. We raise this point not because
it is surprising that "culture" was a contested term in all three classrooms, but to raise the question (still unanswered
for us)  of what   are design implications    for making   cultural   practices  an  explicit object  of inquiry  in science
classrooms.
         In the following examples, we show classroom excerpts from all three teachers to illustrate the varied
definitions of cultures from each teacher:
    1.   Ms. Love: culture is something that would be different from what I do: "I also want to be able to pull out
         what are some of the things that are cultural to us? Anyone know what I mean by cultural to us? So if I
         walked into your home, what would be different from what would be in my home? If I walked in there sick,
         and I'm just like (starts coughing, holding her side, acting sick), what are the kinds of things would your
         parents do for me if they took me in, those kinds of things? Or if you walked into my home sick, what are
         the kinds of things I would do for you?"
    2.   Ms. Evans: culture is based in your family and your ethnicity: "I'm guessing that it's something that your
         parents or grandparents knew about because as I look around the room, many of us from your culture don't
         know about it but all the people that do know about it are of the Asian cultures. Does that make sense? And
         so will all who use it go home and talk to your parents and find out how they knew to use Mangosteen."
    3.   Ms. Williams: culture is handed down from your families: "So what we're really interested in here is what
         your family does based on the culture that you come from. Ok? So this is something that comes down for
         you from your family, from your culture, that's especially important. So not something that you learned in
         school, but something that you learned from your family of ways to keep you healthy, ways to keep you
         from getting sick...So raise your hand if something that is on your self-doc, something that's on your map in
         front of you right now with the pictures on it, or something that you know of off the top of your head, that's
         something that you do when you get sick or something that you do everyday that's something that your
         grandparent does, or that you've learned from your family."
In Ms. Love's example, her definition of culture seems to assume that there are no shared cultural practices--that a
person's  cultural practices  only count as   "cultural"   if   they are  different  than someone   else's. In Ms.   Evans's
example, culture is handed down through family and membership in an ethnic group. In Ms. Williams's case, culture
is  only something   that is  learned  from   your  family,     not  something  learned   in  school. While  each    of these
conceptions of culture may be incomplete in some way (ie, excluding peer groups as a site of cultural membership,
thinking  about shared   cultural practices), they  represent     a starting point  for us to think   about how   to support
conversations   around  culture   in classrooms--especially       as  they   pertain to   science. For   example,  the   self-
documentation gave teachers a glimpse of sources of certain knowledge systems around health ("my dad says that
drinking tea gives you more blood"). With the recognition that students' beliefs around health come from strong
family histories of knowledge being passed down from one generation to the next (Ms. Williams's definition of
culture), teachers are less likely to see these beliefs as "misconceptions" and more as rational ideas. By recognizing

                                                      1140    ·   © ISLS
                                                ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

(and celebrating) differences between individuals' cultural practices (Ms. Love's definition of culture), we can begin
to broaden our definitions of what counts as school science. Finally, in recognizing that some cultural practices are
common among people who share certain ethnicities--and by pointing that out in science class, we begin to position
students as both experts and members of certain ethnic groups, thereby helping students to "affirm their cultural
identities" (Ladson-Billings, 1995, p. 6) at the same time that they participate in meaningful scientific learning.

Implications
This design effort represents our first attempt to incorporate ethnographic data and methods into the design of formal
science instruction. In attempting to surface and leverage students' out of school expertise around health, the self-
documentation technique shows promise as a way for teachers to gain some insight into their students' out of school
practices. Because of the time-consuming nature of ethnographic work, thick descriptions (Geertz, 1973) are formed
about a small number of participants. Self-documentation might be a way to help practitioners, with 20 or more
students in their classes, gain some  insight  into who   their students are--the multiple  and varied repertoires    of
practice that they engage in and the corresponding areas of expertise they bring with them to the classroom.
         This analysis also raises some dilemmas for us about how best to leverage students' culturally-based health
practices in the learning of discipline-specific practices. Gutierrez and Rogoff (2003) argue that "An important
feature of focusing on repertoires is encouraging people to develop dexterity in determining which approach from
their repertoire is appropriate under which    circumstances"   (p.4).  While the self-documentation  task itself    was
successful in eliciting students' repertoires of practice around health, more work needs to be done in the design of
science learning environments to leverage those practices (while knowing the histories behind them) and support
students in understanding when and how to navigate between their various repertoires of practice and where there is
overlap or tension between them.
         Another implication we see from this study is the challenge of leveraging culturally-based practices while
at the same  time   supporting the learning of disciplinary   practices and content. At the same  time that   the   self-
documentation activity gave teachers insight into how to connect science to their students' everyday lives, we have
more work to do to connect these practices with deep disciplinary content.

References
Aikenhead, G.S. (1996). Science education: Border crossing into the subculture of science. Studies in Science
         Education, 27, 1-52.
Ballenger, C. & Carpenter, M. (2004). The puzzling child: challenging assumptions about participation and meaning
       in talking science. Language arts, 81(4), 303-311.
Bell, P., Bricker, L. A., Lee, T. R., Reeve, S., & Zimmerman, H. T. (2006). Understanding the cultural foundations
         of children's biological knowledge: Insights from everyday cognition research. In S. A. Barab, K. E. Hay &
         D. Hickey (Eds.), Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference of the Learning Sciences (ICLS)
         (pp. 1029-1035). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Bell, P. (2004a). On the theoretical breadth of design-based research in education. Educational Psychologist, 39(4),
         243-253.
Bell, P. (2004b). The educational opportunities of contemporary controversies in science. In M. C. Linn, E. A. Davis
         & P. Bell (Eds.), Internet environments for science education (pp. 233-260). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Bricker, L. A., & Bell, P. (2008). Mapping the learning pathways and processes associated with the development of
         expertise and learner identities. In P. A. Kirschner, J. van Merriënboer & T. de Jong (Eds.), Proceedings of
         the Eighth International Conference of the Learning Sciences (pp. 3-206­3-123). International Society of
         the Learning Sciences, Inc.
Brickhouse, N. W., Lowery, P., & Schultz, K. (2000). What kind of girl does science? Journal of Research in
         Science Teaching, 37(5), 441-448.
Brown, A. L., & Campione, J.C.(1998). Designing a community of young learners: Theoretical and practical
       lessons. In N. M. Lambert & B. L. McCombs (Eds.), How students learn: Reforming schools through
       learner-centered education (pp. 153­186). Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
Chrisman, N.J. & Kleinman, A (1983). Popular health care, social networks, an cultural meanings: The orientation
         of medical   anthropology.  In D.  Mechanic     (Ed.), Handbook    of health,  health care, and   the health
         professions (pp. 569-590). New York: The Free Press.
Clark-Ibañez, M. (2004). Framing the social world with photo-elicitation interviews. The Behavioral Scientist,
         47(12), 1507-1527.
Cole, M. (1996). Cultural psychology: A once and future discipline. Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press.
Collins, A.(1999).The changing infrastructure of education research: Issues in educational research. In E. C.

                                                    1141  ·   © ISLS
                                               ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

     Lagemann & L. S. Shulman (Eds.), Issues in education research: Problems and possibilities (pp.289­
     298). San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
diSessa, A. (2002). Why "conceptual ecology" is a good idea. In M. Limón & L. Mason (Eds.), Reconsidering
       conceptual change: Issues in theory and practice (pp. 29-60). Dortrecht: Kluwer.

Eisenhart, M., Finkel, E., & Marion, S.F. (1996). Creating the conditions for scientific literacy: A re-examination.
       American Educational research Journal, 33(2), 261-295.
Geertz, C. (1973). The interpretation of cultures. New York: Basic Books.
Goffman, E. (1961). Encounters: Two studies in the sociology of interaction. Indianapolis, IN: Bobbs-Merrill.
Gutiérrez, K., & Rogoff, B. (2003). Cultural ways of learning: Individual traits or repertoires of practice.
       Educational Researcher, 22(5), 19-25.
Harding, S. (1998). Is science multicultural?: Postcolonialisms, feminisms, and epistemologies. Bloomington, IN:
       Indiana University Press.
Harré, R. & van Langenhove, L (1999). Positioning theory: Moral contexts of intentional action. Malden, MA:
       Blackwell.
Lee, C.D. (2007). Culture, literacy, and learning: Taking bloom in the midst of the whirlwind. New York: Teachers
       College Press.
Lee, C.D. (1995). A culturally based cognitive apprenticeship: Teaching African American high school students'
       skills in literary interpretation. Reading Research Quarterly, 30(4), 608-631.
Lee, C.D., Spencer, M.B., & Harpalini, V. (2003). "Every shut eye ain't sleep": Studying how people live culturally.
       Educational Researcher, 32(5), 6-13.
McIntyre, E., Rosebery, A., & Gonzalez, N. (2001). Classroom diversity: Connecting curriculum to students' lives.
       Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann.
Moll, L.C., & González, N. (2004). Engaging life: A funds of knowledge approach to multicultural education. In J.
       Banks & C. McGee Banks (Eds.), Handbook of research on multicultural education (Second edition) (p.
       699-715). New York: Jossey-Bass.
Nasir, N. S., Rosebery, A.S., & Lee, C.D. (2007). Learning as a cultural process: Achieving equity through
     diversity. In K. Sawyer (Ed.), Cambridge handbook of the learning sciences (pp. 489-504). New York:
     Cambridge University Press.
National Science Resource Center (2002). Microworlds. Burlington, NC: Carolina Biological Supply Company.
Phelan, P., Davidson, A. L., & Cao, H. T.(1991) Students' multiple worlds: Negotiating the boundaries of family,
       peer, and school cultures. Anthropology & Education Quarterly, 22(3) 224-250.
Reeve, S., Bricker, L.A., & Bell, P. (in preparation). Cultural influences on youth prior knowledge about health and
     health care: Implications for science education.
Stevens, R.(2000). Divisions of labor in school and in the workplace: Comparing computer and paper-supported
     activities across settings. Journal of the Learning Sciences,9(4), 373­401.
Swidler, A. (1986). Culture in action: Symbols and strategies. American Sociological Review, 51(2), 273-286.
Tzou, C., Bricker, L. A., & Bell, P. (2007). Micros & Me: A Fifth-Grade Science Exploration into Personally and
       Culturally Consequential Microbiology. Seattle, WA: Everyday Science & Technology Group, University
       of Washington.
Warren, B., Ballenger, C., Ogonowski, M., Rosebery, S., Hudicourt-Barnes, J. (2001). Rethinking diversity in
     learning science: The logic of everyday sense-making. Journal of research in science teaching, 38(5), 529-
     552.
Warren, B., Ogonowski, M., & Pothier, S. (2003). "Everyday" and "Scientific": Re- thinking dichotomies in modes
     of thinking in science learning. In R. Nemirovsky, A. Rosebery, J. Solomon, & B. Warren (Eds.), Everyday
     Matters in Mathematics and science education: Studies of complex classroom events (pp. 119-152). Mahwah,
     NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
White, B. Y., & Frederiksen, J. R. (1998). Inquiry, modeling, and metacognition: Making science accessible to all
     students. Cognition and Instruction, 16, 3­11.

                                                   1142  ·   © ISLS
