                                                ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

         Cross-disciplinary practice in engineering contexts ­ a
               developmental phenomenographical perspective
           Robin Adams, Tiago Forin, Saranya Srinivasan, Purdue University, West Lafayette IN
                      Email: rsadams@purdue.edu, tforin@purdue.edu, sap@purdue.edu
      Llewellyn Mann, Swinburne University of Technology, Melbourne AU, suneagle@hotmail.com

          Abstract:   This paper presents an overview of results from a phenomenographic study
          that investigates critical differences and similarities in the ways people experience cross-
          disciplinary practice in engineering contexts.      Study implications are discussed regarding
          developmental perspectives on cross-disciplinary ways of thinking, acting, and being.

Introduction
Many complex engineering problems facing society such as climate change, healthcare and international
security require cross-disciplinary approaches that integrate diverse perspectives into a collective whole.
Here,    "cross-disciplinary"   refers  to practices  associated    with  thinking  and     working   across  different
perspectives such as multidisciplinary, interdisciplinary, and transdisciplinary. Reports on the future of
engineering education stress preparing engineers to become "emerging professionals" who can deal with
complexity,    innovate,   flexibly adapt  to  new   situations,  and bridge   disciplinary   boundaries   to produce
deeper   insights  (NAE,   2004).   There   has been    substantial  investment  and interest   in  cross-disciplinary
practice; however, the level of empirical attention is considerably less (Bromme, 2000). Studies focus on
humanities and social sciences (e.g., Klein, 1996; Lattuca, 2001), although there are some studies on the
physical and natural sciences (Galison, 1997; Nerssessian, 2006; Newstetter et al, 2004) and engineering
design (Adams et al, 2009a).
          While    understanding    how    groups work    together   and  create new   knowledge      is an  important
research focus, this study moves the lens from groups to individuals to make visible the development of
cross-disciplinary practices.    Phenomenographical methods were used to investigate critical similarities and
differences    in how   individuals    experience   and  comprehend    cross-disciplinary    practice in  engineering
contexts.  Using experience as a lens for investigation acknowledges the relationship between experience
and learning (Tuan, 2007, p. 16): "the modes through which a person knows and constructs a reality...and
learn from what one has undergone."         Phenomenography also provides unique understandings of practice
that can readily contribute to course and program renewal and redevelopment (Daly et al, 2008).                 In this
paper we present an overview of study results and discuss some implications for research and education.

Theoretical Frameworks
Three frameworks guided this study.        The first framework involved a synthesis of cross-disciplinarity at the
group    level of  analysis    (Adams   et al, 2009a)    that revealed    important variations   regarding:   problem
orientation (from thematic oriented projects to systems oriented participatory projects), mode of knowledge
production (from juxtaposition of perspectives to an overarching and transformative synthesis), outcome
(from no change in knowledge to knowledge fusion through critical reflection), interaction structures (from
collaborating as disciplinarians to transcending disciplines), discourse practices (from common interests to
creation of new language and logic), and impacts on participants (from retaining a disciplinary identity to
critical reflection  on    pluralistic identities).  While     the  synthesis   illustrates  how multidisciplinarity,
interdisciplinarity, and    transdisciplinarity   differ in   significant ways,   they   all presuppose    that cross-
disciplinary   practice is driven   by  problems    beyond    the confines  of  any single   discipline  and  involves
transgressing     disciplines.  Disciplinary   practices are  systems    of inquiry characterized   by    theories and
concepts, and modes of observation, interpretation, and arguing claims regarding truth and validity (Klein,
2004). Cross-disciplinary practice at the individual level is likely to involve confronting, recognizing, and
respecting different epistemological views (Lattuca, 2001; Klein, 1996) in which deep learning interacts
with identity development (Sfard & Prusak, 2005).             This synthesis aided this study by (1) highlighting
important variations in cross-disciplinary practice to guide participant recruitment, (2) revealing the need
for empirical     research at   the individual, not  group,   level  unit   of analysis, (3)  indicating   theories of
epistemological and identity development that may emerge from this study, and (4) characterizing cross-
disciplinary practice as a situated practice.

                                                    1166  ·   © ISLS
                                               ICLS 2010    ·  Volume 1

          The  second   framework     is based  on    Dall'Alba's    (2009)  model   of  professional development.
Dall'Alba and Sandberg (2006) describe understanding as embedded in dynamic, intersubjective practice ­
a  notion that  integrates thinking,   acting, and    being   into an unfolding   "professional-way-of-being"    that
makes   visible  the situated   nature   of professional    development,     variations in  skill development,    and
characteristics of skillful performance. This connects to theories of situated learning, reflective practice,
and communities of practice.       For this model, skill progression represents how individuals might become
increasingly adept at tasks that they routinely practice.        Skillful performance (an embodied understanding
of  practice)  represents  a  limited    number   of  qualitatively     different ways  a   practice is  understood.
Advancement along this dimension is marked by increasingly comprehensive ways of understanding ­ an
"unfolding circularity" of ongoing inquiry to achieve more complex and comprehensive understandings of
the central ideas of their practice. This framework aided this study by (1) identifying ways to characterize
an embodied understanding of cross-disciplinary practice, (2) further locating this study in theories of
situated cognition, and (3) informing the choice of phenomenography as a research framework.
          Phenomenography       is a  qualitative method      to investigate different  ways   of  experiencing   and
understanding aspects of practice (Bowden & Green, 2005; Marton & Booth, 1997).                   It is used to reveal
surface  and  deep   approaches    to learning and    has  been    used to investigate  the experience   of learning,
teaching, concepts   such    as programming       and  velocity,   and  more  recently   professional  practice.   In
phenomenography the "phenomenon" is a person's experience in relation to an aspect of the world and the
outcome of phenomenographic study is the researcher's interpretation of that phenomenon (Mann et al,
2007). It is an empirically derived method where a theory of variations is emerging as a way to explain the
existence of categories and how they are related. In phenomenography, the goal is to identify categories of
description comprising distinct groupings of qualitatively different ways of experiencing a phenomenon
and internal relationships among groupings as increasingly complex ways of experiencing the phenomenon
and a   growing   awareness     and   comprehension     of  practice    (Bowden   &  Green,   2005).    In  this way
phenomenography creates a link between experience and awareness where variations in experiences may
reveal characteristics of an embodied understanding of practice.

Research Design
Twenty-two (22) engineers and non-engineers who
work  in  engineering   contexts     were   strategically
recruited to  maximize     diversity  and   establish an
inclusive "outcome space". This sample size and
strategy      is     consistent        with     typical
phenomenographic      studies.     Variations   in    the
sample were identified through a literature review
and include:   context  of work     (academia,  private
industry, and community service), years of cross-
disciplinary     experience,    gender,     nature    of
experience in terms of project scale (i.e., size of
teams) and complexity (i.e., number of disciplines
involved), and epistemological distance (i.e., scale
of    disciplinary    similarity      or    difference).
Epistemological distance is the extent to which an
individual interacts with those with similar ways of
knowing   such   as  an engineer    working    with   other
kinds of engineers or substantially different such as an engineer working with a social scientist or artist.
Figure 1 shows key sample variations: years of experience, project scale, and epistemological distance.
          Data was collected using a semi-structured interview protocol in which participants were asked to
bring to  mind   concrete  experiences    of  cross-disciplinary    practice (see  Mann    et al, 2007). Follow   up
questions ask interviewees to elaborate on their experiences and what they mean by certain concepts.
Probes may include information about the situation or characteristics of that situation that represent their
ideas of cross-disciplinary practice.    All probes were based upon what the participant expressed so far in
the interview, and not formed through predetermined ideas and questions from the interviewer.              Interviews
lasted 30 minutes and were audio recorded then transcribed.
          Analysis began with reading and re-reading transcripts as a collection and identifying what was
significant within a whole transcript and in relation to other transcripts.       Transcripts were sorted into piles

                                                   1167   ·   © ISLS
                                                 ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

of similarities and differences and assessed by identifying substantive excerpts from the transcripts that
supported patterns in each pile.      Over time the number and description of the different piles settled and
became the categories of description.        Subsequent passes through the data focused on articulating and
substantiating the relationships    among     these   categories,    drawing   from  the  data as well  as   theoretical
frameworks.    Relationships among categories were examined in terms of how categories related to a set of
common ideas and to differences in breadth and depth of understanding.                 In this study, the relationship
among   categories  mapped      out increasingly      more   comprehensive     understandings   of   cross-disciplinary
practice. Overall, the analysis was a rigorously iterative process of being disciplined by the data, looking
for empirical evidence of patterns, and seeking logical arguments in how patterns mapped to theoretical
frameworks.    In this way findings emerged through a co-evolutionary process of discovery of categories
and construction of structural relationships between categories.

Results
Below we summarize key findings: the four categories of description that emerged, critical variations
across categories,  and      relationships   among    categories      that  reveal increasingly   advanced    ways    of
experiencing   and comprehending      cross-disciplinary     practice    in engineering   contexts.  Progression  from
Category 1 to Category 4 represents increasingly complex ways of experiencing and understanding cross-
disciplinary practice  in    engineering    contexts.  In  this  paper     we  provide  illustrative examples   of  the
categories of description and present new findings on the hierarchical relationships among categories.              An
in-depth analysis of the categories is provided elsewhere (Adams et al, 2009b).

Category 1: Working together ­ Emily, Grace, and Isabella
The experiences in Category 1 illustrate cross-disciplinary practice as working together with people who
have different training to effectively find a better solution.         The following excerpts highlight some of the
key attributes of this category: (1) an iterative process of asking questions, challenging assumptions, and
listening for understanding, (2) being comfortable with asking for information that might seem obvious, (3)
knowing what you and others contribute, and (4) recognizing differences in what people know and how
they communicate, (5) and the need to take personal responsibility to be an effective collaborator.
        "For   me  cross-disciplinary practice  is probably  working     with someone  of another discipline in a rather
        intricate way. In a way that's as brief as possible so that each party can continue their own work, but as
        thorough as possible when you get together so that you have very good information for each other...what
        needs to be improved, what details need to be in there." [Emily]
        "I mean it's very much learning how to talk to people that don't come from the same background that you do,
        academically.  Being able to communicate what you want to do in a language that is accessible to an average
        level PhD scientist but not someone inside your own discipline necessarily....Just don't jump right in to the
        gritty details of it." [Isabella]
        "...probably the biggest challenge is getting the two to communicate...to listen and be very clear as to what
        you're trying to say and to make sure that the people listening to you are understanding that so, listening,
        asking questions to follow up is the biggest thing." [Grace]
        "I think it's vital.   I think that's the only way to do it. If you don't have value for the other discipline, what
        are you even doing working with them?         If you don't value what they are doing, you are not going to care
        how they do it, why they do it.    You're not going to ask enough questions, and the questions are going to be
        important for the way you design what ever you're designing." [Emily]
        "Give people more respect as far as what they can contribute....I found that there were lots of good ideas that
        came from the engineers when they spoke up and there were lots of really important things that the nursing
        staff could contribute that I didn't think they could. Engineering people look at nursing people and think
        they're smart but in a whole different way that's not really that smart.   They don't think of it as being difficult
        knowledge because it's all really, it seems like common knowledge like take chicken soup for a cold or
        something....really have their own special way of knowledge and I've come to appreciate that a lot." [Emily]

Category 2: Intentional learning ­ Uri, Olivia, Pablo, Brianna, Ryan, Nadia
Where the experiences in Category 1 focus on the dynamics between people, the experiences that represent
Category 2   focus on  individuals'       intentional learning.      For Category   2, cross-disciplinary    practice is
intentional learning so that everyone gains (me, my team, and my stakeholders). The following excerpts
highlight some attributes of this category: (1) creating opportunities to learn new perspectives or ways of
knowing, (2) purposefully educating each other to collectively enable a systems perspective, (3) learning

                                                    1168   ·   © ISLS
                                               ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

through experience and failure, (4) learning how to negotiate meanings across perspectives and formulate
or investigate problems through multiple lenses, and (5) a passion and appreciate for continual learning.
         "...and every time I work with one of these people you have to understand something about what they do and
         you always, when you first start and everybody I've ever talked to seems to have this same perspective; you
         underestimate how hard the other person's field is.   You've spent all this time and effort developing your
         capability; and oh, by the way you'll pick that up too and you learn pretty quickly if/that if you're not just
         going to do this superficially; that you know they've traveled their long road too. And so you have to meet as
         equals but you have to, and respect each other, but you have to learn about they're problem if you're really
         going to be successful in at least some amount and commit to that.     But that's fun so..." [Olivia]
         "...a you help me/I help you kind of thing but and I would come back and I would never know enough so
         you'd have to read more and the best way of doing it was in an immersion kind of mode..." [Olivia]
         "I think I've become  more    convinced   that the  people need, it's    like  you go along  in you    need   your
         immunizations, you need to have these points in life of injection of something and I think that it's important
         to plant those seeds along the way and I haven't really thought about that..." [Olivia]
         "I want to say I just became more open minded towards other disciplines.       I used to think, we're engineering,
         it's much more difficult than everything else and although we can't communicate as well as the business
         people, but we're more technical, but when you start working with them, everyone sort of has their own set of
         abilities and weaknesses that they have to work together.   I think by working cross-disciplinary, it sort of
         strengthens everybody." [Uri]

Category 3: Strategic leadership ­ Jacob, Michael, Fergus, Tyler, Daniel, Yvonne
Where the experiences of Category 2 focus on learning, the experiences that represent Category 3 focus on
applying learning   to actively  enable   cross-disciplinary    work   and       outcomes.     In other  words,    cross-
disciplinary practice is strategic leadership to enable cross-disciplinary work and synergy for the best
outcome.    Leadership is central in that it involves being the "interface", "connector", or "communication
specialist" to enable innovation or proactively transform a negative working environment into a positive
one.  The following excerpts highlight some attributes of this category: (1) make or enable conceptual
connections, (2) build allegiances and trust, and (3) facilitate systems-oriented strategies or frameworks that
leverage diverse   perspectives.  Some       strategies  involve    actively     transforming     a negative     working
environment into a positive one.
         "...cross-disciplinary engineering is creating or innovating across multiple disciplines, so that's just saying it
         differently. But the strongest thing that does come for me is across markets or educational pillars.    The other
         one which doesn't fit real nicely, but these days a lot of people do, is across different cultures." [Daniel]
         "I've got components, now I've got to think about, based on this organization, who are the right people that I
         need to speak with and get on a team so that we can ensure that we drive this thing forward."   [Fergus]
         "I'm a communications specialist...I get a sense for people so I also get a sense of what they mean when
         they're telling me something. And so I would use that capability to get minds met.    I would use a lot of other
         techniques, but I was a bridge." [Jacob]
         "...I believe, because there is a possibility that people who come in late don't get the same deal, don't get
         treated the same way. You've missed a lot of the discussions, you don't understand.        In addition, if you're
         really adding a valuable team member, the discussions probably weren't as productive and fruitful as they
         could have been without his missing voice.  So if you believe in a balanced approach to the problem-solving
         which I happen to believe, statistically you're more likely to have a better solution if you have more voices
         that are reasonable and respected sitting in the room....So balance, to me, says that you, you and I and three
         or four other people, whatever the size of the team is, are sitting around and we respect each other, ok, and
         we're willing to listen to each other and consider that these things, these issues that are raised or solutions
         that are raised are real and should be considered. That's what I mean by balanced problem solving....So
         everybody's in on the ground floor. It's important because you get a better solution in my opinion.      You also
         have owners of the solution." [Jacob]
         "We're so busy trying to be sure that we're understood by others, that we don't seek to understand....So that
         is absolutely critical in order to be trusted, to trust people, you have to be trustworthy yourself.   So it really
         starts with you and then you model behavior you want.   It's also important in this team.    And then probably
         the one that (captures) it best is believing in the value of synergy." [Jacob]
Category 4: Challenging and transforming practice to integrate systems ­ Anthony, Xavier, Hannah,
Logan, Samantha, Wendy, Kelvin
Where  the  experiences  of Category     3   focus  on   enabling   cross-disciplinary      work,   the  experiences     of
Category 4 represent transformative reflective practice that challenges prior training and ways of thinking.

                                                   1169  ·   © ISLS
                                                ICLS 2010        ·  Volume 1

For this category, cross-disciplinary practice is challenging and transforming practice to integrate systems
and produce     an  outcome     greater than   the  sum  of        its parts.  The following excerpts    highlight  some
attributes of this category: (1) critically challenging disciplinary practice and the ways conflict can be
transformative, (2) integrating stakeholders as collaborators, (3) attuning to the human aspect of complex
systems, (4) advocating perspectives by taking into account the broader context, and (5) embracing cross-
disciplinarity as everyday practice.
          "Perspective really comes from the experiences that one has had and not one person has had the same
          experiences....that gives me a different perspective because I've seen different things, I've been exposed to
          different things. Maybe I've traveled all over the world, or no, I've only lived in Indianapolis all my life.
          You know those kinds of things; it gives you, that brings perspective..." [Hannah].
          "For better or worse I am who I am and some people appreciate that....I don't do anything different here than
          I do at home as I'm looking through something.       So this is not my `day' personality." [Logan]
          "I've always thought that it's always a good interaction from the standpoint of a multi-disciplinary scientist,
          that when you go in you work with the stakeholders you're at, you're on equal ground, you're on equal
          footing. There is an exchange of information.   They're kind of framing the problem in a much different way
          than what you see it. You tend to be more isolated as a scientist, as someone who is at a university.    They're
          dealing with this on a day-to-day basis, they have the muddy-boots kind of experiences.      So the way in which
          they articulate the problem, they way in which they see it, the way in which they, the constraints that they
          have, is very, very valuable to listen to that....So, working with stakeholders is not just, you know, something
          we take lightly.  It's actually part of the science.   It's incorporated into the whole methodology." [Xavier]
          "...there are a whole bunch of metaphors, like the idea of poaching or borrowing or, I can't think of any more
          now, ok there really are a whole bunch of metaphors, that I don't see as transformative enough.      That's great;
          you went out and borrowed an idea from somewhere else, and you're like so how can I use that tool in my
          stuff? But does that transform your stuff? Does that transform your discipline?   I don't think so."  [Samantha]
          "Well, you know, we did it collaborating with social scientists, right, in some respects.    I mean, I've invested
          a tremendous amount of my own time trying to learn what these methods are.         You know, I'm reading, you
          know, qualitative methods. I've got the books around here too that my colleagues read and so I'm making the
          personal investment to sit down and learn what I can about their practice of science and how it integrates with
          my traditional practice of science. How do you structure mine and how do you structure theirs to come and
          do, you know, make the interface work." [Xavier]
          "...if either of the two disciplinary scientists aren't willing to give up some turf, it's never going to happen,
          you know, it's never going to happen productively."       [Xavier]
          "does the home need to have institutionalization or institutional markers or some kind of outward existence or
          can it be a group of people who identify in certain ways are, that don't find their cognitive home somewhere
          else? I don't know.   But it's a more dynamic place. It is a more revolutionary place." [Samantha]

Relationship Among Categories
The   categories    of description  that      emerged  from         the
analysis are distinct ­ each captures a qualitatively different
facet of cross-disciplinary practice in engineering contexts.
These  map       to    the   framework     for     an  embodied
understanding of professional practice in terms of thinking
(awareness of "difference", situation complexity, and goal
direction), acting (engaging with "difference" and situation
complexity),    and being    (self-perceived   role or   identity).
Relationships among these categories are also hierarchical
(see Figure 2). While attributes of each higher category encompass attributes of prior categories, critical
variations of the more comprehensive categories are not evident in less comprehensive categories (see
Table 1).   This    hierarchical  progression   is  both       data-driven    (emerged from  the     analysis) and logical
(attributes of higher categories move from surface to deep and narrow to broad comprehensions).
          Category 1 (Working Together) is distinct because of a focus on the experience of collaborating
and communicating with people who have different perspectives, language, interaction styles, and ways of
thinking. This appears to be a foundational category since the other categories build off of these ideas in
increasingly complex ways.      As shown in Table 1, critical attributes of Category 1 involve an awareness of
differences in disciplinary training and how these differences complicate the process of working together
towards an effective outcome.     This awareness often triggers an iterative communication process of asking

                                                    1170       ·   © ISLS
                                                                                    ICLS 2010   ·   Volume 1

                                                        TABLE 1.    CRITICAL VARIATIONS IN CROSS-DISCIPLINARY PRACTICE
                        Category 1:                               Category 2:                            Category 3:                                              Category 4:
                      Working together                   Intentional learning                         Strategic leadership                           Challenge & transform practice
AWARENESS OF       ·  Difference = disciplinary     ·    Difference = disciplinary        ·  Difference = disciplinary, organizational,        ·  Difference = lived experiences; transcends
COLLABORATION         training·"Difference" makes        perspective                         cultural                                             disciplinary boundaries·"Difference" as opportunity·"Differences" clash; need strategies and new·"Differences" enable transformation
DIFFERENCES           collaboration complicated     ·    Respect for difficulty of           paradigms to enable collaboration and             ·  Honor other ways of knowing; no way is better than
                   ·  Everyone "smart" in own            disciplinary training               innovation                                           another
                      way                                                                 ·  Aware of need for common ground, trust,
                   ·  Respect as "value-added"                                               shared ownership
                                                                                          ·  Respect for the interfaces
AWARENESS OF       ·  Complexity as function of     ·    Complexity as function of        ·  Complexity drives need new paradigm of            ·  Complexity requires attuning to human context
SITUATION             client and technological           societal and globalneedsdimensions  societal, global, economic views                  ·  Aware of stakeholder risks and consequences·Aware of limits of disciplinary approaches·Aware of system boundaries (disciplinary,
COMPLEXITY         ·  Aware of limits regarding     ·    Aware of limits of own              and frameworks                                       organizational, cultural)
                      technological feasibility          knowledge                        ·  Problems require organizational thinking          ·  Problems require integrated technological ­ social ­
                   ·  Problems as client-driven,    ·    Problems as emergent                                                                     human systems thinking
                      theme-driven
AWARENESS OF       ·  Meet needs, expand            ·    Learning as its own goal ­       ·  Worthwhile outcome for all                        ·  System level and participatory outcome greater
GOAL                  application, identify what         self, team, stakeholders         ·  Successful launch                                    than sum of partsis feasible from another·Interaction yields new·Common ground as an outcome·Shape decisions
                      disciplinary perspective           insights                                                                              ·  Give up disciplinary turf
                                                    ·    New partnerships                                                                      ·  Integrative synthesis that transcends disciplines
                                                                                                                                               ·  Transform views on good practice, good science
ENGAGEMENT         ·  Iterative communication       ·    Self-directed intentional        ·  Change the parameters to discovery and            ·  Work at the interface; work at mile high system
WITH SITUATION        process                            learning process                    cross-disciplinary paradigms                         view·Create opportunities to learn·Focus on problem formulation through·Complex systems thinking
                                                         - immersion and failure             multiple perspectives (not "jump too quick        ·  Bring all aspects of lived experiences together
                                                    ·    Build partnerships                  to implementation")                               ·  Passion to improve system performance
                                                                                          ·  Create collaboration networks
ENGAGEMENT         ·  Client / partner as           ·    Meet as learners, educators      ·  Proactively manage and leverage differences       ·  Engage stakeholders as partners
WITH                  information source            ·    Learn how to think between       ·  Orchestrate discovery and innovation              ·  Advocate different perspectives; be altruistic·Take responsibility fordisciplines, synthesize·Bring people together around shared goal;·Diversity and conflict as transformative
DIFFERENCES           being effective               ·    Learn how to collaborate            build expert network
                      communicator                                                        ·  Build trust, shared ownership, allegiance,
                                                                                             common ground
IDENTITY           ·  Responsible for               ·    Passion for learning, dealing    ·  "Let up on the ego" ­ enable team                 ·  Live at interface as transformational learning site
                      contributing training as           with complexity                  ·  Take the risk and lead                            ·  Revolutionary new "home"; perceived loss of
                      disciplinary team member      ·    Learner and educator             ·  Facilitate synergy at interface, synergy             disciplinary home
                   ·  Team member                                                            angels                                            ·  Cross-disciplinarity as everyday practice ­
                                                                                          ·  Interface, bridge, translator, etc.                  integrates work and life
     From Category 2 to 1: Improving the conditions needed to          From Category 3 to 2: Applying prior learning on the challenges         From Category 4 to 3: Critical reflective practice to
     work together with people with different training to address      and affordances of cross-disciplinary practice to proactively enable    enable transformative learning and outcomes (for self,
     complex problems of social and global significance                successful cross-disciplinary discovery and innovation                  teams, stakeholders, and disciplinary practices)

                                                                                        1171  ·   © ISLS
                                             ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

questions and listening for understanding with those who are perceived as a relevant for determining what
is desired or feasible within a bounded application space such as meeting a specific client's needs.          This
also often involves taking individual responsibility for being an effective communicator and collaborator.
Different perspectives are seen as a "value-added" but not understood in a deep way.
         Category 2 (Intentional Learning) distinctly focuses on the process and outcomes of collaborative
and situational learning. This category builds off of Category 1 (Working Together) because it represents a
process of improving the conditions needed to work together with people with different training to address
complex problems of social and global significance.        As shown in Table 1, a focus on cooperation and
collaboration expands to include social learning, a focus on complex problems expands to include social
and  global  elements,  and  a role   evolves   from  being   a collaborator  to being   a  self-directed  learner.
Awareness of differences changes from recognizing disciplinary differences to respecting the difficulty of
disciplinary  training and learning   at the intersection  of   differences.  Creating   opportunities  to address
complex challenges emerge from intentional learning experiences that involve seeing failure through an
opportunistic mindset and having a passion for self-directed learning. Here, personal learning occurs in
parallel with efforts to be an educator so that collaborators can co-create a shared understanding.
         Category  3   (Strategic  Leadership)  distinctly focuses   on proactively  enabling   successful    cross-
disciplinary discovery and innovation through managing and leveraging differences. "Orchestrating" is
emphasized explicitly through a self-identified role of being a facilitator at the cross-disciplinary interface
and taking the risk of leading projects towards successful outcomes.            As shown in Table 1, this is a
leadership role that is about enabling the team rather than promoting individual egos.           Like Category 1
(Working    Together)  elements    of collaboration   and  successful   outcomes    are  evident  in   Category  3;
however,   an awareness   and  understanding    of  what enables  success    expands  to include   issues  of trust,
respect, shared ownership, and inclusivity such that disciplinary, organizational, and cultural perspectives
can be synergistic and open up new ways of thinking.          Category 3 builds off of Category 2 (Working
Together) by applying prior learning on the challenges and affordances of cross-disciplinary practice to
proactively enable successful cross-disciplinary discovery and innovation.          As shown in Table 1, prior
experiences have established an awareness of how cross-disciplinary work can break down: differences in
perspectives across disciplinary, organizational, and cultural perspectives; poor problem formulation that
leads to ineffective and inappropriate solutions; an inability of disciplinary paradigms to meet the needs of
complex situations that involve economic and political dimensions; a need to engage a social network of
expertise; and the importance of building allegiance, a common vision, and collaborative decision making.
         Category 4 (Challenge and Transform Practice) distinctly focuses on questioning practices and
boundaries.   Where Category 3 (Strategic Leadership) involves leading teams in creating common ground
and new ways of thinking, a leadership role for Category 4 expands to include being a transformative agent
as  well as  being transformed;    where  Category   3 focuses   on  enabling   cross-disciplinary  discovery  and
innovation, Category 4 is about critical reflective practice to enable transformative learning and outcomes
(for individuals,  teams,  stakeholders,  and   disciplinary  practices).    As shown    in Table   1,  Category 4
involves expanding the idea of     "difference" to include lived experiences and recognizing how boundaries
between differences are socially constructed.       This awareness facilitates critical analysis of the idea of
"difference" and a critical exploration into similarities across different perspectives, which leads to new
inclusive practices, theories, and identities.  The essence of Category 4 is challenging epistemic frames
comprised of skills, knowledge, values, identity, and theories of knowledge, as well as honoring differences
and how diversity enables transformative thinking and transcending boundaries. Part of this is attuning to
the  human   and  contextual  aspects  of complex     problems.   This  focus   on   human   issues  is evident  in
participatory strategies that engage diverse stakeholders as partners, not just information resources.        When
human and contextual factors are integrated into the system, the limits of prior views of "good practice" or
"good science" are revealed and enable new ways of thinking about system performance.              For Category 4
there is a  unique  and   explicit identity  of "being   cross-disciplinary".   This new    identity may   involve
disrespect  within  and   exclusion   from   prior  disciplinary  communities    as  well   as seeking    out  new
revolutionary "homes".

Implications and Future Work
While there are a number of theoretical implications of this study, a central contribution is a developmental
framework of cross-disciplinary thinking, acting, and being at the individual level. Overall, the analysis
revealed  four hierarchically  related   categories of variation  that  emphasize    (1) the   ways  "difference",
complexity, and goal motivations are experienced and (2) how these experience shape actions and self-

                                                 1172  ·   © ISLS
                                                 ICLS 2010      ·  Volume 1

perceived   identities.   Across   these    variations are    themes    of  epistemological   development,     respect   for
"difference", social networking and participatory acts to create common ground, and identity development
(for self and in relation to others). F or example, an expanding awareness of "difference" is associated with
epistemological reflection and an evolving respect for different perspectives.               This is evident in the ways
"difference" is described (from disciplines to organizational structures to cultures to lived experiences), the
actions associated with an awareness of difference (as something to be overcome, explored, leveraged and
managed, and critically reflected upon and transformative), and how it is characterized in reference to other
perspectives (as a relevant "value-added", as respected as difficult, as respected in decision making, and as
honored as a way of knowing). In this way, studies of cross-disciplinary practice may help understand how
disciplinary and cross-disciplinary learning interact.
           This study also suggests practical implications. In phenomenography, the link between practice
and preparation for practice is that the way learners experience a phenomenon in the past will form how
they  act  in the   future.  Some    of the  themes    in the   results  have  direct  implications  for  structuring    and
sequencing learning opportunities.          For example, a theme of learning to collaborate as well as learning
through    collaboration     suggests   the  potential impact      of  engaging    learners   early and   often in     cross-
disciplinary collaborations ­ regardless of their level of disciplinary grounding.                  Similarly, a theme of
intentional learning suggests the potential for connecting self-directed and self-regulated learning strategies
or mindsets to a broader agenda of cross-disciplinary learning.               At a minimum, the role of variation in
developing an awareness of cross-disciplinary practice suggests a critical need to provide learners with
diverse experiences to enable an embodied understanding of practice.

Acknowledgments
The   authors  would     like to thank   Shanna    Daly,   Denny    Davis,    and  David  Radcliffe   for their insightful
contributions, and the National Science Foundation for funding this work (EEP-0748005).

References
Adams, R.S., Mann, L., Jordan, S., and Daly, S. (2009a).      "Exploring the boundaries: language, roles, and structures in
           cross-disciplinary design teams."  In J. McDonnell and P. Lloyd (eds), About Designing: Analysing Design
           Meetings, 2009, Chapter 16.   London: Taylor and Francis Group.
Adams,  R.S.,  Forin,    T., Mann, L.   and  Daly,  S  (2009b).    "Cross-disciplinary  practice in engineering  contexts."
           Proceedings of the International Conference on Engineering Design (ICED), Palo Alto, August.
Bowden, J.A. & Green, P. (2005).     Doing Developmental Phenomenography.          Melbourne: RMIT University Press.
Bromme,    R. (2000).    "Beyond   One's   Own  Perspective:    The  Psychology    of Cognitive  Interdisciplinarity."  In P.
           Weingart & N. Stehr (Eds), Practising Interdisciplinary, pp. 115-133.      Toronto: University of Toronto Press.
Daly,  S., Mann,     L., and   Adams,   R.  (2008).    "A  new    direction   for engineering education   research:    Unique
           phenomenographic     results that impact   big  picture  understandings."   In Proceedings  of  the  2008    AaaE
           Conference, Yeppoon, Australia.
Dall'Alba, G. (2009).    Learning to be Professionals.    Innovation and Change in Professional Development, Volume 4.
           Springer Science+Business Media B.V.
Dall'Alba, G. and J. Sandberg (2006). "Unveiling Professional Development: A Critical Review of Stage Models."
           Review of Educational Research, 76(3): 383 - 412.
Galison, P. (1997).  Image and Logic, 1997.   Chicago: The University of Chicago Press.
Klein, J. T. (1996). Crossing boundaries: Knowledge, disciplinarities, and interdisciplinarities. Charlottesville, VA:
           University Press of Virginia.
Klein, J. T. (2004). "Prospects for transdisciplinarity". Futures, 36: 515-526.
Lattuca, L. (2001). Creating interdisciplinarity: Interdisciplinary research and teaching among college and university
           faculty. Nashville: Vanderbilt University Press.
Mann, L. M. W., D. Radcliffe, and Dall'Alba, G. (2007).         "Using Phenomenography to Investigate Different Ways of
           Experiencing Sustainable Design." In Proceedings of the ASEE Annual Conference & Exposition, Hawaii.
Marton, F. and Booth, S. (1997). Learning and Awareness.        New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
National Academy of Engineering (NAE) (2004). Engineering of 2020: Visions of Engineering in the New Century.
           Washington DC: National Academy of Engineering, National Academy Press.
Nersessian, N. J. (2006). "The Cognitive-Cultural Systems of the Research Laboratory." Organizational Studies, 27(1):
           125-145.
Newstetter, W., E. Kurz-Milcke, et al. (2004). "Agentive Learning in Engineering Research Labs."        Proceedings of the
           annual Frontiers in Education Conference.
Sfard, A.  and A.    Prusak  (2005). "Telling identities:  In   search of  an analytic tool for investigating learning   as a
           culturally shaped activity." Educational Researcher, 34(4): 14-22.

                                                      1173    ·   © ISLS
