                                               ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 2

      Content Analysis of Collaboratively Constructed Knowledge
               Artifacts:         Issues and Opportunities for Research
        Abstract: New social media for collaborative knowledge construction, often associated with
        "Web 2.0," represent an emerging context for the research of learning and instruction. Wikis,
        for example, allow methods of collaborative knowledge construction that were very difficult
        to achieve with previous technologies. Applications of wikis and related technologies (e.g.,
        Drupal and Django) are blooming in every corner of society, influencing the ways in which
        people  learn and  exchange    with one    another.   They   are  also making   their  way   into our
        research,    resulting  in  new    methodological     challenges    concerning    the   analysis   of
        collaboratively constructed materials. This symposium will discuss new methods of content
        analysis  in wiki-environments.    The   symposium    includes   an international  set of presenters
        from Canada, Belgium and Norway, representing a small but growing research community
        that are  engaged  in  such investigations.    Each  paper  will present  the  research context   and
        method    of  content   analysis  that was     developed   to  evaluate   collaboration   in  a   wiki
        environment.

Introduction to Symposium
        Across   the learning   sciences, wikis  and   other  forms   of collaborative  knowledge     construction are
increasingly making their way into our classroom and informal learning environments (e.g. Harrer, Moskaliuk,
Kimmerle, & Cress, 2008; Forte & Bruckman, 2007; Greenhow, Robelia, & Hughes, 2009). Wikis appeal to
educators and researchers alike for several reasons: they enable students to contribute, edit, and maintain a
shared document, they are relatively easy to learn, and the revision history is preserved for future reference and
analyses. However, despite the growing popularity of wikis, little is known about the processes that students
engage in when contributing to a wiki. What kinds of practices do they adopt when writing a wiki page? How do
they interact with the content ­their own and that of their peers ­ and how do those interactions change over
time? Can we measure student learning in such task?          How can we evaluate the effectiveness, or the specific
dynamics of collaboration?
        As observed by Jeremy Roschelle in his closing comments at the 2009 CSCL conference, the learning
sciences still lack standard methods for analyzing the interactions that occur between students in a collaborative
learning task. Challenges to analyzing collaborative processes include choosing an appropriate unit of analysis,
segmentation, and   developing   a coding  scheme   that   captures the  learning goals   of interest to  the  research
(Strijbos, Martens, Prins, & Jochems, 2006). In-depth analyses of collaborative materials can also be constrained
by the design of the technology environment and the kinds of analytic tools that are available to researchers. The
idiosyncrasies of such research ­ the particular technology environments, collaborative designs, and research
foci ­ have made it difficult to design analytic methods that can be shared or normed across the research
community. A survey of the existing literature reveals little, if any, published approaches for how to analyze the
conceptual content or collaborative progress within a wiki-based activity.
        In the  absence of   established  analytic methods    within   the  academic   community,    researchers must
design their own metrics for analyzing wiki-based collaborative knowledge construction.         This symposium was
conceived as a way of widening this discussion within the forum of the ICLS meeting.           We have gathered four
distinct research groups ­ two from Canada and two from Europe ­ who have all confronted the same challenge.
We invite  each  of  these groups   to present   their research  paradigm    as well   as a  specific methodological
innovation or approach.  Our discussant, Christine Greenhow, who is not affiliated with any of these research
programs, will synthesize the ideas and advances in this work and lead a discussion amongst participants.

 Paper 1: Development of a Content Analysis Approach for Collaboration in a
                                            Wiki Environment
      Bram De Wever, Hilde Van Keer, Department of Educational Studies, Ghent University, Belgium
                           Email: bram.dewever@ugent.be, hilde.vankeer@ugent.be

        This  paper  focuses   on  developing  a content   analysis of   collaboration in a  wiki environment.    This
contribution focuses on developing a content analysis approach studying collaboration in a wiki environment. It
first discusses a number of units of analysis with different level of granularity. Next, a framework for content
analysis is presented, focusing on one level and distinguishing between content and presentation matter.
        In order to find out what is actually happening during the creation of a wiki, we can focus on different
units of analysis. One unit of analysis is the complete wiki, i.e. the complete collection of wiki pages created by
students. Observations at this level can focus on how the development takes places over time: What is the first

                                                   117   ·  © ISLS
                                                 ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 2

page created? What are the following pages? What is the order of page creation? Information on the priorities
and the need to change pages can be revealed and linked to explicit or implicit planning issues.
         Another unit of analysis is the individual wiki page. By taking a detailed look at the editing history of
each page, relevant information can be retrieved: How many times is the page edited? What were the major
changes in the different edits? How many people worked together on this specific page? Who edited the pages at
what time? What was the pacing of the edits? Were the edits labeled as "minor edits"? However, not all the
information on the page level is to be found in the page history logs. Much relevant information can be gathered
by analyzing the content of the wiki page's final version. Analysis might consider how many links to other
pages   are included,   how  many    external links  are   included,   and how  well  the page      addresses the given
assignment. One might also analyze the formatting or layout of the page, as well as what types of media are
included. Moreover, detailed information can be found by comparing the consecutive versions of a certain wiki
page. Was information added, deleted, or moved from one version to the next? Which information was subject
to change? Were specific types of media (pictures, audio, video) added (or deleted)?
         In the description above, every version of the wiki page could be seen as a unit of analysis. However,
since every version of the page could comprise multiple elements that are changed, some authors (e.g., Peters
and Slotta, this symposium) opt to use every changed element as a unit of analysis, which they call transactions.
         All of the previously discussed units of analysis can be hierarchically nested: All transactions are
nested within one version. Every version is then again nested within a page. And every page is in turn nested
within the overall wiki (see Figure 1 ­ upper portion). However, another unit of analysis, namely the user
(student) does not completely fit with this hierarchically nested structure. Although transactions and versions
can be hierarchically nested within users (every transaction is nested within one and only one version, and every
version is edited by one and only one user), users themselves are cross-indexed with respect to wiki pages. That
is, users can edit multiple pages (see Figure 1 ­ lower portion).
         The user is an important unit of analysis when it comes to analyzing collaboration within a wiki. At this
level, the following questions can be addressed: How many edits were made by a specific user? How many
pages were edited by a specific user ­ or how many pages were edited on average by the users? How often did a
user edit the wiki? Most of this information cannot be found in a log file, but must be constructed from one of
the hierarchical units identified above. For instance, how many minor/major edits were done by a certain user?
How many additions, figures, etc. has a user added? By combining information from the different levels, the full
picture of  a   user's participation can be developed.     Indeed,   a number  of   interesting questions  can  only be
answered by combining information. Moreover, users can be clustered into different groups or types, depending
on  their    condition    within  the    research    study   or   their  activities  within     the  wiki-environment.

Figure  1.  Four  hierarchical   levels within  a wiki           Figure 2.  Coding schemes for wiki edits, including
(upper figure) become more complex when a layer                  specific codes for content (left) and presentation or
is added for users (lower figure).                               formatting of pages (right).
         We developed a general framework for performing content analysis on collaboratively developed wiki
materials. To begin, we focused on the single wiki page as our unit of analysis, which provides a basis for
discussing the deeper levels framework (i.e., at the transaction level). In the proposed symposium, we will
compare     our approach   with  the    methods   of analyzing    wiki   data presented   by    the  other participants.
         Figure 2 above presents an overview of the coding scheme for each wiki page, for every version of the
page. Since a version can contain different changes ("transactions"), multiple codes can be assigned to each unit

                                                     118   ·  © ISLS
                                                  ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 2

of analysis. Content codes include text, pictures, and links that can be added, deleted, or changed. For links, we
differentiate between external links (linking to other references on the WWW), internal links (linking to other
pages within the wiki), and links to anchors (linking within the same wiki page). Other forms of media could be
added to this scheme, e.g. videos, if necessary. Whereas the Add and Delete categories are straightforward, the
Change category is not. Technically speaking, changing any text involves deleting some parts or adding others.
Therefore, one could argue that a Change category is not needed. However, by including a specific "change"
code, we focus on the fact that an existing idea is edited, which is not exactly the same as deleting an idea and
adding one, where there is not necessarily a link between those two actions. Thus, when a part of a page is
deleted (say in the introduction), or another part added (say in the conclusion of the page), such edits should be
coded as Delete or Add, respectively. When one paragraph is rephrased, this should be coded as Change.
          With regard to presentation or formatting of the wiki page, we differentiate between changes at the
sentence or paragraph level, at the page level, and at more global wiki level. In addition, we include a code for
revisions  that involve  simply    correcting mistakes  (e.g.,  typos).   It is important   to recognize   the differences
between content and presentation, and to note that some actions may be coded in both taxonomies.              For instance,
if  somebody    adds  a  title, this should    be coded     both as     Text/Add   in the   Content   scheme    and   Page
level/Titles/Make title in the Presentation scheme, whereas simply changing some existing text to make it into a
header or title would only result in the Presentation code, since the text was there beforehand.
          This method of coding can permit a wide range of analyses, according to the specific needs of the
research design.   While we are in the beginning stages of utilizing such techniques in our own research, we are
confident  that it can   be applied  reliably, and  that it  can  be    further developed   for other   units  of the wiki
organizational scheme (Figure 1). Additionally, qualitative measures concerning the semantic content of the
wiki pages themselves can be added. Thus, our present coding scheme could serve as at a first stage of analysis,
to identify the versions and collaborative patterns in which content is edited (added, deleted, change). In a
second stage, these versions can be studied in a more detailed way. This symposium will allow the authors to
discuss such procedures with co-participants as well as with the audience.

Paper 2: Analyzing Student Collaborations in a Wiki-based Science Curriculum
   Vanessa L. Peters, James D. Slotta, Ontario Institute for Studies in Education, University of Toronto, Canada
                                   Email: vlpeters@gmail.com, jslotta@gmail.com

As part of a larger research study (see Peters & Slotta, 2010), we designed a collaborative wiki-based activity
that engaged    secondary   students in co-creating  a  community       knowledge   base  to   serve as  a resource   for a
subsequent inquiry activity. Over eight weeks, 112 students from four sections of a high school biology course
contributed to a common wiki repository about Canadian biodiversity. A wiki provided the ideal functionality
for  this activity as it enabled   students to easily   access  and  edit    each other's contributions,   reorganize  the
repository, and link pages to establish connections between related themes or ideas.
          While it was important to preserve the open-ended feeling of collaborative editing that typifies wikis, it
was equally important to have a simple and structured way for students to create wiki pages that addressed
specific science content. We therefore created a hybrid wiki environment that included a customized "Create a
New Page" web form (developed using Ruby on Rails) that collects basic information about their resource page,
then generates a new wiki page with pre-specified headers to help scaffold the content in students' wiki entries.
Analysis and Findings
The  activity was   evaluated   in terms of   collaborative    editing, usefulness  of wiki    materials in   later inquiry
activities, and student learning outcomes. Students were actively engaged in the construction of knowledge
resource within the wiki, creating 31ecozone pages with a mean word count of 2809.13 (SD = 1408.73). Each
wiki page was run through Copyscape©, a web-based utility that compares web-based material to check for
instances of plagiarism, with negligible results.
          To analyze students' knowledge construction practices, we coded their contributions to the wiki as
individual  "transactions,"  defined  as the   distinct changes   to    a wiki   page  that occur    during authoring.    A
transaction could be as simple correcting a spelling error, or it could be the revision of a paragraph that involves
adding, deleting and moving text. It must be noted that, while wiki systems generally track all edits according to
"versions" (i.e., where each version corresponds to one editing session), any editing session might contain
multiple transactions. Thus, coding for transactions meant looking within each version edit, to see whether the
author conducted multiple edits before saving the page. Transaction codes included: move, add, delete and
format. For each of the first three codes, we then coded the object of the action: text, image, external link, or
internal link. In the case of text actions, we coded whether the resulting text was embedded or detached (see
Figure 1). Finally, we coded whether the text was made to one's own text, or that of a peer. This distinction was
important because collaborative knowledge construction entails building on and extending the ideas of others
within the learning community.

                                                     119  ·  © ISLS
                                                 ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 2

Figure 1. Wiki transaction showing "embedded" text that has been added and deleted.

         Using the transaction as our unit of analysis, we coded the complete revision history of the wiki (i.e.,
the community knowledge base) to identify the kinds of contributions that students made, when they made
them, and the relative frequency of contributions by different students. This coding allowed us to measure which
students made substantive contributions at what points in the curriculum, whether participation was more or less
equitable and whether ideas grew iteratively or simply as a piecemeal collection.
         As a result of our analysis we identified several trends in terms of students' editing practices when
contributing to a wiki. We also found a relationship between students' individual editing practices and their
scores on their final unit exam. This presentation will provide an overview of the research and describe the
methodology that was used in the study. We will detail the coding, analysis of collaboration and growth patterns
within the wiki, and conclude with recommendations for educators wishing to implement a wiki technology in
their classrooms.

Paper 3: Does Scale Matter: Using Different Lenses to Understand
Collaborative Knowledge Building
                 Elizabeth S. Charles, Dawson College, Canada, echarles@dawsoncollege.qc.ca
                     Nathaniel Lasry, John Abbott College, Canada, lasry@johnabbott.qc.ca
                  Chris Whittaker, Dawson College, Canada, cwhittaker@dawsoncollege.qc.ca

         Web-based environments for communicating, networking and sharing information, often referred to
collectively  as "Web    2.0,"   have   become  ubiquitous    ­ e.g.,  Wikipedia,   Facebook,     Flickr, or  YouTube.
Understanding    how   such     technologies  can promote     participation,  collaboration   and  co-construction   of
knowledge, and how such affordances could be used for educational purposes has become a focus of research in
the Learning   Science   and    CSCL   communities  (e.g.,  Dohn,   2009; Greenhow     et al., 2009).     One  important
mechanism is self-organization, which includes the regulation of feedback loops and the flows of information
and resources within an activity system (Holland, 1996). But the study of such mechanisms calls for new ways
of thinking about the unit of analysis, and the development of analytic tools that allow us to move back and forth
through levels of activity systems that are designed to promote learning. Here, we propose that content analysis
can focus on the flows of resources (i.e., content knowledge, scientific artifacts, epistemic beliefs) in terms of
how they are established and the factors affecting whether they are taken up by members of the community.
         We present our analytic approach, and some empirical data that tests out its constraints. Our approach
is informed by a "systems thinking" perspective and relies on aspects of Activity Theory (Engeström, 1999) as
well as distributed cognition (e.g., Salomon, 1993, Hutchins, 1995). In doing so, we attempt to look across
several levels of granularity within an activity system. To start we look at the smallest unit of sense making
between individuals and investigate how their contributions lead to the construction of an artifact, which is a
form of interactional analysis (e.g., Zemel & Cakir, 2009). On another level, we look at how that artifact
becomes a shared object, whether it is used by others in the community, and how it becomes culturally imbued
(typical of   socio-cultural analysis). This  means  that   we  systematically   interweave   the  use of  two units of
analysis: (1) micro-scale, and (2) macro-scale. Our interest here is to determine whether the insights made by
one or both levels reveal substantially different things about the system and its actors. As well, we shed light on
co-regulatory mechanisms that may be at play, such as collective cognitive responsibility (Scardamalia, 2002).
         We   bridge these   levels of  granularity by   producing   a  visualization of the  discourse   contributions,
expanding upon earlier work by the first author (Karin, Charles & Kolodner, 2006). We demonstrate that such
visualizations can facilitate the investigation of how collective states of knowledge and beliefs emerge within an
activity system such as a collaboratively edited wiki.
         The data we analyze is a case study of an online activity involving a class of 27 first year science
students enrolled in an introductory physics course, with topics such as Newton's laws, and the basic principles
of  forces and   motion. These    data  are drawn  from  a  larger  study that   investigated  the impact   of different
instructional approaches     to collaborative learning,  across  4  classes,  at a post-secondary    institution in  the
province   of Quebec  The    province   of  Quebec, Canada,    has  a  unique 2-year  pre-university   college   system,
equivalent to grades 12 and first-year university in other parts of the world. However, the science curriculum in
our program is taught roughly at the level of an introductory university courses.

                                                     120  ·  © ISLS
                                               ICLS 2010  ·    Volume 2

         We  selected   this instructional case because     it exemplifies    collaborative   knowledge    building  and
refinement from a productive online discussion forum, which led in turn to a class wiki. This development was
intriguing because it emerged from an activity system with few initial resources (i.e., weakly scaffolded) and
open-ended participation goals.    The teacher's instructions were simply to explore two questions following a
physics lab on the topic of acceleration and its effect on weight.      Participation was encouraged and monitored,
though no grades were assigned. In other words, we anticipated that co-regulation would be a large factor in the
success of this activity system.
         We started on the micro-scale, analyzing the interactions at the level of the threaded postings. These
are the tightly coupled (or chained) postings that respond     to an initial idea (see Figure 4, below). Along the way
to being submitted to the wiki, the idea is transformed. Sometimes it was a simple clarification (B, E, F, H).
Sometimes it took on new meaning, which we consider to be a cultural artifact (C, G, I, J).

   Figure 4.   Micro scale representation of contributions to class wiki, deriving from previous discussions.

         When there were no new artifacts being produced, we switched to the macro-scale unit of analysis (see
Figure  5, below).   Though   not   threaded, new postings     instead   referred  to identified  artifacts: (1) content
knowledge (the lilac colored boxes at right) and (2) epistemic knowledge (the blue boxes on the left). Both ideas
are taken up by the community and constitute their collective knowledge. This visualization thus represents
these two kinds of artifacts and their flow through the activity system.
         Finally, we also recorded how several of the actors continued to regulate the flow of these resources, in
particular two students,   Jacques  and Angela  (see both      Figures). When    viewed  from    the macro-scale,   such
repeated   actions can  be seen  as the emergence  of    practice.   When     such practice   is tightly coupled  to the
improvement of a shared artifact, we argue that it demonstrates the construction of a shared goal and propose
this may exemplify what Scardamalia (2002) refers to as collective cognitive responsibility.

                                                   121  ·  © ISLS
                                               ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 2

 Figure 5.   Macro level representation of the flow of content and    epistemic knowledge in the activity system.

     Paper 4: Learning Through Collaborative Creation of Shared Knowledge
                Objects: Technological Support and Analytic Challenges
          Crina Dam!a, Intermedia, University of Oslo, Norway, crina.damsa@intermedia.uio.no,
          Patrick Sins, Utrecht University, the Netherlands, p.h.m.sins@uu.nl
          Bert Reijnen, Stoas University of Applied Sciences, The Netherlands, b.reijnen@stoashogeschool.nl

          Recent studies of collaboration demonstrate that simply bringing people together in groups with some
task, or pooling the group's knowledge, are insufficient conditions to lead to productive real collaboration
(Barron, 2003; Salas, Shawn, & Burke, 2005). One recent approach to learning called Knowledge Creation
(Paavola & Hakkarainen, 2005) depicts learning as a collaborative activity aimed at creating new knowledge
mediated through the creation and development of shared knowledge objects (e.g., research reports, instructional
material or scientific models). According to this approach, collaborative learning does not serve only individual
learning  or only social interaction. Rather, collaboration   is  seen as organized  around  common   knowledge
objects whose creation and development defines their purpose.
          To design educational contexts that apply this idea involves designing new pedagogical methods and
technological tools that are grounded in the knowledge creation approach to learning. One of the prominent
approaches to such innovative designs is technological support of object-mediated collaboration, in the form of
virtual collaboration spaces. However, such designs are often undermined by the fact that little is known about
how  to  analyze  processes  of object-mediated collaboration     and learning. Consequently, our  study seeks    to
understand how learners create knowledge in a virtual environment that supports object-mediated collaborative
learning. We   describe  an  analytical framework  that     supports  an integrative approach  to analyzing  how
interactions between learners in the environment contribute to the progression of their knowledge objects.
          The study was conducted in a collegiate institution in the Netherlands that prepares pre-service teachers
for lower secondary education in the field of agricultural and animal studies. The current study involves 15
students in one of the Professional Situations a 5-month curriculum unit. Students worked in groups of 4-5 on
long-term projects constructing shared knowledge objects and employing the Knowledge Practices Environment
(KPE) to support their work.  KPE is a virtual collaboration space offering facilities for collaboration, with peers
and working with knowledge objects in shared work spaces. Each shared space encompasses a workplace which
presents users with three views: a Process view (to support planning and organizing the process), a Content item
view (to  allow   creating, sharing and  collaboratively    editing of documents,    wiki pages, or notes) and    a
Community view (to enable management of the community). Each group of students worked in their own shared
space, with the emphasis on using wiki or document versioning for collaborative text production and object-
bound chat for supporting focused discussions around the produced material (see Figure 6).

                                                   122  ·  © ISLS
                                              ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 2

                            Figure 6. Object development in wiki pages and object versions

        The integrative approach described above involves combining the analysis of the interactions involved
in the creation  of objects with   the analysis of the   object  up-take  and  progress of  the objects (see  also
contribution by Charles, Lasry, & Whittaker, above). Based on an analysis framework for verbal and written
interactions previously constructed by two of the authors (Dam!a, Kirschner, Andriessen, Erkens, & Sins, in
press) we distinguish between epistemic and regulative actions. Epistemic actions are those that bring about the
construction and progress   of the shared  knowledge-object.     These  are actions involved in or resulting from
productive interactions.    They   can  be described    qualitatively  in such  terms   as "creating  awareness,"
"explicating vision," "alleviating lack of knowledge," "elaborations," a" negotiations to create explanations and
shared understanding"  or   "generative  collaborative   actions and   problem solving."   Regulative actions are
concerned primarily with the processes necessary to direct, organize and support the collaborative process, and
include categories of projective, coordinating and relational actions.
        With respect to analyzing students' knowledge objects, two analytic perspectives are distinguished.
First, the normative perspective, which involves determining the quality of the final object according to domain-
specific criteria, established together with the teachers using an evaluation form. Second, the content-evolution
perspective, which analyzes the progression of the contents of the constructed objects. Inspired by Suthers
(2006) this analysis focuses on the epistemic content that is brought in by group members (i.e., ideas) and that
evolves in terms of conceptual complexity during the period in which the object is developed. Another category
of this analysis concerns the way this content was shaped, elaborated, synthesized, selected, and revised over
time. These analysis categories were drawn mainly from the literature on text writing and elaboration.

             Figure 7. The object-based timeline analysis of an artefact evolution

                                                  123  ·  © ISLS
                                               ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 2

             Figure 8. The user-based timeline analysis of an artefact evolution

         Our   analysis tool makes   it possible to    trace  changes   in the  knowledge  objects, by providing
visualization of performed activities related to a selected object (or set of objects) or for a particular user (or
group) on a timeline. (see Figure 7 and 8, above).  To support the analysis of students' interactions feeding into
their shared knowledge   objects,  the system connects    the chat  discussions that took place between  students
related to specific objects (e.g., document or versions of a wiki), serving to unveil the way in which verbal
actions are taken-up and how ideas expressed are materialized in the knowledge objects.

References
Barron, B. (2003). When smart groups fail. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 12, 307-359.
Bereiter, C., & Scardamalia, M. (1989). Intentional learning as a goal of instruction. In L. B. Resnick (Ed.)
         Knowing, learning, and instruction: Essays in honor of Robert Glaser (pp. 361-392). Hillsdale, LEA.
Dam!a, C. I., Kirschner, P. A, Andriessen, J. E. B., Erkens, G., Sins, P. H. M. (in press). Shared epistemic
         agency ­ An empirical study of an emergent concept. Journal of the Learning Sciences.
Dohn, N.B. (2009) Web 2.0: Inherent tensions and evident challenges for education. International Journal of
         Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 4(3), 1556-1607.
Engeström, Y. (1999). Activity theory and individual and social transformation. In Y.Engeström, R. Miettinen,
         & R.  Punamaki,   (Eds.), Perspectives  on activity   theory   (pp. 19­38). Cambridge,   MA:  Cambridge
         University Press.
Greenhow, C., Robelia, B., & Hughes, J. E. (2009). Web 2.0 and classroom research: What path should we take
         now? Educational Researcher 38(4), 246-259.
Harrer, A., Moskaliuk, J., Kimmerle, J., & Cress, U. (2008). Visualizing wiki-supported knowledge building:
         Co-evolution of individual and collective knowledge. Proceedings of WikiSYm '08, Porto, Portugal.
Holland,  J.H. (1995).  Hidden  order:  How   adaptation    builds complexity.   Reading, MA:   Addisoon-Wesley
         Publishing Co.
Hutchins, E. (1995) Cognition in the wild. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Karkin, S., Charles, E.S., & Kolodner. (2006). Visualizing Discussion by the Use of the Conversation Chain
         Model.  Poster   in proceedings   of the   7th   International  Conference   of  the Learning  Sciences:
         Bloomington, IN.
Paavola, S. & Hakkarainen, K.: The Knowledge Creation Metaphor ­ An Emergent Epistemological Approach
         to Learning. Science & Education, 14(6), 535--557 (2005)
Peters, V. L., & Slotta, J. D. (2010). Scaffolding knowledge communities in the classroom: New opportunities
         in the Web 2.0 era. In M. J. Jacobson & P. Reimann (Eds.), Designs for learning environments of the
         future: International perspectives from the learning sciences (p. 205-232). Secaucus, NJ: Springer.
Salas, E., Sims, S., & Burke, C. (2005). Is there a "Big Five" in teamwork? Small Group Research, 36, 555-599.
Salomon, G. (1993). Distributed cognitions. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Scardamalia, M. (2002). Collective cognitive responsibility for the advancement of knowledge. In B. Smith
         (Ed.), Liberal education in a knowledge society (pp. 67-98). Chicago: Open Court.
Strijbos, J., Martens, R., Prins, F., & Jochems, W. (2006). Content analysis: What are they talking about?
         Computers & Education, 46, 29-48.
Suthers, D.  D.  (2006).   A  qualitative analysis  of    collaborative knowledge    construction through shared
         representations. Research and Practice in Technology Enhanced Learning, 1(2), 1-28.
Zemel, A. & Çakir, M. (2009). Student and Team Agency in VMT. In G. G. Stahl (Ed.), Studying Virtual Math
         Teams, (pp.). New York, NY: Springer Publishing.

                                                   124  ·  © ISLS
