                                               ICLS 2010      ·  Volume 1

    Centering a Professional Learning Community on a Learning
    Progression for Natural Selection: Transforming Community,
                          Language, and Instructional Practice

                           Erin Marie Furtak, Deborah Morrison, and Kathleen Henson
            University of Colorado at Boulder, School of Education, UCB 249, Boulder, CO 80309
            erin.furtak@colorado.edu, deb.morrison@colorado.edu, kathleen.henson@colorado.edu

       In this study we examine the development of a professional learning community (PLC) centered
       on  the practice of understanding   student     learning  of   natural selection. Eight biology  teachers
       engaged with researchers to use an educative learning progression (LP) empirically developed
       from student work as a tool for exploring prior ideas and sharing potential instructional strategies
       to move   students  towards  scientific understandings       of natural   selection.  The   PLC  involved
       iterative cycles of development and reflection of the LP, formative assessments and feedback
       strategies. Three primary results are reported in this paper with respect to the PLC's development
       associated with the LP: transformation of interactions within the PLC, changes in the language
       teachers used to describe student thinking, and modifications in the ways instructional practices
       were shared. These changes demonstrate the potential for a PLC when used in conjunction with a
       LP to encourage meaningful changes in classroom practice.

Theoretical Background
The National Science Education Standards [NSES] (National Research Council, 1996) defined the knowledge and
practices students are expected to learn, but were never intended as a `how-to' document for teachers (Collins,
1998). To supplement the NSES, science education researchers are currently creating Learning Progressions (LPs),
which are empirically-based sequences of conceptual understandings and scientific skills intended as guides for
teaching and learning. LPs map "the successively more sophisticated ways of thinking about a topic that can follow
and build on one another as children learn about and investigate a topic over a broad span of time" (National
Research Council, 2007, p. 213).
       At  least two  approaches  have emerged        for the   construction  of LPs. The    first approach consists of a
progression of correct ideas based on standards documents or consultations with scientists, articulated across grade
spans (American Association for the Advancement of Science, 2001; Catley, Lehrer, & Reiser, 2005). This kind of
LP tends to be created by exhaustive conceptual analyses of how scientifically accurate student ideas should develop
during instruction; examples have been created in the domain of evolution (Catley et al., 2005) and modern genetics
(Duncan, Rogat,  &  Yarden, 2009).   These LPs        are being  developed    as guides  for  curriculum  and large-scale
assessments. A second approach to LPs entails the creation of maps of concepts anchored on one end by naïve ideas
about the natural world and on the other end by scientifically accepted explanations. The middle is occupied by
increasingly sophisticated intermediate understandings. A key feature of this second type of learning progression is
that they are anchored at the lower end by students' common prior ideas and misunderstandings (Briggs, Alonzo,
Schwab, & Wilson, 2006; Wilson, 2005).

Toward Learning Progressions as Teacher Development Tools
Given the aforementioned challenges presented by previous studies employing LPs in the classroom, it follows that
LPs could be complimented with additional information to make them not only maps of how student knowledge
develops through instruction, but also maps of the instructional strategies that will help teachers more effectively
teach a given concept. Knowing the means by which students learn concepts is important, but without the tools to
help teachers recognize and act upon those ideas, the means by which the information LPs contain will be translated
into practice is unclear. LPs need to be developed that will scaffold the development of the knowledge and practices
that teachers need for effective science instruction.
       The science education community, after several years of developing LPs, is now emphasizing the need for
empirical explorations of the impact of LPs on teacher practice and student learning (Shavelson, 2009). According
to the Center on Continuous Instructional Improvement's recent report on LPs, the field needs "continuing effort,
and funding, to refine and test the progressions that now are under development, including making a concerted effort
to demonstrate the effects on instruction and improved student outcomes when teaching and assessment are aligned

                                                      129   ·  © ISLS
                                                  ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

with  well  tested progressions  -  to provide  a kind   of  "existence  proof"  that  further  investment    in developing
progressions would be justified." (Corcoran et al., 2009, p. 9).

Educative Learning Progressions
Although the primary purpose of LPs as currently conceived is to sequentially map the knowledge and practices
students are expected to learn, LPs have great potential to be invaluable tools for teacher development.          LPs could
serve as the foundation for what Davis & Krajcik (2005) called `educative curriculum materials' with the dual
potential of scaffolding not only student learning, but also teacher learning in a conceptual domain. This kind of LP
­ which will henceforth be referred to as an educative LP - contains information regarding knowledge of common
student ideas and alternative conceptions, suggestions for strategies or actions to help students learn, and a model for
teacher development in relation to the LP. An educative LP is thus a suite of tools that may work synergistically to
support improvement in teacher practice and student learning.
        In the inquiry-based learning environments currently emphasized in science education reforms (National
Research Council, 1996, 2001, 2007) the ideas that students develop are often undifferentiated, poorly stated, and
inconsistent with standards-style statements of idealized student understanding (e.g. Driver, Guesne, & Tiberghien,
1985). In order for teachers to navigate these ideas and move students toward learning goals, they must have deep
content knowledge, as well as knowledge of students' understandings and misconceptions (Duschl, 2003; Gess-
Newsome,    1999;   Shulman,    1986). Since   teachers'  content knowledge     is not   always  interconnected     or  easily
translated  into reform-based    classroom  practice, the   ideas students   present  in inquiry-based    activities   pose a
particular challenge (Luft & Roehrig, 2007; Windschitl, 2004).
        Educative LPs could serve as scaffolds for teachers in inquiry-based settings by helping them to anticipate
not only the ideas students might share, but also to suggest instructional strategies tailored to these ideas. In order to
serve  that purpose,  however,   LPs   need  to include   examples    of student   responses  for each    level, as  well   as
instructional strategies, feedback suggestions to help students proceed up the LP, and professional development to
support changes    in practice. Educative   LPs should   thus  contain   the preceding   five elements;   the first  four are
features of the educative LP itself, and the fifth emphasizes the importance of sustained professional development
within a community of practice to support teachers' adoption of new instructional strategies based on the educative
LP (Lave & Wenger, 1991). Sustained professional development centered on an educative LP and its accompanying
tools could help teachers learn the structure and relationship of students' understandings about a particular concept,
teaching strategies to elicit student thinking, likely student responses, and targeted feedback for students. In this
way, educative LPs can act as a guide for teachers, showing them potential steps to take in order to help students
move along the learning progression, thereby meeting increasingly challenging learning goals (Sadler, 1989) and
positively impacting student learning (Black, 1998). To explore the potential influence of an educative LP on a PLC,
this paper responds to the following research question: How does sustained, ongoing professional development in a
PLC centered on the LP transform the community, language and practice?

Context: Natural Selection and the Daphne Project
Charles Darwin's theory of evolution through the process of natural selection is the unifying framework for Biology
(Dobzhansky, 1973); nevertheless, students often have a difficult time understanding it (Bishop & Anderson, 1990;
Ferrari & Chi, 1998). Studies indicate evolution instruction in high school has been "absent, cursory, or fraught with
misinformation"    (Rutledge   & Mitchell,  2002, p.  21),  and   students commonly      have  misconceptions    about   how
populations change over time (Anderson, Fisher, & Norman, 2002; Rudolph & Stewart, 1998; Shtulman, 2006).
        The Daphne Project is a design-based research study located at the intersection of the new theory of LPs
and classroom practice (Brown, 1992; Sandoval & Bell, 2004; Sloan 2009).           The goal of the Daphne Project was to
collaborate with a department of biology teachers to explore and refine a hypothesized LP. It was hypothesized at
the outset of the study that engaging in the process of developing this LP would help teachers be better prepared to
recognize and act upon student thinking, which in turn would impact student learning by closing what has been
called a `feedback loop' in the formative assessment process (Black & Wiliam, 1998; National Research Council,
2001).
        The educative LP created in the Daphne Project combines features of LPs designed as frameworks for
curriculum  with   lower anchors    serving as  foundational   correct understandings    (Catley  et al., 2005)   and   those
anchored by students' common prior ideas as suggested by Shepard (2009) and Wilson (2009). In this way, the LP
has as its foundation both an overarching framework to inform scope and sequence as well as information mapping
students'  complex    thinking that can often   obfuscate  the path   forward  for teachers.  The  educative     LP  is not a
curriculum in itself, but is intended as a framework to guide teachers' enactment of a curriculum by representing a

                                                      130  ·   © ISLS
                                                  ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

sequence of correct ideas as well as a categorization of the common misunderstandings students may have regarding
those ideas. The educative LP is shown in Figure 1; the horizontal sequence of correct ideas is taken directly from
Mayr (1997), and the two vertical sequences (Origin and Inheritance of Traits and Selective Force constructs) were
identified through analyses of student responses to the assessments in the Daphne Project. The educative LP is
paired with accompanying tools intended to scaffold instruction, as well as a professional development model to
support teachers in changing their practice. The educative LP for natural selection includes a set of formative
assessment prompts designed to be embedded in the curriculum to provide opportunities for teachers to elicit student
thinking and map it to the progression. It also includes common student responses to each assessment at each level
and suggested feedback strategies for students with different ideas.

                                 Figure 1. Learning Progression for Natural Selection

       A      suite of tools including a  series  of formative  assessment  prompts,  sample  student   responses, and
feedback ideas were    developed and   piloted across the three years  of the Daphne Project. The result was   a set of
formative assessments that targeted different ideas on the Origin of New Traits and Selective Force constructs,
including a   constructed-response   prompt    of "How    do   species change   over time?",  a multiple-choice  plus-
justification prompt,  an evaluation   of Peter  and Rosemary    Grant's  data on Darwin's   finches in the Galapagos
Islands, and interpretation of real-life scenarios (Figure 2). and analysis of these prompts being implemented led to
collection of student responses for each level of the LP, as well as suggested feedback strategies (Table 1).

                                   Figure 2. Sample formative assessment activity

                                                      131  ·  © ISLS
                                                  ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

Table 1. Sample student responses, and feedback strategies linked to the need-based conceptions on the Origin and
Inheritance of Traits construct.

Description                 Example Student Responses                         Suggested Feedback
Anthropomorphic:               "The moths become darker because of             Examine evidence collected in class
Changes arise from             bark."                                          activities and focus upon where variation
deliberate acts by the         "The moths would change their color to a        originated
parent organism or the         darker color to blend in with the dark          Explore Lamarck's idea of descent with
species as a whole             bark."                                          modification, and compare to modern
                                                                               ideas about genetic inheritance
Environmentally Induced:       "When food and other resources become           Explore differences between mutations
Changes emerge because         scarce, the finches develop over a period       in an individual and population changes
of environmental               of time different beaks to eat the hard         Discuss instances in which individuals
conditions; i.e., the          seeds that seem to be abundant."                change in response to the environment
environment causes             "Animals mutate to fit in with their            (e.g. arctic hares), and how this differs
changes in organisms to        natural surroundings. So becoming darker        from changes in the proportion of genes
occur                          helps to keep them in camouflage."              in a population

Sustained Professional Development
Since the LP and the tools themselves do not represent a sufficient intervention to help teachers develop their own
practices, a central component of the Daphne Project was the development of a PLC consisting of the authors and
seven biology teacher participants, with a biologist providing content-specific guidance when necessary. These
multiple stakeholders brought myriad perspectives to the PLC, allowing for the active exchange of ideas based on
the participants' diverse expertise. The PLC met monthly during the school year for the duration of years two and
three of the project. According to DuFour (2004), three components of successful PLCs in schools are (1) a focus on
student learning, (2) a culture of collaboration and (3) a focus on  results. Each of these components was undertaken
within the Daphne Project work as the activities of the PLC were modeled on problem-solving and assessment
development cycles from mathematics education (Borko, 2004; Webb, Romberg, Burrill, & Ford, 2005) to facilitate
teachers' reflection on their current practices and adoption of new practices supported by the educative LP.
          The Daphne Project PLC is modeled on an iterative four-step process.      At each step in this process student
learning was central in teachers' collaboration around specific instruction and feedback necessary to move students
with specific prior ideas forward to correct understandings. The first step is for teachers to Reflect upon their current
practice, sharing  instructional strategies and   materials    with each  other  and discussing  their advantages   and
disadvantages (Loughran, Mulhall, & Berry, 2004). In the second step, teachers Explore student thinking in their
classes and compare those ideas with the LP. In this step, a particular focus is placed upon deepening teachers'
content knowledge, as well as understanding students' common misunderstandings and alternative conceptions and
the sources of those ideas. In the third step, teachers Practice using the associated tools and formative assessments,
categorizing samples of student work, anticipating feedback, and discussing video cases. At this stage, encouraging
teachers to discuss not only the identification of student ideas is essential, but also anticipating the kinds of feedback
students within each category of student thinking would need. The fourth step has the teachers Enact their natural
selection units with the tools contained in the educative LP, after which the teachers continue the cycle by reflecting
upon their enactment and Revising their plans for next time.

Method

Participants
Eight biology teachers at Springfield High School participated. Springfield, considered among the top high schools
in the state, is an ethnically and socioeconomically diverse school near a large city in the western US. The teachers
represented a wide range of backgrounds and experience, ranging from a second-career student teacher to a 29-year
veteran Biology teacher. Students in the participating teachers' classes were enrolled in four levels of biology: 9th
grade pre-International Baccalaureate Biology, 10th grade General Biology, 10th grade English Language Learner
(ELL) Biology, and 11th grade Advanced Placement Biology.

                                                     132  ·   © ISLS
                                                ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

Learning Progression and Professional Learning Community
On the basis of the student ideas about natural selection identified above, a draft LP was developed, piloted, and
revised based  upon  analyses of  student work (Furtak,   2009).   By organizing students' ideas in a linear fashion,
progressing from simple to complex, moving away from the ideas of Lamarck toward those of Darwin. As described
above, the LP was accompanied by formative assessments designed to elicit student thinking, along with sample
student responses and feedback strategies that were updated and extended by the reseachers and teachers through the
course of the study.
         Prior to the beginning of the study, the biology teachers at Springfield High did not have common planning
time, and  other than   using the same    textbook at each   level of  biology instruction, did not have      a  common
curriculum. The teachers and the lead researcher participated in meetings every two to three weeks during the 2008-
2009. Sessions involved discussing approaches to teaching evolution, predicting and exploring students' ideas about
natural selection, categorizing student work, and discussing different instructional approaches given student ideas
represented in the LPs.

Sources of Data
Videotapes made of PLC meetings spanning the 2008-2009 and 2009-2010 academic years are the primary source
of data for this study. Complimenting these videotapes are field notes kept by the authors of the study during each
meeting, reflective notes made immediately followign each meeting, artifacts from the meetings, and content logs
made of each videotape.

Data Analysis
Through the course of the study, the authors kept ongoing notes based upond emergent themes they noticed during
the PLC meetings. Reflection and discussion of these notes within research group meetings revealed converging
themes centered on three shifts that occurred across the course of the academic year: shifts in the community
interactions, shifts in the language teachers used to characterize student thinking, and shifts in practice.
         The  authors   independently viewed   videos   supplemented   by  the artifacts described  above      and  noted
instances of interest in the PLC videos related to these three themes. Observations were categorized according to
their relationship to the three elements of focus in this study: community, language, and instrucitonal practice. Then
propositions were made on the basis of what each researcher viewed as the nature of the interactions in that video.
The three researchers then met and came to a consensus about the nature of the three categories in each video.
Longitudinal comparisons were then made across the set of PLC videos.

Table 2: Sample categories
Categories        Questions to frame analysis
Community         How do teachers interact within the PLC community? Who allies with whom? What are the
                  issues of status that arise? Who is speaking, and who is listening? How do they listen to and
                  respond to each other?
Language          How do teachers characterize student ideas? What kinds of ideas do they mention, and what
                  words are they using to describe them? How do these relate/not to the learning progression?
                  Issues of creationism and intelligent design versus misconceptions?
Instructional     What kinds of instructional practices are discussed? What are the rationales for using these
Practices         teaching practices? How are learning experiences sequenced? How do these teaching practices
                  relate to those represented in the learning progression?

Results
Results of our analyses of the multiple sources of data collected around the PLC meetings indicate that the PLC
became more empathetic and communicative, respecting and exchanging ideas in a way that did not happen at the
beginning of the study. In addition, teachers moved away from describing student beliefs in general terms and
migrated  toward  description  of the student  ideas  represented  in  the learning progression,  using      the common
language present in the LP to describe and label these ideas. Finally, teachers' discussion of their instructional
practices moved away from simple discussion of what their favorite activites were to more targeted description of
which practices were better suited to the ideas represented in the LP. In the full paper, we will describe and illustrate

                                                    133  ·  © ISLS
                                                ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

how these changes occurred over the course of the study, describing in detail important events in this transformation
process; however, for the purposes of the proposal, we summarize our results briefly below.

Shifts in Community Dynamics
Early in the study, teachers took oppositional stances about practices in individual classrooms, without strong sense
of a need for collaboration. For example, In the first PLC meeting, Lisa stated that that she was not trying to change
student beliefs about evolution while Rachel stated that she didn't feel like she needed to respect non-scientific
student ideas. Over time, however, the conversation in the PLC shifted almost completely away from oppositional
stances and toward teachers expressing mutual respect for each other's aprpoaches to teaching the strategies
common to the LP, sharing strategies and their effectiveness at addressing particular student ideas, and taking up
each other's ideas. For example, Rachel moved away from her oppositional stance later in the study, responding to a
video of a colleague teaching with the statement, "I just really like that last bit of questioning she did...who would
be the only predator...what would happen? So she, like, took it to be predictive and extended the idea."    This
comment highlights the development of mutual respect within the group.       In addition, the balance of contribution to
the PLC shifted away from its initial status, in which Rachel and Chris, the teachers most confident in their content
knowledge, dominated the discussion at the expense of other teachers who were less confident, toward a more even
balance of contribution. We argue that this shift took place not only because the previously dominant teachers
gained a new respect for the practices of their colleagues, but also because the previously non-dominant teachers
gained confidence in content knowledge through the PLC and therefore had more to contribute.

Shifts in Language to Describe Student Ideas
Early in the study, teachers were not able to differentiate between different kinds of student ideas about natural
selection. In early meetings, they spoke extensively either about students' rejection of evolution and natural selection
or, when pushed to speak about common student understandings, teachers stated their impression of student ideas in
general terms. This general stance is reflected in a statement by Alison, who said, "I just feel like yeah they're
confused about all parts of natural selection so I'll just go from there." Later in the study, conversation about
evolution all but disappeared in favor of explicit description of student ideas using the categories from the LP; for
example, distinguishing between various categories of what we came to call 'need-based change' in the forms of
students arguing that the environment induces changes in organisms, or that organisms mutate to fit their
surroundings. In addition, teachers cited Mayr's facts and inferences when talking about the 'big ideas' students were
expected to come to know. In fact, Chris and Lisa - teachers who previously had not worked collaboratively - met
independently of the scheduled PLC meetings and categorized preassessments according to the categories in the LP.

Shifts in Descriptions of Instructional Practices
We found that early in the study, teachers described which activities they liked to use to teach particular concepts,
but did not have common activities that would facilitate their sharing of strategies across the group. Much of early
discussion in the PLC was therefore focused on the teachers coming to an understanding of exactly what they were
doing in their classrooms. However, as the study progressed, teachers agreed to use a common set of formative
assessments in all of their classrooms as a basis for a discussion about their relative effectiveness in eliciting student
ideas along the LP. In addition, teachers' conversations about the source of common student misunderstandings
served as an impetus to create new formative assessments to which each teacher contributed, and which each teacher
then used in her or her own classroom. In addition to these common activities that were a part of the educative LP,
teachers came to discuss more explicitly which of the student ideas represented on the LP necessitated use of
different activities in the classroom. Early in the development of the PLC teachers expressed hesitation to solicit
student ideas about evolution. This hesitation appeared to be driven by a fear of creating conflict in the classroom.
Later, this hesitation disappeared and teachers not only     were  interested  in soliciting student ideas but also   the
sources of those ideas.  We suggest that the confidence to tackle student ideas grew out of the stronger content
knowledge and instructional strategies developed in the PLC.
        In addition to these common formative assessments, teachers also came to share the different variations of
common class activities that they were using in their natural selection units.     For example, several teachers used
some version of the Biological Sciences Curriculum Study's (2006) activity in which students pick up colored dots
from patterend cloth, discovering over multiple iteractions of the activity that the harder-to-see dots were less likely
to be picked up from the cloth. During the course of the study, all teachers decided to use some form of this activity,
some using physical materials and others using an online applet to model the same phenomenon. Teachers then

                                                    134  ·  © ISLS
                                                   ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

came together later in the study and discussed the relative effectiveness of the activity, weighing trade-offs such as
time spent on the activity and depth of student understanding.
         Another change in the discussion of instructional practices within the PLC was a change in focus from
talking about  activities to  specifically  identifying and   addressing  student  misconceptions,  and targeting which
instructional examples, analogies, and activities would best address them.      In addition, teachers reflected on the fact
that students reverted back to their naïve ideas when presented with novel scenarios in class. This highlights the fact
that these teachers, in addition to developing more advance strategies for eliciting and identifying student ideas, are
also reflecting upon the process of conceptual change in a more sophisticated manner than at the beginning of the
study (Smith, diSessa, & Roschelle, 1993).
         .
Educational Importance
Thte preceding   data indicate    that the PLC  centered   on   the educative  LP  provided teachers  an opportunity to
reconnect  and   develop  a   common     language around   a  single  conceptual   domain, enriching their   own  content
knowledge while they simultaneously built a new community in their department. We found that repeated meetings
centered on the educative LP helped to refocus teachers from defensive stances regarding the teaching of evolution
to the smaller instrucitonal issue of natural selection, to enrich teachers' common language regarding student ideas,
and inform their discussion and selection of instructional strategies targeted at student thinking.
         The present research also illustrates the importance of involving the 'user' audience in the development of
LPs and their accompanying tools.
         Given the current level of interest in the development and study of LPs in science education, the present
analysis is of critical importance to inform educational researchers and professional developers of the utility of these
tools not only in guiding assessment and curriculum development, but also in developing the content knowledge of
practicing science teachers and building community around a common content area.

References
American   Association    for the Advancement     of Science.   (2001).  Atlas  of Science LIteracy. Washington,   D.C.:
         National Academies Press.
Anderson, D. L., Fisher, K. M., & Norman, G. J. (2002). Development and Evaluation of the Conceptual Inventory
         of Natural Selection. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 39(10), 952-978.
Biological Sciences Curriculum Study. (2006). BSCS Biology: An Ecological Approach (10th ed.). Dubuque, Iowa:
         Kendall/Hunt.
Bishop, B. A., & Anderson, C. W. (1990). Student Conceptions of Natural Selection and Its Role in Evolution.
         Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 27(5), 415-427.
Black, P. (1998). Assessment by Teachers and the Improvement of Students' Learning. In B. J. Fraser & K. G. Tobin
         (Eds.), International    Handbook   of Science    Education  (pp. 811-822).   Dordrecht,  Netherlands:  Kluwer
         Academic Publishers.
Brown, A. 1992.   Design Experiments: Theoretical and methodological challenges in creating complex interventions
         in classroom settings.   The Journal of the Learning Sciences,   v.2, n.2, p.141-178.
Borko, H. (2004). Professional Development and Teacher Learning: Mapping the Terrain. Educational Researcher,
         33(8), 3-15.
Briggs, D. C., Alonzo, A. C., Schwab, C., & Wilson, M. (2006). Diagnostic Assessment with Multiple-Choice
         Items. Educational Assessment, 11(1), 33-63.
Catley, K.,  Lehrer,  R.,   &    Reiser, B. (2005).  Tracing    a   Prospective Learning   Progression   for Developing
         Understanding of Evolution: Paper Commissioned by the National Academies Committee on Test Design
         for K-12 Science Achievemento. Document Number)
Collins, A. (1998). National Science Education Standards: A political document. Journal of Research in Science
         Teaching, 35(7), 711-727.
Davis,  E. A., &  Krajcik,    J. (2005).  Designing  Educative    Curriculum   Materials to Support  Teacher   Learning.
         Educational Researcher, 34(3), 4-14.
Dobzhansky, T. (1973). Nothing in biology makes sense except in the light of evolution. The American Biology
         Teacher, 35, 125-129.
Driver, R., Guesne, E., & Tiberghien, A. (1985). Children's Ideas in Science. Philadelphia: Open University Press.
DuFour, R. (2004). What is a "Professional Learning Community"? Educational Leadership, 61(8), p. 6-11.
Duncan, R. G., Rogat, A., & Yarden, A. (2009). A learning progression for deepening students' understanding of
         modern genetics across the 5th-12th grades. . Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 46(6), 655-674.

                                                       135  ·  © ISLS
                                                 ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

Duschl, R. A. (2003). Assessment of Inquiry. In J. M. Atkin & J. Coffey (Eds.), Everyday Assessment in the Science
         Classroom (pp. 41-59). Arlington, VA: NSTA Press.
Ferrari, M., & Chi, M. T. H. (1998). The nature of naive explanations of natural selection. International Journal of
         Science Education, 20(10), 1231-1256.
Furtak, E. M. (2009). Toward Learning Progressions as Teacher Development Tools. Paper presented at the Learning
         Progressions in Science Conference, Iowa City, IA.
Gess-Newsome, J. (1999). Secondary Science Teachers' Knowledge and Beliefs about Subject Matter and Their
         Impact on Instruction. In J. Gess-Newsome & N. G. Lederman (Eds.), Pedagogical Content Knowledge
         and Science Education (pp. 51-94). The Netherlands: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Lieberman, A, and Miller, L.     (2008). "Balancing content and process: Facing challenges." In Lieberman, A. and
         Miller, L. (eds.), Teachers in Professional Communities. New York: Teachers College Press, p.29-38.
Loughran, J., Mulhall, P., & Berry, A. (2004). In Search of Pedagogical Content Knowledge in Science: Developing
         Ways of Articulating and Documenting Professional Practice. Journal of Research in Science Teaching,
         41(4), 370-391.
Luft, J. A., & Roehrig, G. H. (2007). Capturing Science Teachers' Epistemological Beliefs: The Development of the
         Teacher Beliefs Interview. Electronic Journal of Science Education, 11(2), 38-63.
Mayr, E. (1997). This is Biology. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
McLaughlin, M. & Talbert, J. (2006). Building school-based teacher learning communities: professional strategies
         to improve student achievement. New York: Teachers College Press.
National Research Council. (1996). National Science Education Standards. Washington, D.C.: National Academy
         Press.
National Research    Council.  (2001). Classroom    Assessment     and  the  National   Science   Education   Standards.
         Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press.
National Research Council. (2007). Taking Science to School: Learning and Teaching Science in Grades K-8.
         Washington, D.C.: National Academies Press.
Rudolph,  J. L.,  &  Stewart, J. (1998).  Evolution and    the Nature   of Science:   On the   historical discord and its
         implications for science education. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 35(10), 1069-1089.
Rutledge, M. L., & Mitchell, M. A. (2002). High School Biology Teachers' Knowledge Structure, Acceptance, and
         Teaching of Evolution. The American Biology Teacher, 64(1), 21-28.
Sadler, D. R. (1989). Formative Assessment and the Design of Instructional Systems. Instructional Science, 18, 119-
         144.
Sandoval, W.    & Bell, P. (2004).   Design-based   research methods for studying       learning  context:  introduction.
         Educational Psychologist, v.39, n.4, p.199-201.
Shavelson, R. J. (2009). Reflections on Learning Progressions. Paper presented at the Learning Progressions in
         Science Conference.
Shepard, L. (2009). From Advocacy to Adoption: Getting Formative Assessment into More Classrooms. Discussant
         Remarks. Paper presented at the American Educational Research Association Annual Meeting.
Shtulman,   A.  (2006). Qualitative  differences between      naive and    scientific theories of evolution.   Cognitive
         Psychology, 52, 170-194.
Shulman, L. S. (1986). Those Who Understand: Knowledge growth in teaching. Educational Researcher, 15(2), 4-
         14.
Sloane,  F.  (2009).  Randomized   trials in mathematics    education:  recalibrating   the proposed high    watermark.
         Educational Researcher, 37(9), p.624-630.
Smith, J. P., DiSessa, A. A., & Roschelle, J. (1993). Misconceptions Reconceived: A Constructivist Analysis of Knowledge
         in Transition. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 3(2), 115-163.
Webb, D. C., Romberg, T. A., Burrill, J., & Ford, M. J. (2005). Teacher Collaboration: Focusing on Problems of
         Practice. In T. A. Romberg & T. P. Carpenter (Eds.), Understanding Math and Science Matters (pp. 231-
         251). Mahwah. NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Lave, J., & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated Learning: Legitimate Peripheral Participation. Cambridge: University of Cambridge
         Press.
Wilson, M. (2005). Constructing Measures: An Item Response Modeling Approach. Mahwah, N.J.: Erlbaum.
Wilson,  M.  (2009).  Learning   Progressions to Guide     Systems  of  Formative and    Summative   Assessment.   Paper
         presented at the Annual Meeting of the American Educational Research Association.
Windschitl, M. (2004). Folk theories of "inquiry:" How preservice teachers reproduce the discourse and practices of
         an atheoretical scientific method. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 41(5), 481-512.

                                                    136  ·   © ISLS
