                                                ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 2

Symposium: Fostering the Acquisition and Application of Domain-
                   Specific Knowledge through Concept Mapping

     Carmela Aprea (Co-Organizer), Hermann G. Ebner, University of Mannheim, Department of Business
                          Administration, Square L4, 1, 68131 Mannheim, Germany
                      E-mail: aprea@bwl.uni-mannheim.de; ebner@bwl.uni-mannheim.de
Bert Slof1 (Co-Organizer), Gijsbert Erkens1, Paul A. Kirschner2, 1Utrecht University, Research Centre Learning
 in Interaction, P.O. Box 80.140, 3508 TC Utrecht, The Netherlands, 2 Open Universiteit Nederland, P.O. Box
                                      2960, 6401 DL Heerlen, The Netherlands
                         E-mail: B.Slof@uu.nl; G.Erkens@uu.nl; Paul.Kirschner@ou.nl
Baerbel Fuerstenau, Jeannine Ryssel, Janet Kunath; Dresden University of Technology, Department of Business
                         Administration, Münchner Platz 3, 01187 Dresden, Germany
    E-mail: baerbel.fuerstenau@tu-dresden.de; janet.kunath@tu-dresden.de; jeannine.ryssel@tu-dresden.de
    Peggy Van Meter (Discussant), The Pennsylvania State University, Department of Educational and School
             Psychology and Special Education, 228 CEDAR Building, University Park, PA 16802
                                               E-mail: pnv1@psu.edu
             Mireille Betrancourt (Chair), Geneva University, Faculty of Psychology and Education,
                                      Pont d'Arve 40, 1211 Geneva 4; Suisse
                                      E-mail: Mireille.Betrancourt@unige.ch

          Abstract: This symposium centers on the concern about the acquisition and application of
          conceptual knowledge     in the  domain  of   business  and   economics,  both  important    and yet
          demanding   educational   goals. The   contributions   are  aimed   at  studying whether     concept
          mapping can be helpful in reaching these goals. Moreover, we intend to provide preliminary
          guidelines for using concept maps (CMs) as a learning tool in this specific field. For this
          purpose, we adopt an instructional design perspective that focuses on the issues as (1) what
          kinds of learning tasks can be successfully promoted by using CMs, (2) what kinds of learning
          activities need to be stimulated in order to accomplish these learning tasks, (3) how concept
          mapping  supports  students   in performing   the   required  learning   activities, and (4)  which
          additional instructional means can be helpful to increase its effectiveness.

Symposium Overview
Overall focus and potential significance: Issues in the field of business and economics dramatically affect
peoples'  lives in an increasingly    globalized world.    Thus,  the ability to  acquire knowledge    in  this specific
domain   and to  apply  this knowledge     to public and   private  concerns   is not only   essential with  respect to
professional business and economics training but may be deemed as an overarching educational goal. However,
due to the diversity in (1) concepts, (2) possibilities of relating these concepts, and (3) representing the domain
(i.e., causally, mathematically), knowledge in business and economics may be regarded as highly complex (e.g.,
Miller & VanFossen, 2008). As a consequence, acquiring a well-developed knowledge base and/or applying this
knowledge    to business and   economics    problems    are   anything  but easy   ventures.   Empirical  studies (e.g.,
Marangos & Alleys, 2007) suggest that even major business and economics students at an university level still
encounter difficulties when trying to reach these educational goals. It is in the context of this unsatisfactory
situation that concept maps (CMs) attract the interest of researchers and educators in the field. However, while
most of the research done here uses CMs as a teacher-provided text adjunct or as an assessment device (e.g.,
Lawless, Smee, & O'Shea, 1998), scholars in business and economics education have more recently begun to
study concept mapping as a learning tool for supporting the processes of acquiring and/or applying domain-
specific knowledge. Against this background, the main purpose of the symposium is to scrutinize this latter
application of concept mapping in the field of business and economics education, which includes pinpointing
potential benefits  and  pitfalls. Based   on  the results    of the  research   studies presented, we     also provide
preliminary guidelines for using CMs as a learning tool in this particular field. In spite of being derived from
domain-specific research, we suppose these guidelines to be adaptable to other complex knowledge domains.
Thus, the symposium may be of interest to all researchers and educators who wish to understand and effectively
cope with the challenges and predicaments of learning about complex knowledge domains.
          Major issues addressed: In order to obtain the goals mentioned above, we adopt an instructional design
perspective (e.g., Van Merriënboer & Kirschner, 2007), that integrates the views of CMs (1) as a mean of
supporting certain kinds of learning activities (i.e., as a process), and (2) as a learning goal (i.e., as a product) in
itself. Within this frame of reference, we particularly focus on the following issues:
(1) What kinds of learning tasks in the field of business and economics education can be successfully promoted
    by using concept mapping as a learning tool?

                                                     13  ·  © ISLS
                                               ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 2

(2) What kinds of learning activities need to be stimulated in order to accomplish these learning tasks?
(3) How does concept mapping support students in performing the required learning activities?
(4) Which additional instructional means might be helpful to increase the effectiveness of concept mapping as
    a learning tool?
         Summaries of the contributions:
         Paper 1 focuses on concept mapping and summary writing as learning tools for fostering students'
understanding of the knowledge domain after playing a management game. The findings indicate that both
construction tasks lead to more learning gains in comparison to a control condition. However, in contrast to the
expectation, the summary writing task was superior to the concept mapping task.
         Paper 2 suggests that collaborative problem-solving in the field of business economics is facilitated
when the different part-tasks are made explicit, are properly sequenced, and foreseen with ontologically part-
task congruent support in the representational tools. Collaboratively constructing different representations (i.e.,
concept maps) of the knowledge domain with the aid of representational tools increases students' understanding
which beneficially affects their problem-solving performance.
         Paper 3 addresses the issue of students' difficulties with concept mapping and how these may be
overcome by directly (i.e., training) and indirectly (i.e., collaboration) scaffolding the construction of concept
maps. The results indicate that collaboratively constructing concept maps fosters students' understanding of the
domain,  but  the effects of scaffolding should   be  carefully  matched    to students' characteristics (e.g., prior
knowledge) and the intended learning outcome (i.e., factual or conceptual knowledge).

Paper 1: Concept Mapping versus Summary Writing as Instructional Devices
for Understanding Complex Business Problems

                             Baerbel Fuerstenau, Jeannine Ryssel, & Janet Kunath

Background and Aim
Prepairing students to work with complex cases and procedures is one of the central goals of business and
economics education. Traditional instruction is meeting this goal with only limited success. Thus, researchers as
well as educational politicians recommend solving the problems mentioned by relating instruction more closely
to workplace assignments and business processes. Using management games has been advocated to meet this
educational goal by supporting students in understanding complex interrelationships and applying knowledge in
new situations and to new tasks. However, 20 years of research indicates that management games alone are not
sufficient and additional instruction aimed at stimulating students to actively rethink the management game
contents is required. For that purpose ­ among other forms ­ concept mapping or summary writing can be
applied. In a meta-analysis Nesbit and Adesope (2006) showed a slight advantage of concept mapping over
alternative construction  tasks like summary    writing. This  may    be explained   by  the diagram  format    which
corresponds with the notion of knowledge as a semantic network. Thus, the similarity of knowledge and concept
maps (as learning media) may support students in externalizing their cognitive structure and in using concept
maps as learning aids. In addition, a concept map represents every concept only once, and by that directly shows
the interaction of one concept with other concepts, i.e. the structure. In contrast, a text is linear and constructed
according to a specific grammar (Larkin & Simon, 1987). Similar or same concepts can be used several times,
and it is difficult to directly articulate a structure or macrostructure. However, since there are diverse findings,
more research is needed with respect to the effectiveness of concept mapping in contrast to summary writing.In
addition, many research studies have been carried out with the aim of investigating concept maps as learning
aids in science education (Nesbit & Adesope, 2006; O'Donnell, Dansereau, & Hall, 2002), whereas research in
the domain of business and economics has rarely been taken into account.
         In light of these considerations, the aim of our study is to investigate the effects of concept-mapping
and  summary   writing   on promoting   students' learning   processes   in the  field  of business sciences.   Both
techniques are used as a complement to the management game "Easy BusinessTM" and should support students
in understanding complex business interrelationships.

Method
Research Question: Is concept mapping more effective than summary writing for promoting students' learning
processes in the field of business?
Participants and intervention: Forty-four ninth grade students at a public high school took part in our study
during the school year 2008/2009. On average they were 14.5 years old. All students played the management
game "Easy BusinessTM" in groups. It was designed as a board game that provides the opportunity to learn the
supply chain of a company and the decisions involved by visualizing the departments of a company.Moreover,
students have  the opportunity   to  experience the effects  of  their decisions  in the   annual accounting.   After
finishing the management game, the students were randomly assigned to one of two experimental groups (either

                                                   14  ·  © ISLS
                                               ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 2

concept mapping or summary writing) or to a control group. The students of the experimental groups were
asked to construct a concept map of the most important interrelationships of the management game. As an aid
they received a list of concepts and relations. We trained the respective technique with the students about one
month   before starting  the study. The  text group  was   requested   to write  a summary    on the    most important
interrelationships of the management game. They received a list of concepts as an aid. Both techniques aimed at
supporting the students in consolidating the newly acquired knowledge. The students of the control group just
played the management game and did neither additional concept mapping nor additional summary writing.
          Hypotheses: 1. Concept mapping and summary writing are superior to the control condition; 2. Concept
mapping is superior to summary writing.
          Data gathering: Before and after the treatment a knowledge test consisting of 9 open-ended questions
was administered. The test is constructed in parallel forms A and B, so that the results can be accounted for by
the intervention and not by learning from the pre-test. Following the taxonomy of Anderson and Krathwohl
(2001), the cognitive process categories "remember" and "understand" in particular were combined with the
knowledge dimensions "factual knowledge" and "conceptual knowledge". In addition, we included a question
aiming at the cognitive process category "applying" and the knowledge dimension "procedural knowledge".
The tests were designed in a constructed response format including short answer and essay tasks.
          Data analysis: The students' answers were analyzed using a qualitative content analysis. This is a
systematic, replicable technique for assigning words or phrases of a text to content categories based on explicit
rules of coding. The intercoder reliability measured 93% (Holsti coefficient) underscoring the reliability of the
category system. On the basis of the qualitative content analysis a test score was calculated for each student. To
determine whether differences in knowledge increase between the pre-test and the post-test could be explained
by concept mapping or summary writing, a two-way mixed analysis of variance was carried out with "group" as
between-subjects factor and "time" as within-subjects factor. Since neither the Kolmogorov-Smirnov-Tests of
goodness and fit nor the Levene-Tests showed significant results, the prerequisites for conducting the ANOVA
were given. In addition, effect sizes (measure dint) were determined. In case of pretest-posttest designs the effect
size can be determined by: dint (= interaction) = dposttest ­ dpretest. The pooled standard deviation from the respective
groups was used as standard deviation.

Results
The two-way mixed ANOVA showed a main effect for the factor time (F(1,41)=128.244; p=.000), indicating a
significant increase in knowledge over time for all groups. The main effect for the factor group showed that the
groups significantly differ in their level of knowledge in the post-test, but not in the pre-test (F(2,41)=4.289,
p=.02). In the post-test the summary group exceeded the two other groups. The concept mapping group was
second  best,  and the  control group   reached the  lowest   level of  knowledge    in the  post-test. In addition, a
significant interaction effect (time x group) could be identified (F(2,41)=6.131; p=.005). In other words, the
groups differ significantly in their knowledge increase from pre-test to post-test. The effect sizes with regard to
both experimental groups versus control group (d=0.867) and summary group versus concept mapping group
(d=0.841) are remarkable. The data indicate that the summary group outperformed both the concept mapping
group   and  the control group,  whereas   the  concept   mapping    group  and    the control group    did  not  differ
significantly in knowledge increase.

Conclusions
As assumed in hypothesis 1, the summary writing group and the concept mapping group are superior to the
control group that did not work on a construction task after the management game. This is especially indicated
by the effect size which contrasted both experimental groups vs. control group, though the concept mapping
group is not significantly but only by trend better than the control group. This result is consistent with other
studies according   to  which   active involvement   in   knowledge    construction  (e.g., by concept     mapping   or
summary writing) is fostering learning. Though the management game in this case supports the learning process
significantly (significant main effect time ANOVA), the additional construction activity is significantly better.
This seems to be true across domains. Contrary to our second hypothesis, the summary group outperformed the
concept mapping group. The following reasons might explain this result: 1. Concept mapping is a comparatively
new format for knowledge explication and the students are not familiar enough with the technique so that they
cannot apply it confidently. Instead, the students are much more used to summary writing. Continuous training
in concept   mapping   previous to  the study  might   lead  to other  results. 2. The  format of active    knowledge
explication does not matter that much compared to the active involvement itself. Thus, summary writing is as
effective as  concept  mapping  or  some  other alternative.  This  is in line  with   many  studies that  report only
marginal differences between concept mapping and alternative construction techniques. More research is needed
here. 3. A closer look at the test shows that the difference between concept map group and summary group
mainly results from items concerning procedural knowledge. By excluding these items from data analysis, the
difference between the experimental groups is no longer significant. Therefore, it still has to be proven whether

                                                    15  ·  © ISLS
                                                  ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 2

summary writing better supports students in the development of procedural knowledge than concept mapping or
whether this is only true for remembering and understanding.
          In a replication study planned for the school year 2009/2010 we will use exactly the same design
except that  we   will   train the students  in  constructing   concept maps    a number  of   times  before  starting the
management game. Thus we will be able to determine whether results can be explained by familiarity with a
special technique. Furthermore, we will apply the design to another topic in the field of business in order to
exclude the possibility of the results depend on a specific business topic. Finally, we are going to examine
whether concept mapping can foster the development of procedural knowledge and higher cognitive process
dimensions, e.g., applying or analyzing.

Paper 2: Matching Representational Tools' Ontology to Part-task Demands to
Foster Problem-solving in Business Economics

                                    Bert Slof, Gijsbert Erkens, & Paul A. Kirschner

Background and Aim
Collaborative problem-solving is often regarded as an effective pedagogical method beneficial for both group
and individual learning. The premise underlying this approach is that through a dynamic process of eliciting
one's  own   knowledge,        discussing this   with  peers,   and   establishing  and  refining    the  group's shared
understanding of the knowledge domain, students acquire new knowledge and skills and process them more
deeply (e.g., O'Donnell, Hmelo-Silver, & Erkens, 2006). However, due to its complexity (i.e., diversity in
concepts, principles and procedures, see Miller & VanFossen, 2008) students in business economics encounter
difficulties with acquiring a well-developed understanding of the knowledge domain (e.g., Marangos & Alleys,
2007). When solving problems, students, therefore, rely primarily on surface features such as using objects
referred to in the problem instead of the underlying principles of the knowledge domain, and employ weak
problem-solving strategies such as working via a means-ends strategy towards a solution (e.g., Jonassen &
Ionas, 2008). This hinders students in effectively and efficiently coping with their problem-solving task because
the ease  with    which   a    problem  can   be solved   often  depends   on   the quality  of   the available  problem
representations (e.g., Ploetzner, Fehse, Kneser, & Spada, 1999). To this end, it would be beneficial if students
are supported in acquiring and applying suitable representations (e.g., Ainsworth, 2006). Research on concept
mapping (Nesbit & Adesope, 2006; Roth & Roychoudhury, 1993) has shown that the collaborative construction
of  external representations    (i.e., concept   maps)  can   guide   students'  collaborative cognitive   activities  and
beneficially affect learning. Due to its ontology (i.e., objects, relations, and rules for combining them, see Van
Bruggen, Boshuizen, & Kirschner, 2003) a representational tool enables students to co-construct a domain-
specific  content scheme    fostering   students'  understanding    of the knowledge    domain    in  question. Problem-
solving tasks, however, are usually composed of fundamentally different part-tasks (i.e., problem orientation,
problem solution, solution evaluation), that each requires a different perspective on the knowledge domain and,
thus, another representational tool with a different ontology. To be supportive for problem-solving, the ontology
provided in a representational tool must be matched to the part-task demands and activities of a specific problem
phase. Otherwise, effective problem-solving may be hindered (e.g., Van Bruggen et al.).
          The goal of the study presented in this paper is to determine whether an instructional design aimed at
providing  ontologically    part-task  congruent   support   in  the  representational tools leads    to more   successful
problem-solving performance in the field of business economics.

Method
Participants and intervention: Students from six business-economics classes in from two secondary education
schools in the Netherlands participated in this study. The total sample consisted of 93 students (60 male, 33
female). The mean age of the students was 16.74 years (SD=.77, Min=15, Max=18). Working in a Computer
Supported    Collaborative     Leaning  (CSCL)   environment,     all groups   had  to solve a  case-based    problem  in
business-economics     in which    they   had to  advise  an  entrepreneur   about  changing   the   business strategy  to
increase  profits (i.e., company    result).  To come   up   with a   suitable advice, students had   to  carry out three
different part-tasks in a predefined order, namely (1) finding out the main factors that affects the company's
results and relate them to the problem (problem orientation), (2) evaluate how certain interventions such as
changing the business strategy affect company results (problem solution), and (3) calculate and compare the
financial effects  of    these interventions   and formulate    a final   advice  based  on  this  comparison   (solution
evaluation). To study the effects on problem-solving performance, the ontology in the representational tool was
either matched or mismatched to the part-tasks (see Table 1). The students were randomly assigned to 31 triads
divided between the four experimental conditions; seven triads in the match condition and eight triads in each of
the mismatch conditions (i.e., conceptual, causal, and simulation condition).

                                                       16  ·  © ISLS
                                                      ICLS 2010     ·  Volume 2

              Table 1: Overview of the Experimental Conditions

              Condition                   Part-tasks and provided ontology                    Match / mismatch
                             Problem orientation   Problem solution   Solution evaluation
              Conceptual     Conceptual            Conceptual         Conceptual              Match for the orientation phase
              Causal         Causal                Causal             Causal                  Match for the solution phase
              Simulation     Simulation            Simulation         Simulation              Match for the evaluation phase
              Match          Conceptual            Causal             Simulation              Complete match

        Hypothesis:       It was    hypothesized      an  instruction   design      aimed   at    providing  ontologically      part-task
congruent support in the representational tools leads to more successful problem-solving performance in the
field of business economics than not receiving it.
        Data gathering: All student groups spent six 45-minute lessons solving the problem during which each
student worked on a separate computer connected by a network to enable synchronous communication (i.e.,
chat-tool and the sharing of the representational tool(s). Before the first lesson, students received an instruction
about the CSCL-environment, the group composition, and the problem-solving task. Students worked on the
problem in the computer classroom where all chat-discussions and answers to the part-tasks were logged.
        Data analysis: To measure the effect of condition on problem-solving performance, an assessment
rubric for all   criteria of  the   problem-solving       task was    developed        (see Table    2).  The   problem-solving     task
consisted of three part-tasks in which the groups each had to answer three questions. All nine answers were
evaluated based on their `suitability', `elaboration', `justification', and `correctness', resulting in 36 items (9
answers * 4 criteria). It was also evaluated whether groups used answers from a subsequent phase and altered
their way of reasoning when they had to answer the questions asked in a following phase (i.e., `continuity').
There were two phase transitions (i.e., transition from problem orientation to problem solution and transition
from problem solution to solution evaluation) and therefore two items (2 items). Finally, the`quality of the final
advice' was evaluated by three items; number of concepts incorporated in the advice, financial consequence of
the advice, and whether the final answer was in line with the guidelines provided in the original task description.
All 41 items were coded as 0, 1 or 2; a `2' was coded when the answer given was of high quality. Groups could,
thus, achieve a maximum score of 82 points (41 * 2 points). One-way MANOVA with Bonferroni post hoc
analyses was used to analyze the effect of condition. Since there were specific directions of the results expected
(see hypothesis) all analyses are one sided.

     Table 2: Items and reliability for problem-solving performance (N = 31).
        Criteria          Description                                                                                Items    !
        Suitability       Whether the groups' answers were suited to the different part-tasks.                       9        .81
        Elaboration       Number    of  different  business-economics   concepts      or  financial  consequences    9        .56
                          incorporated in the answers to the different part-tasks.
        Justification     Whether the groups justified their answers to the different part-tasks.                    9        .71
        Correctness       Whether the groups used the business-economics concepts and their interrelationships       9        .68
                          correctly in their answers to the different part-tasks.
        Continuity        Whether the groups made proper use of the answers from a prior problem phase.              2        .67
        Quality advice    Whether the groups gave a proper final advice.                                             3        .76
                          - Number of business-economics concepts incorporated in the advice.
                          - Number of financial consequences incorporated in the advice.
                          - Whether the final answer conformed to the guidelines provided.
        Total             Overall score on the collaborative problem performance.                                    41       .92

Results and Conclusions
One-way MANOVA on the total score of the problem solving performance showed a significant difference for
condition  (F(3,27)=4.38,     p=.01).    Bonferroni    post   hoc     analyses     revealed  that   groups   in   the  match    condition
scored significantly higher than groups in both the conceptual (p=.01; d =1.46) and the simulation condition
(p=.01; d=1.48).      When   the    results for   the dependent       variables     were  considered      separately,   using   one-way
ANOVAs with Bonferroni post hoc analyses, condition effects were found for `justification' (F(3,27)=4.85,
p=.01)  and   `correctness'    (F(3,27)=3.97,      p=.01).    The   mean   scores        indicate   that there  were    two   significant
differences between conditions. First, groups in the match condition scored significantly higher on `justification'
than groups in both the conceptual condition (p=.01; d=1.56) and the simulation condition (p=.01; d=1.56).
Second, groups in the match condition scored significantly higher on `correctness' than groups in both the
conceptual    condition   (p=.01;   d=3.97)      and  the simulation     condition       (p=.03;    d=2.52). Although      expected,  no
significant differences were found between the match and the causal condition. Students in both conditions
received the causal ontology (relevant concepts, solutions and their causal interrelationships), providing students
the means     to co-construct   multiple    qualitative    perspectives    on      the   knowledge    domain.     It  seems,    therefore,

                                                            17  ·   © ISLS
                                                 ICLS 2010    ·  Volume 2

important to recognize that causal reasoning is beneficial for collaborative problem-solving (e.g., Jonassen &
Ionas, 2008).
         Collaborative problem-solving in business economics is facilitated by an instructional design aimed at
making the different part-tasks explicit, sequencing them properly, and foreseeing them with ontologically part-
task congruent support in the representational tools. The complementary function of those different perspectives
can gradually increase students understanding and, therefore, support them in solving a complex problem (see
Ainsworth, 2006). That is, groups receiving ontologically congruent support for each part-task (i.e., match
condition) gave  more correct   and justified answers   to   the part-tasks and a came   up with  better final solutions to
the problem than groups in the non-matched conditions. Future work is aimed at analyzing the chat-discussions
and the constructed representations (i.e., concept maps) to gain more insight in the learning process itself and
the lack of difference between the match condition and the causal condition. During the conference insight into
students' discussions about the knowledge domain (i.e., concepts, principles, and procedures) will be presented.

Paper 3: Direct and Indirect Means of Scaffolding the Effective Use of Student-
generated CMs in Economics Education

                                       Carmela Aprea, & Hermann G. Ebner

Background and Aim
Not only does the adjunctive presentation of diagrams, drawings, pictures and other forms of visualizations play
a prominent role in everyday classroom practice, it is also a long-running issue in educational research (e.g.,
Ainsworth,   2006).   With  the growing     popularity of    cognitive and  constructivist  learning   approaches,   many
scholars  in the  learning  sciences have   begun  to  suggest    that  the benefits  of  these adjuncts can     be further
intensified if students are prompted to generate their own graphical representations (e.g., concept maps). This
conjecture seems to be corroborated by empirical findings in various content domains (e.g., science learning,
teacher education, foreign language acquisition) and with different types of students such as primary school
children and high school students (e.g., Nesbit & Adesope, 2006). However, besides the fact that only few
studies address the question whether the benefits of student-constructed concept maps are transferable to the
domain of economics education, the research literature is not conclusive, and in some studies even severe
difficulties in using concept mapping as a learning tool are reported (e.g., Reader & Hammond, 1994). As the
results of these studies suggest, one reason that might have caused these difficulties is students' (and teachers')
lack of familiarity with these learning tools. Thus, beginners are easily overwhelmed by the demands of the
concept mapping task. Against the background of these findings, it can be concluded that there is no such thing
as a `concept mapping finger-tip effect', but that some form of scaffolding might be required to ensure adequate
tool use. One way of addressing this need is to provide students with a mapping training. Yet, the results of
training studies (e.g., Chang, Sung, & Cheng, 2002) suggest that the success of this direct scaffolding method
seems to be limited. At least in short time interventions, it proved helpful only for students with sufficient
domain and strategic knowledge. However, students lacking such a level of prior knowledge seem to need
additional   support. Given   the   current debate on     the   social construction   of  cognition  and  learning   (e.g.,
O'Donnell, Hmelo-Silver, & Erkens, 2006), a promising candidate for such an additional support is to embed the
concept  mapping    task  within  a collaborative  learning     environment.  For    example,   Roth and Roychoudhury
(1993) assume that collaboratively constructed maps may provide an ideal context for overt negotiation of
meaning and construction of knowledge, because they require individuals to externalize their propositional
frameworks. Others (e.g., Jones & Issroff, 2005) have highlighted the motivational and affective support of
collaborative learning.   Congruently  with   De  Simone,       Schmid, and  McEwan       (2001), this adaptation   of the
learning environment is classified as an indirect form of scaffolding.
         Given these suggestions, the aim of the research study to be presented in this paper was twofold,
namely   exploring    (1) the impact   of student-generated      maps   as  tools for  fostering  conceptual   knowledge
acquisition and application in the domain of economics education, and (2) whether effective tool use can be
facilitated by direct means (i.e., training) and/or indirect means (i.e., collaboration) of scaffolding.

Method
Participants and intervention: 169 students from two urban secondary level business schools participated in this
study. Fifty percent of the students in the sample were female, and the mean age was 20 years. In order to
address the research issues mentioned above, students were randomly assigned to one of three treatment groups:
(1) Subjects of the first group (text plus experimenter-provided graphic group; n = 52) received a text passage in
combination with an already elaborated expert map. The text passage deals with the topic of environmental
economics and contains about 1000 words. This treatment group was included to control for the general dual-
coding effect of verbal and visual information provision. (2) Subjects of the second group (individually mapping
group;  n  =  59) firstly  received  a mapping    training    unit.  This   training unit was   inspired by    a cognitive

                                                       18  ·  © ISLS
                                                 ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 2

apprenticeship approach and consisted of three components: (a) a list of steps how to construct a concept map;
(b) a short text passage to model map development; (c) a training text passage for coaching purposes. The
content of these text passages was unrelated to the experimental text on environmental economics. After the
training, the experimental text passage was handed out and students were asked to individually read the text, to
identify the main ideas of the text and then to re-construct its content in a diagram. (3) As in the individually
mapping   group,  subjects  in the third  group  (collaboratively   mapping    group;   n  = 58)  received  the mapping
training and the environmental economics text passage without any visual adjunct. They were then asked to first
read the text alone and make a preliminary sketch. After that, they were requested to discuss their sketches with
a learning partner and to subsequently draw up a shared concept map.
         Hypotheses: We hypothesized that the collaborative mapping treatment might lead to the best results in
terms of cognitive learning outcomes, followed by the results of the individually mapping group and the results
of  the text plus experimenter-provided     diagram   group.    Moreover,   we  supposed     that collaborative mappers
outperform the individual mapping group with respect to concept map quality.
         Data    gathering: An  achievement     test and a    free recall test were used    for assessing  the  cognitive
learning  outcomes.   The   achievement    test (Knowledge     Acquisition  Test;  KAT)      included six  mixed-format
questions (multiple   choice   and open-ended).    These    questions mainly    addressed   detailed  understanding  and
transfer of  conceptual  knowledge     and encompassed      content   from  the  whole    text  passage.  The  KAT  was
administered twice, namely immediately after the instructional treatments (subsequently referred to as KAT1)
and approximately three weeks later (subsequently referred to as KAT2). Likewise, about three weeks later,
students were asked to write down all they could remember about the text. This free recall test (FRT) was
intended to assess whether and to what extent students were able to remember the overall conceptual structure
of the text. To account for map quality (MQ), we moreover evaluated accuracy, elaboration and organization of
students' representations. In addition, we included students' general economic knowledge as a covariate by
using several items from the Test of Economic Literacy (TEL) (Soper & Walstad, 1987).
         Data analysis: All dependant measures (i.e. KAT1; KAT2; FRT, MQ) were submitted to one-way
ANOVAs and post-hoc tests. These statistical procedures were conducted for (1) the whole sample as well as
(2) for students with extremely high or low general economic knowledge as indicatedby the TEL items.

Results and Conclusions
Analyses  of  the  whole    sample  showed   that    subjects  from  the  collaborative    mapping   group  significantly
outperformed the text plus provided graphic group with respect to the FRT (F(2,142)=3.545, p<.05). Moreover,
these   subjects constructed   more    accurate  and   elaborated    concept   maps   than   their  individual  mapping
counterparts. On the other hand, individual mappers demonstrated a significantly better knowledge organization.
None of the other outcome measures proved to be significant at the !=.05 level. Students with low general
economic    knowledge   mirror  the   whole sample     results  with  respect   to the   FRT    and  the  MQ    measures.
Furthermore, collaborative mappers within this subgroup showed significantly better results on the KAT 1 than
individual mappers (F(2,78)=3.841, p<.05). With respect to this latter learning outcome measure the reverse
holds for the subgroup of students with high general economic knowledge (F(2,25)= 3.231, p<.05).
         Since the data only partly reflect the expected effects, it cannot be concluded that concept mapping
generally enhances students' knowledge acquisition and application in the domain of economics education.
However, the results seem to reveal an important relationship between the means of scaffolding the mapping
task on the one hand and learning outcomes as well as prior knowledge on the other. Thus, a more refined
perspective on the operating conditions of concept mapping within our field of application might be needed. On
the basis of the data, at least three directions for such refinements seem to be evident:
(a) Firstly, the results give rise to the assumption that students who can be considered as high-achievers in
    terms of general economic knowledge seem to profit most from an individually concept mapping task in
    combination    with a   training. In contrast,   collaboration  seems  to  be  particularly   helpful with  regard to
    supporting students with low economic knowledge scores. However, since the current design did not entail
    a non-trained control condition, a cautious interpretation of the findings is of course imperative. With this
    admonition    in mind,  it can  be   tentatively recommended      to  differentiate the  means   of scaffolding with
    respect to the prevailing learner characteristics.
(b) Secondly, the results indicate that concept mapping in economics education seems to be of specific use for
    promoting    long-term  retention  of  overall   conceptual    knowledge   structures,  whereas   no  such  long-term
    effect for the retention of text details could be found. In accordance with researchers of learner-generated
    graphical representations in other domains (e.g., Van Meter et al. 2006), we therefore deem it necessary to
    differentiate the effectiveness of concept mapping tasks with respect to intended learning outcomes.
(c) Finally, along   with   De Simone, Schmid and McEwen (2001), we               feel that  in order to gain a   deeper
    understanding of the specific benefits of concept mapping and the respective means of scaffolding we need
    to study in more depth the learning processes that are associated with the various treatment conditions as
    well as the interactions of students in the collaborative mapping group.

                                                      19  ·  © ISLS
                                                 ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 2

Conclusions and further work
The contributions indicate that a learning tool as concept mapping enables students to represent their conceptual
understanding of the knowledge domain and to discuss it with their peers. Actively engaging in such learning
activities can foster the acquisition/retention and the application of domain knowledge (i.e., during problem-
solving). Its effect are, however, not straightforward, what students can represent in the concept map should be
carefully match with (1) the intended/desired learning process and learning outcome, (2) and students' prior
knowledge.   Future  research   is, therefore, required to  gain more    insight in how specific  learning activities,
leading to intended learning outcome, can be evoked and what role instruction exactly plays in supporting those
kinds of learning activities.

References
Ainsworth, S. (2006). DeFT: A conceptual framework for considering learning with multiple representations.
         Learning and Instruction, 16(3), 183­198.
Anderson, L. W., & Krathwohl, D. R. (2001). A taxonomy for learning, teaching, and assessing: A revision of
         Bloom's taxonomy of educational objectives. New York: Longman.
Chang, K.-E., Sung, Y.-T., & Chen, I.-D. (2002). The effect of concept mapping to enhance text comprehension
         and summarization. The Journal of Experimental Education, 71(1), 5­23.
Collins, A. M., & Quillian, M. R. (1969). Retrieval time from semantic memory. Journal of Verbal Learning
         and Verbal Behavior, 8(2), 240­247.
De Simone, C., Schmid, R. F., & McEwan, L. A. (2001). Supporting the learning process with collaborative
         concept mapping using computer-based communication tools and processes. Educational Research and
         Evaluation, 7(2-3), 263­283.
Jonassen,   D.  H., &    Ionas, I.  G.  (2008). Designing     effective support  for  causal reasoning. Educational
         Technology Research and Development, 56, 287­308.
Jones,  A., &   Issroff, E. (2005).  Learning   technologies:  Affective  and  social issues  in computer  supported
         collaborative learning. Computers & Education, 11(4), 395­408.
Larkin, J. H. & Simon, H. A. (1987). Why a diagram is (sometimes) worth ten thousand words. Cognitive
         Science, 11, 65-99
Lawless, C., Smee, P., & O'Shea, T. (1998). Using concept sorting and concept mapping in business and public
         administration, and in education: an overview. Educational Research, 40(2), 219­235.
Marangos, J., & Alley, S. (2007). Effectiveness of concept maps in economics: Evidence from Australia and
         USA. Learning and Individual Differences, 17, 193­199.
Miller, S.  L., &   VanFossen,   P.  J. (2008).  Recent  research  on   the teaching  and  learning of  pre-collegiate
         economics. In L. S. Levstik & C. A. Tyson (Eds.), Handbook of Research in Social Studies Education,
         pp. 284-304.
Nesbit, J. C., & Adesope, O. O. (2006). Learning with concept and knowledge maps: A meta-analysis. Review
         of Educational Research, 76(3), 413­448.
O'Donnell, A. M., Hmelo-Silver, C., & Erkens, G. (2006). Collaborative learning, reasoning, and technology.
         Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
O'Donnell, A., Dansereau, D. F., & Hall, H. (2002). Knowledge maps as scaffolds for cognitive processing.
         Educational Psychology Review, 14(1), 71­86.
Ploetzner, R., Fehse, E., Kneser, C., & Spada, H. (1999). Learning to relate qualitative and quantitative problem
         representations in a model-based setting for collaborative problem solving. Journal of the Learning
         Sciences, 8, 177­214.
Reader,  W.,   & Hammond,       N.  (1994). Computer-based     tools to  support  learning from  hypertext: Concept
         mapping and beyond. Computers Education, 22, 99­106.
Roth, W. M., & Roychoudhury, A. (1993). The development of science process skills in authentic contexts.
         Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 30(2), 127-152.
Soper, J. C., & Walstad, W. B. (1987). Test of Economic Literacy. 2nd Edition. New York: Joint Council on
         Economic Education.
Van Bruggen, J. M., Boshuizen, H. P. A., & Kirschner, P. A. (2003). A cognitive framework for cooperative
         problem solving with argument visualization. In P. A. Kirschner, S. J. Buckingham-Shum, & C. S.
         Carr   (Eds.),  Visualizing  Argumentation:    Software   tools for collaborative   and  educational sense-
         making. (pp. 25-47). London: Springer.
Van Merriënboer, J.J.G., & Kirschner, P.A. (2007). Ten steps to complex learning. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence
         Erlbaum.
Van Meter, P., Aleksic, M., Schwartz, A., & Garner, J. (2006). Learner-generated drawing as a strategy for
         learning from content area text. Contemporary Educational Psychology, 31, 142­166.

                                                     20  ·  © ISLS
