                                                 ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

Measuring Transformative Modeling: A Framework of Formatively
 Assessing Students' Deep Conceptual Understanding in Physical
                                                 Sciences
       Ji Shen, University of Georgia, Mathematics and Science Education, Athens, GA, jishen@uga.edu
                       Ou Lydia Liu, Educational Testing Service, Princeton, lliu@ets.org
 Hsin-Yi Chang, National Kaohsiung Normal University, Graduate Institute of Science Education, Kaohsiung,
                                    Taiwan, hsinyichang@nknucc.nknu.edu.tw

        Abstract: Measuring students' conceptual understanding can provide important information
        for   learning and   teaching.  Many    formative    assessment      approaches  elicit students'  prior
        knowledge without identifying the sources of their misconceptions. This proposal presents a
        framework      that  guides the  development       of  formative     assessment   to  measure    student
        understanding of physical science topics using three types of connections. Particularly, we
        assess  how    students link   physical   states,  processes   and    mechanism,     integrate different
        scientific models, and connect scientific knowledge to everyday experience. Based on this
        framework, we construct sample items on sinking and floating and piloted the items with 18
        preservice middle    grades    science teachers.   Analyses   of student  responses     to these sample
        items   provide  evidence   of  the effectiveness      of the framework      in extracting  information
        valuable to improve learning and instruction. Criteria and implications of using this formative
        assessment framework in science classrooms are then discussed.

Introduction
Many national and state-level science tests fail to measure deep understanding (Hyde et al. 2008; Liu, Lee,
Hoftstetter, &  Linn,  2008).  As   a  result, American      students continue   to  languish   on  international science
assessments (OECD, 2006). To reverse this trend and promote science achievement in the U.S., it is critical to
design formative   assessments   that   can    effectively capture    students'  prior  experience   and   measure  deep
understanding (Shen, Gibbons, Wiegers, & McMahon, 2007).
        The challenge of capturing students' deep understanding through formative assessment is manifold.
The complicated dimensions of science learning create challenges in both assessment design and utility of the
information  extracted  from   the  assessment.   For instance,     many     science assessments    targeting conceptual
understanding are designed to measure a single aspect of the correctness of science content. However, science
learning is such an integrated and dynamic system that multidimensional abilities should be considered in the
assessment   (Anderson  &    Krathwohl,  2001).   The    assessment    should   capture   student  ability in integrating
understanding and justifying explanations as well as their mastery of content knowledge. Most importantly, to
take advantage of the assessment results, teachers should understand how students apply textbook knowledge in
a new learning context.
        To   address   these challenges,  many    science    education   researchers    have developed     frameworks  to
capture the multiple dimensions of science learning that shifted away from only focusing on content correctness
(Linn et al. 2006; Yin et al. 2005). Science educators are also interested in understanding how students develop
competences such as inquiry and modeling abilities to conduct science experiments (e.g., Gotwals & Songer,
2006). Acknowledging the multiple dimensions of science learning, we expand the dimension of conceptual
understanding  to capture    students' modeling   and    inquiry   abilities in this study.  Particularly, we  present a
framework that guides the development of formative assessment to measure students' understanding of abstract
and complex topics in physical sciences in three types of connections: linking physical processes and states with
underlying mechanism, integrating multiple explanatory models, and connecting their science knowledge to
natural observations and everyday experiences (National Research Council [NRC], 2000; Shen & Linn, 2010).
        We focus on formative assessments that help teachers identify students' weaknesses in order to learn
science concepts more effectively. Our framework can be enacted in multiple formats, e.g., paper and pencil
quizzes, computerized word problems, oral interviews, or group-discussion questions. In the following section,
we first discuss some exemplar assessment approaches in science education on which our framework is built.
We then present the rationale and mechanism of our framework. Finally we elaborate on the framework with
sample student responses on an item in sinking and floating.

Measuring Deep Conceptual Understanding
Effective assessment practices in science education are aligned with distinctive learning theories (NRC, 2001;
Wilson, 2005).  Here we  elaborate on three examples that influenced the development of our framework.

Measuring Integrated Understanding Using Knowledge Integration

                                                     137   ·  © ISLS
                                                ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

Many students gain fragmented knowledge. Linn and colleagues have developed a knowledge integration (KI)
framework that emphasizes student abilities in establishing connections among ideas (Linn & Eylon, 2006; Linn
et. al., 2006; Liu et al. 2008). The KI framework emphasizes the repertoire of ideas that students build as they
interact with the world. Students add varied ideas as they experience science in daily life. The KI framework
calls for taking advantage of the reasoning that students employ to formulate these views. The framework
promotes coherent understanding by encouraging students to add new ideas, distinguish new and existing ideas,
develop scientific criteria to reconcile ideas, and build coherent connections. The KI framework is realized
through technology-enhanced learning environments that present complex and usually unseen science topics
through computer visualization programs. The KI assessment framework features multiple assessment formats
(e.g., pre/post tests, annual assessment, embedded assessment) for both formative and summative evaluation
purposes. The KI scoring rubric rewards student reasoning and ability to articulate scientific evidence as well as
content  mastery.  The KI   assessment   framework   has   been  tested with large-scale empirical  studies   and   has
demonstrated satisfactory psychometric properties (Lee, Liu, & Linn, in press; Liu et al. 2008).
         The KI framework states that there are different types of connections (Linn & Eylon, 2006) but does
not distinguish these types in scoring (Linn et al. 2006). Building on this framework, we further detail and
speculate that three types of connections are extremely important (will be discussed momentarily) in helping
students gain deep conceptual understanding across science disciplines. Our assessment framework is aimed at
identifying these different types of connections, which in turn can inform instructions.

Measuring Understanding of Scientific Models
Modeling-based    instruction in  science  classrooms   is a constructivist  approach   that encourages    students to
develop,  use,  and   evaluate  models    to  describe,  explain,  and   predict scientific  phenomena      (Chinn  &
Samarapungavan, 2008; Clement, 2000; Lehrer & Schauble, 2006; Schwarz & White, 2005). For example,
through the MoDeLS project, Schwarz et al. (2009) developed a learning progression framework based on
modeling   for  upper  elementary    and   middle   grade  students. They    defined  a scientific model    as  "as  a
representation that abstracts and simplifies a system by focusing on key features to explain and predict scientific
phenomena" (Schwarz et al. 2009, p.633). They considered two dimensions of the practice of modeling. One
dimension addressed scientific models as tools for prediction and explanation; the other dimension considered
the change of models when understanding improves. They built a construct for assessing students' progress in
each dimension.
         The works by Schwarz et al. (2009) and others provide important insights in how to teach and measure
modeling in science classrooms. Our work focuses primarily on how deeply students understand scientific
models and how well students are able to connect scientific models to natural phenomena. We believe that
robust understanding of existing models can help students compare, evaluate, and revise models. We agree with
Schwarz et al. (2009, p.635) in that "it is crucial to involve learners in the construction of models." However,
we argue that it is equally important that students firmly grasp provided models because these models provide
the solid foundations from which students can construct their own ones (Shen & Confrey, 2007). When students
learn more advanced models in higher grades, they need to build on and integrate the simplified ones they have
learned earlier on. Therefore, one important component in our framework is to assess how students integrate
different scientific models they have learned.

Measuring Complex Reasoning in Scientific Inquiry
Science  education  researchers  also look   at students'  complex   reasoning   in inquiry. Principled    Assessment
Designs for Inquiry (PADI) is an assessment framework that focuses on providing design patterns and structures
to measure students' inquiry skills and science knowledge. For example, Gotwals and Songer (2006) created a
content-inquiry matrix  that   laid  out  different levels   of science  inquiry  and   science content    required in
assessment  tasks. They   used   the  matrix  to  highlight  the  interplay between   inquiry   abilities and  science
knowledge as students performed inquiry tasks or took inquiry assessments. The matrix had three levels of
science content knowledge and three steps of science inquiry processes. The simple level of science content
knowledge meant that the task or assessment provided sufficient content; the moderate level required students to
demonstrate solid understanding of science concepts; the complex level required students to connect among
multiple concepts.  For the   three  steps of science   inquiry  the authors indicated  that  the  steps  might differ
depending on the aspects of inquiry being targeted, such as generating scientific explanations or constructing
representations using data.
         While the content-inquiry matrix is used to help assess how students develop science knowledge and
inquiry skills at different levels of complexity over time, our framework focuses on laying out important aspects
of conceptual understanding that students need to explain complex phenomena specifically in physical sciences.
Similar to the PADI framework, our framework assesses complex reasoning closely related to inquiry such as
explaining phenomena    in  light of  its  underlying   mechanism,   or  connecting  between    multiple   explanatory

                                                    138  ·  © ISLS
                                                 ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

models. The difference is that our framework can be used in a variety of teaching and learning contexts that may
or may not necessarily measure the full scale of inquiry.
         We propose a new assessment framework on conceptual learning to address the limitations that we see
in the existing approaches. Built upon the existing literature, our work is an ongoing contribution to advance the
formative assessment of students' deep understanding in science classrooms. We envision such a framework as
a useful tool for instructors to revamp instruction based on the information extracted from the assessment
responses.

Theoretical Framework
Our framework is informed by the instructional theory of transformative modeling (TM) (Shen & Confrey,
2007,  2010).  It is a  theoretical  framework  used    to   describe,  analyze,  and  inform  learning   processes.  TM
delineates learning and teaching as a process of modeling the natural world through chains of operations on
materials.  At the   center of the  operations  are a  set   of transformations   that  alter the  nature  of physical  or
symbolic objects by adding or suppressing information. The transformed materials, as well as the operations on
these materials, render potential for future learning. Examples include transforming detailed observations into
numerical records to ground scientific understanding of measurement uncertainty, transforming data and graphs
into mathematical formula to enrich abstract conception of motion, transforming between the geocentric model
and the heliocentric model to better comprehend the solar system.
         In  this framework,    conceptual   learning  is  defined   as   the  process of gaining   ability to  transform
materials in both physical and abstract forms. Specifically, the consistency among the transformed materials
perceived   by  a cognizing    agent defines  the   depth  of   the  comprehension     of the  concept.   The   variety of
transformation    types and  forms   determines    the  broadness     of  the  construed  concept.     For  the depth   of
comprehension, an example is the common misconception that many students hold about the cause of the
seasons (Harvard-Smithsonian Centre for Astrophysics & Schneps, 1988). Many students reason that it is hot in
the summer because the sun is closer and it is cold in the winter because the sun is farther away (the distance
model). This reasoning draws upon everyday experience (e.g., sitting besides a fireplace) that one feels warmer
when sitting closer to a heat source. In the TM theory, we interpret this explanation as being able to transform
everyday experience to explaining the seasons to a certain degree, even though it is not compatible with the
scientific model. People later learn that the northern hemisphere and the southern hemisphere have opposite
seasons, and that in fact in summer the earth is farther away from the sun. The distance explanatory model then
becomes conflicting to the new information, which calls for a deeper understanding of the cause of the seasons.
For the broadness of conceptual understanding, the TM framework advocates the incorporation of multiple
representations   in learning   science  to  ensure coherent       understanding.  For  instance,  when    students  learn
kinematics,    constant   transformation    among   graphic     representations   can   help   them    summarize     many
observations and physics principles (Shen, 2009). Students need to acquire a rich set of graphs (e.g., position-
time graph, velocity-time graph, free-body diagram) to broaden their understanding of Newtonian mechanics.
         Based on the TM instructional theory and previous analyses of students' responses to questions on
electrostatics (Shen & Linn, 2010), we identify three most important aspects in knowledge transformations: (a)
linking scientific   mechanism   with both   states and   processes    of  the target  domain;  (b) integrating  multiple
explanatory    models,  and (c) connecting   scientific  models    with   everyday observations.    In the  following   we
elaborate on these three important transformations.

Linking Physical States, Processes, and Underlying Mechanism
The   idea  of integrating  mechanism    with   states  and   processes    comes  from    the fact  that much   scientific
understanding originates from transforming observations of natural changes into data, inscriptions, and digital
records. During such an observation, the states and the processes need to be accurately described. The scientific
records of the initial, transitional, and final states help students identify the interacting agents and the relevant
variables that constitute the key properties of the target system. A physical process of a system consists of
changing states over time. Many of these processes lead to a physical equilibrium (e.g., thermal equilibrium) in
which   the state of  the system   does  not change    anymore.     A  mechanism   is  defined  as  an   explanation (e.g,
mathematical formalism, causal inference) one draws to theorize the patterns of how the key states emerge and
change. Oftentimes,     the mechanism    introduces  abstract   concepts   (e.g., force)  or  microscopic   entities (e.g.,
electron).
         Here are two examples in physical sciences that illustrate how students need to integrate mechanism
with states and processes to gain deep understanding. An electrical state of an object may be positively charged,
negatively charged, or neutral. For example, an object is initially positively charged. Then, it is discharged after
touching one's hand, and eventually, the object becomes neutral. Students may only pay attention to the initial
state (positively  charged)  and the  final  state  (neutral)   of the object  without  thinking   about  the in-between
process when    the  change  takes   place. The understanding      of  the charging/discharging    processes   provides  a
trajectory of the observed changes and trends of the electrical states. Therefore, a better understanding includes

                                                     139   ·  © ISLS
                                                 ICLS 2010  ·   Volume 1

the  process  where   the negative    charges are   transferred from  the   hand    to  the object to  neutralize  it. The
understanding is further enhanced by learning the mechanism of why charges move: like charges repel and
opposite charges attract. That is, the forces between charges drive the motion of the charges. Likewise, deep
understanding of the state of thermal equilibrium involves explaining the heat transfer processes. A thermal
state of an object (hot, warm, or cold) can be measured by its temperature. Consider a hot object in touch with a
cold object. The initial thermal states of the two objects are measured in different temperatures. Many students
learn that, eventually, the two objects will reach the same temperature. They need to know how this happens by
learning the processes and mechanism. When envisioning that heat is transferred from the hot object to the cold
object, one is considering the process. A mechanism states that temperature difference drives heat to transfer
from an object with higher temperature to another object in touch until they reach the same temperature (thermal
equilibrium).

Integrating Multiple Explanatory Models
One  may   build different  models    to explain  the same    phenomenon     since   there  are different  aspects  of  the
phenomenon    one  chooses     to model  (Shen   &  Confrey,  2010).  Some    of    the models  are consistent  with    the
accepted scientific models; others conflict with accepted understanding. Students typically start with simple and
concrete models, and then advance to more abstract and general ones in learning complex science topics (Lehrer
& Schauble, 2006). We argue that when learning more advanced models, students need to integrate the earlier
models   they have    learned. For  instance, to  explain  and  predict  how  the   planets   move  in the  solar   system
(kinematics only), students may start with a geocentric model since that is what one sees from the earth. Then
students  may   move   to learn   the heliocentric  model   used  to explain  the    geocentric   model.  A   higher-level
understanding indeed incorporates the two models and helps students go back and forth between the two models
depending on the context.
         For the discharging example, one may employ a charge-based model as discussed in the previous
section. One may also use a particle-based model: initially, the object has less electrons (which carry negative
charges) than a neutral state (the final state). During the discharging process, electrons from human hand move
to  the object. The   movement     of electrons  is driven  by  the  interactions   (forces)  among   the  particles.  The
connection between the two models lies in the fact that types of charges are properties of certain particles (e.g.,
electrons are negatively charged). For thermal equilibrium, the heat transfer process may be attributed to a
substance carrying heat that flows from one object to another, which may be considered as a misconception.
Alternatively, one may consider a particle model.      In this model, temperature of an object is a measure of the
average kinetic energy of the particles, which corresponds to the average speed of the particles. That is, an
object  with  a higher    temperature   has particles vibrating   faster on   average    than   an object  with   a lower
temperature. In the heat transfer process, collisions between particles drive the transfer of the kinetic energy
from one object to the other.

Connecting Science Knowledge to Physical Observations and Everyday Experience
Physical sciences study the patterns of the physical world and students experience the physical world every day.
It is expected that students learn science more effectively and meaningfully if their learning is built upon and
tied back  to   their everyday    experience  (Linn,  2006).  Unfortunately,   many      teachers  do  not use  students'
experience as resources for teaching. As a result, students often build models in the learning context but rarely
connect to their learning experiences in other contexts or to everyday experiences (Kozma, 2003). Being able to
connect scientific models to other learning contexts or everyday experiences is an indicator of the degree to
which students develop integrated understanding of the represented concept.
         Many examples of everyday experience are related to discharging: e.g., grabbing a metal doorknob and
getting shocked, touching the metal part of a car before refueling, spraying water to prevent fluffy hair. Deep
understanding   of electrostatics  requires  students to  make   sense   of these   phenomena     outside  of classrooms.
Similarly, when    learning heat    and  temperature,  students  should     reflect on   everyday  experiences    such  as
determining a better material to keep things warm.

Constructing Assessment Items on Sinking and Floating
Sinking and floating are interesting phenomena for students to investigate. It involves different explanatory
models and everyday experience. Abundant previous research was devoted to identify students' understanding
of sinking and floating (e.g., Dentici et. al. 1984; Halford, Brown, & Thompson, 1986; Mullet & Montcouuiol,
1988; Rowell & Dawson, 1977; Yin, Tomita, & Shavelson, 2008). In the following section, we first introduce
the physics behind the phenomena of sinking and floating. We then present three sample items to illustrate how
we apply the TM framework to build assessments that help students identify the connections among key states
and processes, link multiple explanatory models, and apply to the physical world. Finally we present sample
student responses and demonstrate how the responses can be analyzed using our framework.

                                                     140  ·  © ISLS
                                                ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

Physics of Sinking and Floating
To determine if an object is either a sinker or a floater without putting it in a fluid, one can compare its average
density with the density of the fluid - the density model. If the average density of the object is greater than the
fluid, then the object will sink when put in the fluid. If it is smaller, the object will float. If the average density
of the object is equal to the fluid, then the object will suspend in the fluid. Alternatively, one may also compare
the weight of the object with its buoyancy - the force model. Buoyancy on an object is defined as the net force
exerted by the surrounding fluid. (1) One may simply predict that an object will sink when put in the fluid if the
buoyant force on the object is smaller than its weight. But the opposite is only partially true: the object will start
to float if its buoyancy is greater than its weight. This only applies for an object completely submerged under
water. It may lead to the misconception that the buoyancy is greater than weight when an object floats on water.
Having learned the density model, one may think that the force model is redundant. In fact, the force model is
able to explain the processes of sinking and floating in much more details. (2)
        A deep understanding needs students to be able to integrate the density model and the force model. To
compare the buoyancy and the weight of an object completely submerged under a fluid, one may compare its
weight with the weight of the fluid displaced since the buoyancy of an object is equal to the weight of the fluid
displaced (Archimedean   principle). Also   since the object  is immersed in the fluid, the volume of the object is
the same as the volume of the fluid displaced.   Hence, it is equivalent to compare the density (mass/volume) of
the object with the density of the fluid.

Instruments Used to Assess Understanding of Sinking and Floating
Figure 1 shows a sample item in an instrument used to identify students' misconceptions developed by Yin,
Tomita, and Shavelson (2008).    This item does a nice job in revealing students' misconception, i.e., "Big/heavy
things sink, small/light things float."   Some students    may   predict the two blocks  will "sink" when  stacked
together (or subsurface float) because the bundle of blocks A and B is heavier than each individual block.

                           Block A and Block B both float in water. Suppose that
                           we glue them firmly together and place them in water;
                           together they will: ____________.

                                                                              B
                                A                    B                        A
                   Figure 1. A sample item on sinking and floating from Yin et al. (2008).

        However,   this   kind  of   items  does    not inform   the   teacher  of the  possible origins  of these
misconceptions. Using our TM framework, a possible explanation for the misconception is that the students may
not distinguish density (mass over volume) from weight (a force). This explanation is also consistent with our
experiences of teaching the topics on sinking and floating. In everyday language, the term heaviness often refers
to the two terms interchangeably. (3) One can explain the phenomenon of sinking and floating using the density
model or the force model (detailed explanation is provided in the next section). But these explanatory models
may be taught in a fragmented fashion, and students are not able to connect these models. Moreover, this kind
of items does not inform the teacher if students are able to connect the knowledge of sinking and floating to
observations. We  may    infer that the   incorrect answer   entails that the  student cannot connect to  everyday
experience, e.g., if one bundles two pieces of wood together, the bundle still floats.

A Sample Item on Sinking and Floating Using the TM Framework
Participants. We created an instrument on sinking and floating using the TM framework and piloted with 18
undergraduate students working towards middle grades science teaching certificates (17 female, 1 male).      These
students had weak science background based on the results of a survey measuring general physics knowledge
(25% correct). The items on sinking and floating were administered in a quiz after they had two lessons on
sinking and floating (4 hours in a total) including a lab confirming Archimedean Principle. The quiz has six
constructed-response items. It took the students half to one hour to finish. Here we provide an example.

Item Two Balls  [due to space limit, here we only present one sample item and students' responses]
The item Two Balls (see Figure 2) asks students to predict and explain what will happen to two balls (one
floater and one sinker) in water when salt is added. A physical demonstration can also be set up. Students can
use either the density model or the force model to explain the observations as in the previous item. The key
points are summarized in Table 1.

                                                    141  ·  © ISLS
                                                         ICLS 2010    ·   Volume 1

         Ball A and ball B have the same volume. A is floating on
         water, B is sitting at the bottom of the water tank.                                    A
         (1) Which ball has the greater buoyancy? Explain.
         (2) Which ball has the greater density? Explain.
         (3) Sam adds some amount of salt in water and let them
         dissolve. What happens to the buoyancy of the two balls?
         Explain.
         (4) What changes would you expect after Sam has added salt
         in the water?                                                                                 B
         [A physical demonstration can be shown when students
         respond to this problem].

                                       Figure 2. Item "Two Balls" on sinking and floating.

       Table 1: The density and force models used to explain the item Two Balls.

                                    Density Model                                                      Force Model
State        ·    Ball  A  is   floating  initially. Part  of   ball   A  is   ·   Ball  A   is   floating    initially. Part    of all   A   is
                  submerged under water.                                           submerged under water.
             ·    Ball B is sitting at the bottom initially. All of ball       ·   Ball B is sitting at the bottom initially. All of ball
                  B is submerged under water.                                      B is submerged under water.
             ·    After adding salt, ball A still floats. Ball B may           ·   After adding     salt, ball A   still floats. Ball   B  may
                  sink  or float    depending   on   the amount     of   salt      sink  or  float    depending    on    the amount     of salt
                  added in.                                                        added in.
             ·    After  adding     salt,  the  density   of    the   water    ·   After adding     salt, the  weight    of  the water  of  the
                  increases.                                                       same volume increases.
Process      ·    When the salt is added, more part of ball A comes            ·   When  the     salt is  added, more    part  of   the ball  A
                  out of water.                                                    comes out of water.
             ·    When     salt is  added, ball B    may  still sit   at the   ·   When     salt is   added,  ball B     may  still sit at  the
                  bottom.   It  may   also  move     up  and  becomes      a       bottom.   It  may     also  move      up  and  becomes     a
                  floater.                                                         floater.
Mechanism    ·    An object less dense than water tends to float. An           ·   An object accelerates if the net force acting on it is
                  object denser than water tends to sink. An object                non-zero  (Newton's      second    law).  An   object   is at
                  having   the   same  density  as   water   suspends     in       rest or moves at a constant velocity if the net force
                  water.                                                           acting on it is zero (Newton's first law).
             ·    For a floater, the proportion of the volume of the           ·   There are two forces acting on an object floating
                  object   that  is submerged    under   water   over     its      on water: weight and buoyancy.
                  whole    volume     equals   the   proportion     of   the   ·   There are three forces acting on an object sitting at
                  density of the object over the density of the fluid              the bottom of a water tank: weight, buoyancy, and
                  (relative density).                                              normal force by the tank.
                                                                               ·   Buoyancy is equal to the weight of fluid displaced
                                                                                   (Archimedean Principle).

               The detailed explanation follows. Since ball A displaces less volume of water than ball B, it has a
       smaller buoyancy than B.     For a floater, its density is less than the density of water; for a sinker, its density is
       greater than the density of water. So the density of ball A is smaller than that of ball B. When salt is added, the
       density of the salt water is increased. Therefore, ball A keeps floating. For any floater, the buoyancy equals its
       weight, so the weight of ball A does not change. This means that the buoyancy of ball A does not change. To
       maintain constant buoyancy, ball A has to rise up a bit to displace less volume of salt water. For ball B, it may
       still rest at the bottom, but exerting less force on the bottom of the water tank. It may also move up if the
       amount of salt dissolved leads to a greater density of the salt water than ball B. If that is the case, Ball B will go
       all the way to the top until a part of it comes out of the salt water.

       Students' Responses and Implications for Instruction
       All students stated that ball B has a greater density in sub-question #2. This indicates that all the students are
       able to use the density model to explain the final states of sinking and floating at this stage. However, students'
       responses to sub-questions #1, #3 and #4 revealed that most of them did not integrate the buoyancy model to
       explain and predict the phenomenon of sinking and floating.

                                                             142    ·  © ISLS
                                                   ICLS 2010    ·  Volume 1

          Students may confuse the sinking and floating states with the underlying mechanism of competing
forces. Buoyancy is a variable (force) that influences the sinking or floating of an object. However, students
often think that buoyancy refers to the state of floating (i.e., floating higher indicates a greater buoyancy), and
may think that buoyancy is a property of an object. In the pilot test, 10 out of 18 students thought that ball A had
a greater buoyancy in sub-question #1. A typical response stated that "Ball A has the greater buoyancy because
it is floating on the water." Another student wrote, "Ball A has a greater buoyancy because it has a density that
is less than water and is floating, (therefore) buoyant forces acting on it are greater." It was very likely that this
student had a concept of "relative buoyancy" in mind. This student might equate buoyancy to the relative
magnitude of buoyancy and its weight, corresponding to the relative density of the object compared with the
density of the water.    Students often ignore associated changes when one change is introduced to a physical
system (Shen et al. 2007). For sub-question #3, all students responded that both balls changed in the same
manner: the two balls either had a greater buoyancy, smaller buoyancy, or the same buoyancy. Similarly, for
sub-question #4, 12 out of 18 students responded that both balls floated "better" or "higher." All of them
recognized the change that when salt was added, the density of the fluid was increased. However, most of them
didn't distinguish the two balls as two different cases, as one student reasoned, "the two balls will float better in
the salt water, since the difference between the densities of the balls and salt water is greater, both balls will
float higher than they did in plain water."
          Analyses of these responses provide many insights on how to help students gain deep understanding of
sinking and floating in future instruction. These items create the need and the instructional means for students to
integrate different  models    they have   learned,    as they    may   realize through  class  discussion  or    instructors'
feedback    that their explanatory  models    conflict    with    each  other.  Follow-up  questions   that target    detailed
changing processes of sinking and floating may help students to connect these models. Sample questions may
include "how does ball A `know' how much to rise up when salt is added? How does ball B `know' when to go
up? What happens to its buoyancy when ball B moves up? When ball B comes out of water, does it stop right
away?"  These    questions  also  call for more       careful observations  that   help the   students link   the states and
processes   of   sinking and   floating.  Students'    alternative    conceptions   and  prior  experience    can     serve as
knowledge      resources  for   bridging  different    explanatory      models.   For   instance,  conceivably,       students'
understanding    of  "relative buoyancy"   as     the ratio of   buoyancy   over  its  weight  may  lead   to the  scientific
understanding: for an object less dense than water, it has a greater ratio of buoyancy over weight.

Conclusion and Implication
In this study we present an assessment framework that focuses on three aspects of conceptual understanding:
linking physical states and processes with underlying scientific mechanism, integrating multiple explanatory
models, and connecting scientific models with everyday experience or natural observations. We illustrate with
students' responses to items on sinking and floating. Careful analyses show that these aspects are imperative for
students to learn science. Specifically, the proposed framework has potential to help instructors identify the
important links that students often miss among multiple explanatory models. With information provided by the
framework    instructors  can  effectively observe     the  detailed   processes   that students  need  to  explain    certain
science phenomena, and help students integrate prior knowledge or experience to new science concepts.

Endnotes
(1) From a microscopic view, the net effect of buoyancy is due to the collisions of numerous fluid particles -- the particle
     model, which is not discussed in this paper.
(2) Considering an object completely submerged under a fluid. If its buoyancy is greater than its weight, then the object
     starts to move up in acceleration until it floats above the fluid. When the object moves out of water, it displaces less
     water, hence experiences less buoyancy. When the object displaces the right amount of water so that its buoyancy
     equals its weight, the object does not stop immediately. It has acquired momentum, so it keeps moving out of water.
     Then the weight takes over and the object is pulled back towards the water. After some oscillations at the surface of the
     water, it stops eventually and  its buoyancy     and weight   are  balanced. This  force model connects   to Newtonian
     mechanics (force corresponding to acceleration) and links process (moving up and down) and with initial and final
     states (floating or sinking). The density model also connects to the mathematical construct of ratio, which has many
     implications.
(3) Most of them are also not able to distinguish mass and weight, which is relevant, but probably not critical here.

References
Anderson, L. W., & Krathwohl, D. R. (Eds.). (2001). A taxonomy for learning, teaching, and assessing: a
          revision of Bloom's taxonomy of educational objectives. New York: Longman.
Chinn  A.C.,     &  Samarapungavan     A.  (2008).     Learning    to  use  scientific  models:   Multiple  dimensions      of
          conceptual change. In: R.A. Duschl & R.E. Grandy (Eds.), Teaching Scientific Inquiry (pp 191-225).
          Rotterdam, Netherlands: SensePublishers.

                                                        143   ·  © ISLS
                                                 ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

Clement, J. (2000). Model based learning as a key research area for science education. International Journal of
          Science Education, 22 (9), 1041-1053.
Dentici, O. A., Grossi, M. G., Borghi, L., Ambrosis, A. D., & Massara, C. I. (1984). Understanding floating: A
          study of children aged six and eight years. European Journal of Science Education, 6(3), 235-243.
Gotwals, A., & Songer, N. (2006). Cognitive Predictions: BioKIDS Implementation of the PADI Assessment
          System (PADI Technical Report 10). Menlo Park, CA: SRI International.
Halford,  G.S.,   Brown,    C.A.,   & Thompson,    R.M.    (1986).   Children's   concepts  of volume   and   flotation.
          Developmental Psychology, 22, 218­222.
Harvard-Smithsonian      Centre  for  Astrophysics  (Prod.),   &  Schneps,   M.H. (Dir.). (1988).  A private universe.
          Santa Monica, CA: Pyramid Film & Video.
Hyde, J.S., Lindberg, S.M., Linn, M.C., Ellis, A.B., Williams, C.C. (2008). Gender similarities characterize
          math performance. Science, 321, 494-495.
Kozma, R. B. (2003). The material features of multiple representations and their cognitive and social
          affordances for science understanding. Learning and Instruction, 13, 205-226.
Lee, H. -S., Liu, O. L., & Linn, M. C.    (in press). Validating Measurement of Knowledge Integration Science
          Using Multiple-Choice and Explanation Items. Applied Measurement in Education.
Lehrer, R., & Schauble, L. (2006). Cultivating model-based reasoning in science education. In R.K. Sawyer
          (Ed.), The  Cambridge      handbook   of the  learning   sciences  (pp. 371-388).    New   York:  Cambridge
          University Press.
Linn, M.C. and Eylon, B.-S. (2006). Science education: Integrating views of learning and instruction. In P.A.
          Alexander   and   P.H.  Winne   (eds.) Handbook      of Educational    Psychology (2nd  ed.). Mahwah,     NJ:
          Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Linn, M.C.,     Lee, H.-S.,  Tinker,  R., Husic,   F., &   Chiu,   J.L.  (2006). Teaching   and  assessing  knowledge
          integration in science. Science, 313, 1049-1050.
Liu, O. L., Lee, H.S., Hoftstetter, C. & Linn, M.C. (2008). Assessing knowledge integration in science:
          Construct, measures, and evidence. Educational Assessment, 13, 33-55.
Mullet, E., & Montcouquiol, A. (1988). Archimedes' effect, information integration and individual differences.
          International Journal of Science Education, 10 (3), 285­301.
National Research Council. (2000) Inquiry and the national science education standards: A guide for teaching
          and learning. Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
National  Research    Council.   (2001).  Knowing   what    students know:   the  science  and design   of educational
          assessment. Washington, DC: National Academies Press
Organization for Economic Co-operation and development (OECD) (2004). Problem solving for tomorrow's
          world: First measures of cross-curricular competencies from PISA 2003. Paris: Author.
Rowell,   J.A.,  & Dawson,    C.J.  (1977).   Teaching  about   floating and  sinking:  An  attempt  to link cognitive
          psychology with classroom practice. Science Education, 61, 245­253.
Schwarz,   C.V.,   &  White,  B.Y.    (2005). Metamodeling      knowledge:   Developing    students' understanding  of
          scientific modeling. Cognition and Instruction, 23(2), 165-205.
Schwarz, C.V., Reiser, B.J., Davis, E.A., Kenyon, L., Acher, A., Fortus, D., Shwartz, Y., Hug, B., & Krajcik, J.
          (2009).  Developing     a  learning progression    for  scientific modeling:   Making   scientific modeling
          accessible and meaningful for learners, Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 46(6), 632-654.
Shen, J. (2009). Walking out graphs: Multiple representation isn't enough. Science Scope, 33 (4), 47-51.
Shen, J.  & Confrey,     J. (2007).   From   conceptual  change   to transformative    modeling: A   case  study of an
          elementary teacher in learning astronomy. Science Education, 91 (6), 948-966.
Shen, J. & Confrey, J. (2010). Justifying alternative models in learning the solar system: A case study on K-8
          science teachers' understanding of frames of reference. International Journal of Science Education, 32
          (1), 1-29.
Shen, J., Gibbons,    P.C., Wiegers,   J.F.,  & McMahon,     A.   (2007). Using   research based  assessment  tools in
          professional development in current electricity. Journal of Science Teacher Education, 18 (3), 431-459.
Shen, J., & Linn, M.C. (2010). Connecting scientific explanations and everyday observations: A technology
          enhanced curriculum on modeling static electricity. Manuscript submitted for publication.
Yin, Y., Tomita, K. M., & Shavelson, R.J. (2008). Diagnosing and dealing with student misconceptions about
          "Sinking and Floating." Science Scope, 31(8), 34-39.
Yin,  Y., Vanides,   J., Ruiz-Primo,   M.  A.,  Ayala,  C.  C.,  & Shavelson,    R. J. (2005). A  Comparison   of  two
          construct-a-concept-map science assessments: Created linking phrases and selected linking phrases.
          Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 42(2), 166-184.
Wilson, M. (2005). Constructing measures: An item response modeling approach. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.

!

                                                     144  ·  © ISLS
