                                               ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 2

      Understanding Families' Educational Decision-Making Along
                                 Extended Learning Pathways
    Leah A. Bricker, Loyola University Chicago, Lewis Tower #1036, Chicago, IL 60611, lbricker@luc.edu
       Heather Toomey Zimmerman, Penn State University, University Park, PA 16802, heather@psu.edu
         Suzanne Reeve, University of Washington, 312 Miller Hall, Seattle, WA 98195, sreeve@uw.edu
           Philip Bell, University of Washington, 312 Miller Hall, Seattle, WA 98195, pbell@uw.edu
          Brigid Barron, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, barronbj@stanford.edu; Discussant

       Abstract: This paper explores the socio-cultural-historical influences on educational decisions
       made by a sample of families from an urban community in the northwestern United States. We
       report on three analyses of the everyday cultural and social contexts in which parents' and their
       children's  ideas  about  formal  and  informal   education   are developed    and  applied  through
       educational choices. The research employs a family-centered analytical focus and a cognitive
       ethnography    of learning  to  examine   educational   decisions  and  knowledge    about   learning
       opportunities that families use in their homes, at school, and in their communities. Our analyses
       foreground the role of choice and values in families' everyday lives, their lived histories, and
       their educational decisions. Implications for better coordinating in-and-out of school learning
       experiences in light of extended learning pathways are discussed.

This paper explores the socio-cultural-historical factors that influence families' consequential decisions related
to learning and   educational  opportunities. We   report  on  three analyses  of the everyday   cultural and   social
contexts in which parents' and their children's ideas about formal and informal education are developed and
applied, both in the United States and in other countries. The research employs a family-centered focus and a
cognitive ethnographic approach to educational decisions and knowledge of opportunities that families use in
their homes, schools, and communities. Research focuses on how families learn to navigate school and select
and/or create out-of-school activities, with implications for theories that examine the coordination (or not) of
home and school learning experiences.
         After  an   overview of the   cognitive ethnography   from  which   these three  case studies stem   and an
overview of our conceptual framework, the first case analysis examines the influence of Vietnamese immigrant
parents' social and educational histories on the ways in which they view and construct academic identities for
their children. The second analysis examines the parent-child interactions between three mothers and daughters
around   science  and  math   learning experiences.  The   third   analysis examines  how    two  families   negotiate
decisions about in and out-of-school learning experiences as influenced by education ideologies formulated in
Africa, Vietnam, and the United States.

Learning Ethnography of Educational Choices: Methodological Approach
These analyses share a learner-centered focus and a cognitive ethnographic approach, deeply exploring how
families' personal histories interact with the educational choices they make relative to a myriad of available
learning  opportunities, including school, afterschool,    and summer    time activities. The  data utilized in these
analyses were collected as part of a three-year team ethnography. Researchers followed the same youth across
the settings of their lives to study how these youth learn about science and technology specifically, as well as
how they develop expertise in personally consequential domains (Bell, et al., 2006; Bricker and Bell, 2008). The
majority of the observations of the focal participants have taken place in school and at home. However, focal
participants have also been observed in a multitude of additional settings, such as religious institutions, after
school clubs, museums, sporting events, camping excursions/vacations, neighborhoods, and parks.
         Across all settings, data collection methods included: (a) observation and participant observation; (b)
interviews (both ethnographic and clinical); (c) self-documentation techniques, in which focal participants were
given digital cameras and asked to document various objects and phenomena (e.g., use of technology) and then
interviewed about their photographs; and (d) document collection. Two surveys, designed to gather information
about socioeconomic status, ethnic identity, and participation in science were administered. Researchers also
conducted analyses of public census tract data for the neighborhoods in which families lived. Data sources
include: (a) field notes of all observations, interviews, participant self-documentation, and documents collected;
(b) video- and audio-recordings of all observations and interviews (when in settings that allow video and/or
audio  taping);  (c) digital photographs  taken   during   observations  and  interviews;  (d) video  and/or  digital
photographs taken by participants as part of their self documentation assignments; (e) documents collected
during family visits (e.g., magazines, school work, writing samples from clinical interviews); and (f) survey
results.

                                                    141  ·  © ISLS
                                                      ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 2

Study Design and Participants
In the spring of 2005, researchers formed a partnership with an elementary school in a large metropolitan area of
the Pacific Northwest (pseudonym Granite Elementary). Granite caters to a diverse student body with respect to
ethnicity, nationality, languages spoken, and socioeconomic status. Approximately 65% of the students are of
Asian    or Pacific   Islander  descent,   16%    are  of Hispanic    descent,  12%    are African   American,   and  5%   are
Caucasian. Many of the children are from first-generation immigrant families. During the 2004-2005 school
year, 60% of the students qualified for free or reduced price lunch.
           In the fall of 2005, researchers began recruiting families into the ethnographic study. Thirteen families
agreed to participate, and the sample of focal participants from each of those families was balanced for age (six
children in fourth grade and seven in fifth grade at the beginning of the study) and gender (seven boys and six
girls).  Study     participants   were   chosen    to  reflect   the  school's   diversity    in racial/ethnic  make-up    and
socioeconomic status. Currently, 128 people are consented into the ethnography, including the focal participants
and their immediate family members, extended family members (e.g., grandmothers, cousins), teachers, and
peers. In these papers, we focus on five of the thirteen focal families.

The     Development         of    Everyday       Expertise:       How    Significant    Learning       is  Accomplished
Socially and Culturally in Everyday Life
In  this   paper,  we consider      the influence  of  social,  cultural, and   historical factors  on families'   educational
perspectives and decisions. One way in which scholars have investigated individual and social perspectives is
through the lens of ideology. Ideologies mediate people's understanding and learning processes in profoundly
important      yet  unconscious     ways   (Althusser,    1971;     Bakhtin,  1983)    through    complex   social  processes
(Thompson,      1984).   The   social   dynamics   around  educational    ideologies   are particularly   complex   given  that
significant    learning  is constituted   across   settings,  groups,   and  pursuits  over   extended  timescales.   Learners
routinely navigate a range of diverse social, material, and discursive contexts every day--from the classroom to
home, afterschool programs, informal education institutions, and out into their communities--with a variety of
purposes    and    value systems     in place  (Banks   et al.,   2007).  Learning  is accomplished     across  these diverse
pathways of participation in activity and affiliation with cultural groups in ways we do not fully account for in
the literature.    Consequently,     the field   needs empirically-informed      theoretical   models  that  fully reflect the
complexity     of  everyday    life and  everyday  learning.     These models can be used to understand how and why
learning    is  accomplished--or      impeded--across     sociocultural   contexts  throughout     diverse  social niches  and
networks in relation to enacted ideologies. Even as U.S. communities become increasingly diverse in terms of
ethnic and racial group membership, immigrant histories, and linguistic variation, few teachers or university
professors     are equipped    to   work  effectively  with   all students   in their classrooms.   Cultural   and  ecological
perspectives    are   increasingly      understood to   be   central  in  the   scientific understanding     of learning   and
development, and they have strong implications for educational practice (Lee, 2008; Banks et al., 2007; Bell,
Lewenstein, Shouse & Feder, 2009).
           Together our analyses answer two driving questions: How do socio-cultural-historical factors influence
families' consequential decisions related to learning and education? What role do individual family members
have    in  the choices    made?    Educational   ideologies    play  a  profound  role    in these learning   processes.  Our
theoretical framework seeks to account for the social and material dimensions of sophisticated domain learning
as it relates to the interests and practices of specific cultural groups (Bell, et al., 2006). The ultimate explanatory
goal is to better understand the extended learning pathways (e.g., related to the accomplishment of expertise
development in science and technology) that are culturally architected through complex sequences of contingent
interaction and activity that occur across the breadth of everyday life. Our theoretical stance on sophisticated
learning and expertise development builds upon the social, cultural, and material perspectives associated with
situated    perspectives    on learning   (c.f., distributed   cognition   [Hutchins,  1995],     situated learning  [Lave  &
Wenger, 1991], the agency-identity framework [Holland et al., 1998], and critical feminist perspectives [Barton
et al., 2003; Suchman, 2007]). These perspectives allow us to develop a theoretical and empirical understanding
of the social and material influences on what is taken to be sophisticated learning and activity that occurs within
and across figured cultural worlds. Such figured worlds exhibit significant cultural variation, are often contested
among social actors, and are inequitably available to individuals and groups.
           Key to our analyses of these cases is the assumption is that educational choices and educational values
are co-constituted. Families make choices building on what they value, and valuing develops through choices
made in social and cultural settings. Researchers have documented that the development of learner's interest,
reputation, and identification with forms of expertise and practice have a strong influence on what they choose
to learn and to value (Barron, et al. 2009; Esmonde et al., 2009; Pea et al., 2007; Stevens, O'Connor, et al.,
2008; Zimmerman, Reeve & Bell, 2008).
           This work is part of the broader efforts of the Learning in Informal and Formal Environments (LIFE)
Center to answer questions about the social genesis and expression of learning choices and the socio-cultural-
historical  values    that  drive   them.  Learners   develop     competencies   and   dispositions  that  contribute to  their

                                                          142  ·  © ISLS
                                                    ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 2

choosing and valuing of learning opportunities. This includes social learning processes put in place between
experts and novices (Bransford & Schwartz, 2009), choices and values that drive specialized learning interests
(Barron et al., 2009; Reeve & Bell, 2009), preferred learning arrangements, such as seeking help or working
alone (Stevens et al., 2008), social positioning of individuals in ways that support or constrain learning (Harré,
2008; Holland et al., 1998), as well as features of social cognitive development, such as strategies associated
with learning through imitation (Meltzoff et al., 2009). In these analyses, we use ethnographic and interview
data to document both choices families made and the values behind these decisions.

Paper 1: Negotiating Identity and Expertise in a Vietnamese Immigrant Family
Children of families who have immigrated to the United States must often negotiate different systems of values
and ideas across home, school, and community settings. Even within the home setting, parents' and children's
differing educational experiences, language abilities, and perspectives on the dominant culture can make for a
complex network of influences through which young people must find their way. Though some scholars have
begun   to investigate  these challenges     (e.g., Lee,  2008;   Orellana,   Reynolds,  Dorner     & Meza,   2003;   Phelan,
Davidson   &   Cao,  1991;  Suarez-Orozco      &    Suarez-Orozco     &    Todorova,  2008),    the ways   in which   young
people's   learning  is affected  by  the   disparate  worlds    they  traverse are   still poorly  understood.This    paper
discusses  the  experiences   of  one   Vietnamese      boy    (pseudonym     Luke  Vuong)      and how   he  is  positioned
differently by his mother in the domain of school learning and in his home-based expertise with technology               (cf.
Harré, 2008). It focuses on the question, how do immigrant parents' educational life histories and value systems
affect how they construct learner identities for their children in school and home-based pursuits?

Findings
Luke Vuong (age 13) and his younger sister Anna (age 10) were born in the Philippines to Vietnamese parents,
mother Agnes and father Sinh (all names are pseudonyms). The Vuong family immigrated to the United States
from the Philippines in 2002, when Luke and Anna were young children. The family speaks Vietnamese at
home, although both children are bilingual in Vietnamese and English.
          Over the course of our team's acquaintance with the Vuongs, Luke's mother Agnes expressed deep and
repeated concerns that Luke did not study hard enough or do well enough in school. Her concern about his
academic   performance     caused  her     serious  distress,  and  resulted   in  changing     Luke's   school  enrollment,
requesting  standardized   testing to   test his cognitive     abilities, and multiple  efforts  to support   out of  school
learning   opportunities  including   after  school    clubs,  individual   reading,   and   educational  software.   Agnes
frequently  described   Luke   as  being   "lazy"     and  needing  constant    "pushing"   to  complete   and   turn in  his
schoolwork.
          As we continued working with the Vuongs, it became clear that the way in which Agnes positioned
Luke academically was heavily informed by her experiences growing up in South Vietnam. Agnes's formative
years were spent in a home and a national environment where economic and educational opportunities were
both limited   and  often  unequally    distributed.   Agnes   often   expressed  to  us   that Vietnamese    students  were
expected   to  study  long  hours  and     prepare    intensively  for    admission to  a   limited  number   of  university
possibilities. She  related her   own   experience     of   being  unable   to  pursue   a  university   education, and   the
subsequent great importance she placed on the educational opportunities of her children. Agnes' values, derived
largely from her social and cultural histories, have clearly impacted the family's decisions related to Luke's
learning.
          At the same time as Agnes and other family members positioned Luke negatively with respect to his
school  performance,     however,    Luke    had    a developing   identity    within  his   family   as  someone     who is
knowledgeable and skilled in a home-based pursuit - operating and maintaining a variety of technological tools.
When our research team first met the Vuongs, they did not own a computer, but Luke reported helping his
father, Sinh,  use  the Internet  in their   apartment    complex's    computer   room.     The Vuongs    bought  their  first
computer in part with proceeds from participating in our study, and since then, they have owned a series of
desktop   and  laptop   computers,   as well  as    other  technological    systems  (e.g.,  televisions, speaker   systems,
handheld and console video games). Agnes reported multiple times that she calls on Luke for help with the
family computer, including installing software and operating various programs. She also related that Luke was
one of the main participants in putting together a new television and speaker system, and that the family calls on
him to troubleshoot technological problems. While she continues to express concern that Luke's studying and
academic performance are below her expectations, Agnes increasingly praises Luke's mechanical abilities and
his understanding of technology.
          The  ways  in  which Luke     is positioned   in school-  and    home-based  pursuits     have been informed by
family  members'    educational   experiences    and   cultural  values.   Each of  these   factors can  have  multiple  and
complex influences on how learner identities are formed and sustained. For example, one reason Luke's parents
(especially his mother) look to him for technological expertise at home is because of his comparatively stronger

                                                        143  ·  © ISLS
                                                  ICLS 2010  ·    Volume 2

abilities in  speaking    and reading  English.   At  the  same    time,   however, one   likely  factor behind   Luke's
difficulties in school is his challenge in developing academic English at the necessary level of sophistication.
          This  work    sheds light on how   families'    sociocultural histories play important   roles  in educational
identity formation. It also has relevance for understanding learning pathways among the growing population of
immigrant and bicultural youth in the United States. As ethnic and cultural diversity continues to increase in the
nation's schools, educators must take a complex view of the students in their classrooms and of the myriad of
social and material influences on who these young people are and will become.

Paper     2:   Orienting      Children       Towards         Science:       Influences       of  Parental      Values
and       Family        History     on    How         Parents         Arrange       Children's         Educational
Experiences
This paper    looks  at the role of mothers    in supporting   and  arranging  for  educational  experiences  related to
science and math--both in school and out of school--for their daughters. Ethnographic methods are used to
create three mother-daughter case studies. In each case study, the mother's family histories are analyzed in
relationship to science and math learning experiences that they plan for and decide about with their daughters.
This work identified four key areas of educational decision making: 1) middle school selection, (2) afterschool
programs, (3) summer learning activities, and (4) the at-home structure created for homework, hobbies or other
pursuits. The research question that guides this study is: What is the influence of family histories and parental
values on how parents arrange and encourage educational experiences related to science and math for their
daughters? The focus is on the four themes above as the girls transitioned from elementary school into middle
school.
          Work in developmental psychology focuses on parental educational beliefs--especially in the areas of
academic stereotypes and achievement (e.g., Bhanot &           Jovanovic, 2005; Raty & Kasanen, 2007). This work
explores the psychological mechanisms underlying the under-representation of females in math, science and
engineering fields. A related line of work adds social interactions to its psychological analysis of how parents
foster disciplinary  affiliations.  Researchers   (Crowley,  Callanan,     Tenenbaum,  &  Allen,   2001; Tenenbaum    &
Leaper, 2003) studied parent-child interactions and found that parents differentially orient their children towards
subject matter learning--spending more time with boys on science. Other work analyzed how children engage
in school    science in   comparison  to their reported   home    experiences.  Researchers   (Brickhouse,   Lowery,  &
Schultz, 2000) found that home activities and social networks were important in determining science identities.
Barron et al. (2009) found that youth with more sophisticated STEM expertise had benefited from a greater
variety of parental supports for their learning.
          This paper adds on this literature in three ways. First, the majority of prior work analyzes large data
sets, assessment protocols, and/or interviews. Observations of activities in family settings are added. Second,
many studies compare the beliefs of the children to the beliefs of the parent. This comparison ignores the social
processes by which the beliefs are shared. Here, the analysis is on parents' beliefs and values embedded in
family practices to understand how the processes by which the daughters take up or resist their parents' ideas.
Finally, much of the research looks to understand if mothers or fathers give more support to their sons or
daughters. Instead, here the focus is on the experiences of girls and women.

Findings
This analysis focuses on three mothers and three girls--Raven, Wendy, and Penelope (pseudonyms)--when
they   discussed or   reflected  on  decisions    related to   learning  experiences  or  when    they crafted  learning
arrangements.    Overall,   Wendy's,   Raven's,   and  Penelope's     mothers   were   active learning   advocates.   As
advocates, the mothers were involved and involved others in helping their children. The mother arranged for or
assisted with homework, helped with searches for relevant information, sought out learning activities for their
child, and provided access to artifacts and tools. Mothers set up physical spaces for academic success in the
home--including access to computers and materials needed for homework. These mothers also arranged for
trips to extend learning (e.g., Raven to the library and Wendy to an organic garden).
          The mothers' experiences with their own parents were often articulated as influencing their activities
with   their daughters.   For example,   Eve   Smith, Penelope's     mother,  was   born, raised,  and   schooled in  the
Philippines; where she received a bachelor's degree in management. Eve expressed that while education was
valued in her family, higher education was not necessarily valued for women by her father.               Eve told us her
father "didn't want to waste his money sending her to school; she should just stay home and get married.               ­
Smith home, November 14, 2006". Unlike her father, Eve often encouraged Penelope in math and science--and
school more generally.     Eve determined Penelope was going to college, sharing with the research team that she
was already saving money. During multiple visits, Penelope teased the research team that she did not want to
attend college at our institution--she commented instead about liking another local university and its mascot.
While   teasing  was    a communication   genre    common      in the Smith   household,  it  also revealed  Penelope's

                                                      144  ·  © ISLS
                                                   ICLS 2010     ·  Volume 2

awareness at 5th grade of multiple colleges in her immediate area and her goal to attend one. In this way, Eve's
views advocating for Penelope's educational experiences and Penelope's goals for herself were shaped from
Eve's father's talk around schooling.
           Raven's mother Cyndi also used her life experiences to navigate suggesting college. Cyndi cited her
love of school and her own lack of success in getting her bachelor's degree as motivation for Raven. Wendy's
mother Grace was more immediately focused on her daughter's success in middle and high school through
joining the gifted and talented program, and Wendy's college was not such a primary focus for Grace.
           The   mothers  worked    to  make  their  homes      environments     where  scholarship  was  encouraged,    high
standards were achieved, and academics were balanced with recreational and social times. At the same time,
mothers created home environments that were resources for learning the knowledge and practices valued by the
families' communities. For example, the mothers set up homework spaces and/or resources, arranged with tools
(i.e., Internet, rulers, books, etc.) for the children to use. They created social networks to support learning from
cultural groups,    from  neighbors,    from golfing   partners,   from    family, and   from religious  groups.   The   social
networks were used for science and math learning, and they were also used in support of hobbies and other
interests.
           In  the  case  of  Eve   and Penelope,    Eve   encouraged       Penelope   to work   on  her homework      and to
participate   in academically-related     afterschool   programs,      like the  science  afterschool   program.    When   the
transition to middle school happened, Eve thought about how she could change her life to be more helpful to
Penelope academically, as illustrated by this fieldnote excerpt: "Eve and I talk about her new schedule--she
wants to be more help with Penelope and her middle school homework. She is trying to adjust her [work]
schedule to help Penelope study math and science. ­ Smith family home, 2006-11-14". Eve relied not only on
the school    but  herself   to support   Penelope's    continued      academic    success.  Eve   did this  through   buying
commercial     books,   arranging   for one  of Penelope's       godmothers     to tutor  Penelope  in  math  concepts,   and
encouraging her to participate in a science afterschool program as well as a church-centered music afterschool
program.
           Grace   also  created   an   academic  environment         for her   three daughters    including Wendy--often
maintaining    a library-like quiet  during  study  times.    During the academic year, Grace planned an afterschool
schedule for Wendy that included homework time, music practice, a 30-minute television break, and a snack.                 In
one case, when Grace was not home, she created instead an afterschool work-play schedule for Wendy on a
Post-ItTM  note.    Grace    also  encouraged   her  children      to participate  in supplemental     activities. Cyndi  was
observed to give similar assistance through spending time on the Internet looking up help for math and related
subjects and by taking Raven to the library.

Conclusion
One of the main findings is that the children's family life was a rich collection of learning resources to support
science  and   math   as  well  as  cultural activities (music,       religion, and   cooking). Mothers   acted    as learning
advocates to craft learning experiences for their daughters that they believed to be the most useful (based on
their own histories and cultural experiences) is not readily available. Families tapped social networks to provide
their daughters the kinds of science and math related experiences are believed (based on parental histories and
cultural experiences) will provide the daughters the best experiences, and parents gave their daughters choice, in
varying    degrees, about    their  educational decisions.      Additionally,   families  were  thoughtful   when     selecting
educational opportunities for their children--to balance academic and social needs. Parents are not commonly
studied in the learning as resources that provide science-related help, yet these cases show how parents, and
mothers in specific, have a huge impact in helping a child learn science-related knowledge and skills related to
both school work and out-of-school pursuits. This analysis argues that mothers need to be more considered in
their role  as   learning partners  when   trying   to understand      the  development    of their daughters'     disciplinary
affiliation and identity.

Paper 3: Examining the Complex Ecologies Associated with Immigrant Youth
and Family Educational Decision Making
Youth from immigrant families make up a large percentage of youth in the United States and the percentage is
steadily increasing   (e.g.,  Fuligni,  1997).  Yet,   little is   understood   about  their lives (Suárez-Orozco,    Suárez-
Orozco, and Todorova, 2008). Many scholars studying immigration and education have focused on bilingual
education   (cf. Suárez-Orozco,     Suárez-Orozco,     and    Qin,  2005)   and  academic    achievement    once   youth from
immigrant families become participants in the United States' educational system (e.g., Suárez-Orozco, Suárez-
Orozco, and Todorova, 2008). In addition to these important areas of scholarship, we propose a focus on how
immigrant youth and families learn what it means to "do" school in the United States, which we argue is a form
of  expertise  (cf. Bricker     and Bell, 2008;   Ericsson,      Charness,   Feltovich,   and Hoffman,    2006).    Given  the
importance of prior experience relative to acts of learning (e.g., Bransford, Brown, and Cocking, 2000), our

                                                        145   ·  © ISLS
                                                  ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 2

analysis   hinges on  emic   (Harris, 1987;   Pike, 1954)    and   place-based   (e.g., Holloway     and Valentine,  2000)
accounts of lived educational histories.
           We  wish   to examine  what   meanings    immigrant     youth and    families  associate  with  the concept  of
schooling   given  their  lived educational   histories, which     include educational    experiences    (both formal  and
informal)  in countries   of origin,  as well as  those  along   migratory    paths. We   examine    the everyday   spaces
associated with schooling that immigrant youth and/or their parents inhabit over time, including the spatial
discourses used in these everyday spaces (cf. Holloway and Valentine, 2000). Our research question for this
analysis is: What ideologies and lived experience undergird educational decisions made by immigrant youth and
families?

Findings
To investigate    our research  question,  we  utilize  data from   two  case   studies  of Biqila   Gamada    and  Ka-zee
Cheung   respectively.   Biqila and   Ka-zee  are focal  participants   in the  aforementioned    ethnographic     research.
Biqila and his family arrived from Kenya two years before enrolling in the ethnography. Ka-zee was born in the
United States but her parents came to the United States from Vietnam. As part of our analysis, we map both
Biqila and    Ka-zee's    educational  patterns,  which   are  influenced     by   parental educational    ideologies  and
experiences.
           In Biqila's case, he understands the educational choices made by his family in the larger context of his
and his families' lived schooling experiences in Africa (namely Ethiopia and Kenya). His father attended only a
few years of elementary school in Ethiopia. Biqila's sister reports her father telling all of his children that
without an education, everyone will "...use you as a napkin" (i.e., wipe their hands on you). All decisions are
made in Biqila's household based on furthering one's education because Biqila's father wants his children to
"...be somebody like he wants to see." In this analysis, we show how in one instance a particular educational
decision   becomes    contested  space   (Low  and   Lawrence-Zúñiga,      2003)     and  threatens  to  pit obtaining  an
education against the development of significant expertise development in a sport (which if continues has a high
probability of culminating in a higher education scholarship). We also use an interdiscursive analysis (e.g.,
Bricker and Bell, in preparation; Silverstein, 2005) to highlight the various spatial and temporal aspects of
Biqila's lived educational history and choices as they unfold along extended learning pathways.
           In Ka-zee's case, we note that all educational decisions are made by Ka-zee's father Mau. Ka-zee has
been tracked into special education programs and classes since early elementary school. Mau makes educational
decisions for Ka-zee based on his educational ideology that in Vietnam, only the top tiered students have a
chance to compete for employment that confers economic advantages, while in the United States, even those
who are mediocre can still "make it." Using interaction analysis to find patterns in discourse and behavior, we
map   Mau's   educational   behaviors  and  ideologies   of  what   it means   to  "do"  school   to his own   educational
experiences in Vietnam. We also report on how Mau `learned' what it means to make educational choices for
one's offspring in the United States; learning that is situated in a space undergirded by racial and socioeconomic
influences.

Conclusion
These  cases  show    the influence   of educational    ideology   and  lived experience    in educational   practices and
decision-making.    Through     geographic, linguistic,  and   interaction  analyses,   we  uncover    and   explore  these
educational ideologies and patterns and show how they travel through space and time to influence educational
decisions. In addition, we show that educational decisions, although made to offer youth the best education
possible, can conflict with other possible decisions and experiences that might lead to the very educational
opportunities that parents want for their children.

References
Althusser,  L. (1971).    Ideology   and  the ideological    state apparatus.   In Lenin    and philosophy.    New   York:
           Monthly Review Press.
Bakhtin, M. (1983). Rabelais and his world. Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
Banks, J. A., Au, K. H., Ball, A. F., Bell, P., Gordon, E. W., Gutierrez, K., et al. (2007). Learning in and out of
           school in  diverse   environments:    Life-Long,  Life-Wide,    Life-Deep.    Seattle, WA:     UW   Center   for
           Multicultural Education.
Barron, B., Martin, C., Takeuchi, L., & Fithian, R. (2009). Parents as learning partners and the development of
           technological fluency. International Journal of Learning and Media, 1(2).
Barton, A. C., Ermer, J. L., & Burkett, T. A. (2003). Teaching science for social justice. New York, NY:
           Teachers College Press.
Bell,  P., Bricker,   L.A.,  Lee,  T.R.,  Reeve,    S., &   Zimmerman,      H.T.   (2006).  Understanding      the cultural
           foundations   of  children's   biological    knowledge:     Insights   from   everyday     cognition    research.

                                                      146  ·  © ISLS
                                                 ICLS 2010   ·   Volume 2

         Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference of the Learning Sciences (ICLS), pp. 1029-1035.
         Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Bell, P.,  Lewenstein,     B., Shouse,   A.W.   &   Feder,   M.A.    (Eds.). (2009).   Learning   science  in  informal
         environments:     People,    places,  and    pursuits.    Committee    on   Learning    Science   in  Informal
         Environments, Board on Science Education, Center for Education, Division of Behavioral and Social
         Sciences and Education, National Research Council. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press.
Bhanot, R., & Jovanovic, J. (2005). Do parents' academic gender stereotypes influence whether they intrude on
         their children's homework? Sex Roles, 52(9/10), 597-607.
Bransford, J.D., Brown, A.L., & Cocking, R.R. (Eds.) (2000). How people learn: Brain, mind, experience, and
         school. Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
Bransford, J., & Schwartz, D. (2009). It Takes Expertise to Make Expertise:           Some Thoughts about Why and
         How. In K. A. Ericsson (Ed.), Development of professional expertise: Toward measurement of expert
         performance    and    design of  optimal  learning    environments.  New    York, NY:   Cambidge     University
         Press.
Bricker,   L.  A., &   Bell,   P. (2008).  Mapping    the  learning   pathways  and    processes  associated   with  the
         development of expertise and learner identities. In P. A. Kirschner, J. van Merriënboer & T. de Jong
         (Eds.), Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference of the Learning Sciences.
Bricker, L.A., & Bell, P. (in preparation). Linguistic markers as evidence of interdiscursive learning in youth
         talk across encounters.
Brickhouse, N., Lowery, P., & Schultz, K. (2000). What kind of a girl does science?: The construction of a
         school science identity. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 37(5), 441-458.
Crowley, K., Callanan, M. A., Tenenbaum, H. R., & Allen, E. (2001). Parents explain more often to boys than
         to girls during shared scientific thinking. Psychological Science, 12(3), 258-261.
Delgado-Gaitan,    C., &   Trueba,  H. (1991).  Crossing     cultural borders:  Education    for immigrant  families in
         America. London, UK: The Falmer Press.
Dreier, O. (2009). Persons in structures of social practice. Theory & Psychology, 19(2), 193-212.
Ericsson, K.A., Charness, N., Feltovich, P.J., & Hoffman, R.R. (Eds.). (2006). The Cambridge handbook of
         expertise and expert performance. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Erickson, K., & Stull, D. (1998). Doing team ethnography: Warnings and advice. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage
         Publications.
Esmonde, I., Blair, K., Goldman, S., Martin, L., Jimenez, O., & Pea, R. D. (in press). Math I am: What we learn
     from stories that people tell about math in their lives. In B. Bevan, P. Bell & R. Stevens (Eds.), Learning
     outside school time. New York:     Springer.
Fuligni, A.J. (1997). The academic achievement of adolescents from immigrant families: The roles of family
         background, attitudes, and behavior. Child Development, 68(2), 351-363.
Harré, R. (2008). Positioning Theory. Self-care, Dependent Care & Nursing, 16(1), 28-32.
Harris, M. (1987). Cultural anthropology (2nd ed.). New York, NY: Harper & Row Publishers.
Holland,   D., Lachiocotte,    W.,  Skinner,  D.,  &  Cain,     C. (1998).  Identity and   agency  in cultural  worlds.
         Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Holloway,   S.L.,  &   Valentine,  G.  (2000). Children's    geographies:    Playing,  living, learning. London,    UK:
         Routledge.
Horton, J., & Kraftl, P. (2006). What else? Some more ways of thinking and doing `children's geographies.'
         Children's Geographies, 4(1), 69-95.
Hutchins, E. (1995). Cognition in the wild. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Lave,  J., &   Wenger,  E.   (1991).  Situated  learning:    Legitimate   peripheral  participation.  Cambridge,  MA:
         Cambridge University Press.
Lee,  C.D.  (2008).  The   centrality of   culture to the  scientific study  of learning   and   development:  How   an
         ecological framework in education research facilitates civic responsibility. Educational Researcher,
         37(5), 267-279.
Low, S.M., & Lawrence-Zúñiga, D. (2003). The anthropology of space and place: Locating culture. Malden,
         MA: Blackwell Publishing.
Meltzoff,  A., Kuhl,   P., Movellan,   J., &  Sejnowski,     T. (2009).   Foundations for  a new   science of  learning.
         Science, 325(5938), 284-288.
Moll, L.C., & González, N. (2004). Engaging life: A funds of knowledge approach to multicultural education.
         In J. Banks & C. McGee Banks (Eds.), Handbook of research on multicultural education (Second
         edition) (pp. 699-715). New York: Jossey-Bass.
Olneck, M.R. (2004). Immigrants and education in the United States. In J. Banks & C. McGee Banks (Eds.),
         Handbook of research on multicultural education (Second edition) (pp. 381-403). New York: Jossey-
         Bass.

                                                      147  ·  © ISLS
                                              ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 2

Orellana, M.F., Reynolds, J, Dorner, L. & Meza, M. (2003). In other words: Translating or "para-phrasing" as a
        family literacy practice in immigrant households. Reading Research Quarterly, 38(1), 12-34.
Pea, R. D., Goldman, S., Martin, L., Blair, K. P., Booker, A., Esmonde, I., et al. (2007, July). Situations and
   values in family mathematics. In Proceedings of CSCL-2007 (Computer-Supported Collaborative
   Learning) (pp. 26-35). Rutgers, Mahwah, NJ:    Erlbaum Associates.
Phelan, P., Davidson,   A.L. &  Cao,  H.T. (1991). Students'     multiple worlds:  Negotiating   the boundaries  of
        family, peer, and school cultures. Anthropology & Education Quarterly, 22(3), 224-250.
Pike, K.L. (1954). Language in relation to a unified theory of the structure of human behavior. Ann Arbor, MI:
        Braun-Brumfield, Inc.
Räty, H & K Kasanen, K. (2007) Gendered views of ability in parents' perceptions of their children's academic
        competencies.   Sex Roles, 56(1-2), 117-124.
Reeve, S. & Bell, P. (2009). Children's self-documentation and understanding of the concepts "healthy" and
        "unhealthy." International Journal of Science Education, 31(14), 1953-1974.
Silverstein, M. (2005). Axes of evals: Token versus type interdiscursivity. Journal of Linguistic Anthropology,
        15(1), 6-22.
Stevens, R., O'Connor, K., Garrison, L., Jocuns, A., & Amos, D.M. (2008). Becoming an engineer: Toward a
   three dimensional view of engineering learning. Journal of Engineering Education, 97, 355-368.
Suárez-Orozco,   M.M,    Suárez-Orozco,    C.,  &  Qin,    D.B.   (Eds.)   (2005).  The  new     immigration:    An
        interdisciplinary reader. New York, NY: Routledge.
Suárez-Orozco, C., Suárez-Orozco, M.M., & Todorova, I. (2008). Learning a new land: Immigrant students in
        American society. Cambridge, MA: The Belknap Press of Harvard University Press.
Suchman,    L.  (2007).  Agencies  in  technology     design:  Feminist   reconfigurations.   In  Human-machine
        reconfigurations: plans and situated actions!. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Tenenbaum, H. R. & Leaper, C. (2003). Parent-child conversations about science: The socialization of gender
        inequities? Developmental Psychology, 39(1), 34-47.
Thompson, J. B. (1984). Studies in the theory of ideology. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Vygotsky, L.S. (1978). Mind in society: The development of higher psychological processes. Cambridge, MA:
        Harvard University Press.
Waters, J.L. (2006). Geographies of cultural capital: Education, international migration and family strategies
   between Hong Kong and Canada. Transactions of the Institute of British Geographers, New Series, 31,
   179-192.
Zimmerman, H. T., Reeve, S., & Bell, P. (2008). Distributed   expertise in a science center: Social  and
   intellectual role-taking by families. Journal of Museum Education, 33, 143-152.

                                                  148  ·  © ISLS
