                                                    ICLS 2010     Volume 1

        Using changes in framing to account for differences in a
                             teacher's classroom behavior
Jennifer Evarts Lineback, Fred Goldberg, San Diego State University, 5500 Campanile Drive, San Diego, CA 92182
                              lineback@sciences.sdsu.edu,        fgoldber@sciences.sdsu.edu

         Abstract:     In this paper we account for how a 5th grade teacher changes in how she attends and
         responds to student thinking in terms of differences in her framing of the instructional situation.
         Coordinating verbal (i.e. speech, voice inflection, and word emphasis) and non-verbal (i.e. body
         orientation,  eye  gaze,  and     gesturing)  behavioral     data, we    characterize     three  patterns   that
         reappeared with stability throughout a fourteen-day, inquiry-based instructional module on the
         water cycle.   We argue that each of these behavior patterns suggests a distinctive way the teacher
         frames her instruction.    We     label these frames  as: (A)   moving    towards   content     objectives; (B)
         promoting a student-centered discussion; and (C) making sense of students' ideas.                 The episodic
         manner in which these frame shifts occur in the classroom suggests a way of conceptualizing a
         learning progression in teachers' ability to attend and respond to student thinking.

Introduction
The following transcripts document two brief exchanges between a fifth grade teacher and her students that took
place on successive days during a fourteen-day, inquiry-based, science unit on the water cycle.               Exchange #1 is part
of  a classroom   discussion where     the teacher  and  students  are   trying   to understand     an   idea for an  experiment
suggested by a student (Jasper).   Exchange #2 is part of a classroom discussion where the teacher (Mrs. Miller) is
trying to get students to come up with   specific ideas about precipitation.      Words in italics indicate   words emphasized
by  the speaker. Non-verbal  behaviors   that coincide with talk are   indicated in brackets.

Exchange #1:   Day 13
    1    Jasper:   If you did that with a different drink, that would work.
    2    Mrs. Miller:   Now why would you want to use a different drink?           Other than water?
    3    Jasper:   'Cause then you have no clue if it's leaking or not.           I mean that could be water from a leak or
    4    water from the condensation.
    5    Mrs. Miller:   Like, what would you want to freeze?
    6    Jasper:   You could use, like ... like soda or something, and then water appeared in the bag, you know it's-
    7    And you, like, drank it and you found out it wasn't like, soda or something-
    8    Jamil:   Oh yeah.   I get what you're trying to say-
    9    Mrs. Miller:   OK.  Alright.   Go ahead.    Go ahead.    Finish what you're saying.       (...)
 10      Jamil:   I get what Jasper's saying.     Like, if you use, like, a different drink, like let's say, orange juice or
 11      something or soda, um- If it was leaking, ... if you thought it was leaking water, you would know if it was
 12      from the condensation, because the orange juice is yellow, it's not all like clear like water.

Exchange #2:   Day 14
    1    Mrs. Miller: What steps- notice that word right there- [points to the word "steps" written on the easel]
    2    What    steps might be   involved  in   making  each    type of precipitation?    ...     And does somebody have a
    3    thought?   Cam? (...)
    4    Cam:     First, rain is collected by the ocean, and the cloud carries it until it can't carry it anymore.          So, it
    5    drops- so it- so when it can't carry it anymore, it drops it.      It holds it until it's completely- it- it completely
    6    can't hold it anymore, at all. And, then it just falls.
    7    Mrs. Miller:     So, (...) does that define precipitation?     Does what you say really tell me what these four
    8    [points to the types of precipitation] are? Or does it tell me what that [points to the word "precipitation"] is?
    9    What do you guys think?       Is Cam telling me what this is, or is he telling me what these are?
 10      Jack:   He's telling you what rain is.
 11      Mrs. Miller:   Really?

         Although   the   context for  both teacher/student    exchanges    is the   same  (i.e.   the  water cycle),  the verbal
information  gleaned    from the   transcripts   suggests   that the  interactions    taking place      on these   two days   are
substantively different. If these transcripts are analyzed along with the co-occurring extra-verbal behavior, such as
the participants' body    orientation, eye  gaze,  and  gestures,  the  case   is strengthened     that  something   dramatically

                                                        145      ISLS
                                                  ICLS 2010    Volume 1

different is taking place in these exchanges.  How can researchers best make sense of this shift in the dynamics of
the classroom, particularly with respect to the teacher's practice?      We propose that the construct of framing is a
potentially useful framework to help answer this question.

Framing as a Framework
Educational researchers have adopted the theoretical construct of framing in recent years to help account for the
dynamic nature of students' and teachers' reasoning during instruction.       A concept that originated in the disciplines
of anthropology, sociology, and linguistics, framing refers to an interpretation of how an individual makes sense of
"What's going on here?" (Bateson, 1972; Goffman, 1986; Hammer, Elby, Scherr, & Redish, 2005; Tannen, 1993).
Framing    is considered  to be   a  mechanistic,  cognitive    process, serving   to activate   sets  of locally   coherent
epistemological,   conceptual, and   social resources  and   enabling  individuals to  effectively  navigate    their current
situation (Hammer et. al, 2005; Redish, 2004).     An individual's frame, and the resources that are thereby activated,
informs the set of expectations that he or she has about a situation, which is necessarily grounded in his or her
previous experience with similar types of situations.
          In  the context of education,    framing  influences  both   what   individuals attend   to  within   instructional
situations and how they think to respond in the moment.      For example, a teacher's framing of instruction influences
how and to what she attends in the classroom, as well as how she thinks to respond (Levin, Hammer, & Coffey,
2009).   How students frame instructional activities helps determine the ways they interact with one another, their
teacher, and the available learning materials (Hammer et. al, 2005; Scherr & Hammer, 2009).           In an empirical study,
Scherr and Hammer (2009) characterized distinct sets of co-occurring behavioral clusters that suggested that college
students were  framing their group activities in different ways  at different points in time. Shifts  between these frames
were observed within single physics sessions, indicating that students did not maintain one consistent way of making
sense of and approaching their learning activities. By considering frames as a theoretical framework, researchers
may be able to better make sense of changes in students' and teachers' behaviors and posit why they behave as they
do.
          It has been previously suggested that when teachers attend and respond to the substance of students' ideas,
the students are more likely to genuinely engage with the material under investigation and advance in their learning
(Black and Wiliam, 1998; NRC, 2001).        With respect to developing students' inquiry practices, a teacher's focused
attention  and  response  can,  therefore,  help  students   refine and   develop  their  questions,   investigations,   and
explanations surrounding specific natural phenomena (Levin, 2008; NRC, 2000).            If attending and responding is a
key component of promoting student inquiry, then it is critical for researchers to be able to account for how and why
teachers  attend  and  respond  to  the things that   they  do.  Framing   provides   a  vehicle   for us  to   do just that.
Characterizing the ways a teacher frames instruction enables us to make sense of how she attends and responds to
students in the moment and explore how her attention and responses change longitudinally.
          The objective of this paper is to present behavioral evidence that suggests different ways a single teacher
frames her inquiry-based instruction within a unit on the water cycle.        This work lays the foundation for research
that investigates the frequency by which she shifts between frames, how this frequency changes over time, and how
such changes may indicate progress in   learning  to attend and respond to student thinking.   Furthermore, this research
enables us to determine whether similar frames and shifting patterns are observed in additional teachers.

Methods
The  setting  for this study was   a fifth  grade teacher's  classroom   during   her implementation      of a  fourteen-day
"module" on the water cycle.    The module represented one of several developed by our research group designed to
provide teachers with a context with which to explore and promote student inquiry practices (1). To accomplish the
goal of   encouraging   practices such  as  making-sense    of  and reasoning   about   scientific phenomena,      proposing
plausible, mechanistic    explanations  of  those  phenomena,    and   collecting  evidence   to support     or refute  these
explanations, the water module begins with the teacher posing an open-ended question to her students:

          Suppose that one night it rains.  When you arrive at school, you notice that there are puddles of
          rainwater in the parking lot.  When     you go  home,  you   notice that the  puddles  are   gone.  What
          happened to the rainwater?

The students are encouraged to suggest possible answers and consider reasons why these answers are plausible.
While the minimal curricular materials provide teachers with potential student responses and possible ideas for
follow-up discussion topics, the teachers are encouraged to base their future instructional moves solely on the nature

                                                      146      ISLS
                                                  ICLS 2010     Volume 1

of the students' ideas as they emerge during the discussion itself.      Hence, the teacher may choose to go in a variety
of different directions in this and subsequent class sessions depending on the responses of the students.
         A single teacher, Mrs. Miller, was observed in her classroom throughout the duration of the water module
in the  spring   of the  2008-9 academic   year.  Mrs.    Miller  is  a  national-board certified  teacher   and  has  taught
elementary school for over twenty-five years.     She has served as a mentor teacher for novices and has identified
herself as a teacher comfortable  with teaching science.  Prior to the module implementation, Mrs. Miller participated
in inquiry-based professional development (PD) activities organized by our research group for just under one year.
Our PD sessions provide opportunities for in-service elementary and middle school teachers to practice attending
and responding to student thinking, with the explicit intent of helping them develop their ability to promote rich
student scientific inquiry in the classroom.
         Mrs. Miller's class sessions during the module were video recorded in entirety. This video served as the
primary source of data for analysis, supplemented by field notes taken by the first author both during class and
during debriefing interviews with the teacher that occurred shortly after each instructional session.        Since the focus
of the  research    was  on  teacher  framing,  portions  of the  classes   that  centered    on student    group   work  and
experimentation, which tended to involve minimal teacher participation and to which we had less access, were
excluded from the data analyses.     Methods of analysis were modeled after those used      by Scherr and   Hammer (2009),
in that video data was evaluated for patterns that displayed specific sets of Mrs. Miller's verbal (i.e. speech, voice
inflection, and word emphasis) and non-verbal (i.e. body orientation, eye gaze, and gesturing) behavior that seemed
to consistently co-occur.   Once such behavioral pattern sets were tentatively characterized, they were compared with
additional segments of class video to determine whether they occurred with relative frequency and stability.             From
those that were established to be regularly occurring patterns, inferences were drawn regarding how these patterns
might reflect Mrs. Miller's framing of the instructional session.

Results
Three distinct and coherent patterns of Mrs. Miller's verbal and nonverbal behaviors seemed to emerge from the
data, which we are calling patterns (A) "focusing on content," (B) "focusing on generating student interaction and
discussion," and    (C) "focusing on   making   sense of  student ideas."   These   patterns  seemed    to  occur with   some
regularity throughout the module, with some occurring more frequently and lasting for a longer duration than others.
Interestingly, these patterns did not seem to appear in a specific chronology.     For instance, pattern (A) was not only
observed in the earliest class sessions of the module, nor was pattern (C) detected only in the final sessions.          The
data also indicated that Mrs. Miller's students were actively engaged in discussion throughout the module, no matter
the pattern of behavior exhibited by Mrs. Miller.   The types of interactions in which they engaged and the substance
of the discussion that took place, however, did appear to shift in coordination with Mrs. Miller's behavior.
         In the sections below, each of Mrs. Miller's three behavioral patterns is described in detail.           Supporting
evidence for these patterns is provided via portions of classroom transcript, digital stills taken from video, and field
notes taken from the debrief interviews.     These  data  provide    the basis for inferences  drawn    regarding   how  Mrs.
Miller  was framing her  instruction.  The emerging   behavioral  patterns were considered    to be  stable in that they were
consistent for at least several exchanges between discussion participants.       It is worth noting that while there were
occasions where a single behavioral pattern seemed to last for the entire class session, there were several occasions
where Mrs. Miller shifted between different sets of behavior(s) at different points during a single session.

Pattern (A): Focusing on content
Behavior  associated    with pattern  (A) was   observed  regularly   throughout   the module    and often  lasted  for  large
portions of the class session.    Throughout these segments, Mrs. Miller regularly employed gestures emphasizing
and/or enacting specific words or phrases, seemingly to help her students focus on particular concepts.                 These
gestures often involved pointing out important terms or characters selectively inscribed on an easel (Fig. 1b) and/or
drawing attention to specific content terms she employed in her verbal questioning.       For example, in Figure 1c, Mrs.
Miller held her hand up above her hand at a horizontal angle, emphasizing the idea of cloud height to her students.
         With respect to teacher talk, Mrs. Miller tended to initiate these discussions by asking pointed questions in
a direct, clear voice (e.g. line 1-2 in Exchange #2 shown in the introduction).     These questions were often prefaced
with "what is/are" and repeated at various intervals throughout the session to keep the students following a particular
line of thinking.   Her intonation during her speech, like her gestures, tended to emphasize content specific terms and
phrases. Mrs.    Miller  seemed   to pay  close attention to students'    terminology,   as   reflected in  her repeating  or
emphasizing    a particular  term or  phrase volunteered  by   a  student  and/or  asking   a student   follow  up  questions
regarding a term or phrase he or she used.    Furthermore, Mrs. Miller selected certain pieces of her students' talk for
display  on  the  easel, seemingly    choosing  those phrases    that advanced    the  discussion   towards    content  goals.

                                                      147     ISLS
                                                  ICLS 2010     Volume 1

Teacher/student   interactions  throughout  these  discussions     tended  to follow   the traditional initiation, response,
evaluation (IRE) format (Mehan, 1979).

                                       a                                   b                                       c

Figure 1:  Examples of Mrs. Miller's body orientation and gestural movements consistent with behavioral pattern
(A): (a) Mrs. Miller creates a summary table that her students are to fill out; (b) Mrs. Miller gestures across her
easel, directing their attention to the "steps" she is looking for; (c) Mrs. Miller emphasizes a particular descriptor she
is looking for in her students' responses.

         The following section of transcript displays an interaction between Mrs. Miller and her students taken from
Day 2 of the module.    The discussion illustrates behavior typical of pattern (A) and centers on the different types and
locations of clouds.

  1      Tommy: When you're at the, like the, um, ocean? To the west, in early- you get dark clouds.               Usually, it
  2      would be marine layer, and it- um, most of it would be moving in, and then when it gets in enough, it will
  3      just come into  a cloud.  I don't know- [Mrs. Miller writes:   "West early,   dark clouds moving in."]
  4      Mrs. Miller:    But, ah- wh- are they high [moves hand horizontally above head, indicating "high"] or low?
  5      What's the altitude, I guess is what I'm asking.   What's the altitude of the clouds?
  6      Tommy: Well, when they're by the ocean, they're gonna be low.            And then, when- When they're going on
  7      land, they're just going to drift a little higher and higher. [Mrs. Miller writes: "low" and "higher."]
  8      Mrs. Miller:    'K, so they're gonna get higher.   Is there someway we can connect how high they are           with
  9      what they look like? (...)
 10      Cam:    Um, like, maybe when, like, there's storm rainy clouds, way high, maybe that means it just gonna
 11      drizzle or something.   But, when they're lower, they're gonna- it's gonna, like, pour and rain really hard.
 12      Mrs. Miller:   Lower.    Clouds.  Heavy rain.  Higher clouds.     Drizzle.  [Mrs. Miller writes on a new sheet of
 13      paper:   "Lower clouds, heavy rain.    Higher clouds, drizzle."]      What does anyone else think about that?
 14      About clouds and their altitude as to how they look?

         Notice  in  lines 1-4  that Tommy   does  not  refer   to the height  of the  clouds.  Nevertheless, Mrs. Miller
introduces the concept of altitude (line 6) and then goes on to emphasize specific terms in her own talk and in that of
her students (e.g. high, low, and altitude in lines 5-6 and higher in line 9).         She appears to be trying to get her
students to recognize a relationship between clouds' appearance and their altitude.        This is reinforced by Mrs. Miller
inscribing what she identifies as the most pertinent words and phrases (e.g. "Lower clouds, heavy rain.               Higher
clouds, drizzle." in line 14) on the easel and repeatedly asking questions about a relationship between clouds and
their location (e.g. "Is there someway we can connect how high they are with what they look like?" in lines 9-10).
During her debriefing interview, Mrs. Miller's focus centered on the fact that her students' thoughts "were really
scattered" during the discussion and they weren't "getting it."        She seemed disappointed that they hadn't reached
specific conclusions.
         This   pattern of  behavior,  exemplified by   Mrs.    Miller  in both   this segment  and    Exchange    #2 in the
introduction, suggests that she is framing her instruction in these types of discussions as moving toward content
objectives, which we shall refer to as "frame (A)." Her direct line of questioning, reiteration of questions, emphasis
on terminology and phrasing, and her later description of students "not getting it," all appear to be consistent with
maintaining this type of content-driven frame. Rarely during these types of interactions would Mrs. Miller allow
herself or her students to veer onto trains of thought that differed from this singular agenda.

Pattern (B):     Focusing on promoting student interaction and discussion
Similar to pattern (A), behavior associated with pattern (B) was observed throughout the module and lasted for large
portions of the class session.  In these discussions, Mrs. Miller   neither directed her students' attention to an easel nor
to her notes, as was commonly observed in pattern (A).       In fact, she did not seem to direct the students' attention to
herself at all.  Rather,   Mrs. Miller seemed  to  position   herself, both   verbally  and non-verbally,  as a    discussion

                                                      148     ISLS
                                                   ICLS 2010    Volume 1

facilitator and "traffic cop," deciding who speaks next and who must wait.      Her gestures seemed to be less emphatic
or enactive than those observed in pattern (A) and were usually limited to pointing out the sequence of students next
in line to contribute to the discussion (see Figure 2).
        With respect to teacher talk, Mrs. Miller would generally initiate discussions with an open-ended question
about some  type  of  phenomenon      (e.g. "Which   clouds   cause lightening?").  Subsequent   to this initial question,
however, her verbal contributions were generally limited to brief, non-committal "mmm hmmm's," and/or to call
out the names of the students next in line to participate.    Occasionally, she would insert a brief comment indicating
that one student's contribution added to or responded in some way to a comment made earlier by a different student.
She rarely evaluated or probed the students' ideas.     Instead, Mrs. Miller seemed to expect that the students would
comment   on   and/or ask questions    about   each   other's contributions. These  segments   did  not  follow    a single
conceptual strand or delve particularly deeply into a single explanation or observation.      Rather, students seemed to
pursue several different trains of thought, dependent upon which ideas they decided to take up in the moment.

                               a                                          b                                      c

Figure 2: Examples of Mrs. Miller's body orientation and movements consistent with behavioral pattern (B): (a &
b) Mrs. Miller points to the next student to speak; (c) Mrs. Miller faces a student as he contributes to the discussion.

        The following transcript, taken from Day 3 of the module, is typical of interactions consistent with pattern
(B).  The focus of this session was on the causes and consequences of lightening.      It is worth mentioning here that
Mrs. Miller's behavior varied little during this entire sixty-minute session, reinforcing the idea that pattern (B)
behavior is often stable for long segments of class time.

  1     Jack:   If you cut down every tree in the world, which isn't possible, but if you did, and you had nothing
  2     attracting lightening, it wouldn't be able to- um, um, some place twice. (4 sec pause.)
  3     Mrs. Miller:   Alright. [Points to Tommy.]
  4     Tommy:      Well, I was thinking that, if- if- lightening comes, is it just how much h- heat or electricity it
  5     gets?   To touch the ground?      Like, how many volts it collects?     [Mrs. Miller writes in her notebook and
  6     looks back up at Tommy.]        Or, (...) if a cloud has power, how much power does it get, compared to a
  7     smaller cloud, you know?      If a big thundercloud, it might have a lot of it, and always strike the ground...
  8     Mrs. Miller:   Mmmm.        Sam?
  9     Sam:   If you're in a submarine (...) Ah, not that that deep down, um, and lightening, um, went down, would
 10     it be able to, um, shock the submarine from underwater?         [Mrs. Miller looks down at her notebook and up
 11     at Sam.]
 12     Harry:    If it hit the water [Mrs. Miller looks at Harry.], it would probably be able to send an electric
 13     current through it (...)
 14     Mrs. Miller: Danny and then Len.

        In this dialogue, Mrs. Miller's words are limited to non-committal responses or calling out students' names
(e.g. line 9 "Mmmm.    Sam?"), and her gestures are constrained to pointing to students.       The student ideas are on
display and tend to dominate the conversation.     This segment also shows that, as commonly observed in pattern (B),
multiple student ideas are available at any one time, many of which are never taken up by other participants in the
class (e.g. Jack's ideas in lines 1-2 and Tommy's ideas in lines 4-8).     In the debriefing interview that followed the
class session, Mrs.   Miller commented      on the  large  number   of students participating in the discussion    and  the
frequency of that participation.    While she was able to point out a few emergent student ideas when prompted, her
focus was more on the participatory nature of the discussion, rather than on the richness of the expressed ideas.
        Mrs Miller's pattern of behavior during these segments of instruction appeared to sharply contrast to that of
pattern (A), which tended to be much more teacher-directed.         The verbal and non-verbal behaviors of Mrs. Miller
depicted in pattern (B) interactions suggest that she is framing the instructional sessions (or portions thereof) as
"making   room  for   students   to share   ideas and reach   their own   conclusions about   phenomena   with     minimal

                                                       149     ISLS
                                                   ICLS 2010    Volume 1

interference from the teacher," or promoting a student-centered discussion for short. We will refer to this as, "frame
(B)."   Mrs. Miller's limited talk and her propensity for calling out the names of students seems consistent with
eliciting student ideas and encouraging student participation. Mrs. Miller seemed to be intent on making room for
her students to express their thoughts and allowing the students' ideas to take the floor.   Rarely did she try to control
and/or direct the trajectory of the students' ideas.   Her focus on participation during her debrief interview, rather
than the substance of her students' ideas, seems to reinforce this interpretation.

Pattern (C):   Focusing on making-sense of student ideas
The set of behaviors associated with pattern (C) was observed less frequently and for shorter duration (usually less
than 15 minutes) than those associated with patterns (A) and (B). Similar to that which was observed in pattern (B),
Mrs. Miller's behavior made room for student ideas and allowed them to be objects of discussion.            A substantive
difference between (B) and (C), however, was Mrs. Miller's active role during that discussion.           In these sessions,
Mrs. Miller seemed to concentrate intently on the substance of the students' ideas, leaning towards the student as he
or she spoke. She also actively employed   gestures  during these interactions, seemingly    to enact the situation that the
student was   describing    (see  Figure  3a). On    one   occasion,   she    even   spontaneously  constructed a  simple
demonstration to further enact the student's idea being described (see Figure 3b).       These non-verbal gestures are in
contrast to those associated with pattern (A), where she tended to use hand and body movements to emphasize
specific content terms or phrases in her own talk rather than those of her students.

                                                   a                                               b

Figure 3:  Examples of Mrs. Miller's body orientation and gestural movements consistent with behavioral pattern
(C):  (a) Mrs. Miller uses arm gestures to enact a particular idea posited by a student (see line 14 in transcript below
for co-occurring talk); (b) Mrs. Miller constructs a demonstration enacting a student's experimental design.

        Similar to what was observed in behavioral pattern (A), Mrs. Miller tended to be more engaged verbally
during these discussions.   A major difference, however, is her engagement with the students' ideas, rather than her
own.   During these sessions, she actively asked questions of her students, emphasizing their words and probing more
fully into their thoughts about the phenomena under discussion (e.g. "Now why would you want to use a different
drink?  Other than water?"   line 2 in Exchange     #1 listed   in the introduction).   In these discussions, Mrs. Miller
seemed  to act as  a participant, similar to   the other   members   of   the class, working with   the ideas the students
proposed.  At  times, she   attempted  to repeat   the students'   ideas  back  to them, following   such comments   with
inquiries as to whether she had "got it" or if she "was putting words in [their] mouth."     Such questions indicate that
she was checking in with her students to determine if she fully understood their ideas.
        The following is a transcript that reflects an interaction typical of behavioral pattern (C).    It was taken from
a discussion that occurred on Day 12 of the module, which centered on a question posed by a student (Tommy)
concerning a phenomenon that he had witnessed.

  1     Danny:    I just know I've seen it before. On the car windows-
  2     Mrs. Miller:   So more on a car window, though.         [Looks at Tommy.]     Is it the same idea as a car window?
  3     Or is it different? Are you thinking something different?
  4     Tommy:     It's almost the same concept except- except that is sideways, and I'm talking about, ah-       up- you-
  5     ah- up, like, so as a straight area, so it doesn't have any tilt. You know? You have a window that's this way
  6     [Tommy tilts his right hand downward], you know the drop of water's gonna come down [Tommy indicates
  7     drops sliding down with his left hand].    And if it's this way   [Tommy holds his right hand horizontally], it'll
  8     come toge- I don't know why, it just comes together, like, you know.
  9     Mrs. Miller:   So, you're asking if it's on the ceil- First, how's it get on the ceiling?
 10     Tommy:     Well, ah- a- I don't know, it was just thinking   maybe if   you splash water or something.
 11     Mrs. Miller:   Oh.   If you splash water or something?
 12     Tommy:     Ah- ah-  yeah.

                                                       150     ISLS
                                                    ICLS 2010      Volume 1

 13       Mrs. Miller:  So, it [looks up at her hands, which are raised      to the ceiling] comes together-  [moves her
 14       hands together]
 15       Tommy:     And then it makes one drop of water and falls.
 16       Mrs. Miller:  Instead of coming just straight down.       [brings both hands downward]
 17       Tommy:     Yeah- like, why does the water move?         It doesn't have [Mrs. Miller looks up at right hand.] any
 18       reason to. [Mrs. Miller drops hand downward.]

          Mrs. Miller's interactions with Tommy in this transcript clearly indicate that she is trying to understand the
phenomenon that Tommy is trying to describe.        She asks several pointed questions (e.g. "Is it the same idea as a car
window?     Or is it different?" in lines 2-3 and "How's it get on the ceiling?" in line 9) and employs gestures
throughout the exchange.    This    use  of gestures    seems to  serve  two  objectives:  (1) to help herself visualize the
phenomenon better, and (2) to ask Tommy if she has grasped his           idea correctly.  In total, the verbal and non-verbal
behaviors of Mrs. Miller displayed during pattern C suggest that she is framing this portion of the instructional
session  as making   sense of    student ideas, which   we  refer   to as, "frame (C)."   Her active participation, probing
questions, and use of gestures seems consistent with trying to understand her students' thoughts and further the
development of these thoughts.     Overall, these appeared to be richer discussions than those that occurred when Mrs.
Miller employed frames (A) and (B) in that these conversations tended to extend and develop a single student's idea
to its conclusion rather than following a series of different ideas superficially.

Discussion
Mrs. Miller is a teacher who has historically taught science by focusing on reaching content objectives.                Data
collected from  Mrs.   Miller's   classroom   early in  the 2008-9     academic  year (not   reported here)  showed   a clear
tendency for Mrs. Miller to focus her attention on institutionalized content standards.           After participating in PD
sessions  focused  on  attending   to student   thinking  for   one year,  however,   Mrs. Miller's   verbal and  non-verbal
behavior in the classroom indicated that she no longer framed her instruction solely in terms of reaching content
objectives.  Instead, our findings show that while Mrs. Miller did demonstrate behavior that indicated that she was
framing instruction as reaching content objectives in some situations, she also demonstrated that she framed her
instruction as promoting a student-centered discussion and making sense of students' ideas.              The employment of
different frames, rather than a single frame, suggests that she is shifting in her approach to teaching science and
facilitating scientific inquiry.
          It might be expected that an experienced teacher, such as Mrs. Miller, would move between frames in a
stable, predictable manner.   This was certainly not the case.     She did not appear to shift from one instructional frame
to another sequentially, such as framing the initial module sessions as reaching content objectives (A), framing
subsequent   sessions as  promoting    a  student-centered    discussion   (B), and framing   the final  module   sessions as
making sense of students' ideas     (C).    Nor did she seem to shift between frames in a cyclic fashion, moving from
frame (A) to (B)  to (C) rapidly, only   to instantiate a similar cycle in later instructional sessions. Instead, Mrs. Miller
tended to shift between frames sporadically, framing instruction differently on successive days and occasionally
appearing to shift between frames within single instructional sessions.       For example, Exchange #1    took place on Day
13 and provided behavioral evidence that Mrs. Miller was framing instruction as making sense of students' ideas.
Exchange #2 took place the very next day (Day 14) and provided behavioral evidence that Mrs. Miller was framing
instruction as reaching content objectives.     Furthermore, Mrs. Miller displayed behavioral evidence (although not
included here) that she was framing instruction as promoting a student-centered discussion just twenty minutes prior
to the Exchange #2 segment.
          Mrs. Miller once again   participated in  our research project during the 2009-10 academic year.     Her  second
implementation of the water module provided us with the opportunity to explore how her framing of instruction may
have changed from her first implementation. Preliminary behavioral analysis indicates that Mrs. Miller employs
frame (A) considerably less frequently, whereas evidence of frames (B) and (C) seems to be more prevalent than
was observed during her first implementation.      Furthermore, while instances of    frame (C) continue to be fewer    in
number and of shorter duration than those of frame (B), Mrs. Miller does appear to be shifting between these two
frames more frequently within session than was observed during her first implementation of the module.            Although
these data are admittedly tentative, fewer instances of (A) (e.g. focusing on content only) and shifting from (B) to
(C) more regularly (e.g. engaging with student ideas in-the-moment during student discussions) suggests that Mrs.
Miller is progressing with respect to attending and responding      to  the substance of her students' thinking.  Her
debrief interviews from this fall seem to corroborate this interpretation, for her comments seem to be focused
primarily on her students' ideas and how these ideas can promote additional explanation and discussion about

                                                        151      ISLS
                                                   ICLS 2010     Volume 1

phenomena.  This focus  contrasts with last year, when     she tended to comment on whether     her students did or did not
achieve content goals and/or to what degree her students were participating in discussion.
        Part of the broader scope of our research project is to begin to conceptualize a teacher learning progression
in the promotion of scientific inquiry. We expect that such      a learning progression necessarily  involves a dimension
in how teachers attend and respond to the substance of their     students' ideas. Linear descriptions  of learning
progressions tend to characterize learning as happening in stable, plateau-like stages representing the increasing
degrees of sophistication (e.g. Thompson, Braaten, & Windschitl, 2009).       The  dynamic, episodic   nature of Mrs.
Miller's observed behavioral patterns, however, suggests that it might be less meaningful to describe longitudinal
progress in terms of successive stages or levels. While it is arguable that frame (C) is more sophisticated than frame
(A) regarding a teacher's consideration of the substance of her students' thinking, it is questionable as to whether it
is desirable (or feasible) for a teacher to only frame instruction this manner.   Allowing    students to first share their
ideas and reasoning in a student-centered discussion might be a necessary foundation for engaging, probing, and
working with their ideas. Characterizing how a teacher shifts in her framing of instruction, as well as the frequency
in which she shifts between frames, might serve to be a more productive way to think about a learning progression
in attending to and responding  to  student thinking. Hence, a learning progression in this dimension might consider
the degree to which a teacher is able to move flexibility between frames in-the-moment as different students' ideas
emerge through discussion.
        From a research perspective, framing appears to be a useful construct to help make sense of the ways Mrs.
Miller attends and responds     to her students thinking.     Such a  construct   allows us to move   from just  describing
observable classroom activity to positing reasons for why she might be attending and responding in specific ways at
different times during instruction. Furthermore, thinking of framing in terms of activation of specific resources
provides a means to consider the possible explanatory mechanisms underlying that activity.

Endnotes
(1) The work described in this paper was supported by National Science Foundation grant 0732233, "Learning Progressions for
    Scientific Inquiry: A Model Implementation in the Context of Energy."

References
Bateson, G. (1972). A Theory of Play and Fantasy (Originally published 1954). In G. Bateson (Ed.), Steps to an
        ecology of mind; collected essays in anthropology, psychiatry, evolution, and epistemology (pp. xxvii, 545
        p.) San Francisco: Chandler Pub. Co.
Black, P. & Wiliam, D.    (1998).    Inside the Black Box:       Raising Standards Through Classroom Assessment. Phi
        Delta Kappan, 80, 139-148.
Goffman, E. (1986). Frame Analysis: An essay on the organization of experience. New York: Northeastern
        University Press.
Hammer, D., Elby, A., Scherr, R. E., & Redish, E. F. (2005). Resources, framing, and transfer.           In J. Mestre (Ed.),
        Transfer   of  learning    from a    modern   multidisciplinary    perspective   (pp. 89-120).    Greenwich,  CT:
        Information Age Publishing.
Levin, D. M. (2008). What secondary science teachers pay attention to in the classroom: Situating teaching in
        institutional and social systems. (Doctoral dissertation, University of Maryland, 2008)
Levin, D. M., Hammer, D. & Coffey, J. E. (2009). Novice Teachers' attention to student thinking.                Journal of
        Teacher Education, 60: 142-154.
NRC.   (2000). Inquiry  and     the national   science education     standards:    A   guide  for teaching  and    learning.
        Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
NRC. (2001). Classroom assessment and the National Science Education Standards. Washington, DC: Committee
        on Classroom Assessment and the National Science Education Standards.
Mehan, H. (1979). Learning lessons: Social organization in the classroom.          Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University
        Press, 1979.
Redish, E. F. (2004). A theoretical framework for physics education research:            Modeling student thinking. In E.
        Redish, C. Tarsitani & M. Vicentini (Eds.), Proceedings of the Enrico Fermi Summer School, Course
        CLVI: Italian Physical Society.
Scherr, R. E., & Hammer, D. (2009). Student behavior and epistemological framing: Examples from collaborative
        active-learning activities in physics. Cognition and Instruction, 27(2), 147-174.
Tannen, D. (1993). Framing in Discourse. New York: Oxford University Press.
Thompson,  J., Braaten,   M.,   Windschitl,  M.  (2009).   Learning   progression  as  vision  tools for  advancing novice
        teachers' pedagogical performance.       Paper presented for LeaPS Conference, Iowa       City, June 2009.

                                                       152     ISLS
