                                              ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 2

Adaptive human guidance of computer-mediated group work
Baruch Schwarz (organizer, chair), Hebrew University of Jerusalem, msschwar@mscc.huji.ac.il
               Christine Wang & Ming M. Chiu, State University of New York at Buffalo,
                                    {wangxc, mingchiu}@buffalo.edu
               Cynthia Carter Ching, University of California at Davis, ccching@ucdavis.edu
 Erin Walker and Kenneth Koedinger, Carnegie Mellon University, {erinwalk, koedinger}@cmu.edu
               Nikol Rummel, University of Freiburg, rummel@psychologie.uni-freiburg.de
            Christa S. C. Asterhan (organizer), LRDC, Pittsburgh, asterhan@pitt.edu
                  Michael Baker, CNRS Paris, michael.baker@telecom-paristech.fr
       Annemarie Palincsar (Discussant), University of Michigan, annemari@umich.edu.

Symposium overview
       Many     studies  have  shown     that  small-group    work     can  have   positive  effects  on   student
achievement, especially compared to other forms of instruction that involve less peer interaction (e.g.,
O'Donnell, 2006). However, learners may not benefit as much as they could, because they often fail to
spontaneously     engage  in productive    forms    of  interaction and   dialogue (Fischer,   Kollar,  Haake  &
Mandl, 2007). An expert teacher or tutor monitoring group progress and providing support in real time
has been found to significantly improve group productivity (see Webb, 2009, for a recent review on
guidance    of collaborative  group   work).   In  this symposium,     we  focus   on human    guidance    directly
provided by a teacher during (1) small group discussion, and (2) scripted through assigning the role of
tutor  and  tutee in dyadic  collaboration    (also  called peer   tutoring).  For example,  in  teacher-guided,
small-group discussion, Chiu (2004) has shown that the explicitness of teacher's content-specific help
was negatively related to students being on task immediately after the teacher's intervention, and to
group's performance on that problem. Providing low levels of help content, and issuing few directives
seemed to benefit student performance. Chiu showed that beyond the kinds of interventions teachers
undertook,   a  key  element   in  determining    the  effectiveness   of teacher  interventions is  whether   the
teacher's help is tied to students' ideas (see also Meloth and Deering, 1999 for similar insights). As
claimed by Yackel (2002), however, such an adaptive behavior task is extremely complex for teachers,
especially since they have to closely monitor group and individual progress.
       Peer tutoring has also been found as productive. For example, in reciprocal teaching (Brown &
Palincsar, 1989; Palincsar & Herrenkohl, 1999), students were trained to carry out certain strategies
designed   to  their improve   comprehension      of  their texts. Fuchs   and colleagues   (Fuchs   et al, 1997)
studied   tutors-students   trained   to   give   highly    elaborated    conceptual  rather   than   algorithmic
explanations helped in promoting high-level discourse. Reflecting on the important activity of the help
receiver,  King   (1999)   trained tutors  to  ask   questions  designed   to  encourage  the   tutee to   provide
explanations, to ask further questions to push the tutee to elaborate upon or justify their explanations as
well as to correct incomplete or incorrect explanations. All these experiments led to overall beneficial
effects but the contingency of the help given by the tutor to the tutee, its adaptive character, is crucial
but not easily reached.
       On-line learning environments open new perspectives for guiding both small-group discussion
and peer tutoring. The tools embedded in computer software may enable the teacher/tutor to monitor
and evaluate group and individual processes more accurately, and as a result provide support that is
contingent upon the learners' needs. However, it is questionable whether the positive results obtained
in face-to-face   settings are transferable    in the   guidance   of  small  groups  or individuals    in on-line
environments. On-line guidance of individuals or small groups is then a new enterprise.
       The  four   presentations   in this symposium      focus  on  the  effectiveness  of guided   small  group
discussion and peer tutoring and on their adaptive character. We will describe moderation and tutoring
strategies, the   unfolding  interaction   between    moderator    and group   (members),   the effectiveness  of
certain prompts and strategies over others, and, for on-line group work, ways to support the teacher or
tutor. The  first presentation    focuses  on  face-to-face   peer  tutoring.  It proposes   a  new   quantitative
methodology to study the reciprocal relation between the actions of the tutor/teacher/moderator, on the
one hand, and of the tutee/small-group, on the other. They show how this new methodology may be
used to gain new insights into the way both sides of the interaction mutually influence each other's
actions. The three other presentations concern on-line group work and show indeed that peer tutors can
be effectively supported by computer software to become more adaptive to their peer tutees' needs
(Walker,    Koedinger   &   Rummel),     that moderators    can    adaptively  moderate  multiple    synchronous
discussions    (Schwarz  &   Asterhan),    and  that   teachers can   cope  with  students'  heteroglossia  in e-
discussions on socio-scientific issues (Baker).

                                                  149   ·  © ISLS
                                           ICLS 2010     ·   Volume 2

Statistical Discourse Analysis of Young Children's Peer Tutoring at
Computers
Christine Wang, Ming Ming Chiu & Cynthia Carter Ching

       Past studies have shown that active participation is essential for peer tutoring and collaboration
that successfully yields subsequent individual learning gains (e.g., Mackie, 1983; Gauvain & Rogoff,
1989). Yet these studies are lacking in two ways:          (1) excessive focus on tutor actions can limit our
understanding of the tutees' contributions (Chi, Siler, & Jeong, 2004); and (2) understudied sequential
mechanisms between early actions and later actions of tutors and tutees within and across peer tutoring
sessions   may limit  our understanding    of moment-by-moment           tutoring   dynamics     (Ellis  &   Gauvain,
1992). These   challenges  become     compounded       when  we    look  at   young     children as   a peer  tutoring
population, because, compared to studies of older populations, the limited indicators of participation
(often verbal  expression  of   new ideas  or  disagreement,      Roscoe     &  Chi,    in press) are   not  sensitive
enough to capture younger children's emerging (and sometimes effective) tutoring processes (Cooper,
Ayers-Lopez, & Marquis, 1982).
       The purposes of this study are to address these limitations in the existing literature, to understand
young tutors and tutees' mutual and sequential influence on each other's participation while engaged in
computer tasks, and to investigate what other kinds of non-verbal indicators of engagement would be
effective for this population. We focused on two one-on-one tutoring sessions, one for each of two
groups consisting of a first-grader one kindergartner.        The task was for the first grader to teach the
kindergarteners to use the SimpleText computer program. Using statistical discourse analysis (SDA,
Chiu   &   Khoo, 2005),   we    analyzed the  videotaped     behavior    sequences      of  a  first-grader  (Nancy)
teaching   two kindergartners   (Calvin,   Ellen)   to use   the  SimpleText     program     during   469   transcript
conversation turns. Each conversation turn was coded for the variables used in the model (see Figures 1
and 2), which showed high inter-coder reliability (Krippendorff's ! [2004]).
       Unlike ordinary least squares regressions, SDA addresses the difficulties of nested data, discrete
outcomes, and serial correlation during analysis of group processes at the conversation turn level. SDA
identifies watersheds  (breakpoints)   and    models     discrete   outcomes,    time    period  differences,  serial
correlation, and direct and indirect effects.
       Pyij=p(Yyij=1|Calvin,b01)=F(by00+fy0j+by01Calvin) (1)
       The probability (Pyij ) that the vector of y tutee outcome variables Yyij occurs at turn i of time
period j is the expected value of Yyij via the Logit link function (F) of the overall mean by00, the time
period deviations (fy0j), and each variable (e.g., Calvin).
       Pyij=F(by00+fy0j+by01Calvin+!"#yujUyij+byvjVy(i-1)j+"yvjVy(i-2)j) (2)
       Current   (U)  and  previous    speaker    variables   (Vy(i-1)j,  Vy(i-2)j) were    entered     via a  vector
autoregression (see Figures; Kennedy, 2004). These analyses were then applied to the parallel tutor
outcome variables.

Results
       The tutor and the tutees generally gazed on-task (89%; 80%, respectively) and were active (81%,
61%). Being "active" was defined as talking, using the computer, or pointing.                 The tutor contributed
more ideas (53% vs. 17%) and displayed positive emotion more often (10% vs. 5%).                        Locations of
artifacts  (mouse,   keyboard),  tutor   behaviors,    and   tutee  behaviors       all influenced      one  another's
participation (see Figures). The tutees were more active when the mouse or keyboard was closer to
them.  While   tutor commands    increased    tutee activity,  tutor  disagreement       stifled  it.   However, the
explanatory models differed substantially for each tutee. Results also suggest that tutor actions might
have  stronger effects and  be   more  important    when     tutees are  less  engaged     or  more   passive. More
important, tutee differences altered interaction dynamics, even with the same tutor on the same task.
The  keyboard    location and   tutee behaviors     had    similar  effects   on    the tutor's  behaviors    such  as
disagreement, on-task gaze, actions and emotional displays.
       Sequential effects were also noted. For example, tutee disagreements sharply increased tutor
disagreements. After the tutee gazed on-task (­1), the tutor was more likely to express a new idea,
suggesting that the tutor checked for joint attention before expressing a new idea.             This result suggests
that young tutors attend to one another's engagement more subtly than shown in previous research.
Tutee new ideas did not immediately beget further new ideas, suggesting that the tutor might have
spent time processing the tutee's new ideas.
       There   are several contributions    that  we     see from    this    early  exploratory    work.    First, the
multidimensional     indicators of  active participation     (verbal,    non-verbal,    computer-related      actions,
emotions) provided many ways to study interaction during peer tutoring. Second, we expanded the
tutoring  explanatory  mechanism    by   showing    how    tutees   influence    tutors    and  how   they   mutually

                                                150    ·  © ISLS
                                           ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 2

interact. The  tutor's   different tutoring dynamics     with  different tutees highlight   how  tutoring
mechanisms   can differ   across   working pairs. Future   research can  illuminate how tutor differences
influence tutoring dynamics. Third, the statistical discourse analysis systematically shows how recent
actions affect subsequent actions at the micro-level and suggests future applications at the macro-level
to address  temporal   issues. This study   suggests  that online moderators  and   online students would
likewise mutually influence one another, and that online artifacts can also play a substantial role in
directing  attention and  influencing participation.  Specifically,  online moderators  can  benefit from
access to online students' computer actions and video displays of their non-verbal behaviors to adapt to
their needs accordingly.

Figure 1. Model predicting 4 types of tutee participation behaviors. All arrows indicate significant
effects Solid arrows indicate positive effects and dashed lines indicate negative effects. Thick arrows
indicate larger effects.

Figure 2. Model predicting 7 types of tutor behaviors. All arrows indicate significant effects Solid
arrows indicate positive effects, dashed lines, negative effects. Thick arrows indicate larger effects.

Automated Adaptive Support for Peer Tutoring in High-School Mathematics
Erin Walker, Nikol Rummel and Kenneth R. Koedinger

Reciprocal peer tutoring is a type of small-group work where two students of similar abilities take turns
tutoring each other. It has been shown to improve domain learning of students involved (Fantuzzo,

                                              151   ·  © ISLS
                                            ICLS 2010   ·   Volume 2

Riggio, Connelly & Dimeff, 1989), most likely because students who tutor other students benefit from
the reflective and elaborative processes involved in observing problem-solving steps and providing
explanations (Roscoe & Chi, 2007). However, for students to benefit from the tutee role they must
receive help that is conceptual (Fuchs et al., 1997) and that gives the tutee correct information about the
domain (Webb, 1989). Many previous efforts at assisting peer tutoring have focused on structuring the
tutoring process. For example, King, Staffieri, and Adelgais (1998) attempt to increase the conceptual
content of the interaction by having students ask each other a series of questions at different levels of
depth, and Fantuzzo et al. (1989) support the correctness of the interaction by having students compare
tutee  problem-solving  steps   to  problem   solutions.    While   these approaches   have     been  successful,
adaptive support for the peer tutor may be an improvement over fixed support in two ways. First, it
would be able to provide individually tailored interaction support, for example by detecting when peer
tutor  help was  not  conceptual    enough,   and giving   relevant  feedback. Second,    it would    be able   to
provide context-sensitive domain support, adaptively alerting peer tutors to tutee errors rather than
simply providing a resource for peer tutors to consult.
         We have developed adaptive support for peer tutoring by augmenting the Cognitive Tutor
Algebra (Koedinger, Anderson, Hadley, & Mark, 1997), a successful intelligent tutoring system for
individual  learning, with   peer  tutoring activities. In  our  extended   system,   students  work   on literal
equation solving problems, where they are given a prompt like, "Solve for x" and an equation like "ax
+ by = c". Each student gets the opportunity to tutor a partner by observing the tutee solve problems,
marking problem steps, and giving help in a chat window. We provided peer tutors with two types of
adaptive support: one which assisted the peer tutor in giving correct help (domain component), and one
which  assisted  the  peer  tutor  in  giving conceptual    help  (interaction component).      For  the domain
component, we adapted the hints and feedback already present in the Cognitive Tutor Algebra for a
collaborative context. As tutees took steps in the problem, peer tutors were asked to mark the tutees'
steps as correct or incorrect. If peer tutors made an error (e.g., marked a "correct" step "incorrect"), the
system indicated the error by highlighting it in the interface, and then gave peer tutors the domain
feedback students would typically receive if they were solving the problem individually, along with a
prompt to communicate it to the tutee (see Figure 1a). As tutees solved the problem, the peer tutor
could request a domain hint from the computer tutor at any time. While this domain help provided peer
tutors with  information    on which   problem-solving     steps were  correct  and   why,   it did  not provide
explicit guidance  or  feedback     on how    students  should   help their  partner, and    thus  we  added    an
additional interaction component to the assistance. Prior to composing a chat message, students were
asked to select a sentence classifier labeling their message as a prompt ("Ask Why"), error feedback
("Explain Why Wrong"), hint ("Give Hint"), or explanation ("Explain What Next"). Upon submitting
the help,   an  intelligent tutor  for collaboration    used   a combination   of the   self-classification,    an
automated assessment of the help quality, and the domain context (whether tutees had just made an
error or not) to make an estimate of the level of student help-giving skills. Based on this assessment,
the computer gave context-sensitive reflective prompts in the chat window that were seen by both the
peer tutor and the tutee (see Figure 1b). We expected that the adaptive support would lead peer tutors to
give more correct help by alerting them to the domain errors that they made, and lead peer tutors to
give more conceptual help by alerting them when more conceptual help would be necessary.
         We conducted a classroom study with 77 participants comparing two conditions: adaptive
assistance (40 participants) and fixed assistance (37 participants). In the fixed condition, students had
access to problem solutions and tips for good collaboration. The support contained the same content as
the assistance  in the adaptive    condition  but  did  not vary  based   on student  actions.   We    found that
adaptive support did indeed have a positive effect on student help. When peer tutors made marking
errors, they corrected their error significantly more often in the adaptive than in the fixed condition
(adaptive M = 65.8%, SD = 26.6%; fixed M = 7.5%, SD = 14.6%; F(1,69 = 127.6), p < 0.001). Further,
students gave significantly more conceptual help in the adaptive than in the fixed condition (adaptive M
= 2.58, SD = 2.75; fixed M = 1.38, SD = 2.14; Mann-Whitney U = 525.5; p = 0.05). Overall, it
appeared that adaptive support was more effective than fixed support at improving student interaction.
         We further examined why the adaptive support may have had a positive effect on student
interaction using qualitative observations. Interestingly, when students received reflective prompts they
would rarely acknowledge them, and often would not appear to incorporate the advice into their next
utterance. This behavior was in stark contrast to their use of domain hints given by the computer, which
were often immediately repeated to tutees in a form stripped of conceptual content (e.g., tutors might
receive the hint "subtract x to get it to the other side", and simply say "subtract x"). This pattern of
behaviors   suggested  either  that students  perceived    domain   help  as more   integral    to the task  than
interaction help,  or that  they  perceived   it as easier  to implement    than interaction    help.  Further, it
seemed that students felt free to ignore advice from a computer in a way that they would not from a
human    being, potentially   because  our   computer    agent   was  not as   responsive  to   specific student

                                                 152  ·  © ISLS
                                           ICLS 2010   ·    Volume 2

utterances as  a  human   would   be. Given  these  observations,    it is interesting  that student    behavior
improved   in the adaptive   condition   compared   to the   fixed condition.  One    factor that  qualitatively
appeared to mediate this process was student feelings of accountability for their partner's learning. It is
possible that even the limited responsiveness of the computer to the peer tutor behavior, in combination
with the reflective prompts being posted publicly (i.e., in view of the peer tutee), triggered feelings of
social responsibility which led peer tutors to give help more thoughtfully. Accountability also played a
role in how peer tutors attributed the help they give tutees. Peer tutors would occasionally frame their
help as coming from the computer (e.g., "it wants you to subtract x"), placing peer tutors and tutees in
the position of interpreting the help together. Allowing peer tutors to take on a novice role compared to
the computer may be a secondary advantage of the assistance provided. In future work, we hope to
explore  why  adaptive   support  has  a beneficial  effect  on student    interaction, and  what   features of
adaptive support augment this effect.

Figure 1. The adaptive domain support and adaptive interaction support given to collaborating students.

Human guidance of synchronous discussions: A nascent school practice
Baruch Schwarz and Christa Asterhan

       Although small group methods have been shown to have positive effects on student achievement
(e.g., O'Donnell,  2006;  Slavin, 1995),   simply  placing   students   in small  groups   does   not guarantee
learning gains which depend on the quality and depth of discussions, such as the extent to which
students give/receive help, share knowledge, build on each others' ideas and justify their own, and the
extent  to which   students   recognize   and resolve    contradictions    between    their  own    and  others'
perspectives (Asterhan & Schwarz, 2009; Webb & Palincsar, 1996). Teachers should then help to avoid
detrimental practices and to facilitate beneficial ones. However, little is known about how the teacher
can foster  small  group    learning.  Influencing   student   interaction    through   teacher's  discourse is
particularly underrepresented in research (Webb, 2009). Several studies (e.g., Chiu, 2004; Webb, 2009)
have found that beyond the question of what type of teacher prompts are more effective (direct or
indirect, explicit or implicit) , a key element in determining the effectiveness of teacher interventions is
whether the teacher's help is tied to students' ideas.
       Due to the complexity of this task (Yackel, 2002), some researchers have preferred to adopt a
phenomenological approach to observe how extraordinary teachers facilitate group learning in specific
contexts (e.g., Hmelo and Barrows, 2006, 2008 in a PBL context; and Zhan, Scardamalia, Reeve and
Messina,   2009,  for long-term  classroom  learning     in small  groups   with  Knowledge     Forum).  These
studies show that small-group facilitation is complex but possible and open new research directions: (a)
How can 'normal' teachers face the challenge of ascertaining student thinking during small group work
to base their interventions? (b) How can `regular' teachers successfully monitor and support several
discussion  groups at   the same  time?  Our  goal  is   to show   that it is possible  to  provide   a suitable
environment that tackles these challenges in the context of a program for fostering critical thinking
through collective argumentation.
       Overall, software tools have limited ability to provide adaptive scaffolding (Puntambekar &
Hübscher,   2005). Collaborative   scripts are not     adaptive   either.  In the  context   of a-synchronous
discussions in on-line group work in post-secondary e-courses, guidance has been studied and referred
to as e-moderation (e.g., Salmon (2004). Human guidance of synchronous group discussions seems to
be  more   appropriate, but has  not  been sufficiently  studied   yet.   Studying guidance     of synchronous
discussions is then a new adventure but two ideas of e-moderation of e-courses should be retained:

                                               153  ·  © ISLS
                                                                                                                Automatically updated miniature awareness tools
                                          ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 2

Moderators   should not   be intrusive but  be caring   about  their students. The  balance  between  non-
intrusiveness and care is difficult to find, since moderation should be based on ascertaining current
group thinking.

Design research for enabling e-moderation of multiple synchronous discussions
      As our goal concerns facilitating critical reasoning through synchronous group interaction, the
moderator is committed (a) to participation, (b) to argumentation, and (c) to the other. Moderating
commitment to argumentation is particularly demanding since it means both monitoring argumentative
moves and following the ideas developed along with these argumentative moves, especially in classes,
that is, in multiple synchronous discussions. We undertook a design research program that led to the
construction  of the  Moderator's    Interface,  placed   within  a  multifunctional  environment    called
Argunaut. Figure 1 shows some of the most important functionalities of the Argunaut Moderator's
Interface (AMI).

Figure 1. Argunaut's Moderator's Interface and its main features.

         Choice from different detailed awareness displays to be enlarged in the main frame:

  (a) Discussion graph    (b) User activity    (c) Chat table         (d) Shape use         (e) Group relations

 User and group
 selection, view on
 active, online users

 Control panel for
 sending remote
 messages to (selected)
 discussants

 Pop-up messages as
 seen from discussant

         In this presentation, we will report on a case study in which one teacher, Rhonna, moderated
four groups of three university students discussing societal dilemmas. We will answer three questions.
The two first are: (1) What are the strategies of e-moderation in parallel synchronous discussions? and
(2) what are the AMI's functionalities that mediate the enactment of these functionalities? The AMI, is
central in all the strategies deployed by Rhonna in her multiple discussions. It enables passing from one
group to another   one  instantaneously. This   possibility combined     with  the persistence of previous
contributions confers  to AMI   the potentiality   to navigate across  multiple  synchronous   discussions.
Rhonna begins by (a) observing contributions without intervening though hovering over postings to
quickly read their content in the Discussion Graph tab, or scrolling up and down the Chat Table tab,
help grasping the development of ideas. This observation leads her to identify the development of ideas
and the contribution of students in this development. Also, the role of each participant could be made
salient through selecting a discussant in the participant list made his/her contribution visible in the
Discussion Graph or in the Table Chat. The Ontology Use and the Group relations tab were mostly
used to get an impression about overall group functioning.
         An   interesting strategy developed    by  Rhonna    is (b)  to include   students in their group
discussion through private care, that is, without the other discussants being aware of that private care:

                                               154  ·  © ISLS
                                               ICLS 2010     ·  Volume 2

she first notices that one student did not participate, and then in her successive visits to the group of
this student,  to  monitor   her   participation.     Rhonna    uses   private   channels   of communication      with
annotations attached to specific contributions. She finally convinces her to participate because two
channels, public and private are open at the same time. A third general strategy is to encourage groups
to open new perspectives through generic interventions. This is made possible because Rhonna is able
to monitor the development of one discussion at a glance with the help of awareness tools through the
Ontology use tab that shows the distribution of connecting links, and suggests for example that there is
too much agreement in a particular discussion. The Remote Control Panel enables Rhonna to send pop-
up messages to the group as whole to prompt them to consider additional perspectives.                    She also (d)
progressively helps in deepening the discussion space either by using generic interventions or through
specific hints. These monitoring actions are once more achieved through the Discussion Graph and the
Chat Table. The Chat Table is particularly handy to check ideas with dexterity. Rhonna also uses the
distribution of links to see that links are almost uniformly black, indicating a lack of distinctive and
different  standpoints.   She  uses   the    remote   control   panel     through  alternation   and combination    of
highlighting, using pop-ups and annotations to encourage the deepening of the discussion space. She
draw   the  discussants'    attention     to specific     contributions    or    groups of   contributions   (through
highlighting); she refers to a specific contribution through a question or a challenge (with annotations);
and she points at a general lack of the discussion (with the pop-ups). She also (e) socializes students
that include themselves in discussions, of course in the public sphere, without patronizing but rather in
indirect ways: After having identified that one student is willing to participate in the discussion but that
the  others have   not    referred to her    so far,   Rhonna    initializes   private  communication    with  her  to
encourage her and public communication to encourage the discussants to refer to each other. This
combination enables the socialization of an out-group discussant into the discussion, in a delicate way
and by avoiding any patronizing. Rhonna also (f) puts public focus on specific issues (substantial or
problematic). The power of this strategy depends on the possibility to advertise it. The Remote Control
Panel enables an array of moderator's interventions to catch the eye of the group persistently, until
discussants catch the bait.
          In the presentation we will also answer a third and central question: Do e-moderation actions
have some impact on the flow of synchronous discussions?                   We will show that to some extent, the
moderator   could   capitalize  on    the    tools provided     by    the system   and   use   them  to  evaluate  the
effectiveness   of her    past actions.      We    will   conclude    that   the adaptive   facilitation of   multiple
synchronous discussions is possible in classrooms. We will show then that this nascent practice with
help in the organization of learning settings in classrooms that preserve group collaboration but give to
the teacher a central role in moderating multiple discussions towards productive interactions.

Buds, flowers and fruit: potentialities for guidance in collaborative
argumentation-based learning
Michael Baker

       The title of this presentation is inspired from the following passage of Vygotsky's works, justly
famous for the power of its imagery: "The zone of proximal development defines those functions that
have not yet matured but are in the process of maturation, functions that will mature tomorrow but are
currently   in an  embryonic       state. These    functions    could     be termed    the "buds"    or  "flowers"  of
development rather than the "fruits" of development." (Vygotsky, 1935/1978, p. 86). Bruner's seminal
work   (Wood,   Bruner    &  Ross,    1976)   defined     types    of tutorial   interventions that  could   guide (or
"scaffold") and facilitate the processes whereby such buds could come to fruition. The relevant use of
scaffolding    strategies required  the   adult    to be  able  to    identify features of   the individual  learners'
problem-solving    behavior,   such    as    focusing     on   the problem,      progression   towards   the solution,
motivation and emotion. The growing emphasis in the Learning Sciences research community on the
study of collaborative learning in small groups raises problems for adaptive guidance of such groups of
a quite different order of complexity from those encountered in individual learning. Whilst teachers
guiding   individual learning      need   to  pay     attention to    problem-solving    in  specific   domains,   and
individuals' emotional states, in group interactions, if there genuinely is collaboration, then problem
solutions emerge from the interaction via processes that in some sense go beyond the sum of individual
contributions. In many countries, teachers are simply not trained to be aware of and to identify the
"buds" of potentially productive and constructive forms of interaction (Miyake, 1986; Baker, 1999).
       In this paper, I begin by discussing potentially constructive forms of interaction, for a specific
genre:  argumentative      interactions,     arising  during    collaborative    problem-solving     in  science,  and
pedagogically-oriented debates concerning societal questions. This focus is motivated by an extensive
and growing literature on the role of argumentative interactions in the co-construction of knowledge

                                                      155  ·  © ISLS
                                            ICLS 2010    ·  Volume 2

(e.g. Coirier & Andriessen, 1999; Kuhn & Udell, 2003; Leitão, 2000; Andriessen, Baker & Suthers,
2003; Schwarz & Glassner, 2003; Muller-Mirza & Perret-Clermont, 2009). Within this research, three
main families of such processes have been described. The first set of potentially constructive processes
concerns changes in students' degrees of epistemic commitment ("change in view", Harman, 1986)
towards the problem solutions that are proposed (for example, changes in belief and/or acceptance).
The way that students' views change turns out to be radically different according to whether they `care'
or not about what is being discussed; in other words, whether the topic involves their value and idea
systems (such as in the case of discussing human cloning) or does not (such as in working on the
concept of energy in physics). In one case, students are often led to strengthen and deepen their views,
as a result of argumentation; in the other, they proceed by elimination of flawed proposals (Baker,
2003). The second set of processes involves knowledge negotiation, building or co-construction of new
solutions,  during argumentation    itself, or  as a   means  of building   new   compromises.     The  third set
involves  cognitive-linguistic  operations   performed     on fundamental     concepts at  stake  in the debate,
distinguishing concepts from each other (by "argument by dissociation"), and deepening the meaning
of the questions being debated (Baker, 2002).
       Such complex and subtle potentially constructive interactive processes are difficult for teachers
-- as for researchers -- to identify. Indeed, teachers may need to set their understanding of students'
interactive learning processes within a broader understanding of collaborative learning, whereby their
guidance   interventions as   moderators    of  students'   debates   operate  on at   least three   dimensions:
effective collaboration (such as degree of shared participation, listening and uptake), moderation of the
debate itself (adhesion to debate ground rules, coherence, progression towards a clear outcome) and
providing or verifying taught knowledge. The problem of teachers' identification of dialogical learning
potentials is further compounded by the prevalent heteroglossia (Bakhtine, 1929/1977) of students'
discourses, which combine elements of school-based and everyday genres (Wertsch, 1991). This means
that (to take an authentic example), although students' discussion of wearing makeup and doing body-
piercing may not at first glance appear to provide an opportunity for adaptive guidance, it may do so if
it is seen  in the context   of a discussion    of what    Nature is,  in a   debate about   human   cloning  or
genetically-modified organisms (Baker, 2009).
       In  the second   part of the presentation,    I shall  present analyses  of   guidance  interventions   of
teachers who are moderating students' synchronous on-line pedagogical debates (in the domains of
physics   problem-solving,   and  water     preservation   policies), together  with   the   precise  interactive
contexts in which the interventions are produced. These will then be compared with the buds that could
have  been  identified,  had  the teachers   been  aware     of them.  The    presentation   will conclude  with
reflections on  how   to train  teachers    to identify  opportunities    for adaptive  guidance     of students'
pedagogical debates.

Selected References
Baker, M. J. (2003). Computer-mediated Argumentative interactions for the co-elaboration of scientific
    notions. In J. Andriessen, M.J. Baker & D. Suthers (Eds.) Arguing to Learn: Confronting
    Cognitions in Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning environments, pp. 47-78. Dordrecht,
    The Netherlands : Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Baker, M.J. (2009). Argumentative interactions and the social construction of knowledge. In N. Muller
    Mirza & A.-N. Perret-Clermont (Eds.) Argumentation and Education: Theoretical Foundations and
    Practices, pp. 127-144.   New York: Springer.
Chiu, M. M., & Khoo, L. (2005). A new method for analyzing sequential processes. Small Group
    Research, 36, 600-631.
Hmelo, C. & Barrows, H. S. (2008). Facilitating collaborative knowledge building. The Journal of the
    Learning Sciences, 26, 48-94.
Koedinger, K., Anderson, J., Hadley, W., & Mark, M. (1997). Intelligent tutoring goes to school in the
    big city. International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education, 8, 30-43.
Roscoe, R. D. & Chi, M. (2007). Understanding tutor learning: Knowledge-building and knowledge-
    telling in peer tutors' explanations and questions. Review of Educational Research, 77(4), 534-574.
Schwarz, B. & Glassner, A. (2003). The blind and the paralytic: fostering argumentation in social and
    scientific domains. In J. Andriessen, M. Baker, and D. Suthers (Eds.) Arguing to Learn:
    Confronting Cognitions in Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning environments, pp. 227-
    260. Dordrecht : Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Wood, D., Bruner, J., & Ross, G. (1976). The role of tutoring in problem solving. Journal of child
    psychology and psychiatry, 17, 89-100.

                                                 156   ·  © ISLS
