                                                 ICLS 2010     ·  Volume 1

  The Influence of Presentation Format and Subject Complexity
                     on Learning from Illustrated Texts in Biology
                   Mareike Florax, Rolf Ploetzner, University of Education, Freiburg, Germany
                            mareike.florax@ph-freiburg.de, rolf.ploetzner@ph-freiburg.de

         Abstract: In an experimental study, we investigated how learning from illustrated texts is
         influenced by presentation format (separated format, integrated format, and active integration)
         and subject complexity (low, medium and high complexity). Subject matter were biochemical
         processes    of signal  transmission   in  the   human   nervous     system. A  total of  180   students
         participated in the study. Results show that the active integration of texts and illustrations can
         improve the comprehension of highly complex material, whereas it can have inhibiting effects
         for less complex material. The results are discussed with respect to the process requirements
         associated with the different presentation formats.

Introduction
Learning material often consists of different representations. A very common combination of representations is
made up of expository texts and illustrations. The beneficial effects of combining texts and illustrations may be
attributed to the fact that they complement each other with regard to their content (e.g., Ainsworth, Bibby &
Wood, 2002), differ with regard to their computational efficiency (e.g., Larkin & Simon, 1987), or constrain
each other's interpretations (Ainsworth, 2006). Although beneficial effects of learning from combinations of
texts and illustrations have been frequently observed (e.g., Levie & Lentz, 1982), research has also identified
certain difficulties  that  learners  may  encounter    when     processing   such combinations.   While   some   of  these
difficulties seem to be related to the design of the learning material, others seem to be intrinsic to the learners
such as their prior knowledge and learning preferences. For instance, it is assumed that the design of learning
material may    pose    unnecessary   high processing     demands     on  the  learners which,  in  turn, can  lead   to an
overburdening   of   their  cognitive capacities   (e.g., Sweller,    van Merriënboer    & Paas,   1998). With  regard   to
difficulties  intrinsic to  the learners, research  indicates    that particularly those  learners  with  only little prior
knowledge may experience difficulties in relating different representations to each other. This seems to be
especially true if the learning material is of high complexity (e.g., Bodemer & Faust, 2006; Kozma, 2003).
Research also indicates that many learners engage in rather shallow information processing when learning from
texts and illustrations (e.g., Peek, 1993).
         In all the cases mentioned, learners do not take advantage of the synergetic effects that texts and
illustrations may  provide      them and,  as a  consequence,     fail  to  construct a  coherent  mental   model   of   the
information presented (cf. Ainsworth et al., 2002). In order to be able to fully exploit the potential of combined
texts and illustrations, learners seem to need instructional support (cf. Ainsworth et al., 2002; Bodemer et al.,
2004; Hegarty, Carpenter & Just, 1991). At least two approaches aiming at such support can be distinguished.
One approach, the design-oriented approach, focuses on improving the design of learning material. A second
approach, the engagement-oriented approach, aims at inducing appropriate mental processes in the learners. In
three studies, Bodemer et al. (2004, 2005) demonstrated that learning can be improved by encouraging learners
to spatially integrate texts and illustrations by themselves. Because these studies revealed that higher learning
gains were associated with higher subject complexity, Bodemer et al. (2004, 2005) assumed that the higher the
subject complexity, the more advantageous is learning by integrating texts and illustrations. However, since
each study investigated learning in a different domain, the results of the three studies were difficult to compare.
         In this paper, we present an experimental study in which we varied the presentation format as well as
the subject complexity within the same domain of biology. We begin by outlining the theoretical assumptions
and empirical findings within the design-oriented and engagement-oriented approaches. The role of complexity
in learning from combined texts and illustrations is then explored. Thereafter, the experimental study and its
results are described and discussed.

The Design-Oriented Approach
Research on how to design combinations of texts and illustrations has been highly influenced by two theories:
Richard Mayer's Cognitive Theory of Multimedia Learning (CTML; Mayer, 2001, 2005) and John Sweller's
Cognitive Load Theory (CLT; Ayres & Sweller, 2005). CTML takes a process-oriented perspective on learning
from combined texts and illustrations. Based on Paivio´s (1986) dual coding theory, and the assumption that
human working memory is limited in its capacity (Baddeley, 2003), CTML postulates the following cognitive
processes    required   for successful    learning from    multimedia:      a) selecting  relevant  information   in  each
presentation,  b) organizing    the  selected information     in either   a verbal or a  pictorial mental  model,   and  c)
integrating the verbal and pictorial models as well as prior knowledge by means of mapping processes between

                                                      17    ·  © ISLS
                                                    ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

corresponding information (Mayer, 2005). Like other conceptualizations of learning from multimedia, CTML
considers the integration of verbal and pictorial information to be pivotal for constructing a mental model,
which in turn is considered to be important for deep understanding. On the basis of his theory, Mayer (2001)
advises   that texts  and   illustrations should    be presented  in  spatial proximity    rather   than spatially  separated.
Essentially,   it is  assumed   that  spatial proximity     facilitates the  mental integration     of textual and    pictorial
information. In numerous studies, Mayer and colleagues (e.g., Mayer, 1989; Moreno & Mayer, 1999) were able
to demonstrate that a spatially contiguous presentation format leads to more successful learning than does a
spatially separated presentation format. This empirical finding has been termed the spatial contiguity effect.
          As in Mayer's (2001) CTML, it is also assumed in the resource-oriented CLT that human working
memory    is   of limited   capacity  (e.g., Ayres   &  Sweller,   2005).   According   to  CLT,    three  different  types of
cognitive load may burden working memory during learning: (1) extraneous cognitive load, which results from
unnecessary cognitive processes induced by the inappropriate design of learning material; (2) intrinsic cognitive
load, which is imposed by subject complexity which, in turn, is determined by the interactivity of elements in
the learning material as well as the learners´ prior knowledge; and (3) germane cognitive load, which is related
to learning processes such as the construction of concepts and schemata (cf. Ayres & Sweller, 2005).
          For a long time, research on CLT has focused on reducing extraneous cognitive load by improving the
design  of  learning   material (van   Merriënboer      & Sweller,    2005).  For instance,   it is  assumed   that  texts and
illustrations  which    are spatially split  induce    unnecessary    processes such   as  visual   search processes.   These
processes contribute to extraneous cognitive load and may therefore impede learning. In contrast to Mayer's
(2001) CTML, CLT recommends not only to present texts and illustrations together in spatial proximity, but to
spatially  integrate   segments  of   the    texts into the  illustrations,  resulting  in  a so-called    integrated  format.
Envision, a text directly positioned above an illustration. From the perspective of CTML, this would correspond
to a spatially proximate presentation format because both the text and illustration are presented close to each
other. From the perspective of Sweller's CLT, however, this would still correspond to a spatially separated
presentation     format  because the   text   is   not integrated  into  the  illustration. Sweller    and  colleagues     have
demonstrated that an integrated format leads to more successful learning than a spatially separated format (e.g.,
Cerpa, Chandler & Sweller, 1996). They termed this empirical finding the split-attention effect. Research also
revealed that an integrated format is especially beneficial when the subject complexity is high (e.g., Pollock,
Chandler & Sweller, 2002; Ginns, 2006).
          A   further  design  principle   aimed    to  reduce  extraneous    cognitive load     and to  support   the mental
integration of verbal and pictorial information is to make the corresponding information in each presentation
explicit. This can be achieved by visual indicators such as colour-codes (e.g., Bodemer et al., 2004; Tabbers,
Martens & van Merriënboer, 2004), highlighting (e.g., Jamet, Gavota & Quaireau, 2008), or dynamic linking.
For example, van der Meij and de Jong (2006) found that learning from dynamically linked presentations is
especially beneficial when the subject complexity is high.
          Whether corresponding information is made explicit by spatial proximity or by visual indicators, in
both cases    it  is completely  up   to  the learners   as to  whether   or  not they  engage    in   the desired   selection,
organization, and integration processes. Although well-designed learning material may free the learners from
unnecessary cognitive processes, thereby making more cognitive capacity available for learning, it is unknown
to which degree learners actually take advantage of this capacity. Perhaps learning could be further improved by
systematically    encouraging   the   learners   to engage   in   the desired learning    processes.   Furthermore,    various
studies indicate that providing learners with well-designed learning material may even act to inhibit learning,
since some learners undervalue the complexity and difficulty of the learning material, and therefore exhibit only
shallow information processing (e.g., McNamara, Kintsch, Songer & Kintsch, 1996; Schnotz & Rasch, 2005).

The Engagement-Oriented Approach
In contrast to the design-oriented approach, the engagement-oriented approach encourages learners to more
actively  process    the information   presented.    Various   theories  of  learning,  especially   constructivist   theories,
emphasize that the learners' engagement is crucial to successful learning. For example, in Wittrock´s (1992)
theory of generative learning, it is assumed that learners do not passively take up and store information, rather
they actively search for and process information in order to construct knowledge. Learning thus takes place by
actively establishing relations between different pieces of information that are presented to the learners, as well
as by establishing relations between new information and prior knowledge. Accordingly, Wittrock's (1992)
theory implies that understanding depends on the mental processes actively carried out by the learners.
          Various methods have been developed in order to induce and support the learners' engagement in
active information processing. Two examples which have been proven to facilitate learning are the production
of self-explanations (e.g., Chi et al., 1989; Renkl, 2002) and the visualisation of information present in texts
(e.g., van Meter, Aleksic, Schwartz & Garner, 2006). Peek (1993) also recommends instructional interventions
which lead to an external and observable product. For instance, various instructions aim at inducing the relevant

                                                         18  ·  © ISLS
                                                    ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

learning processes by asking the learners to organize textual and pictorial components on the computer screen
(e.g., Bodemer et al., 2004).
          Bodemer et al. (2004, 2005) developed an instructional method which takes all mentioned aspects into
account. They termed this method active integration. Initially, learners were presented spatially separated texts
and illustrations on a computer screen. They were then asked to move segments of the text to their referential
areas in the illustration using the drag and drop method. After completing the task, the learners had constructed
a spatially integrated presentation format by themselves. In three experimental studies, Bodemer and colleagues
were able to demonstrate that learners who integrated texts and illustrations themselves outperformed learners
who were provided with a spatially integrated or a spatially separated presentation format (Bodemer et al., 2004;
2005; Bodemer & Faust, 2006).
          Because higher learning gains were attained with higher subject complexity in the studies of Bodemer
et al. (2004,   2005),   the authors   assumed   that  learning  by integrating    texts and illustrations  may  be    more
successful as the subject complexity increases. This assumption is in line with findings concerning the split-
attention effect (cf. Ginns, 2006): while learning from an integrated format is most beneficial if the subject
complexity is high, it leads to only small improvements if the subject complexity is low. However, because
learning encompassed a different subject domain (physics, statistics and mechanics) in each study of Bodemer
et al. (2004, 2005), the results of their studies were difficult to compare.
          In the following, we present an experimental study which investigates how presentation format and
subject complexity influence learning from combined texts and illustrations. In this study, subject complexity is
varied   systematically  within   the  same  subject  domain.    According     to Sweller and   Chandler  (1994),   subject
complexity denotes the number of interacting elements that have to be processed simultaneously by the learners.
Increases in complexity were achieved by successively adding interacting elements to the learning material.

Experiment

Design
Two    factors, each   with  three  variations, were   considered:    (1) presentation   format  of   combined  texts   and
illustrations (separated format, integrated format, active integration) and (2) subject complexity (low, medium,
high). Dependent variables were retention and comprehension of the learning material. The learners´ working
memory capacity was assessed and taken into account as a covariate. Furthermore, the learners´ spatial abilities
were also assessed and taken into account as a covariate. Because learning time was not fixed, it was recorded
as a further covariate.

Hypotheses
In accord  with   Bodemer     et  al. (2004, 2005),   we   expected   that active   integration facilitates learning   from
combined texts and illustrations more than learning from an integrated format. This hypothesis relies on the
assumption that active integration induces and supports the learners' engagement. Because such engagement
processes are more important with respect to comprehension than to retention, more substantial effects were
expected concerning comprehension. In accord with Ayres and Sweller (2005), as well as Mayer (2001), we
expected learning from an integrated format to be more beneficial than learning from a separated format; i.e., we
expected the split-attention effect. With regard to subject complexity, we expected active integration to be more
beneficial, the higher the subject complexity. More substantial effects of subject complexity were expected with
respect to comprehension than with respect to retention. These hypotheses rely on the assumption that during
learning  from   complex      material  learners    need more    encouragement      and  support   to systematically    and
comprehensively process the material.

Material
The subject domain was information processes of the human nervous system. Various biochemical processes
related to the transmission of signals between neurons were verbally described and graphically illustrated in
such   a way    that the texts and    illustrations complemented    each   other.  For  each group,   the computer-based
learning  material   consisted   of an  explanatory   text  and  an accompanying      illustration which  were  presented
together on a single computer screen. In order to systematically increase the subject complexity, interacting
textual and pictorial information was successively added to the material. Learning material of low complexity
addressed the development of resting potentials within the human nervous system (cf. Figure 1). Learning
material of medium complexity additionally described the development of action potentials. Processes involved
in resting potentials    and  those   involved  in  action potentials influence    each  other. Therefore,  the processes
described  in   the  material  of medium    complexity     did not  only   complement    the processes    described in  the
material of low complexity but the former interacted with the latter. Learning material of high complexity
additionally  described   processes    of inhibiting  action   potentials (cf. Figure  2) which,   again,   interacted with
processes described in the material of low and medium complexity.

                                                        19  ·  © ISLS
                                             ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

                    Figure 1. Learning material of low complexity in a separated format.

                  Figure 2. Learning material of high complexity with active integration.

       Figure 1 also shows an example of the separated format (SF). Each text segment and corresponding
part of the illustration were numbered according to the reading sequence. In the integrated format (IF), the text
segments were placed next to the corresponding parts of the illustration. Active integration (AI) began with a
separated format (cf. Figure 2); participants were then required to drag and drop the given text segments onto
the appropriate part of the illustration. After having arranged all text segments, participants received feedback. If
segments were placed incorrectly, the participants were given two opportunities to revise their integration. In the
end, the participants were presented with the correct integrated format.
       All participants received a short introductory text about the general structures and processes within the
human nervous  system. On the basis    of four multiple-choice    questions,  participants who did not properly
process the introductory text were excluded from the study; at least two of the the four questions had to be
answered correctly. To familiarize participants in the active integration group with dragging and dropping text
segments, they received an introduction to this functionality.
       A pre-test of the participants´ prior knowledge was made up of eight multiple-choice questions which
addressed the learning material. Three overlapping post-tests were constructed addressing respectively the low,
medium and high complex learning material. All post-tests were comprised of questions relating to retention
and comprehension. Both types of questions were constructed in such a way that the correct answers required
the mental combination of verbally and pictorially presented information. Whereas questions on retention asked
for the recall of information explicitly presented in the learning material, questions on comprehension demanded
the participants to draw inferences from the information presented. The post-test for low complex material
consisted of eight questions on retention and five questions on comprehension. The questions on retention were
identical to the questions used in the pre-test. The post-test for medium complex material was comprised of
eleven questions on retention and seven questions on comprehension. In the case of retention, five questions
were identical to questions of the post-test for low complex material and six questions were new. In the case of
comprehension, three questions were identical to questions on the post-test for low complex material and four
questions were new. The  post-test for high  complex     material  was   also comprised of  eleven questions on
retention and seven questions on comprehension. In the case of retention, seven questions were identical to

                                                  20  ·  © ISLS
                                                 ICLS 2010    ·  Volume 1

questions found on the post-test for medium complex material and four questions were new. In the case of
comprehension, five questions were identical to questions on the post-test for medium complex material and
two questions were new. Pre- and post-tests were administered on the computer. Each item answered correctly
was scored with one point.
          With respect  to   the covariates,   working    memory   capacity  was   assessed  by  means   of  the  subtest
"memorizing digits" from the Wilde Intelligence Test (Jäger & Althoff, 1983). Spatial abilities were assessed by
means of three subtests of the System for the Assessment of Performance (Horn, 1983).

Procedure
Participants were investigated in groups of no more than three; they worked, however, individually on the
different material.  Sessions  were   structured   into  five   phases. During the  first phase, participants    took the
memory capacity test and the spatial ability test. During the second phase, participants read the introductory text
and answered the pertaining questions. They were allowed to keep the text until the post-test started. During the
third phase, learners took the pre-test. The learning material was processed in the fourth phase. The amount of
learning time could be chosen individually and was recorded by the computer. Finally, during the fifth phase,
participants worked on the post-test.

Participants
Overall, 180 students from two different universities in Freiburg, Germany, were randomly assigned to the nine
experimental groups. Students of medicine, psychology and the natural sciences did not participate in the study.
Two participants were excluded from the study due to insufficient processing of the introductory text. Five
participants were excluded due to high prior knowledge: they answered more than 25% of the pre-test questions
correctly. Four participants were excluded due to technical problems. Overall, 169 participants remained (age:
M = 22.3, SD = 2.4; gender: 58 males, 111 females).

Results

Prior Knowledge
On average, the participants' prior knowledge was low (M = .34 (4.3%), SD = .62) and there were no significant
differences  between  groups     with respect   to  prior  knowledge    (F(8,160)  =  1.18, n.s.).  There   was  also no
significant correlation between performance on the pre- and post-test (r = .03, n.s.). Therefore, prior knowledge
was not further considered in the analysis.

Covariates
An analysis of variance with the factors presentation format and subject complexity on learning time revealed a
statistically significant effect for subject complexity (F(2,160) = 130.30, p < .01, !2part = .62). There was no
statistically significant effect for presentation format (F(2,160) = 1.13, n.s.). The interaction between the two
factors was also not statistically significant (F(4,160) = 1.55, n.s.). Post-hoc tests indicated that learning from
low complex    material took     significantly less time   than   learning from  medium     complex  material    (Games-
Howell, MD = -5.01, SE = .44, p < .001), which, in turn, took significantly less time than learning from highly
complex material (Games-Howell, MD = -3.87, SE = .63, p < .001). On average, participants exhibited high
spatial abilities (M = 6.8 (75.5%), SD = 1.1) and medium working memory capacity (M = 100.9 (52.3%), SD =
10.1). Analyses  of  variance    showed  no    significant differences   between   groups,  neither for  spatial abilities
(F(8,160) = 1.27, n.s.) nor for working memory capacity (F(8,160) = 1.01, n.s.).

Learning Performance
With respect to highly complex material, descriptive data shows that active integration led to more successful
learning than learning from an integrated format, which in turn was superior to learning from a separated format
(cf. Table 1). The differences between these conditions were larger for comprehension than for retention. While
the descriptive trends for medium complex material were similar to those of highly complex material, the
descriptive trends for low complex material reversed.
          A multivariate   analysis   of covariance     (MANCOVA)         on the   dependent   variables  retention   and
comprehension was computed; it included the factors presentation format and subject complexity, as well as the
covariates  spatial ability, working   memory      capacity   and learning   time. Overall, it revealed   no significant
influence of learning time (F(2,156) = 2.26, n.s.) on post-test results, but significant influences of spatial ability
(F(2,156) = 3.24, p < .05) and working memory capacity (F(2,156) = 5.90, p < .01). Furthermore, a statistically
significant effect  was found    for  subject  complexity    (F(4,312)   = 3.78, p  < .01). The    analysis revealed  no
statistically significant effect for presentation format and no statistically significant interaction effect between
subject complexity and presentation format. The main multivariate effect of subject complexity can be attributed
to statistically significant differences with respect to retention (F(2,157) = 3.43, p < .05).

                                                      21   ·  © ISLS
                                              ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

Table 1: The means and standard deviations of the relative solution frequencies in the post test.

                                            Low complexity         Medium complexity      High complexity
    Separated         Retention             63.1% (23.5%)             72.7% (19.9%)        54.5% (29.1%)
    format            Comprehension         40.0% (24.3%)             45.1% (28.3%)        42.0% (24.5%)
                      Overall               54.2% (20.5%)             62.0% (20.7%)        49.7% (25.1%)
    Integrated        Retention             62.5% (27.0%)             66.0% (23.2%)        59.1% (23.3%)
    format            Comprehension         38.9% (29.4%)             45.1% (20.4%)        51.4% (22.0%)
                      Overall               53.4% (25.3%)             57.9% (20.1%)        56.1% (20.3%)
    Active            Retention             56.3% (31.0%)             60.5% (27.7%)        61.5% (28.3%)
    integration       Comprehension         28.9% (24.0%)             44.3% (21.7%)        55.5% (23.1%)
                      Overall               45.7% (25.8%)             54.2% (22.5%)        59.2% (24.1%)
    Overall           Retention             60.7% (26.9%)             66.3% (24.0%)        58.7% (26.5%)
                      Comprehension         36.1% (26.0%)             44.8% (23.4%)        49.7% (23.3%)
                      Overall               51.3% (23.8%)             58.0% (21.0%)        55.0% (23.0%)

         In order to further explore the data, we conducted a trimmed means analysis according to Wilcox
(1998). Based on the results in the post-test, the lower 10% as well as the upper 10% of the participants were
removed from each group. In the analysis of trimmed means, the covariates learning time, spatial ability, and
working memory capacity showed less influence on post-test results than in the analysis of untrimmed means.
The most important difference between the two analyses was that the interaction between presentation format
and subject complexity reached statistical significance with respect to comprehension (F(4,121) = 2.52, p < .05,
cf. Figure 3). According to a post-hoc simple effects analysis, this interaction results from the changing effects
of active integration (F(2,123) = 7.34, p < .001): The active integration of learning material inhibits learning
when subject complexity is low, but facilitates learning when subject complexity is high. The simple effects
analysis did not reach statistical significance with respect to the seperated and integrated presentation formats.

             Figure 3. Comprehension scores for the three formats at different levels of complexity.

Discussion
Whether the active integration of texts and illustrations as proposed by Bodemer et al. (2004, 2005) acts to
inhibit or to facilitate learning is dependent upon the subject complexity. However, it was only after reducing
the variances within groups, that the expected interaction between presentation format and subject complexity
was statistically confirmed   with respect to comprehension.       When  subject complexity was      high, actively
integrating texts and illustrations was of greater benefit than learning from a separated or an integrated format.
The active integration of text and illustrations inhibited learning when subject complexity was low. What could
have caused this inhibition? It could be that the participants underestimated the difficulty of learning from the
low complex material. In the low complex material, the amount of textual and pictorial information was rather
small and  both   types of information were   clearly    arranged. Requesting the   participants  to integrate this
information might not have led to the intended effortful engagement leading to a deeper understanding of the
material, but rather to a more or less "mindless" execution of the drag-and-drop-task (cf. Salomon, 1983).
Overall, our findings support, or to say it more carefully, do not contradict the hypothesis of Bodemer et al.
(2004, 2005) that learning by integrating texts and illustrations is most successful when the subject complexity
is high.

                                                   22  ·  © ISLS
                                                   ICLS 2010    ·  Volume 1

          Like Martin-Michiellot and Mendelsohn (2000), as well as Bodemer et al. (2004), we were not able to
replicate the   split-attention   effect -  not  even  with  respect   to  highly  complex   material.    This  finding    is in
contradiction to many studies, especially those by Sweller and colleagues (e.g., Cerpa, Chandler & Sweller,
1996). A comparison of the learning material used, however, reveals two differences. First, in the spatially
separated learning material used in many other studies, a more or less unstructured text was combined with an
illustration. In many cases, the relevant areas within the illustration were not clearly distinguished. Thus, it was
up to the learners to identify meaningful assertions in the text and relevant parts of the illustration, and to then
appropriately relate them to each other. In these studies, the separated and integrated formats differed not only
with regard to spatial proximity, but with regard to other factors as well such as text segmentation and picture
labelling (e.g., Chandler & Sweller, 1991). In contrast, the text in our learning material was always structured
into meaningful segments and the relevant areas within the illustration were indicated. It is therefore plausible
that our material imposed smaller extraneous cognitive loads on the learners than the material used in other
studies.  As  a  consequence,     the chance    that a split-attention  effect    would  occur    was  also smaller.    From   a
theoretical point of view, the finding that an integrated format does not lead to better learning than a well-
structured separated format supports an explanation put forward by Erhel and Jamet (2006): the beneficial
effects of integrated formats result from the explication of relations between texts and illustrations rather than
from spatial proximity. A second difference is the design of the pictorial material employed. While Sweller and
colleagues   (e.g., Sweller   &   Chandler,    1994)  often  made   use    of simple  black-and-white     line  drawings,     we
employed coloured schematic illustrations comprised of many visual elements. Both colours, as well as the
number of visual elements, increase the visual richness of an illustration (cf. Peek, 1993). This difference also
could have    contributed  to   a convergence    of  the   extraneous   cognitive   load imposed     on the    learners by    the
separated and integrated formats.
          Overall,   the differences     addressed   above  indicate  that    the roles of segmenting     text,  pointing     out
relevant  parts  of  illustrations, and  designing    visual   material are   underspecified  in   the context   of  the split-
attention effect. It appears that the distinction between a separated format and an integrated format might not
correspond    to a   clear-cut  dichotomy.      Martin-Michiellot    and   Mendelsohn      (2000)   assume     that  texts  and
illustrations can   be designed     and  arranged  in  such  a  way  that   they  do not   yield  an  integrated    format,   but
nevertheless support the learner in relating and mentally integrating both presentations. In a recent study, Florax
and Ploetzner    (in press)   found   evidence   for  this assumption:     learning  from  segmented      texts  and  spatially
separated pictures improved learning as much as learning from spatially integrated texts and pictures.
          The reported study is a first step to clarify the role of active integration for learning from material of
different complexity.    According    to   our  observations,  active   integration  should  only   be  employed     when     the
subject complexity is high, otherwise it might hinder learning. For example, in the realm of academia, where
learning material is usually of high complexity, active integration has the potential to improve learning.

References
Ainsworth, S. (2006). DeFT: A conceptual framework for considering learning with multiple representations.
          Learning and Instruction, 16, 138-198.
Ainsworth, S., Bibby, P., & Wood, D. (2002). Examining the effects of different multiple representational
          systems in learning primary mathematics. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 11, 25-61.
Ayres, P., & Sweller, J. (2005). The split-attention principle in multimedia learning. In R. E. Mayer (Ed.), The
          Cambridge handbook of multimedia learning (pp. 135-146). New York: Cambridge University Press.
Baddeley, A. (2003). Working memory: Looking back and looking forward. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 4,
          829-839.
Bodemer, D., & Faust, U. (2006). External and mental referencing of multiple representations. Computers in
          Human Behavior, 22, 27-42.
Bodemer,   D.,   Ploetzner,   R.,   Bruchmüller,   K.,  &   Häcker,   S.   (2005).  Supporting     learning    with interactive
          multimedia through active integration of representations. Instructional Science, 33, 73-95.
Bodemer, D., Ploetzner, R., Feuerlein, I., & Spada, H. (2004). The active integration of information during
          learning with dynamic and interactive visualisations. Learning and Instruction, 14, 325-341.
Cerpa, N., Chander, P., & Sweller, J. (1996). Some conditions under which integrated computer-based training
          software can facilitate learning. Journal of Educational Computing Research, 15, 345-367.
Chandler,  P.,   &   Sweller,  J.   (1991). Cognitive    load  theory   and   the  format  of     instruction. Cognition    and
          Instruction, 8, 293-332.
Chi, M., Bassok, M., Lewis, M., Reimann, P., & Glaser, R. (1989). Self-explanations: How students study and
          use examples in learning to solve problems. Cognitive Science, 13, 145-182.
Erhel, S. & Jamet, E. (2006). Using pop-up windows to improve multimedia learning. Journal of Computer
          Assisted Learning, 22, 137-147.
Florax,  M.,  &   Ploetzner,   R.   (in  press). What    contributes    to the    split-attention effect? The    role of   text-
          segmentation, picture labelling, and spatial proximity. Learning and Instruction.

                                                        23   ·  © ISLS
                                               ICLS 2010  ·   Volume 1

Ginns, P. (2006). Integrating information: A meta-analysis of the spatial contiguity and temporal contiguity
        effects. Learning and Instruction, 16, 511-525.
Hegarty, M., Carpenter, P. A., & Just, M. A. (1991). Diagrams in the comprehension of scientific texts. In R.
        Barr, M. L. Kamil, P. B. Mosenthal, & P. D. Pearson (Eds.), Handbook of reading research (Vol. 2,
        pp. 641-668). New York: Longman.
Horn,  W. (1983).  Leistungsprüfsystem    [System   for  the   assessment    of performance]   (2nd ed.).  Göttingen:
        Hogrefe.
Jamet, E. &  Gavona,   M.,  &   Quaireau, C.   (2008). Attention   guiding   in multimedia   learning, Learning  and
        Instruction, 18, 135-145.
Jäger, A. O., & Althoff, K. (1983). Der WILDE-Intelligenztest (WIT) [The WILDE intelligence test]. Göttingen:
        Hogrefe.
Kozma, R. (2003). The material features of multiple representations and their cognitive and social affordances
        for science understanding. Learning and Instruction, 13, 205-226.
Larkin, J. H., & Simon, H. H. (1987). Why a diagram is (sometimes) worth ten thousand words. Cognitive
        Science, 11, 65-99.
Levie, W.  H.,  &   Lentz,  R.   (1982).  Effects  of    text illustrations: A   review   of   research. Educational
        Communication and Technology Journal, 30, 195-232.
Martin-Michiellot, S., &   Mendelsohn,   P. (2000).   Cognitive    load while   learning  with a graphical  computer
        interface. Journal of Computer Assisted Learning, 16, 284-293.
Mayer, R. E. (1989). Systematic thinking fostered by illustrations in scientific text. Journal of Educational
        Psychology, 81, 240-246.
Mayer, R. E. (2001). Multimedia learning. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Mayer, R. E. (2005). Cognitive theory of multimedia learning. In R. E. Mayer (Ed.), The Cambridge handbook
        of multimedia learning (pp. 31-48). New York: Cambridge University Press.
McNamara, D. S., Kintsch, E., Songer, N. B., & Kintsch, W. (1996). Are good texts always better? Interactions
        of text coherence, background knowledge, and levels of understanding in learning from text. Cognition
        and Instruction, 14, 1-43.
Moreno, R., & Mayer, R. E. (1999). Cognitive principles of multimedia learning: The role of modality and
        contiguity. Journal of Educational Psychology, 91, 358-368.
Paivio, A. (1986). Mental representations - A dual coding approach. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Peeck, J. (1993). Increasing picture effects in learning from illustrated text. Learning and Instruction, 3, 227-
        238.
Pollock, E., Chandler P., & Sweller, J. (2002). Assimilating complex information. Learning and Instruction, 12,
        61-86.
Renkl, A.  (2002). Worked-out     examples:    Instructional  explanations   support  learning   by self-explanation.
        Learning and Instruction, 12, 529-556.
Salomon, G. (1983). The differential investment of mental effort in learning from different sources. Educational
        Psychologist, 18, 42-50.
Schnotz, W., & Rasch, T. (2005). Enabling, facilitating, and inhibiting effects of animations in multimedia
        learning:  Why    reduction of   cognitive load   can     have  negative  results on   learning. Educational
        Technology Research and Development, 53, 47-58.
Sweller, J., & Chander, P. (1994). Why some material is difficult to learn. Cognition and Instruction, 12, 185-
        233.
Sweller, J., van Merriënboer, J. J. G., & Paas, F. G. W. C. (1998). Cognitive architecture and instructional
        design. Educational Psychology Review, 10, 251-296.
Tabbers, H., Martens, R., & van Merriënboer, J. J. G. (2004). Multimedia instructions and cognitive load theory:
        Effects of modality and cueing. British Journal of Educational Psychology, 74, 71-81.
Van der Meij, J., & de Jong, T. (2006). Supporting students' learning with multiple representations in a dynamic
        simulation-based learning environment. Learning and Instruction, 16, 199-212.
Van Merriënboer,   J.  J. G., &   Sweller,  J. (2005).   Cognitive     load  theory and   complex   learning:  Recent
        developments and future directions. Educational Psychology Review, 17, 147-177.
Van Meter, P., Aleksic, M., Schwartz, A., & Garner, J. (2006). Learner-generated drawing as a strategy for
        learning from content area text. Contemporary Educational Psychology, 31, 142-166.
Wilcox, R. M. (1998). How many discoveries have been lost by ignoring modern statistical methods? American
        Psychologist, 53, 300-314.
Wittrock, M. C. (1992). Generative learning processes of the brain. Educational Psychologist, 27, 531-541.

Acknowledgments
The research reported  in  this paper was   supported    by   the Deutsche   Forschungsgemeinschaft      (DFG) under
contract PL 224/11-1.

                                                   24  ·  © ISLS
