                                                ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

A Closer Look at the Split Attention Effect: Integrated Presentation
                          Formats for Troubleshooting Tasks
                                    Markus Huff, Vera Bauhoff, Stephan Schwan,
           Knowledge Media Research Center Tübingen, Konrad-Adenauer-Str. 40, 72072 Tübingen
                   m.huff@iwm-kmrc.de, v.bauhoff@iwm-kmrc.de, s.schwan@iwm-kmrc.de

          Abstract: According to the spatial contiguity principle of multimedia, learning interrelated
          information should be presented in an integrated instead of in a disconnected way. In this
          experimental study (80 participants), we examined performance with a troubleshooting task
          preventing such an integrated design. Instead, we used a display technology enabling a so-
          called "vexing image presentation", where there is no need for two foci of visual attention.
          Compared to a classic split screen setup in which participants have to shift their visual focus
          frequently, troubleshooting performance was superior in the "vexing image" mode. Hence, not
          the separation of external representations but processes of re-orientation after switching the
          visual focus seem to be responsible for split attention effects.

Theoretical Background
As a well-established principle in multimedia design, the "spatial contiguity principle" is concerned with the
spatial arrangement   of different  sources of information,    for example   a picture   and  an accompanying     text
description. Basically,  the principle assumes  that  inter-related information  (e.g.,  a geometric  sketch  and  its
related mathematical formula; Tarmizi & Sweller, 1988) should be presented in an integrated format in order to
help the learners to mentally connect corresponding elements of the content (Ginns, 2006; Mayer, 1997). In
contrast, if inter-related information is presented in a disconnected way (at locally distinct locations), learners
have to search for corresponding pieces of information. This process wastes cognitive resources that are then
missing for processes of elaboration and transfer into long-term memory (Mayer & Moreno, 2002). Another
relevant  example  of the split  attention effect is troubleshooting.   Here   learners  have to find  an  error  in a
mechanical device and ­ if there is one ­ judge if this is critical for the proper functioning of the system. This is
usually done by visually comparing a real device (or its depiction) with a reference device, be it another real
device or a picture in a manual. Again, one finds the typical characteristics of split attention, namely, the
necessity to switch the focus of attention frequently between two representations in order to mentally connect its
corresponding elements in a time-consuming and error-prone manner.
          However, although     for combinations  of text   and pictures   integrated presentations  that avoid   split
attention are abundant   (e.g., Scheiter,  Gerjets, &   Schuh,  in  press;  Schnotz,  2002),  until recently, similar
solutions for combinations of real devices and pictures, or pairs of pictures, have been scarce. Accordingly,
there have been few empirical studies to date that have examined split attention effects for learning tasks which
require the comparison and mental integration of two pictures (Lee, Plass, & Homer, 2006; Huff & Schwan,
subm.). But current digital technologies, such as augmented reality or auto-stereoscopic displays, offer new
design possibilities for the problem of split attention. In particular, auto-stereoscopic displays allow for the
realization of vexing images, that is, the presentation of two pictures in a way that enables participants to switch
between them just by moving their head without a need for saccades (Huff & Schwan, subm.). Hence, one
major goal of the present study was to examine the suitability of digital vexing images to substantially reduce
the split attention effect for troubleshooting tasks that require extensive comparison of pairs of pictures.
          Further, if one takes a closer look at the troubleshooting process, one can decompose it into at least two
(distinct) sub-tasks, namely, a stage that can be termed as "comparative visual search" (Hardiess, Gillner, &
Mallot, 2008) that is followed by a second stage which can be termed as "decision by mental animation".
          During the first stage of troubleshooting, the learners have to identify one or more elements in the
depiction of the target device that deviate from the respective parts of the correct reference depiction. In order to
do this,  correspondences    between   the  elements    of both  pictures   have to   be established  and    for each
corresponding pair, its similarity or dissimilarity has to be determined. This requires extensive visual search
processes that are accompanied by frequent eye saccades and therewith shifts of the visual focus (Hardiess et al.,
2008). Saccading alters the projection on the retina and consequently disrupts visual input. This in turn leads to
a disruption of the visual working memory because the so-called "transsaccadic memory" store has a limited
capacity and maintains visual characteristics of the learning material for only a brief time after stimulus offset
(Phillips, 1974). If it would be possible to switch between different external representations without saccades,
knowledge acquisition strategies could be based on the iconic memory store of high capacity (Irwin, 1991,
1992; Philips, 1974). In the present study, it is assumed that presenting the picture pairs as a vexing image via

                                                    174  ·  © ISLS
                                               ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

an auto-stereoscopic display might substantially reduce the need for shifts of visual focus and therewith the
frequency and amplitude of saccades that are necessary to process the relevant information.

         Once one or more possible problematic elements have been identified, the learner has to decide for
each element whether or not it causes a malfunctioning. During this second stage, a promising strategy for
diagnosing a breakdown could be to consider the identified element as part of a causal chain of events, and to
simulate this chain of events by mental animation (Hegarty, Kriz, & Cate, 2003). Typically, mental animation is
a process that poses high demands on cognitive resources. By reducing cognitive load during the first stage,
more cognitive resources should be available for the second, decisional stage. Additionally, if participants can
switch  between   two pictorial  representations without   moving   their visual focus,  the causal  chain of events
should  also be  easier to trace.  Therefore,  the second    stage of processing should   profit from   an integrated
presentation via vexing image, too.
         Finally, an additional consideration concerns the kind of differences between a target device and its
correct reference depiction. Here a distinction can be made between differences that are critical for the proper
functioning of the target device (e.g., a missing gear in a clockwork) and differences that are not critical (e.g., a
differentially colored part). Compared to functioning devices, the causal chain of events should be distorted and
shorter for non-functioning devices. Therefore, identifying malfunctioning devices should be more accurate and
faster than identifying a different but functioning clockwork. Hence, in sum, a second major goal of the study
was to develop a more differentiated account of the cognitive processes that contribute to the split-attention
effect.

Hypotheses and Design
In the present study, participants were asked to solve a troubleshooting task by comparing two depictions of a
mechanical pendulum clock and deciding whether one of the clocks was malfunctioning. After a learning phase
in which the participants learned the basic principles of mechanical clockworks, picture pairs were presented
either side by side in a classic split screen presentation mode (Split) or via an auto-stereoscopic display as a
"vexing-image" in an integrated mode of presentation (Vex). While one of the pictures showed a functioning
pendulum clock as the correct reference device, the second picture showed either the same (functioning) clock,
or a different, but also functioning clock, or a different malfunctioning clock. The task was two-fold: First,
learners had  to visually  search  the picture pairs for   differences and  to  state whether   the two  clocks were
identical. If the two clocks differed, a second phase followed in which the learners had to decide whether or not
the target clock was a functioning one.
         We expected troubleshooting performance to be superior in the Vex condition for both the search and
the decision sub-task. More specifically, visual search should be more accurate and faster in the Vex mode as
there is no need to make a saccade when switching between the two external representations. This in turn should
free some resources for the subsequent decision phase, again providing an advantage for the Vex mode. Further,
we expected task performance to be superior for malfunctioning target clocks in the decision task, because in
this case the causal chain of events is disrupted, which in turn should lead to faster and more accurate decisions.
         Compared to the Split mode, where the two external representations were presented on two displays
standing  next to each   other, in the Vex   mode,   the representations   were  presented on   an  auto-stereoscopic
display. With such a display, participants could easily switch between two representations without shifting their
visual focus. Instead, they just had to move their head. First participants, who were trained on the physical
characteristics of a mechanical pendulum clock, had to accomplish a troubleshooting task. Second, they were
asked to judge whether both clocks function properly. For this to work, we constructed three kinds of clockwork
sets, namely,   pairs of  identical clockworks,    and   functioning   and nonfunctioning    pairs   of non-identical
clockworks. In the visual search sub-task, participants just needed to search for the respective identical and non-
identical clockworks.

Method

Participants and Design
80 students of the University of Tübingen, Germany participated in the study. They received compensation for
their participation and were randomly assigned to one of two cells of the between-subjects factor "presentation
mode", which described whether information was presented in the Vex or in the Split mode.

Materials and Apparatus
For each participant, the materials consisted of a computer-based learning environment that also included the
troubleshooting tasks and a set of questionnaires, including one questionnaire for demographic information and
a post-test  containing transfer  questions. Further we    measured   self-assessed   cognitive load with  a German
adaptation of the NASA-TLX (Hart & Staveland, 1988), participants´ spatial abilities with the Mental Rotation

                                                   175   ·  © ISLS
                                                 ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

Test (MRT, Vandenberg & Kuse, 1978), and the Spatial Orientation Task (Hegarty & Waller, 2004). Visual
span was measured with the Visual Patterns Test (VPT, Della Sala, Gray, Baddeley, & Wilson, 1997) and
verbal span was assessed via the "Zahlen Merken" (digit span) scale from the Wilde Intelligence Test (Jäger &
Althoff, 1983).
          The    computer-based    learning environment     was  three-tiled. It took approximately  50  minutes  to
complete. First, participants were asked to learn the basic physical principles of a mechanic pendulum clock that
were displayed on 7 HTML-pages using static images and short descriptive texts. More specifically, participants
had to learn the functionalities of the weight as energy source, the escapement as central time base, and the
different gears with the hands for indicating the time. The second part of this learning environment was a
comprehension test that assessed participant's knowledge of pendulum clocks with 5 multiple-choice questions.
For each question, three answers were displayed of which one was correct. (e.g., "Which statement is true?" (a)
The ticking sound of a mechanical pendulum clock is generated by the pendulum. (b) The escapement is causal
for the movement of the gears. (c) The weight is the energy source of the mechanical pendulum clock. Finally,
the third part of this learning environment was the troubleshooting task. Participants were presented with two
stills of a mechanic     pendulum  clock  that were created   using  blender3D     (http://www.blender.org). The two
pictures either depicted exactly the same or different clockworks (see Figure 1). The "same" pictures showed
clockworks that were exactly the same (including colors and the indicated time). This could be either two
functioning clockworks or two malfunctioning clockworks. There were two kinds of            "different" picture pairs.
The functioning pairs showed different clockworks that both function properly but where one surface feature
was    different (e.g., the clocks indicated  different  times). In contrast,  the malfunctioning pairs showed   one
functioning clockwork and one malfunctioning clockwork (e.g., a clockwork with a missing gear). Additionally,
we varied the color of the clockworks presented pairwise across participants. Altogether, the troubleshooting
task consisted of 40 pairwise clockworks (20 identical and 20 non-identical clockworks pairs). A training phase
at the beginning of the troubleshooting task consisted of 8 clockwork pairs. These trials were excluded from
further analysis.

Figure 1. Examples of the stimulus material. In each trial, participants were presented with a combination of an
 original clockwork with a different clockwork (either functioning with a filled gear or malfunctioning with a
                                                 gear without cogs).

          There were two presentation modes: In the Split mode, the pictures were presented side by side on two
displays standing next to each other. In contrast, in the Vex mode we used an auto-stereoscopic display that
presented the two pictures such that participant were able to alternate between them simply by shifting their
head. In this condition it is not necessary to shift the visual focus (see Figure 2; Huff & Schwan, subm.).
          The    experimental  procedures   were controlled   by  a  PC  and     programmed using  custom    software
programmed with python (http://www.python.org/). In both presentation modes, the first part of the learning
environment was presented on a 24" display. The third part of the learning environment (troubleshooting task)
was either presented on two 24" displays that were placed next to each other (Split mode) or on a single auto-
stereoscopic display (Vex mode). In all presentation modes, the visual angles of the stills were comparable.

                                                     176  ·  © ISLS
                                              ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

      Figure 2. Split screen (left) and vexing image (right) presentation modes both presenting two pictorial
      representations ("A" and "B"). Whereas participants had to shift their visual focus in the Split mode,
      participants in the Vex mode just needed to move their head in order to see the second representation.

Procedure
All participants were tested individually and received instructions via the computer monitor. At the beginning,
participants completed the first two parts of the learning environment (learning phase and comprehension test).
In the third part (troubleshooting task), participants were presented with 48 sets of clockwork pairs. Learners'
task was two-fold. After the stills appeared on the screen, the participant had to visually compare the two
clockworks and to answer the question whether both clockworks were identical by pressing the key "J" for
"Yes" and "N" for "No, the clockworks are different.". Second, if the participant correctly detected that the two
clockworks were different she/he had to decide whether both clockworks function properly or if one clockwork
was defective. Again, the participant had to press the corresponding key in order to answer the question "Do
both  clockworks   function properly?" ("J" for "Yes"    and  "N" for   "No"). Half  of the 40 experimental    sets
contained functioning and the other half non-functioning clockworks (see Table 1); the serial order and the
left/right position of the original clockwork were chosen at random. The first 8 trials were for exercise purposes
and were excluded from analysis.
         Finally, the post-test, the mental-rotation test, the spatial orientation test, the visual patterns test, the
test for the  verbal memory   span, and the  cognitive   load assessment   questionnaire  were   filled out by the
participants.

Results

Pre-Test
After the first part of the learning environment in which the participants worked through a description of the
basic principles of clockworks, they received five multiple-choice questions about pendulum clocks in order to
check their knowledge level. Each question had three possible responses of which one was true. Each correctly
answered question was scored with one point. A total number of 5 points was possible. Three participants who
obtained less than 3 points in this test were excluded from further analysis because they did not learn the
relevant principles of a mechanical pendulum clock.

Troubleshooting task
The troubleshooting task consisted of two components. In the comparison task, the participants had to decide
whether the two depicted clockworks were identical or not. If the participants had detected a difference between
the two clockworks, they were given a second task. In this task, they were required to decide whether the target
clockwork was a functioning or a malfunctioning one.

Comparison task
Comparison    task performance  was  measured   with  the  sensitivity measure  from the  signal detection  theory
(Green & Swets, 1966) and search times to correctly identified sets of two original clockworks.
Mean hit rate (correct answers to target items ­ the clockworks were identical) and to false alarm rates (wrong
answers to differing picture pairs ­ although the clockworks were different, participants answered "yes", both

                                                  177  ·  © ISLS
                                                ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

for functioning   and  malfunctioning    differing  target clocks)  were   calculated  for each participant  in   both
conditions (Split vs.  Vex). Next,  two   corresponding    A'  measures   (Pollack &   Norman,  1964)  as sensitivity
measure   were  calculated  and  submitted   to   a 2   (presentation   mode; between-subjects)   x  2 (target  clock
functionality; within-subjects) mixed factor ANOVA (see Table 1). Participants' performance was significantly
influenced by both presentation mode and target clock functionality as the significant interaction of these factors
showed, F (1, 75) = 15.88, p < .001, !p2 =.17. A Bonferroni correction with " = 0.008 was used to correct for the
6 multiple comparisons in this experiment. Performance in the "vexing image" mode was not affected by the
kind of target clock type (functioning or malfunctioning, p = .996). In contrast, in the split screen mode, search
performance was higher for malfunctioning target clocks than for functioning target clocks (p < .001). The main
effect for "presentation mode" indicates higher performance in the Vex mode and the main effect for "target
clock functionality" higher performance with malfunctioning clockworks, F (1, 75) = 22.13, p < .001, !p2 = .22
and F (1, 75) = 15.52, p < .001, !p2 = .17, respectively.

Table 1: Sensitivity measures of the comparison task (Question 1). Arithmetic means and standard deviations in
parentheses.

                                Presentation mode                  Clock functionality
                                                              Functioning   Malfunctioning
                           Vexing image                       .79 (.07)     .79 (.09)
                           Split screen                       .69 (.06)     .74 (.05)

          The time from    stimulus onset  until   the  decision regarding   the similarity of  the clockworks    was
calculated for each participant in each condition (see Table 2). Data as presented in Table 2 were submitted to a
mixed-factor ANOVA including the within-subject factor "clockwork type" (search times for identical, non-
identical  functional,  and  non-identical   malfunctioning      clockworks)     and   the  between-subjects   factor
"presentation mode" (Vex, Split). Participants' search times were faster in the Vex mode as the main effect for
presentation mode shows, F (1, 68) = 38.03, p < .001, !p2=.36. Further, clockwork type influenced search times
too, F (2, 136) = 6.14, p = .003, !p2 = .08. A Bonferroni correction with " = 0.024 was used to correct for the 2
multiple  comparisons   in this experiment.  Whereas     there  was   no  difference  between the  two non-identical
clockwork types functioning (M = 15.71 sec., collapsed over "presentation mode") and malfunctioning (M =
15.95 sec., collapsed over "presentation mode"), t < 1, p = .62, search times for non-identical clockworks were
faster than search times for identical clockworks (M = 17.19 sec., collapsed over "presentation mode"), ts >
2.62, ps < .011.  However, the interaction of clockwork type and presentation mode did not reach the level of
significance, F (2, 136) = 2.23, p = .112, !p2 = .03.

Table 2: Search times of the comparison task in seconds (Question 1). Arithmetic means and standard deviations
in parentheses.

                      Presentation mode                          Clockwork type
                                             Identical           Functioning       Malfunctioning
                  Vexing image                    11.52 (6.08)      10.83 (5.56)      11.27 (7.79)
                  Split screen                    21.97 (7.01)      19.81 (6.85)      19.90 (6.55)
                  Mean (collapsed over"presentation mode")17.19 (8.40)15.71 (7.71)    15.95 (8.31)

Decision task
If participants were presented with a pair of non-identical clockworks (with the target clock either functioning
or malfunctioning) and they had correctly classified them as "not identical" in the comparison task, they were
asked to state whether both clocks function properly. Again, we analyzed the data with the signal detection
theory measure, sensitivity A', and reaction times for both correctly identified pairs of functioning clockworks
and for correctly identified malfunctioning clockworks. Note, this task uses a two alternative forced choice
paradigm. That is, the sensitivity measure as plotted in Table 3 reflects the participants' ability to distinguish
between   functioning  and  malfunctioning  clockworks     in  the different  presentation  modes.  Hence,  it is not
necessary to include this factor in the analysis.
          Data as displayed in Table 3 were submitted to a t-test with the independent variable presentation mode
for the sensitivity and to a mixed factor ANOVA with the between-subjects factor "presentation mode" and the

                                                    178  ·  © ISLS
                                                  ICLS 2010  ·    Volume 1

within-subjects-factor "functionality" for the search times. Neither the sensitivity measure A', t (54.40) = 1.52, p
= .134, nor the search times were influenced by the presentation mode Fs < 2.65, ps > .11.
        Taken     together,   both sensitivity    and search    time     indicate that   participants in  the  Vex  mode
outperformed     participants in  the Split  mode.    The    superiority   of the  Vex    condition   is based on   higher
performances in the comparison task. In contrast, performance measures in the decision task were comparable
across presentation modes.

Table 3: Results of the identification task (Question 2). Arithmetic means and standard deviations in
parentheses.

       Presentation mode       Sensitivity (A')                          Search time (seconds)
                                                   Functioning clockworks           Malfunctioning clockworks
       Vexing image            .78 (.07)           4.99 (4.24)                      5.77 (7.82)
       Split screen            .74 (.14)           4.99 (4.34)                      6.64 (5.00)

Transfer test
In the final phase of the experiment, participants were asked to answer 6 multiple-choice questions that each
described one malfunctioning clockwork (e.g., "The hour hand stands still, all other hands move correctly.").
Participants  were  presented  with   3  alternative  solutions   (e.g., "The  axis  for  the  hour  hand  transmission is
missing.") of which one was true. Each correct answered question was coded with 1; maximum score was 6.
Mean performance was 4.43 (SD = 1.14), there were no significant differences between presentation modes, t
(74.90) < 1, p = .591.

Cognitive load and learner related factors
Cognitive load was assessed with a German adaptation of the NASA-TLX (Hart & Staveland, 1988). The six
questions   were  analyzed    separately  with  a  t-test including      the  independent   variable  presentation  mode.
Questions   1 (mental  activity),  3  (time pressure),  and   4   (effort) showed   no   significant  differences between
presentation modes (ts < 1.58, ps >.12).    However, compared to the Split presentation mode, participants in the
Vex mode reported a higher amount of physical activity (Question 2), t(64.45) = 2.51, p = .01, were more
confident in scaling their own performance (Question 5), t(65.40) = 3.39, p = .001, and were less frustrated
(Question 6), t(71.92) = -3.12, p = .003.
        The experimental groups were checked for a-priori differences on the two learner-related factors spatial
abilities (assessed with MRT and SO), visual memory span (VPT), and verbal memory span (assessed with
ZM). We conducted a t-test for each of the tests separately with the independent variable presentation mode
(Vex vs. Split presentation mode). There were no significant differences between groups with regard to spatial
ability. Neither MRT, t(74.68) < 1, p = .996, nor VPT, t (74.99) = 1.31, p = .19, and SO, t (66.58) < 1, p = .874
reached level of significance. The same was true for working memory span, t(74.74) = 1.08, p = .28.

Discussion
Although the spatial contiguity principle is well established in research on multimedia learning (Ginns, 2006;
Mayer, 2001, 2006), few attempts have been made to extend the principle from picture-text combinations to
picture-picture  combinations.    Hence,  the  present  study   attempted     to  develop  an  integrated  format  for the
presentation of picture pairs in the context of a troubleshooting task and to compare it experimentally to a non-
integrated split-screen presentation. Also, the troubleshooting task was decomposed into a two distinct phases,
namely a "comparative visual search" phase (Hardiess et al., 2008), and a "decision by mental animation"
phase.
        We observed troubleshooting performance to be superior with a new display technology that allows for
the integrated   presentation  of two   pictures, compared     to a traditional   split-screen condition.  The integrated
presentation was realized by a vexing image which was presented via an auto-stereoscopic display. Here, it is
not necessary to change the location of the visual focus in order to switch between the pictures. Instead, learners
just had to move their head (see Figure 2). Hence, processes of reorientation were reduced to a minimum. In
contrast to the split screen condition, visually comparing the two clockworks in the vexing image condition was
both twice    as fast and   significantly   more  accurate.    This finding    suggests   that error-prone   processes  of
reorientation are one major reason for lower performance scores in learning environments with low spatial
contiguity.  In  addition, participants  were  more   confident    in scaling     their own  performance   and  were   less
frustrated. If the split screen presentation mode can be characterized by frequent shifts of the visual focus and ­
as a consequence ­ frequent re-orientation processes, we can conclude that the split attention effect is reduced in
the vexing image mode, which seems to be an adequate presentation mode for pairs of pictorial representations.

                                                      179  ·  © ISLS
                                               ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

         An interesting finding was that the functioning or malfunctioning of the non-identical clockworks did
influence troubleshooting performance in the Split mode but not in the Vex mode. Because viewers in the
vexing  image    mode  could   keep  their  visual  focus  at the  critical position   while switching    between  the
representations, one can assume that the comparison task can be solved primarily by means of perceptual pattern
matching. In contrast, in the Split mode participants cannot rely on perceptual information alone. Switching
between  representations  requires   also memory    based  processing.   Participants  have  to  encode parts  of  one
representation and compare this mental representation with the corresponding part of the second representation.
Such memory-based processes might involve mental animating of the static clockworks (Hegarty et al., 2003).
A central part of mental animation as described by Hegarty et al. (2003) is the identification of the causal chain
of events. Learners have to identify the energy source and the transmitting gears. This causal chain is disrupted
in malfunctioning clockworks. As participants were instructed in the mechanical principles of pendulum clocks
at the beginning of the experiment, this might have helped them during troubleshooting.
         Surprisingly, we observed all these effects in the first phase when participants were asked to visually
search for differences between the clockworks. Originally, we hypothesized that such processes take place in the
decision phase and not ­ as observed in this study - during the visual search phase. One reason for this might be
that participants intermixed the tasks of comparing the clocks and deciding whether the clocks work properly. If
this is true, the decision about the proper functioning of the clockworks might have been finished before the
decision task  began  and   participants  used the  decision   phase   just to  verify their decision.  For  a clearer
distinction between those two phases, measures of process related variables such as gaze behavior could be
employed. Further research should include eye gaze as dependent measure in order to gain deeper insights in the
cognitive processing of separated information.
         Finally, we measured participants transfer knowledge in a verbal-based transfer test. As there was no
need for costly re-orientation processes in the Vex mode, we hypothesized that participants should be able to
encode   a more   elaborate  and  more     precise  mental   representation   of  the  mechanical   clockwork.  As   a
consequence, compared to participants in the Split mode, transfer test performance should be higher. However,
transfer test performance was comparable across the two presentation modes. Faster search times in the Vex
mode indicate that learners did not use the free mental resources to encode an elaborated mental model. Instead,
they used the free capacity to speed up their responses.

Conclusions
In conclusion, we were able to show that the process of troubleshooting as employed in this study is highly
dependant  on  visual search   processes.  Shifting the  visual focus  frequently   involves costly  processes  of re-
orientation. The subsequent decision, whether or not the identified difference between two mechanical devices
is critical for its proper functioning, is independent of the presentation mode. Solving this task does not require
any shifts of visual attention. Instead, learners can solve it by mentally animating both clockworks in a row.
They are finished if they find an error or if they successfully animated both clockworks. An integrated design
not only reduces the number of shifts of visual focus but also leads to lower frustration scores and higher
confidence  ratings. Hence,  multimedia     design  reducing  costly  re-orientation  processes  is beneficial for the
troubleshooting  task as  a whole.   This  finding  has  also consequences     for our understanding   of multimedia
learning. Whereas previous research focused mainly on the combination of pictorial and verbal information, this
study showed that common principles of multimedia learning also apply to purely pictorial material. Finally,
this study  also demonstrated   that  new   display  technology    is helpful  in  designing new    kinds of   learning
environments and, in turn, in gaining new insights in cognitive processes involved in learning from multiple
external representations.

References
Della Sala, S., Gray, C., Baddley, A.D., and Wilson, L. (1997). Visual Pattern Test. Bury St. Admunds: Thames
      Valley Test Company.
Ginns, P.  (2006). Integrating  information:   Meta-analyses    of the  spatial  contiguity  and temporal   contiguity
      effects. Learning and Instruction, 16, 511-525.
Green, D. M. & Swets, J. A. (1966). Signal detection theory and psychophysics. Oxford: Wiley.
Hardiess, G., Gillner, S., & Mallot, H.A. (2008). Head and eye movements and the role of memory limitations
      in a visual search paradigm. Journal of Vision, 8, 1-13.
Hart, S. G. & Staveland, L. E. (1988). Development of NASA-TLX (task load index): Results of empirical and
      theoretical research. In P. A. Hancock & N. Meshkati (Hg.), Human mental workload. (pp. 139-183).
      North-Holland.
Hegarty,   M., Kriz,  S., &    Cate, C.   (2003).  The  roles of   mental   animations  and  external  animations   in
      understanding mechanical systems. Cognition and Instruction, 21(4), 325-360.
Hegarty,   M., &  Waller,   D. (2004).  A   dissociation  between  mental    rotation  and  perspective-taking spatial
      abilities. Intelligence, 32, 175-191.

                                                    180  ·  © ISLS
                                                  ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

Huff,  M.,  &    Schwan,    S.  (subm.). Integrating information    from  two   pictorial  animations:  Complexity  and
       cognitive prerequisites influence performance.
Irwin, D. E. (1991). Information integration across saccadic eye movements. Cognitive Psychology, 23(3), 420-
       456.
Irwin, D.   E.   (1992).   Memory    for position   and identity  across  eye   movements.     Journal  of   Experimental
       Psychology: Learning, Memory, & Cognition, 18(2), 307-317.
Jäger, A. O., & Althoff, K. (1983). Der WILDE-Intelligenztest (WIT) [The WILDE intelligence test]. Göttingen,
       Germany: Hogrefe.
Lee,  H., Plass,    J. L. &  Homer,   B. D.  (2006). Optimizing     cognitive  load  for  learning from  computer-based
       science simulations. Journal of Educational Psychology, 98(4), 902-913.
Mayer, R. E. (1997). Multimedia learning: Are we asking the right questions? Educational Psychologist, 32,1-
       19.
Mayer, R. E. (2001). Multimedia Learning. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Mayer, R. E. (2006). Cambridge Handbook of Multimedia Learning. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Mayer,   R.  E., &     Moreno,  R. (2002).  Animation   as  an  aid to multimedia    learning. Educational    Psychology
       Review, 14, 87­99.
Phillips,  W.    A.    (1974)   On  the  distinction  between    sensory    storage  and   short-term   visual  memory.
       Perception & Psychophysics, 16, 283-290.
Pollack,  L.  &  Norman,       D. A.  (1964). Non-parametric     analysis   of recognition   experiments.    Psychonomic
       Science, 1, 125­126.
Scheiter, K., Gerjets, P., & Schuh, J. (in press). The acquisition of problem-solving skills in Mathematics: How
       animations can aid understanding for structural problem features and solution procedure. Instructional
       Science.
Schnotz,   W.  (2002).    Towards    an  integrated  view  of   learning from   text and   visual  displays. Educational
       Psychology Review, 14(1), 101-120.
Tarmizi,   R. &  Sweller,    J. (1988).  Guidance   during   mathematical   problem   solving.  Journal  of  Educational
       Psychology, 80, 424-436.
Vandenberg,    S.   G.    & Kuse,   A.   R. (1978).  Mental   rotations,  a group    test of three  dimensional   spatial
       visualizations. Perceptual and Motor Skills, 47, 599-604.

Acknowledgments
Markus    Huff   is indebted   to the LANDESSTIFTUNG            Baden-Württemberg     for  the financial support of this
research project by the Eliteprogramme for Postdocs. The authors thank Kathrin Stalder and Marco Dehez for
their help in conducting this experiment.

                                                      181  ·  © ISLS
