                                                ICLS 2010    ·  Volume 1

      Facilitating Group Learning in Science Laboratory Courses Using
                                             Handheld Devices

                                Chen-Wei Chunga, Wang-Hsin Kuob, Chen-Chung Liub
            a Department of Computer Science and Engineering, National Central University, Taiwan
            b Graduate Institute of Network Learning Technology, National Central University, Taiwan

Abstract: The laboratory course is an inferential curriculum designed to foster science inquiry ability in science
education. However, in the universities of Taiwan, laboratory courses often last only a limited time and explore
only a single topic of inquiry. Students' individual ideas and experiences are not well represented in the group
inquiry process. Therefore, this study attempts to provide an organizing tool on PDAs to help student groups
regulate their inquiry processes and engage in reflective inquiry activities.By gathering data from 56 students (17
groups) participating in the laboratory course, this study utilizes handheld devices as an observational tool for peer
interactions in collaborative inquiry activities. A total of 360 minutes of activity log was analyzed for details of
peer interaction in order to understand how handheld devices can influence group regulation when students are
provided with group regulation functions on PDAs. Students demonstrated six main types of interaction when
formulating group inquiry plans via PDAs. This study makes distinction between four patterns of cooperative
PDA use. Such distinction could assist teachers and system designers in facilitating group activities by avoiding
unfavorable interaction patterns. The results show that unperceived conflicts concealed in individual devices
impede peer   interaction.   This finding suggests   that designers   of   learning  environments  should  consider   the
importance   of  reinforcement    mechanisms    applied   in   Mobile Computer      Supported  Collaborative     Learning
(MCSCL) to maintain shared understanding.
Keywords: Laboratory courses, group regulation, handheld devices, peer interaction analysis
1.   Introduction
The  laboratory  course   follows an  inferential curriculum    designed   to foster science inquiry  ability  in science
education (Hinrichsen & Jarrett, 1999; Hollingworth & McLoughlin, 2001). Students in laboratory courses learn
how to pursue scientific knowledge through inquiry and experience the process of constructing such knowledge
(Edelson, Gordin, & Pea, 1999). Within the inquiry process, students formulate testable hypotheses, measure
variables, and design experiments. However, in current practice, the design and implementation of laboratory
courses is based on an instructional rather than hands-on approach (Mayer 2004; Kirschner, Sweller , & Clark,
2006), i.e., students complete experiments step by step according to the textbook or an instructional manual
provided by the teacher. Such an approach deprives students of the opportunity to experiencethe reflective inquiry
process and to learn how to acquire knowledge through that inquiry process in laboratory courses and settings.
Collaborative    inquiry has recently   come to   be considered   an  effective mode    of reflective scientific  inquiry.
Students can actively develop problem solving and knowledge construction activities during peer discussion and
interaction (Blumenfeld, Marx, Soloway, & Krajcik, 1996; Littleton & Hakkinen, 1999). Peer discussion and
interaction can facilitate social construction of knowledge (Jonassen, 1994) that cannot easily be attained through
individual inquiry learning.However, laboratory courses often last onlya limited amount of time and explore only
a single inquiry topic. For example, laboratorycourses in the universities of Taiwan consist only of weekly 3-hour
classes covering a single topic.  Students' individual ideas and experiences are not well represented in the group
inquiry process due to time limitations. Thus, students may fail to get the opportunity to exchange ideas and
experiences   with   peers.  Furthermore,   previous  studies   have  confirmed     that students  still have  difficulty
formulating testable hypotheses, designing conclusive experiments, and compiling compatible data (Manlove,
Lazonder, & De Jong, 2006). In order to achieve effective reflective scientific inquiry, student groups need
regulative support in collaboratively forminginquiry strategies. Therefore, it is necessary for laboratory courses to
provide an organizing tool to help student groups regulate their inquiry processes and conduct reflective inquiry
activities.
Prior to this study, researchers (Manlove, Lazonder, & De Jong, 2006) had developed some regulative learning
tools on handhelds designed to help students with collaborative development of inquiry strategies; handhelds had
become   increasingly    affordable in  classrooms   over   the course   of  recent  years (Roschelle,   2003; Zurita &
Nussbaum, 2004; Liu et al., 2006; Fry & Hin, 2006; Liu & Kao, 2007), and increased student participation and
collaboration    in classrooms  had  been   experimentally     facilitated by means   of   handheld devices.   However,
although    students could  use handhelds   as regulative   tools in their  pursuit  of knowledge,  they   had difficulty
generating a complete group experience in the limited time available. They could not easily exchange experiences
with peers due to lack of individual inquiry experience. Therefore,this study designed an inquiry learning activity
which integrated in-class discussion of inquiry planning using PDAs with pre-class regulation of inquiry planning.
Students could organize individual exploration plans on the web to build individual inquiry experience in advance.
At the laboratory, handhelds were adopted as a group regulation tool to help students organize and discuss their
group inquiry    plans based  on  their individual   inquiry plans.  This   study attempts  to bridge  the gap   between
individual and collaborative construction of knowledge in order to promote efficiency and effectiveness in science
laboratory courses.
This study   attempts  to understand    how  handheld  devices    can influence   group  regulation   when  students  are
provided    with group   regulation functions  on PDAs.     Recent   research  methodologies   in Computer     Supported
Collaborative Learning (CSCL) have put significant emphasis on the micro analysis of peer interaction, through
which improvement of learning may take place (Stahl, Koschmann, & Suthers, 2006). This study not only takes
into consideration the performance gain resulting from technologies but also attempts to uncover the reason why
the technology improves the interactions that lead to meaningful learning (Liu et al, in press). Accordingly, this
study uses micro analysis to explore the interaction demonstrated by student groups using the group regulation

                                                     182  ·  © ISLS
                                              ICLS 2010  ·   Volume 1

functions of PDAs. Furthermore, to provide a comprehensive understanding of how the PDAs and regulation
functions influence group inquiry achievement in laboratory courses, this study also analyzes the relationship
between group inquiry achievement and interaction patterns as revealed by micro analysis. By gathering and
analyzing the system usage logs of 56 college students in a laboratory course in National Central University, this
study attempts to answer the following research questions based on peer interaction analysis:
!    How do the students in a group interact with each other through PDAs with group regulation functionws hen
     using pre-regulated inquiry plans to form a group plan?
!    What kind of peer interaction patterns can be observed when students develop regulative strategies using
     PDAs that have group regulation functions?
!    How do the peer interaction patterns facilitated by the PDAs influence group inquiry achievement?
2.  Group inquiry planning via handhelds
The laboratory  course involved  in this study included    a pre-class inquiry regulation activity and   an in-class
collaborative inquiry regulation activity. The pre-class   inquiry activity required students to   build individual
inquiry plans based on a given science topic. Students were thereby able to learn the procedure and objectives of
an inquiry activity. In the in-class inquiry regulation activity, studentswere required to work with their partners to
generate a group plan based on the pre-generated plans. This study developed a pre-class inquiry regulation tool
on the web. Using this tool, students could make an inquiry plan. An inquiry plan consists of six main items: (1)
purposes of the inquiry, (2) related theories of the inquiry, (3) instruments, (4) hypothesis, (5) measurement
variables, and (6) procedures.

                       Figure 1. The regulative tool for group inquiry planning on PDAs

                                                  183  ·  © ISLS
                                                   ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

In  the laboratory,  the  teacher would    outline the purposes   of  inquiry,  and   then student groups  would   start to
regulate their group inquiry plan, which would contain the same six main items found in the individual inquiry
plans.  In order to  formulate    testable hypotheses    and  design  conclusive   experiments,   students were   asked  to
collaboratively revise and discuss the individual inquiry plans they had generated on the course website to reach a
unified group plan. The handhelds were used as an organizing tool to combine students' individual plans into a
group inquiry plan. Using the PDAs, students could review their own inquiry plans and compare them with those
developed by their partners while deciding on a unified group plan. An application on the PDAs could generate a
summary of the group inquiry plan based on the decisions the students made in class. Students could then proceed
to the inquiry activity and gather data based on the unified group plan. This whole process is interactive, because
students   were  able to  modify   the group     plan during  the inquiry   if necessary.   After  collecting all the data
necessitated by the group inquiry plan, students would discuss and develop a final report according to the inquiry
plan summary generated by the PDAs. Finally, the teacherwould evaluate the inquiry achievement of the student
groups based on the final reports.
This study develops a regulative tool for group inquiry planning on PDAs intended to support group members in
comparing, reviewing, and generating unified inquiry plans (Fig. 1). The regulation tool enables students to use
PDAs to refer to each others' pre-designed individual inquiry plans. During class activities, the individual inquiry
plans students made before class became options that all students could choose from when selecting the six main
items for their group inquiry plans. Students could review and check the provided options for the main items on
the PDAs. In order to generate a summary of an inquiry, firstly students needed to decide on the purposes and
related theories of   the inquiry. Individuals'    plans regarding   the above    main items   were shown   as options   in
different colors (Step 1 in fig. 1). Students could distinguish between and compare the different options provided
by  the group   members    by  color.  Secondly,   students   needed  to decide    which   of the measurement     variables
proposed by group members should be included in the group inquiry plan. Students were able to do this using the
PDAs by checking boxes next to the variables (Step 2 in fig. 1). Thirdly, students needed to select a hypothesisfor
the inquiry from among the hypotheses proposed by the group members (Step 3 in fig. 1). Fourthly, students
needed to decide on an executable procedure for the inquiry from the list of procedures proposed by the group
members (Step 4 in fig. 1). After students had finished the group regulation activities, the tool would generate a
summary of their inquiry plan on the PDAs (Step 5 in fig. 1).These interactions were recorded on the PDAs along
with details of the peer interactions that took place during the group regulation and inquiry activity. Students'
activities on the PDAs were archived for later analysis of peer interaction so that the effect of the PDAs' group
regulation tool on learning experience in laboratory courses could be confirmed.
3.  Method
The  primary  purpose     of this study is    to explore the  effects of  handheld    devices  with the above   mentioned
regulation functions by analyzing the peer interactions involved in collaborative inquiry activitiesT. he participants
were   56  freshman   students enrolled    in a  physics laboratory   course   at National  Central University    (Taiwan).
Students were divided into 17 groups, whose size ranged from three to four students. This study analyzes student
interactions over the course of two 3-hour sessions of a weekly laboratory class, during which they performed
experiments focused on Newton's second law of motion and the law of conservation of angular momentum.
Students were able to make their inquiry plans on the course website provided by the study. During the laboratory
class, students modified their inquiry plans, referred to options presented in other group members' inquiry plans,
and regulated a unified group plan using the PDAs provided by this study. All of the students' interactions were
recorded by the PDAs while the students regulated their group inquiry plan. After the class, the teacher evaluated
the inquiry reports.
Figure 2 shows the collaborative inquiry behavior found in two threads as recorded by the PDAs. For instance, if
student 1 (s1) checks item 1, this behavior is denoted as s1 (1). Likewise, if student 1 checks the second option of
item 3, this is denoted as s1 (3_2). All regulation activities of individuals, such as modifying options, choosing
options presented by other group members, and reviewing/comparing options provided by group members, were
logged in the PDAs. The activity log helps demonstrate the students' regulation behaviors and development of
regulative strategies as aided by PDA-based tools. This study analyzes peer interactions to determine what peer
interaction patterns students can engage in through PDAs and to confirm the influence of the regulation functions
provided by PDAs on the effectiveness of inquiry activities.

                                                 Figure 2. The activity log
As students performed collaborative regulation activities in the laboratory, data were collected and recorded by
the PDAs.   This study    analyzes a  total   of 360  minutes of  activity log.   All analyses of  peer interactions  were
performed by two independent researchers (coders). The analyses included the identification of peer interaction
activities, e.g. comparison, conflict, and resolution, as well as the classification of peer interaction patterns. The
inter-coder reliability (agreement) for each analysis was at least 85%, indicating that the analysis is sufficiently
reliable. Researchers resolved disagreements in analysis and categorization through discussion.
4.  Results and discussion

                                                       184  ·  © ISLS
                                               ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

The results of the analysis are categorized to address the following questions. (1) What types of peer interaction
can PDAs facilitate in order to help students to regulate their plans? (2) What general patterns of peer interactions
can be observed in students using PDAs? (3) How do the general patterns of peer interaction affect student
achievement in the context of the inquiry activities required by the laboratory course?
Peer interactions through PDAs
The activity logs were analyzed in detail to explore the peer interactions that occur during group regulation
activity. Upon analysis of the activity log, six main types of interaction were identified within the group regulation
activities. These types are as follows:
!   Comparison: Students often compared their own individual inquiry plans with those of others by switching
    the options of some items. In general, they performed such activities in a short period of time in order to
    understand the inquiry plans of others.
!   Perceived conflict (change of options): Suchinteraction occurred when one student chose a different option
    from that which was chosen by another group member. This behavior indicates that the student has noticed
    a difference of opinion between himself/herselfand others regarding the group inquiry plan.For instance, if
    student A chooses the hypothesis proposed by student B as the hypothesis of the group inquiry plan, student
    C  might modify the group       inquiry plan by    choosing another  hypothesis proposed   by himself/herself,
    creating a perceived conflict between student A and student C.
!   Perceived agreement: Such an interaction occurs when a student reviews the group plan and agrees on the
    group inquiry plan as proposed by others.
!   Resolution of conflict: While regulating a group plan, student A might switch to the option that student B
    chose after detecting the conflict between B and himself/herself (perceived conflict) regarding that item in
    the plan. Students A and B would then have reached a resolution regarding this item.
!   Unperceived conflict: The PDAs are personal devices that allow individuals to modify inquiry plans. There
    generally exists a time lag between personal modification of the application server and acknowledgment of
    the modification on other members' PDAs. For example, one student might modify the group inquiry plan
    with his/her PDA and thus cause a conflict with the group plan proposed by others. If other students cannot
    detect the conflict before this inquiry plan is sent off to others, this is unperceived conflict. Since the inquiry
    plans were concealed in       the PDAs,  other students   sometimes  could not  detect the conflicts between
    themselves regarding the inquiry plan.

                                          Figure 3. Group dynamic chart
In order to depict peer interaction explicitly, this study codifies and represents students' interactions based on the
aforementioned peer interaction events in a group dynamic chart (Fig. 3). Each bar in a row represents a thread of
student regulation activity in the PDA. Each dotted arrow from one thread to another in the chart denotes a
perceived conflict. For example, Fig. 3 shows two threadsthat proceeded concurrently after the student in thread 2
submitted his plan. The other student in thread 1 checked a different option for an item and noticed the conflict
between his inquiry plan and those of others (e.g.: line C and line D). Therefore, there is a dotted arrow between
the two threads to represent the perceived conflict. In addition, each thick arrow between threads in the chart
denotes an unperceived conflict. For instance, the arrow between threads 1 and 2 in the first chart of Fig. 3 reveals
that a student had not noticed another student's inquiry plan and did not perceive the difference betweenthat plan
and his/her own (e.g.: line A and line B), because the student in thread 1 had not submitted his/her plan. A
rectangle with vertical lines represents a student comparing his/her plan with those of others. Each long vertical
line indicates a student checking his/her own plan, while a short line indicates him/her checking the plans of others.
A rectangle with a horizontal line shadow denotes conflict and modification. A rectangle with a diagonal line
shadow denotes conflict resolution. Perceived agreement is indicated by a rectangle with a dotted shadow. The
group dynamic chart of each group was analyzed to determine what interaction patterns occurred during the
collaborative inquiry activities.
Analysis of the group dynamic chart reflects the frequency of different peer interaction activities. Table 1 lists the
frequency of each type of peer interaction. Table 1reveals that PDAs helped students obtain a global view of each
individual's inquiry plan. Students frequently performed comparison activities using the PDAs. In total, students
performed such comparisons on 152 items in the different individual inquiry plans. In addition, the PDAs also

                                                   185  ·  © ISLS
                                              ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

helped students to express agreement with their group members. While comparing different options, students
showed perceived agreement in 94 items of the group inquiry plans. In addition, students detected perceived
conflicts in 75 items and chose 169 options which differed from those chosen by their peers. Of the changes of
option selection in the group inquiry plans, 65 options were ultimately determined to be consistent among group
members. Thus, there were still many conflicts that remained unresolved. Interestingly, unperceived conflicts
occurred with high frequency. The log generated by the PDAs shows that there were conflicts between members
over 79 items. This indicates thatconflicts among students are often concealed when PDAsare used to mediate the
formation of group plans. When using such a mechanism, students still have difficulties solving conflicts when
attempting to create a unified group plan.
Table 1. Frequency of peer interaction in collaborative inquiry regulation activity
Interaction types                                        Frequency
Comparing of items                                                                                     152 items
Perceived agreement                                                                                      94 item
Perceived conflict (changing of options)                                                    75 item (169 options)
Resolution of conflict                                                                               65 (options)
Unperceived conflict                                                                                    79 items
Peer interaction patterns through PDAs

                       Figure 4. The group dynamic chart of four peer interaction patterns
Analysis of the group dynamic charts identifies four distinct interaction patterns (Fig. 4) occurring during the
collaborative inquiry activities observed in this study. These patterns are as follows:
! Concurrent informed cooperation: This pattern takes the form of two concurrent threads and occurs when
  students begin by working independently and then jointly revise each other!s plans to form the final plan. At
  the beginning ofthis pattern of interaction, individuals do not inform each otherof the work theyare doing, but
  instead each organizes   a group plan      individually. This  behavior allows    for   frequent occurrences of
  unperceived conflicts at the beginning due to the concurrentnature of the participation. At the later stage ofthe
  pattern, students revise their group plans based on the individuals! results. Perceived conflicts are detected

                                                  186  ·  © ISLS
                                                ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

  and resolved only at this stage. Therefore, the main characteristic of this pattern is the initially independent
  organization of group plans, upon which students then jointly base further revision of their group plan.
! Sequential informed   cooperation:      This interaction   pattern  occurs  when  students organize their plans
  sequentially, i.e., one student initiates a new thread and modifies the group plan, and then another student
  further revises the group plan based on these modifications. Unlike concurrent informed cooperation, this
  pattern only allows for perceived conflicts. There are no unperceived conflicts between the two threads.
! Concurrent concealed cooperation: Students following this pattern organize their plans concurrently and
  independently. They do not notice the difference between their own inquiry plans and those of others. The
  conflicts between their inquiry plans are concealed, and thus many unperceived conflicts occur in this pattern.
  Consequently, students who exhibited this pattern did not demonstrate any conflict resolution.
! No interaction: This pattern occurs when students do not interact with each other to make their group plans.

                       Figure 5. Peer cooperation patterns of the four interaction patterns
The four interaction patterns defined by this study demonstrate how students work together to organize their group
plans using PDAs. Figure 5 presents the four peer cooperation patterns in a comprehensive manner. In concurrent
informed cooperation, students generated group plans based on all individual inquiry plans and then revised the
plan collaboratively. Students exhibiting sequential informed cooperation generateda group inquiry plan andthen
each revised the plan one after another. Less productively, using the concurrent concealed cooperation pattern,
some students generated group plans based only on their individual plans without any cooperation. Even more
disconcertingly, some students did not     interact with   each other at all when formatting their group plans, in
accordance with the no interaction pattern.
This study categorizes the interaction patterns of each group based on the group dynamic charts. The distribution
of interaction patterns is represented in Table 2. Only five groups demonstrated concurrent informed cooperation
while thirteen groups exhibited the pattern of sequential informed cooperation. Surprisingly, there were ten groups
working in the pattern of concurrent concealed cooperation and six groups working in the no interaction pattern;
that is, students in these groups worked independently even when the regulation tools of the PDAs were provided
to facilitate group regulation of plans.
Table 2. Group achievement distribution among different interaction patterns and interaction behaviors mediated
by PDAs

                                                    187  ·  © ISLS
                                                ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

The interplay between interaction patterns and inquiry achievement
Student interaction and interaction patterns were analyzed to reveal how different patterns of interaction affect
inquiry achievement     in the  laboratory   course. This   study thus  analyzes group    interaction   patterns: group
performance as it relates to the five interaction types, time used to regulate group plans, and the ratio of conflict
resolution to demonstrate how the students used PDAs in the laboratory classes to affect their achievement in the
course. Because the PDAs were used to help students resolve conflicts and create shared inquiry plans, this study
measures the resolution ratio within each group by formula (1). The formula can also be used to determine how
different peer interaction patterns affect group inquiry achievement.
                Resolution ratio ! Total number of resolution of options by group members (1)
                                               Total number of changing of options
Table 2 shows the analysis of inquiry achievement and planning time in terms of peer interaction patterns and
interaction activities. Students   displayed   different  characteristics with  regard    to interaction  patterns  and
interaction activities. Obviously, students required more planning time in concurrent informed cooperation and
sequential  informed cooperation   than  in  concurrent   concealed   cooperation, because    the former  two   patterns
require time for students tounderstand each other!s opinions and to resolve conflicts. The average planning time
for concurrent informed cooperative exploration and sequential informed cooperative exploration were 41 and 17
minutes respectively. In contrast, the average planning time of concurrent concealed cooperation was only 10
minutes.
Furthermore, groups whose interactions were classifiable as thesequential informed cooperation pattern showeda
higher  frequency of    perceived  conflicts than  those demonstrating    concurrent  informed    cooperation.  Groups
exhibiting  concurrent  informed   cooperation    also had  a  higher conflict  resolution   ratio than that of   groups
following the sequential informed cooperation pattern, probably because each student following the concurrent
informed   cooperation  pattern,  after independently    revising the  group plan,    had acquired  richer   experience
organizing group plans and thus was better prepared to establish agreement in later activity. Conversely, student
groups  adhering  to the   pattern of   sequential informed    cooperation,  despite  ultimately   demonstrating   high
perceived agreement, were unable to achieve conflict resolution ratios as high as those of concurrent informed
cooperation groups, possibly because students following other students! work when revising group plans lack
personal experience in group plan development.
In the teacher!s evaluation of the final inquiry reports, the concurrent informed cooperation groups obtained the
highest overall scores (ranging from A- to A+) of all interaction patterns. The groups using sequential informed
cooperation achieved the second highest scores (ranging from B to A+). Table 2 shows that planning time and
resolution ratio may each play an important role in affecting group inquiry performance.When using the patterns
of concurrent informed cooperation and sequential informed cooperation, students spent more time planning and
achieved higher conflict resolution ratios.
These  patterns were    defined on the  basis  of the  various types  of  interaction engaged   in by   the groups. By
comparing   the differences  and  similarities of  the 34   groups, some  basic rules  to categorize  their  interaction
patterns could by developed:
!     Concurrent informed cooperative exploration: Students spend a great deal of time planning their inquiry (41
      minutes on average). Groups following this patterndemonstrated a high conflict resolution ratio (on average
      61%) and high perceived agreement (7.4 on average). Student groups following this pattern achieved the
      highest overall scores (ranging from A- to A+) in the teacher's evaluation of the inquiry reports.
!     Sequential informed cooperative exploration: Groups following this pattern showed a high frequency of
      perceived conflicts (10.3 on average). Students could perceive conflicts amongthemselves but did not reach
      a high conflict resolution ratio. Student groups following this pattern achieved the second highest overall
      scores (ranging from B to A+) in the teacher's evaluation of the inquiry reports.
!     Concurrent concealed exploration: Students work independently with only limited interaction. Some
      conflicts go unperceived. Neither conflict nor agreement is perceived by students. Student groups following
      this pattern achieved the second lowest overall scores (B) in the teacher's evaluation of the inquiry reports.
!     No interaction: There is no perceived conflict nor resolution. Student groups following this pattern achieved
      the lowest overall scores (ranging from B- to B) in the teacher's evaluation of the inquiry reports.
5. Conclusions

                                                     188  ·  © ISLS
                                                 ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

Because of the difficulties students encounter with inquiry in laboratory courses, this study attempts to provide
students with  regulative  tools on  PDAs   to   aid in  regulating  and interacting  with peers. Analysis  of  student
interaction through PDAs found five main types of peer interaction, i.e.comparison, perceived conflict, perceived
agreement, conflict resolution, and unperceived conflict, when student cooperation is mediated by PDAs. The
benefits of using PDAs in cooperative planning activities include the ability of PDAs to provide each student with
free access to the artifacts (individual inquiry plans) produced by every group member and thus to negotiate
directly with peers regarding those artifacts in order to produce group work. The four main interaction types
(comparison, perceived conflict, perceived agreement, and conflict resolution) that students demonstrated through
PDAs are important negotiation activities. This result reflects the effect PDAs have in facilitating the negotiation
of group work.
However, unperceived conflicts were frequently observed because of the client-server nature of PDA software.
The implementation      of the   regulation tools    on  the   PDAs   in this study    did not  enforce   simultaneous
synchronization among the PDAs of group members. In other words, the changes to the group plan made by one
member were not immediately displayed on the PDAs of other members. Students were able to obtain the most
recent state of the group work only by reloading after all members had submitted their latest group plans. This
facet of the design resulted in the frequent occurrence of unperceived conflicts.Unperceived conflicts may lessen
the ability of studentsto share their learning experiences with each other.Technological devices, PDAs in the case
of this study, can record and reflect students' current ideas and states, but unperceived conflicts may still be
concealed in the individual devices. Further investigation into the possibility of an effective status awareness
mechanism   to synchronize    the work  of  individuals     in PDAs   may  be  required   to alleviate the problem  of
unperceived  conflict.  For   example,  the reinforcement      mechanism   applied    in MCSCL     to  maintain  shared
understanding among group members may be applied to establish mutual understanding.
This study also identifies four interaction patterns that are indicative of the different styles of interaction afforded
by PDAs. The four interaction patterns are: concurrent informed cooperation, sequential informed cooperation,
concurrent concealed cooperation, and no interaction. Teachers and system designers should take note of the
advantages and disadvantages of using PDAs in facilitating group activities and use this information to avoid
unfavorable interaction patterns such as concurrent concealed cooperation. Different interaction patterns may
have different advantages and disadvantages. For instance, although studenst in groups using sequential informed
cooperation could perceive the current status of members, they still could not easily resolve their conflicts. Such
difficulties may result from the lack of prior experience in learning.     On the other hand, student groups using
concurrent informed cooperation could easily resolve conflicts but had problems with time constraints and some
unperceived  conflicts. However,    the best    way  to  help  students  efficiently negotiate and avoid   unperceived
conflicts still requires further investigation.
Students engaging in different interaction patterns showed different levels of inquiry achievement. Generally, the
amount   of time used   to  regulate group   plans   and   the ratio of  conflict resolution   seems  to affect student
achievement significantly. A high conflict resolution ratio helps students achieve high scores in the final inquiry
report. The study results confirm the importance of shared agreement in negotiation activities. This result is
consistent with the current principle of collaborative learning, which states that students have to express and
discuss  divergent ideas   in order  to construct    and   share knowledge    collaboratively   (Puntambekar,    2006).
Therefore, educators using PDAs in classrooms and the designers of groupware on PDAs should not only support
students in expressing personal ideas but should also build a mechanism or a protocol, such as the display of
different personal ideas as in this study or the MCSCL mechanism (Zurita & Nussbaum, 2004), to mediate the
negotiation process and help establish shared agreement.
References
Blumenfeld, P. C., Marx, R. W., Soloway, E., & Krajcik, J. (1996). Learning with peers: From small group
  cooperation to collaborative communities. Educational Researcher, 25(8), 37­42.
Edelson, D. C., Gordin, D. N., & Pea, R. D. (1999). Addressing the challenges of inquiry-based learning through
  technology and curriculum design. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 8(3&4), 391-450.
Fry, J. M., & Hin, M. K. T. (2006). Peer coaching with interactive wireless technology between student teachers:
  Satisfaction with role and communication. Interactive Learning Environments, 14(3), 12.
Jonassen, D. H. (1994). Toward a constructivist design model. Educational Technology, 34(4), 34­37.
Hinrichsen, J., & Jarrett, D. (1999). Science inquiry for the classroom: A literature review. The Northwest
  Regional Educational Laboratory Program Report.
Hollingworth, R. W., & McLoughlin, C. (2001). Developing science students. Australian Journal of Educational
  Technology, 17(1), 50-63.
Kirschner, P. A., Sweller, J., & Clark, R. E. (2006). Why minimal guidance during instruction does not work: An
  analysis of the failure of constructivist, discovery, problem-based, experiential, and inquiry-based teaching.
  Educational Psychologist, 41(2), 75-86.
Littleton, K. & Häkkinen, P. (1999). Learning together: Understanding the processes of computer-based
  collaborative learning. In P. Dillenbourg (Ed.) Collaborative Learning: Cognitive and Computational
  Approaches (pp. 20-33). Pergamon: Oxford.
Liu, C. C., Chou, C. C., Liu, B. J., & Yang, J. W. (2006). Improving mathematics teaching and learning
  experiences for hard of hearing students with wireless technology-enhanced classrooms. American Annals of
  the Deaf, 151(3), 345-355.
Liu, C. C., Kao L. C. (2007). "Do Handheld Devices Facilitate Face-to-Face Collaboration?" : Handheld Devices
  with Large Shared Display Groupware to Facilitate Group Interactions, Journal of Computer Assisted
  Learning. 23(4), 285-299.
Liu, C.C., Chung, C.W., Chen, N.S., Liu, B.J. (in press). Analysis of Peer Interaction in Learning Activities with
  Personal Handhelds and Shared Displays. Educational Technology and Society.
Manlove, S., Lazonder, A. W., & Jong, T. (2006). Regulative support for collaborative scientific inquiry learning.
  Journal of Computer Assisted Learning, 22(2), 87-98.
Mayer, R. E. (2004). Should there be a three-strikes rule against pure discovery learning? the case for guided
  methods of instruction. The American Psychologist, 59(1), 14-19.
Puntambekar, S. (2006). Analyzing collaborative interactions: divergence, shared understanding and construction
  of knowledge. Computers & Education, 47(3), 332-351.
Roschelle, J.(2003). Unlocking the learning value of wireless mobile devices. Journal of Computer Assisted
  Learning, 19(3), 260-272.
Stahl G., Koschmann T. and Suthers D. (2006) Computer-supported collaborative learning, in Cambridge
  Handbook of the Learning Sciences, ed. R. K. Sawyer (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK).
Zurita G. & Nussbaum M. (2004) Computer supported collaborative learning using wirelessly interconnected
  handheld computers. Computers and Education, 42(3), 289­314.

                                                     189  ·   © ISLS
