                                           ICLS 2010  ·    Volume 2

   Learning about Complexity and Beyond: Theoretical and
    Methodological Implications for the Learning Sciences

  Organizer: Michael J. Jacobson, Centre for Research on Computer-supported Learning and Cognition,
                    The University of Sydney, michael.jacobson@sydney.edu.au

    Chair: Uri Wilensky, Center for Connected Learning & Computer Based Modeling, Northwestern
                                 University, uri@northwestern.edu

    Discussant: Peter Reimann, Centre for Research on Computer-supported Learning and Cognition,
                     The University of Sydney, peter.reimann@synedy.edu.au

       Abstract:  This paper  provides  an overview           of a   symposium   that explored the
       implications of complexity for the field of the learning sciences. Two papers explored
       aspects of learning about complex systems in the domains of physics and electricity and
       of the mathematics of change and variation. The third paper viewed learning from a
       complexity perspective as an   emergent        phenomenon,     and proposes  to   compliment
       traditional quantitative and qualitative methodologies used in learning sciences research
       with computational agent-based modeling methods. The fourth paper is a "theoretical
       case study" in which an "ontological network theory" based on scale free networks is
       proposed, and then used  to reframe the        debate  in  the learning  sciences concerning
       "coherent knowledge"   versus "knowledge-in-pieces"          theories of conceptual  change.
       Overall, it is hoped this session stimulated interest in new theoretical and methodological
       "lenses" for understanding the challenges of learning about complex systems and for
       doing research into learning as complex systems.

Overview
We live in an age where many 21st century scientists theoretically conceptualize and methodologically
investigate complex physical and social systems in new ways that enable consideration of critical aspects of
how these systems behave that have been simplified or ignored in earlier research. For example, whereas
neo-Darwinian views of evolution highlighted the importance of natural selection, recent bio-complexity
perspectives also stress notions of self-organization, interdependence, co-evolution, and emergent patterns
(Bar-Yam, 1997; Gell-Mann, 1994; Holland, 1995; Kauffman, 1993, 1995; Simon, 1999). Other
complexity concepts that scientists are using to study complex natural and even synthetic or artificial
systems include multi-scale hierarchical organization, dynamical attractors, deterministic chaos, network
theories, developmental trajectories, and fitness landscapes.
       However, in the learning sciences, interest in complexity has to date focused primarily on issues
associated with learning about complex systems, such as papers in the learning about complex systems
strand in the Journal of the Learning Sciences by Sabelli (2006), Jacobson and Wilensky (2006), Goldstone
(2006), Lesh (2006), Hmelo-Silver and Azevedo (2006), Hmelo-Silver, Marathe, and Liu (2007), and
Goldstone and Wilensky (2008). An assertion explored in this symposium is that "concepts and
methodologies from the study of complex systems raise important issues of theoretical and methodological
centrality in the field of the learning sciences itself (p. 11) (Jacobson & Wilensky, 2006). Clancey (2008)
has made a similar claim about the central role of complexity and systems thinking as scientific antecedents
of views of situation cognition in the cognitive sciences.
       The purpose of this symposium is to accept the premise that knowledge about the dynamics of
complex physical and social systems is important for students in the 21st century to understand and to then
look at empirical research into the learnability of these ideas. Two papers explored aspects of learning
about complex systems in the domains of physics and electricity and of the mathematics of change and
variation. Both of these papers employ agent-based models and visualizations as important interactive
representational artifacts central to the respective learning interventions employed. In addition, other papers
in this symposium considered ways in which theoretical and methodological perspectives from complexity
may inform research in our field. The third paper in the symposium examined the methodological
limitations of quantitative and qualitative methods used in the majority of learning sciences research if one
views learning as an emergent phenomenon, and proposed complementing these methodologies with

                                               187  ·  © ISLS
                                           ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 2

computational agent-based methods. The fourth paper was a "theoretical case study" that proposed an
"ontological network theory" based on scale free networks, which then was used to reframe the debate in
the learning sciences concerning "coherent knowledge" versus "knowledge-in-pieces" theories of
conceptual change.
       The papers in this symposium fit together in a complementary manner. All papers in this
symposium employ various complexity conceptual perspectives such as agent interactions, self-
organization, hierarchical levels, emergent properties, scale free networks, and three of the four papers
explicitly use agent-based models either to facilitate learning or to enhance research. The format of the
symposium followed this sequence: (a) comments on the symposium themes by the Chair (5 minutes), (b)
15 minute talks by each of the presenters (60 minutes), (c) discussant comments (10 minutes), and (e)
moderated audience discussion (15 minutes). Overall, it is hoped this session stimulated interest in new
theoretical and methodological "lenses" for understanding the challenges of learning about complex
systems and for doing research into learning as complex systems.

References

Bar-Yam, Y. (1997). Dynamics of complex systems.      Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.
Clancey, W. J. (2008). Scientific antecedents of situated cognition In P. Robbins & M. Aydede (Eds.),
       Cambridge Handbook of Situated (pp. 11-34).       Cambridge, MA: Cambridge University Press.
Gell-Mann, M. (1994). The quark and the jaguar: Adventures in     the simple and the complex. New York:
       Freeman and Company.
Goldstone, R. L. (2006). The complex systems see-change in education. The Journal of the Learning
       Sciences, 15(1), 35-43.
Goldstone, R. L., & Wilensky, U. (2008). Promoting transfer through complex systems principles. Journal
       of the Learning Sciences, Manuscript in press.
Hmelo-Silver, C. E., & Azevedo, R. (2006). Understanding complex systems: Some core challenges.
       Journal of the Learning Sciences, 15(1), 53­61.
Hmelo-Silver, C. E., Marathe, S., & Liu, L. (2007). Fish swim, rocks sit, and lungs breathe: Expert-novice
       understanding of complex systems. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 16(3), 307-331.
Holland, J. H. (1995). Hidden order: How adaptation builds complexity.  New York: Addison-Wesley.
Jacobson, M. J., & Wilensky, U. (2006). Complex systems in education: Scientific and educational
       importance and implications for the learning sciences. The Journal of the Learning Sciences,
       15(1), 11-34.
Kauffman, S. (1993). The origins of order: Self-organization and selection in evolution. New York:
       Oxford University Press.
Kauffman, S. (1995). At home in the universe: The search for laws of self-organization and complexity.
       New York: Oxford University Press.
Lesh, R. (2006). Modeling students modeling abilities: The teaching and learning of complex systems in
       education. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 15(1), 45-52.
Sabelli, N. (2006). Understanding complex systems strand: Complexity, technology, science, and
       education. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 15(1), 5-9.
Simon, H. A. (1999). Can there be a science of complex systems? In Y. Bar-Yam (Ed.), Unifying themes in
       complex systems (pp. 3-14). Cambridge, MA: Perseus Books.

                                               188  ·  © ISLS
                                            ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 2

Learning About Complex Systems

The Role of Perceptual Signatures and Agent-Level Mechanisms in Understanding
Emergence: An Example in Learning Electricity

Pratim Sengupta, Mind, Matter & Media Lab, Vanderbilt University, pratim.sengupta@vanderbilt.edu
Uri Wilensky, Center for Connected Learning & Computer Based Modeling, Northwestern University,
uri@northwestern.edu

Research Goals
Our primary research goal is to investigate the effectiveness and cognitive (epistemological) implications of
representing electrical conduction in a multi-agent based computational learning environment based on
agent-level, intuitive mechanisms.

Theoretical Framework
It has been widely noted that knowledge in the various sub-domains of physics, including electricity, is
organized around a few central principles that in turn typically require knowledge of vector algebra and
calculus (Belcher & Olbert, 2003; Bagno & Eylon, 1990; Larkin et al, 1981)1. A design goal that often
drives instructional design in electromagnetism is to organize learners' knowledge around these principles
(Bagno and Eylon, 1997; Belcher and Olbert, 2003; Reiner et al, 2000). In contrast to this, the central
design principle of the NIELS learning environment (NetLogo Investigations in Electromagnetism,
Sengupta & Wilensky, 2005, 2008) is to represent and organize phenomena in the domain of introductory
electricity in terms of a few intuitive "mechanisms" that in turn are based individual agent-level behaviors
and attributes. For example, resistance is represented in terms of simple electron-atom interactions
("collisions" or "bouncing"), and electric current is represented as the emergent "flow" flow of electrons,
that depends on agent-level attributes (e.g., number and speed of electrons).

Context and Methods
In this paper, we will present the analysis of 5th grade (n = 20) students' interactions with a sequence of two
NIELS models (Current in a Wire model (Sengupta and Wilensky, 2008a), and Series Circuit model
(Sengupta and Wilensky, 2008b)). Activity Sheets accompanying each model scaffolded learners'
interactions with these models, during which they were prompted to observe the agent-level attributes and
interactions, and were asked provide written explanations of the following macro-level phenomena in pre-
and post-tests: a) how a light bulb works; and b) the behavior of electric current in a light bulb circuit (i.e.,
whether and why electric current is equal throughout the circuit with a light bulb). The data presented here
includes participants' written explanations and semi-clinical interviews with a few selected students.

Data & Analysis
Post-test responses show that all students indicated that electric current would be equal on either side of the
light bulb, compared to less than 20% in the pre-test. Written explanations and interview responses show
that participants were able to identify both the "mechanism" that produces light, as well as the reason(s) for
constancy of electric current, based on the agent-level natural behavior of the electrons in the circuit ­
"bouncing up and down", and/or "friction" with the atoms ­ which in turn produced heat, and then, light.
        Our argument here is that the intuitive nature of these mechanisms is due to the distinct perceptual
signatures of some of the key agent-level behaviors. For example, although the Current in a Wire model
depict electron-atom collisions, it does not contain any cues pertaining to the temperature of the system
(wire). Yet, almost all the participants in their written explanations indicated it is the collisions (and the
resultant friction) that would "heat up" the wire (filament) of the bulb and that in turn generates "light."
The perceptual signatures here     are "heat" and   "light,"   both of   which  are ubiquitous and   intricate
components of our repertoire of everyday interactions with the physical world. Goldstone and Wilensky
(2009) argued  that such perceptual    signatures are    characteristics of multi-agent based  computational
representations of the underlying mechanisms that generate emergent complex phenomena across several
domains.

1 For example, Maxwell's equations can explain a large number of different electromagnetic phenomena,
and the behavior of most electric circuits can be predicted using Kirchhoff's laws.

                                                189  ·  © ISLS
                                           ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 2

Significance
These results suggest that representing electrical conduction in terms of intuitive, agent-level behaviors can
enable learners as young as 5th graders to understand and explain (in a scientifically correct manner) the
behavior of electric current in linear circuits, which misconceptions researchers have shown to be difficult
for even college students to understand (Chi et al., 1994; Reiner et al., 2000; Bagno & Eylon, 1997).

References
Bagno, E., & Eylon, B-S. (1997). From problem solving to a knowledge structure: An example from the
       domain of electromagnetism. American Journal of Physics, 65, 726.
Belcher, J. W., & Olbert, S. (2003). Field line motion in classical electromagnetism. American Journal of
       Physics, 71, 220.
Chi, M. T. H., Slotta, J. D. and de Leeuw, N. (1994). From things to processes: A theory of conceptual
       change for learning science concepts. Learning and Instruction. 4,  27-43.
Chi, M.T.H. (2005). Common sense conceptions of emergent processes: Why some misconceptions are
       robust. Journal of the Learning Sciences. 14. 161-199.
Sengupta, P., & Wilensky, U. (2005). N.I.E.L.S: An Emergent Multi-Agent Based Modeling Environment
       for Learning Physics. Proceedings of the Agent-Based Systems for Human Learning Workshop,
       4th International Joint Conference on Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems (AAMAS
       2005), Utrecht, Netherlands.
Sengupta, P., & Wilensky, U. (2008). Designing Across Ages: On The Low-Threshold-High-Ceiling Nature
       of NetLogo Based Learning Environments . Paper presented at the annual meeting of the American
       Educational Research Association (AERA 2008), New York, NY.
Slotta, J. D. & Chi, M.T.H. (2006). The impact of ontology training on conceptual change: Helping
       students understand the challenging topics in science. Cognition and Instruction. 24(2), 261 ­ 289.

Seeing Change in the World from Different Levels: Understanding the
Mathematics of Complex Systems

Michelle Wilkerson-Jerde, Uri Wilensky
Center for Connected Learning & Computer Based Modeling, Northwestern University
michelle.wilkerson@gmail.com, uri@northwestern.edu

In an increasingly dynamic and data-driven world, it is important for all students to be able to understand
and interpret mathematical patterns over time in the context of the real-world phenomena that generate
them. While there is a growing body of evidence that students as early as middle school can understand
some fundamental and powerful ideas related to the mathematics of change over time in terms of real-
world contexts such as motion or banking (Confrey, Maloney, & Castro-Filho, 1997; Nemirovsky, Tierney,
& Wright, 1998; Roschelle, Kaput, & Stroup, 2000), as well as the sophisticated dynamics of many
complex systems (Wilensky & Reisman, 2006; Wilensky & Resnick, 1999), little is known about how they
might think about mathematical change as it relates to complex systems: where a number of different
behaviors and entities all contribute to a single quantity of interest, rather than a single behavior or
phenomenon. But such systems are increasingly important in all aspects of academic and everyday life.
From global temperatures that are increasing exponentially due to increased individual consumption to
employment patterns that affect individual workers and are influenced by consumer spending, students
must be able to understand not only how to interpret rates of change in the world, but also how individual
entities and their actions and interactions contribute to and are affected by those rates of change.
       Knowing how students think and learn about change over time in such systems is important not
only because it can help prepare students as active and informed citizens (Sabelli, 2006), but also because it
can serve as a new access point to more formal mathematical topics such as calculus (Nemirovsky, Tierney,
& Ogonowski, 1993; Stroup, 2002), and provide a better foundation for students entering the natural and
social sciences where such systems are especially common (AAAS, 1991). That traditional calculus-based
mathematics and notions of rate of change are so widely applicable and powerful, yet can so easily
obfuscate the very mechanisms and elements that are at the core of those systems, presents a fundamental
challenge for mathematics and science educators. In this presentation, we will explore the potential for
Agent-Based Modeling (ABM) to provide students with an alternative, intellectually honest means to
construct and analyze the mathematical trends produced by complex systems.

                                               190  ·  © ISLS
                                             ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 2

       Agent-based modeling shifts the encoding of quantitative change from an aggregate-level
quantitative trend (for example, the rate of change of a population count) to a collection of agent-level
behaviors that produce those trends (the reproduction behaviors of individuals). As a result of this shift,
agent-based modeling can represent and reflect quantitative change in a way that includes notions of
randomness, sensitivity to local conditions, the role of nonuniform distributions in aggregation, and other
powerful aspects characteristic of change in systems that are not dealt with in traditional calculus. While
considerable research has investigated how computation has expanded who can learn the mathematics of
change, less is known about how it can expand what can be learned about the mathematics of change.
       We propose that such a practice can:

   ·   Broaden student access to the mathematics of change and variation, by providing an alternative
       language with which to "speak" and "build" mathematical models of multi-agent systems that
       change over time.
   ·   Make more accessible to students the connections between the mathematical model(s) of a system,
       and the behavior and mechanisms that comprise that system.
   ·   Provide students with an infrastructure within which the ideas of calculus can be applied to a large
       class of interesting, and personally relevant, phenomena.

       We will support these claims with evidence from think-aloud (Ericsson & Simon, 1984), semi-
clinical (Clement, 2000) interviews conducted with 12 high school students enrolled in a precalculus
course, who engaged in agent-based model building activities related to population growth and analyzed
the graphs of mathematical trends produced by those models. These interviews are part of a larger design
research agenda that intends to explore the potential for a constructionist, computational agent-based
modeling environment to provide students a flexible, meaningful context within which students can explore
the mathematics of complex systems. Findings suggest that while students were initially able to connect the
behavior of a population plot to the behavior of the agent-based model, they were not able to articulate how
the modeled reproductive behavior of that population, or how certain real-world factors such as a
catastrophic event or individual preferences on childbearing might be manifested in the notion of "rate of
change" or in the featured plots. They were also likely to attribute fluctuations in the plot to real-world
events that were not included in the model, or develop incorrect mathematical explanations for real-world
factors. In other words, students had great difficulty connecting the behavior of the model to mathematical
ideas such as rate of change; when they tried to do so, they struggled and were often unsuccessful. After
interacting with, and building their own, agent based models of population growth, students were much
more likely to consider explicitly how behaviors that they knew were included in the model might play a
role in the mathematical trends generated by that model, and were better able to predict mathematical
trends given behaviors that were not included in the model. They were more likely to consider issues of
randomness, individual heterogeneity, and the "stripped down" nature of modeling (that is, that not every
real-world factor can be included in a given model) when analyzing mathematical trends and discussing
mathematical models.

References

Clement, J. (2000).  Analysis   of clinical interviews:   Foundations  & model  viability. In R. Lesh     (Ed.),
       Handbook      of research   methodologies for    science  and  mathematics education   (pp. 341-385):
       Lawrence Erlbaum.
Confrey, J., Maloney, A., & Castro-Filho, J. (1997). Interacting diagrams: A new learning tool. Paper
       presented at the PME-NA 19, Columbus, OH.
Ericsson, K. A., & Simon, H. A. (1984). Protocol analysis: Verbal reports as data: MIT Press.
Nemirovsky, R., Tierney, C., & Ogonowski, M. (1993). Children, additive change, and calculus. TERC.
Nemirovsky,    R., Tierney,  C. C.,  &  Wright,  T.    (1998).  Body  motion  and graphing.   Cognition     and
       Instruction, 16(2), 119-172.
Roschelle, J., Kaput,   J., &  Stroup, W.   (2000).  Simcalc:   Accelerating students' engagement   with     the
       mathematics      of  change. In  M.   Jacobson     & R.   B.  Kozma   (Eds.), Research,   design,    and
       implementing advanced technology learning environments. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Rutherford, F. J., & Ahlgren, A. (1991). Science for all Americans. New York: Oxford University Press
       New York.

                                                 191  ·  © ISLS
                                            ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 2

Sabelli, N. (2006).  Complexity, technology,   science,  and   education. Journal of the   Learning Sciences,
         15(1), 5-9.
Stroup,  W. M. (2002).  Understanding   qualitative   calculus: A  structural synthesis of learning research.
         International Journal of Computers for Mathematical Learning, 7, 167-215.
Wilensky, U., & Reisman, K. (2006). Thinking like a wolf, a sheep or a firefly: Learning biology through
         constructing and testing computational theories - An embodied modeling approach. Cognition and
         Instruction, 24(2), 171-209.
Wilensky, U., & Resnick, M. (1999). Thinking in Levels: A Dynamic Systems Perspective to Making
         Sense of the World. Journal of Science Education and Technology, 8(1).

Theoretical and Methodological Implications of Complexity

Learning as an Emergent Phenomenon: Methodological Implications

Manu Kapur, Learning Sciences Laboratory, National Institute of Education, Nanyang Technological
University, Singapore, manu.kapur@nie.edu.au
Michael J. Jacobson, Centre for Research on Computer-supported Learning and Cognition, The University
of Sydney, michael.jacobson@sydney.edu.au

In this paper, we put forth a theoretical cum methodological proposal for a line of inquiry that seeks to
understand learning as an emergent phenomenon. Our theoretical and methodological arguments detail how
an emergent conception of learning places limits on experimental and descriptive approaches, whether used
alone or in combination. These limits are not so much a function of causality or reduction, but the need to
deal with the dialectical co-existence of linearity and non-linearity that often characterizes complex
phenomenon. To overcome these limits, albeit only partially, we leverage complexity theory to advance
computational agent-based models as part of an integrated, iteratively validated phenomenological-ABM
inquiry cycle to understand learning as an emergent phenomenon from the "bottom up."
         Although there is much excitement about the possibilities that computational methods bring to the
table, there remains little theoretical and methodological exposition of why and how computational
methods can be integrated with existing quantitative and qualitative methods to potentially expand the
research toolkit of educational researchers. How do existing quantitative and qualitative methods fall short
and how might computational methods be integrated to provide better understanding of the phenomenon of
learning, and vice versa? Our argument is based on the premise that learning is a complex phenomenon,
which under certain conditions exhibits emergent properties. Indeed, many contexts of learning--formal or
informal, groups or individuals--are in fact complex systems (Jacobson & Wilensky, 2006; Kapur et al.,
2007). It is this very complexity that sets up the stage for the emergence of knowledge structures,
interactional patterns, values, norms, identity, culture, and so on. Invoking emergence, however, requires
that we deal with a fundamental tenet of complexity: an emergent phenomenon is ontologically and
methodologically irreducible, i.e., an emergent phenomenon is its own shortest description (Kauffman,
1995). This simple yet powerful tenet poses serious methodological challenges. Through a careful analysis
of the assumptions underpinning quantitative and qualitative methods, we will build a case that existing
methods fail to adequately address the issues of non-linearity, temporality, spatiality, and phase-space that
are of central to understanding emergent phenomenon. We will discuss how and the extent to which these
issues can be addressed by integrating computational agent-based methods with existing quantitative and
qualitative methods (Abrahamson & Wilensky, 2005; Blikstein, Abrahamson, & Wilensky, 2006;
Goldstone & Janssen, 2005). In the final analysis, we propose an iterative process of building from and
validating with phenomenological theory and data to seek a better understanding of the complex
phenomenon of learning noting very well that, any method, be it quantitative, qualitative, or computational,
used alone or in combination, will necessarily remain reductive.

References
Abrahamson,   D., &   Wilensky,  U.   (2005). Piaget?    Vygotsky?  I'm   game!:  Agent-based  modeling    for
         psychology research. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the Jean Piaget Society, Vancouver,
         Canada.
Blikstein, P., Abrahamson, D., & Wilensky, U. (2006). Minsky, mind, and models: Juxtaposing agent based
         computer simulations and clinical-interview data as a methodology for investigating cognitive

                                                192  ·  © ISLS
                                            ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 2

         developmental   theory. Paper  presented   at   the annual   meeting of  the    Jean Piaget Society,
         Baltimore, MD.
Goldstone, R. L. (2006). The complex systems see-change in education. The Journal of the Learning
         Sciences, 15(1), 35-43.
Goldstone, R. L.,  &   Janssen,  M. A. (2005).  Computational      models of  collective behavior. Trends   in
         Cognitive Sciences, 9(9), 424-429.
Jacobson,  M. J., &  Wilensky,   U.  (2006). Complex      systems  in education:  Scientific  and educational
         importance and  implications  for  the learning  sciences. The   Journal of the  Learning   Sciences,
         15(1), 11-34.
Kapur, M., Voiklis, J., & Kinzer, C. (2007). Sensitivities to early exchange in synchronous computer-
         supported collaborative learning (CSCL) groups. Computers and Education, 51, 54-66.
Kauffman, S. (1995). At home in the universe: The search for the laws of self-organization and complexity.
         New York: Oxford University Press.

Ontologies as Scale Free Networks: Implications for Theories of Conceptual
Change

Michael J. Jacobson, Centre for Research on Computer-supported Learning and Cognition, The University
of Sydney, michael.jacobson@sydney.edu.au
Manu Kapur, Learning Sciences Laboratory, National Institute of Education, Nanyang Technological
University, Singapore, manu.kapur@nie.edu.au

This paper provides a "theoretical case study" of how perspectives from complexity research might provide
insights into debates of theory in the learning sciences. The debate we examine concerns the "fault line" in
the field related to the "knowledge-in-pieces" versus "coherent knowledge" about conceptual change
(diSessa, 2006), which extends back to the seminal monograph in Cognition and Instruction in which
diSessa (1993) articulated his theory of phenomenological primitives (p-prims) and of "knowledge-in-
pieces."
         An Ontological Networks Theory (ONT) is proposed in this paper that combines complexity
views about scale-free network topologies with learning sciences perspectives about knowledge
representation, conceptual change, and learning. Briefly, scale-free networks (Barabasi, Albert, & Jeong,
1999; Barabasi & Bonabeau, 2003; Steyversa & Tenenbaum, 2005; Watts & Strogatz, 1998) resemble the
airline system that consists of hubs, which are nodes with a very high number of links, in contrast to
random networks--such as a national highway system--that consist of nodes with randomly placed
connections. Barabasi et al. (1999) demonstrated that the basic mechanism that produces a scale free
network involves: (a) growth (addition of new nodes), and (b) preferential attachment (the probability of a
new node linking with an existing node is proportional to the number of links the existing node has).
         The ONT is explicitly based on these core properties of scale-free networks. We propose that the
representation of knowledge about a variety of scientific phenomena consists of network configurations of
nodes and hubs involving preferential attachment and selection processes.    Ontological nodes or O-Nodes
are relatively "small" domain specific ideas about natural phenomena. O-Nodes are conceptualized as
being similar to the construct of phenomenological primitives or p-prims (diSessa, 1993). In contrast,
ontological hubs or O-Hubs are highly connected nodes (i.e., hubs in scale free network theory) that we
regard as similar to the psychological construct of "ontological categories" (Chi, 1992, 2005; Lakoff,
1987). (The full paper discusses the ONT in more detail, including selection processes and deactivating of
nodes.)
         Recently it has been argued by diSessa (2006) that several theories about how people solve
problems and learn often conceptualize knowledge as being relatively stable, consistent, and "coherent."
He maintains that these "coherent knowledge" theories have been more common than "knowledge-in-
pieces" theories (such as diSessa's) in which ideas are viewed as fragmented and highly influenced by
contextual cues and factors. Chi and her associates have articulated one representative theoretical view of
"coherent" knowledge and conceptual change. Chi (1992) proposed a theory (which has been iteratively
revised for several years, see Chi (2005)) that difficulties learners have with changing their concepts about
certain types of knowledge, particularly in the sciences, may be explained as a result of ascribing the
concepts being learned to inappropriate ontological categories. Chi's basic argument is that students will
need to make an ontological shift if they are to achieve conceptual change about such scientific concepts.

                                                193  ·  © ISLS
                                            ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 2

         In this paper, we propose that the ONT may be used to reframe this debate in a principled manner.
First, p-prims appear to be "node-like" in that they are described as "Elements: P-prims are rather small
knowledge structures, typically involving configurations of only a few parts..." (diSessa, 1993, p. 111). In
contrast, other major theories of conceptual change, such as by Chi, seem to describe cognitive structures
such as "ontological categories" that are more "hub-like" than the "node-like" p-prims of diSessa. We
believe the ONT has theoretical properties that are consistent with the major assertions and empirical
findings associated with these two major conceptual change theoretical camps in the learning sciences (i.e.,
"coherent knowledge" versus "knowledge-in-pieces"). Further, the ONT as advantages over the learning
sciences theory, such as the incorporation of a mechanism or process for how and why certain ideas link or
do not link together, that is, the principle of preferential attachment, whereby more highly connected nodes
(and hubs) have a higher probability of being linked to than less connected nodes. Thus new scientific ideas
we might wish for students to learn would have a higher probability of linking to already formed
ontological hubs (i.e., ontological categories), and thus there is a degree of "coherence" or consistency in
how a conceptual network is activated, which research on conceptual change by researchers such as Chi has
shown. Another potential advantage of the ONT is that as other researchers make progress on the properties
and characteristics of scale-free networks mathematically and in terms of applications in other domains
(e.g., neuroscience), these advances may in turn inform and enhance our understanding of processes of
learning in our field. Finally, it is hoped this "theoretical case study" might be suggestive of how
complexity perspectives more generally may be explored for their potential to inform other issues of theory
and methodology in the learning sciences.

References

Barabasi, A.-L., Albert, R., & Jeong, H. (1999). Mean-field theory for scale-free random networks. Physica
         A, 272, 173-187.
Barabasi, A. L., & Bonabeau, E. (2003). Scale-Free Networks. Scientific American, 288(5), 60-69.
Chi, M. T. H. (1992). Conceptual change within and across ontological categories: Implications for
         learning and discovery in science. In R. Giere (Ed.), Minnesota studies in the philosophy of
         science: Cognitive models of science (Vol. XV, pp. 129-186).   Minneapolis: University      of
         Minnesota Press.
Chi, M. T. H. (2005). Commonsense conceptions of emergent processes: Why some misconceptions are
         robust. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 14(2), 161-199.
diSessa, A. (1993). Towards an epistemology of physics. Cognition and Instruction, 10(2), 105-225.
diSessa, A. A. (2000). Changing Minds: Computers, Learning, and Literacy.    Cambridge, MA:     Bradford
         Book, The MIT Press.
diSessa, A. A. (2006). A history of conceptual change research: Threads and fault lines. In R. K. Sawyer
         (Ed.), The Cambridge Handbook of the Learning Sciences (pp. 265-281).   Cambridge, UK:
         Cambridge University Press.
Lakoff, G. (1987). Women, fire, and dangerous things:    What categories reveal about the mind.      Chicago:
         University of Chicago Press.
Steyversa, M., & Tenenbaum, J. B. (2005). The Large-Scale Structure of Semantic Networks: Statistical
         Analyses and a Model of Semantic Growth Cognitive Science, 29, 41­78
Thelen, E., & Smith, L. B. (1994). A dynamic systems approach to the development of cognition and
         action. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Watts, D. J., & Strogatz, S. (1998). Collective dynamics of "small world" networks. Nature.(393), 440-442.

                                                194  ·  © ISLS
