                                                  ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 2

     Understanding the Role of Place in Environmental Education
                                               across Settings
 Scalone Giovanna, Tzou Carrie, Bell Philip, University of Washington, 1100 NE 45th Street, Suite 200, Box
                                              354941, Seattle, WA 98105
                                Email:    {gscalone, tzouct, pbell}@u.washington.edu
 Rose Shari, Calabrese Barton Angela, Michigan State University, 327 Erickson Hall, Dept. of Teacher Education,
                                    Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI 48824
                                             Email: {levines2, acb}@msu.edu

           Abstract: This session explores the role place plays in environmental science learning of
           youth in formal and informal settings. Environmental education has failed to address the lived
           experiences  and  narratives   of youth  living  in   areas most  in  need   of  social, political,  and
           environmental change; and little is known how or why youth might position themselves or be
           positioned as members of the complex ecology of our changing environments.               These  papers
           report on the role of place by looking at the way it is manifested in situated activity systems.
           We argue that place is socially (re)constructed by youth where we come to understand the
           relations youth develop to a place, and the ways in which youth position themselves and are
           positioned socioculturally, politically, and geographically. To illustrate how this plays out, we
           draw  on  a `envisioning   your   future neighborhood'      mapping    activity, a community     based
           program, `GET City', that is focused on green energy issues, and an instructional unit, `My
           Place in  Puget   Sound'    to understand    how     youth  make     connections   to place   and    are
           empowered to make decisions and changes in their local communities.

Introduction
With rising    worldwide    concerns   about   detrimental    human    impacts   on   the   environment,   it   is becoming
increasingly essential that we educate youth to both understand environmental issues and have the agency and
expertise to solve these issues (NAAEE, 2004; Grass & Agyemon, 2002). However, environmental education is
failing to address issues of environmental justice--especially around issues of race, social class, and power
relations--that reflect multiple cultural perspectives, thus serving to reinforce dominant societal values and
marginalize those groups of youth who are most impacted by the most pressing modern environmental issues
(Agyemon,    2003;   Grass   &  Agyemon,      2002;   Lewis   &  James,    1995).  Specifically,    environmental     science
education needs to address the lived experiences and narratives of youth living in areas most in need of social,
political, and   environmental  change.    Literature  in  science  education    has   acknowledged    the  importance     of
connecting formal science instruction with students' out of school lives (cf. McIntyre, Rosebery & Gonzalez,
2001). In so doing, environmental education may play a role in helping youth see the places in which they live,
learn, play, and work as places in which they can enact positive social change. What is needed, therefore, is a
way  to connect     environmental    education with   the  places  where     youth live their   lives and  how     places  are
constructed for and by youth has implications for the learning pathways that are available to them.
           In this session we take a social justice perspective to challenge the implicit purposes and goals of
environmental    education   and    understand    the power     relationships   that  intersect  the  cultures     of  school,
environmental education, and home. We also argue for a systematic understanding of the role that place plays in
environmental learning of youth in formal and informal settings. In order to think about place as a construct, we
draw from    a  spatialized critical  social theory.  Place   is political and   ideological  because   it is   shaped    from
historical and   natural  elements   (Lefebvre    & Enders,   1976).   It is also  a  medium    through   which    culture  is
reproduced because of the way it is organized and experienced (Gruenewald, 2003b). According to Rodman
(1992),  place   is  also  socially  constructed  which    is determined     by individual    agency   and  forces    beyond
individual  control.   For the individual,   places have   multiple    meanings    in terms  of  physical, emotional,     and
experiential realities at particular times.       Consequently,    Wacquant      (1995:    427)  posits    that    places  are
understood   as   social   entities where    they are  "produced    institutionally,   within   ecological    and     technical
constraints, by social and political struggles over competing uses of spaces, resources, and people."
           This paper set explores the role place plays in environmental science learning of youth in formal and
informal   settings. Specifically,   the  papers  explore  how   place,   within   situated activity  systems,     is socially
(re)constructed by youth where we come to understand the relations youth develop to a place, and the ways in
which youth position themselves and are positioned socioculturally, politically, and geographically. Moreover,
we look at how the design of an instructional unit, called `My Place in Puget Sound', connects Puget Sound
science and action with youths' everyday lives and cultural practices. The first symposium paper looks at the
social construction of place where youth from a community center, called Riverside Park Community Center,
were asked to design a future map of their neighborhood. In this paper we argue that the positioning of the youth
in their neighborhood is relative to their cityscapes (Nespor, 1997). Their relations with their neighborhood are

                                                       195  ·  © ISLS
                                               ICLS 2010  ·   Volume 2

patterned in space and time, and are realized by the ways they come to negotiate their positions in spaces
through resistance, agency, and/or affiliation; and the ways they make inaccessible spaces accessible.            The
second   symposium     paper  examines   how    youth     and  their   families  in  an  after   school,   "voluntary"
science/technology/social club, called `GET City' in a mid-sized Midwestern city, come to talk about energy
issues, IT, and STEM energy related careers; and how the language they use positions them with particular roles
and expertise. The analysis focuses on the intersecting discourse communities that play a role in how science
and place are constructed. The third symposium paper examines the role of place and its implications in the
design of an instructional unit where we provide youth with a context to connect Puget Sound science and
action with youths' everyday lives and cultural practices. We examine the ways in which youth learn about
issues in their local marine environment; and how they are empowered to take action by participating in civic
activities, for example the Puget Sound 2020 Action Agenda, where students come to develop new or more
nuanced understandings of issues in Puget Sound; and develop an awareness of applying multiple perspectives
including scientific understandings,  personal  and  cultural   values  as  well as  social and  ethical   concerns to
understanding and decision making related to marine science and to marine-science-related societal issues.

Understanding the Role of Place in Situated Activity Systems
We use the construct of narrative to articulate an account of the construction of place. Specifically, we look at
how narratives highlight or obscure certain social realities influence the construction of activity systems, and
position youth   in certain  ways in  environmental    education.   Building    from Bruner's   account  of  narrative
cognition (1987), we define narratives for our purposes as socially shared accounts of human intention and
action. In this account of social narrative there is an inseparability of character, setting, and action from a
situational perspective.
Narrative can exist and influence learning at multiple levels. Therefore, we look at narratives from three planes
of analysis: individual, social, and cultural, as well as the accompanying learning phenomena for each.
       Cognitive ecology refers to the diverse terrain of influences on the way an individual cognitively makes
sense of, or assigns meaning to, the world. For example, an individual may have certain narratives about herself
as a  learner  (epistemological  knowledge)  based   on   cultural,   gender, age,   and class  identities, and  these
narratives influence the way she acts upon the world (cf., diSessa [2002] for his notion of conceptual ecology).
These  "lifeworlds  embody   the  multiple histories that  give  rise  to experience  and   the interpretation of that
experience" (Lim & Calabrese Barton, 2006). Situated activity systems refer to activity that takes place within
the boundaries of a (socially constructed) place (Goffman, 1961). Individuals can "boundary cross" (Phelan,
Davidson & Cao, 1991) as they move between activity systems, in each of which are embedded culturally-based
narratives. We consider the social plane to be the space where individuals enact their personal epistemologies
and where cultural toolkit elements set up lines of action in social interactions and in situated activity systems.
As individuals come to places, they interact not only with each other but also with the cultural narratives and
resources available in those places. As individuals move within places and perceive those places in certain ways
based on their own cognitive ecologies, they construct places and fill those places with meaning (Casey, 1996).
Cultural toolkits (Swidler, 1986) refer to the ideologies, technologies, and narratives that are uniquely present at
a  given historical moment.  We   consider  cultural activities   and  toolkits broadly, to  include resources    from
environmental   education,  environmentalism,  school,    ethnic  group   memberships,   and religious   participation.
These toolkits then shape activities in certain ways and interact with an individual's own cognitive ecology.
Narratives can exist at all three planes of analysis in the form of prevailing cultural narratives of environment,
local narratives  about   places that shape  activity  systems,    and    individual narratives  based   on    personal
epistemologies and repertoires of practice (Gutierrez & Rogoff, 2003). Individuals who come to those places
and  activity systems  bring with  them certain personal     narratives that  shape  how  they  perceive   the activity
systems in which they engage. This perception has influences on learning and engagement and is important for
us to look at in terms of how to construct learning pathways for students that leverage their personal narratives
and expertise. We also argue that individuals coming to environmental education can contest the prevailing
ideologies within cultural narratives, and that we need to empower youth to do so. Looking at narratives across
the three planes of analysis gives us a specific lens with which to ask, from a social justice perspective, by
whose narratives, for what purposes, and with what consequences for learning does environmental education get
shaped.

Paper 1: Ideological dimensions of place: (re)creating an urban area by Giovanna Scalone &
Philip Bell, University of Washington

Introduction
From a spatialized critical social theory, place is political and ideological because it is shaped from historical
and  natural  elements (Lefebvre  &  Enders, 1976).    It is also a  medium   through   which   culture is  reproduced

                                                   196  ·  © ISLS
                                                 ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 2

because of the way it is organized and experienced (Gruenewald, 2003).          According to Rodman (1992), place is
also socially constructed which is determined by individual agency and forces beyond individual control.              For
the  individual, places  have multiple   meanings    in terms    of physical,  emotional, and   experiential realities at
particular times.   Consequently, Wacquant (1995: 427) posits that places are understood as social entities where
they are "produced institutionally, within ecological and technical constraints, by social and political struggles
over competing uses of spaces, resources, and people."
          This paper describes the social construction of place where students from Riverside Park Community
Center were asked to design a future map of their neighborhood.          We argue that the positioning of the students
in  their neighborhood   is relative  to  their cityscapes     (Nespor,  1997).   The  students'  relations  with their
neighborhood are patterned in space and time.       For one student, her neighbor is a commercial company where
her experiential reality rests on trucks running all day polluting her space with fumes, making it difficult to
breathe; for another student getting to the downtown area means taking multiple buses that run at limited times,
spatially isolating her neighborhood from the downtown area.            These relations are realized by the ways that
students come to negotiate their positions in spaces through resistance, agency, and/or affiliation; and make
inaccessible spaces accessible.
          In this study we asked two questions:     (1) How is place socially constructed in the future map of the
students'  neighborhood?    (2) In    what  way(s)    do   the   students position  themselves    in  relation to  their
(re)constructed neighborhood and how is their positioning relative to their cityscapes?

Research Design and Context
This study took place in a research setting in an urban center in the Pacific Northwest at a community center
that we   call Riverside Park  Community     Center.    It   was an  environmental    justice program   for high school
students.   The Riverside Park community lines the banks of an industrialized river that was designated by the
Environmental Protection Agency as a Superfund site in 2001, which means that it is one of the most toxic
waste sites in the country. The river's pollution is but one of the many environmental issues facing Riverside
Park. In addition, it is one of the few communities left in the city that is zoned for both commercial and
residential use, which means that commercial companies can be physically located next to private residences.
          The  environmental  justice    youth  program    was   sponsored  by  a local   community-based     non-profit
organization. The goal of the program was to educate youth about issues in environmental justice, using the
Superfund site as a context for learning. Classes were held at the community center after school once a week. In
addition, the group performed community service every Saturday for 4-6 hours. The program ran for 12 weeks.
There were 12 youth who consistently attended the program, ranging from freshmen to juniors. Two were
African American, 2 were European American and Native American, and the rest were Latino. Isa and Gabriela
were co-facilitators of the program.
          The overall data for this study is from a cross-setting ethnography of environmental education.              As
participant-observers, we followed the youth from January to June of 2008 as they experienced environmental
education in various settings.   We      collected digital photography    and  fieldnoted accounts   of the  instruction,
interactions, and stories of the participants as they navigated through these varied settings.       For this study, the
data is from a mapping activity that the students engaged in class.        The students were given a current map of
their neighborhood and tracing paper was placed on top of it so that they may design a future map of their
neighborhood.     They  were  asked   to think  about   what   they  want their future to look  like.   Eventually, this
exercise will be used to help other children in the community center to map their neighborhood.
          We analyzed the fieldnotes for episodes where we could see--through the instructional materials used,
the  discourse   of the participants, or  their actions--aspects     of  place  being  socially (re)constructed.  These
episodes were coded for in the data using first open coding (Strauss & Corbin, 1998), and then axial coding
(Strauss & Corbin, 1998) to further articulate the categories within the episodes once they were identified.
Working from the assertions that emerged through the coding, we then systematically looked for disconfirming
evidence across the data set (Erickson, 1986). Finally, for each episode we identified and categorized as being
relevant to (re)constructing place.   This analysis forced us to look more holistically at the data set in order to
understand the context around each episode, the processes involved in defining that episode, and how each
episode fit in with the larger data set.

Findings
In this study we present findings from an analysis of the students' future neighborhood mapping activity and an
analysis of our fieldnotes.   We   identified   episodes   of  place being socially   constructed by  the   students.  A
recurrent theme in our findings is the ideological dimension of place (cf.         Gruenewald, 2003).       We draw on
Gruenewald's (2003) `ideological dimension of place' as a construct to understand, firstly, how place is socially
constructed in the future map of the students' neighborhood; and secondly, how students position themselves in
relation to their (re)constructed neighborhood and how their positioning is relative to their cityscapes.      Drawing
from spatialized critical social theory, Gruenewald (2003) examines how spatial relationships shape culture,

                                                      197  ·  © ISLS
                                                  ICLS 2010  ·   Volume 2

identity, and social relationships.  These relationships are, in turn, expressive of ideologies and relationships of
power. We found that these relationships were realized in the maps that the students had drawn.          The students'
construction of commercial and consumption spaces in their future neighborhood could be indicative of the way
in which space, which is society, is imbued with power relationships. In the reconstructed map, the students had
made accessible for themselves spaces that reflect not only their cultural heritage (for example, the `Mexican
Plaza') bust spaces that express the interests of the upper class (for example, `mansions') as well as sites for
recreational activities which are inaccessible for the students, such as soccer fields.
          Places reflect and reproduce social relationships of power and domination. The control of place by
government and other social institutions, such as "Microsoft" and "Boeing" legitimizes and reproduces the
authority of those    institutions (Gruenewald,  2003).      However,   bell hooks  metaphorical/material   concept   of
marginality shows how place can be constructed as a space of domination and a place of hope (hooks, 1990)
where  the students   have  filled  spaces  on the  map   with   cultural products, such  as  Chinese  Downtown      and
Mexican Plaza.    For hooks (1990) these spaces can be seen as a site for resistance, agency, and affiliation.       It is
at these sites that students may come to understand and recast their social positions through their experiential
and material cultural conditions (Smith & Katz, 1993). In turn, we become responsible for place making.
          Another theme in our findings is the ways in which the students see themselves navigating their future
neighborhood.   While their  construction of   spaces evokes    ideological dimensions of place, it also illustrates how
they are positioned in their community, neighborhood, and beyond.            For these students' the mapping activity
shows how essential sites of consumption are, such as malls; and how valued sites that are currently inaccessible
become    accessible, such  as  "Wild  Waves".   Spaces     that invoke   popular culture become    a resource   for the
students to mark their identities and forge ties across their current and envisioned neighborhood (Cf.         Nespor,
1997: 195).  Students' ideational systems are juxtaposed with dominant ideational systems.          This is manifested
in the ways they make place through their identity and culture.           For example, "Museum of Cris"; "Canada";
"SFC" (S's Freshman Court).
          What is striking in the reconstructed maps is the positioning of the play spaces, for example the soccer
fields to the businesses.  While our data does not attend to the students' histories, it may indicate the value that
students attach to economics and the role it plays in providing resources for themselves and their families. This,
in turn, has forced us to look at the role place plays in terms of employment ­ for the students and their families.
On several occasions the students made repeated reference to fast food establishments.         For the students, these
were indicators of employment.      This especially stands out in the illustrations where in terms of time, students
currently aspire to work at "Chucky Cheez" or "McDonalds", and in the future "Microsoft" and "Boeing".
Here, capital becomes important when it is made available and activated in spaces.            These constructed places
also bear significance on students' identities (cf. Lim and Calabrese      Barton (2006) notion of "lifeworlds")
          Understanding sense of place can be seen as a political activity where it is about the politics of identity
and local understanding (Aikenhead,    Calabrese   Barton & Chinn, 2006).     Gruenewald   (2003) argues that the lack
of attention to space in education has obscured the role of citizens in the process of place making.         It is, thus,
essential that educators    and    students develop an    analysis   of how   an  economy    functions   through space,
geography and social institutions.    If educators and students are to understand culture in places where they live,
they must  explore    the interdependent    economic, political,  ideological, and  ecological  relationships  between
places (Gruenewald, 2003).

Implications
This study  is an  attempt  to  understand   how   places   are  socially constructed by  the students;  and how   they
position themselves in relation to their (re)constructed neighborhood and how their positioning is relative to
their cityscapes. Understanding why students draw on particular sites of consumption, constraint, and sites that
provide resources for the students and their families requires an examination of the students' histories in relation
to the neighborhood (cf. Nespor, 1997).      The episodes in our data illustrate the economic, political, ideological,
and social relationship the students have to their spaces, yet by analyzing the interactions around the mapping
activity with a critical lens on the power relationships of place, and the social construction of place, we can gain
insight into the students' relationships with their neighborhood and their positioning relative to their cityscapes.
Gruenewald (2003b:626) discusses the social dimension of place as being a product of culture by means of
one's experience of places that are mediated by culture, education, and personal experience.           It is within this
construct that place-based education allows students to reflect and unpack particular cultural meanings attached
to place.  Nevertheless, Gruenewald (2003b) maintains that little research has been done in documenting and
explaining what youths' sense of place is and how it might matter in educational contexts.          Gruenewald (Ibid)
contends that as educators we need to develop connections with places where we are able to invest meaning.
          Basso (1996: 72) writes that ideational systems around features of the local landscape become
symbolically constituted, socially transmitted, and individually applied in a way that places flexible constraints
on how the physical environment can (and should) be known, how its occupants can (and should) be found to
act and, how the doings of both can (and should) be discerned to affect each other.       Ideational systems are made

                                                      198  ·  © ISLS
                                               ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 2

up of shared ideas, values, beliefs, rules, and meanings that are expressed through social institutions, and
influence the ways on  which places are organized.   Youth adapt to their   socially constructed places in culturally
specific ways that can be interpreted as self-determinate. Ricoeur (1979 as cited in Basso 1996) maintains that
ideational systems delineate a distinctive way of being-in-the-world.   However, we cannot account for the ways
in which youth construct their reality that reflects a personalized manifestation of a shared perspective on their
human condition (cf.   Basso, 1996). This issue needs to be  addressed   in future research.
         For future research, it is also essential to account for and view sense of place drawing on the "visible
particulars of local topographies, the personal particulars of biographical associations", and "the notional
particulars of socially given systems of thought" (Basso, 1996:144).

Paper 2: "The Coal Plant Could Give People Jobs, But at the Same Time, It could Pollute
the Air" Science learning as participation with and in a place by Shari Rose & Angela
Calabrese Barton, Michigan State University

Introduction and Conceptual Framing
Framing learning as changing participation is a powerful step forward in documenting the goals of science
education. Learning as changing participation has its history within sociocultural studies of learning (Lave &
Wenger, 1991), but, at the same time it calls into question the complicated ways in which the outcomes and
goals of  learning are shaped  by  the  relations of power   and  privilege  that often constitute   a community     of
practice as well as by other historical, political, social, cultural, and physical factors (Gutierrez, 2008).
A focus on changing participation calls attention to the role of place. How individuals value an activity depends,
in part, upon the purposes and goals of that activity, its relationship to a place (including local knowledge and
resources), and the relative positions of power of the agents within that place. Informed by cultural historical
perspectives, we   value place  as a  conceptual   framework     that helps us   to understand   the   importance    the
relationship between the individual and the society and also the local and the global (Nasir & Hand, 2006). In
other words,  part of  understanding   how learning    is mediated    culturally and  historically developing,    is to
recognize how structures and trajectories interact in place-based ways.
       We work in out of school urban environmental education contexts. Despite recent calls to engage youth
in  socio-environmental   decision-making     (Covitt  et   al,  2009),  science    education  more    generally   and
environmental education more specifically, seems to have ignored its intimate and unique connection with the
local community, marginalizing the role of place in education (Bowers, 1997; Gruenewald; 2003a, 2003b;
Sanger, 1998; Sobel, 1993, 1996). Yet, place matters because it orients science learning in particular ways - it
imbues the learning of science with certain expectations, practices, values, and materials. Furthermore, place
matters in yet another way because it positions youth in unique ways toward science learning: How youth are
positioned socioculturally, politically, and geographically shapes how and why students and their teachers might
choose to engage in science or in how they assign meaning or value to it. This latter point is important because
it underscores that by engaging in the knowledge and practices of science in embodied ways, youth (and their
teachers) can also transform the worlds they traverse in ways that matter to them. This is especially important in
the contexts in which we work because historically, environmental discourses have often existed in tension with
the economic concerns of low-income families (Jones, 2008). Consequently, we know very little about how or
why youth might position themselves as important members of the complex ecology of our changing world. We
are particularly concerned about   this issue from   the  perspective  of low-income    urban  youth   who    are often
positioned outside "power" discourses of their schools and their communities.

Research Questions
Our study merges two theoretical traditions ­ sociocultural perspectives on learning (i.e, Lave & Wenger, 1991)
and critically oriented and place-based environmental science (i.e., Covitt et al, 2009) to better understand the
Discourses, funds of knowledge, and hybrid practices (Gutierrez, 2008) that youth draw upon as they make
sense of complex scientific content rooted in local placed-based controversy ­ that of a proposed new coal-
biomass power plant. In particular our research questions include:
What salient Discourses and funds of knowledge frame how youth define an environmental problem, seek to
acquire new information and take a stand in their community? How does explicitly incorporating the primary
and secondary Discourses and a sense of place of urban youth into the environmental decision-making process
affect how youth engage environmental justice?

Research Design and Context
Our study takes place in the context of a year-round community based program focused on green energy issues,
"GET City," in a mid-sized Midwestern city. GET City is an after school, "voluntary" science/technology/social
club for youth ages 10 ­ 14. GET City holds as it dual goals to foster deep and meaningful learning among
urban youth in the areas of advanced information technologies (including data acquisition, management and

                                                   199  ·  © ISLS
                                                ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 2

analysis tools and communication tools) and the science and engineering of green energy issues.
GET   City  adopts  a   place-based,  youth   participatory   action   research (PAR)     approach  which    focuses  on
community science issues related to green energy in the urban center. The program provides opportunities for
urban youth to investigate science issues in their own community and actively participate in change making
processes in their own place as "community science experts" (Calabrese Barton & Tan, accepted). The PAR
approach   provides  an opportunity   to closely  observe   1)  how    youth  leverage  their identities as  they try to
participate in community science projects as community science experts and 2) in what ways a place-based
community science project could facilitate and support youth learning as participation.
      The study took place while the youth engaged in a 4-month investigation into whether their city should
build a hybrid power plant, a highly contentious issue. In addition to gathering more traditional ethnographic
forms of data such as program documentation (i.e., attendance, lesson plans, etc.), fieldnotes recorded daily and
separately by  both     authors, and  interviews   with   youth  and    club   staff,  we also  conducted    interactive
conversations and worked with youth to create products that reflected their curiosities and desires. We folded
these products into our database as well, offering us an opportunity to engage in content analysis of a range of
student works.
      Data analysis involved multiple stages and levels of coding (Strauss & Corbin, 1998). We developed
coding schemes on those aspects of GET City, which seemed to be particularly relevant to engaging youth in
energy issues and in advanced IT. We have paid attention to the quantity and quality of youth and family
engagement, including documentation of which youth and their families participate in what ways, we have
honed in on how science meanings have been negotiated by youth and their families, and on how youth and
families talk about energy issues, IT, and STEM energy related careers, noting how the language they use
positions themselves with particular roles and expertise.

Findings & Significance
Our findings reveal that "place" facilitates and constrains participatory learning by the contextual scaffolds it
gives rise to. By contextual scaffolding we reference the situated cognitive stance that the contextual dimensions
of meaning making are deeply entrenched in the social, historical, geographic, and political relations of which it
is a product (Brown, Collins, & Duguid, 1989). For example, although environmental stewardship discourses
framed youth's decision-making process, concerns about the need for jobs, the rising cost of fossil fuels, and our
reliance on electricity to provide refrigerated food, framed the questions youth asked and the information they
sought to acquire as they struggled to decide what was best for their community.          The   value    of   scientific
information took on significance as youth attempted to figure out how they might reconcile these sometimes
competing and conflicting Discourses.
      To unpack how we view the ways in which place frames participatory learning, in our paper we first
describe how place brings out tensioned dialectics in doing community-based science, including science versus
place, knowledge versus action, and scientific versus cultural, and how these tensioned dialectics shape the
process by which youth worked to transform (and were supported to transform) their participation. For example,
explorations of the power plant positioned the youth by virtue of their role as community members and students
as legitimate stakeholders. Youth were empowered both to negotiate the ways in which they engaged with the
science activities and to use the science knowledge and skills they gained to bring about strategic changes to the
place they inhabit through hybrid practices.
      Second,  we    also discuss   how  these tensioned    dialectics  served  as contextual  scaffolds  in support  of
participatory science learning because of the dialectical hybrid discourses and practices they afforded. Through
hybrid practices, the youth reconciled tensioned dialectics in science learning by authoring their learning: what
they learn (place   vs. science),   why  they  learn (knowledge     vs. action),   and how    they learn (scientific  vs.
personal/cultural). In  particular, participating youth   engaged    at least  three  reconciling  "hybrid"  discourses
(Green Jobs, Save our Mountain Tops, and Earth and Jobs in the Balance), which span a trajectory for how
science, community and environmental justice were positioned with respect to each other and their role in that
reconciliation. By explicitly positioning youth Discourses within the power plant debate, youth challenged the
either/or questions that framed the debate and expanded the role of environmental justice in the process.
      We conclude by looking more closely at how these tensioned dialectics shape the process by which youth
expanded their epistemic, place and science identities through the dialectical, hybrid science practices they
support.

Paper 3: "My Place in Puget Sound": Leveraging youths' sense of place in ocean sciences
education by Carrie Tzou, University of Washington Bothell

Introduction
This work builds off of ethnographic research and findings that argue for place as a construct for connecting
youths' lived experiences and science learning (Authors, in press). In previous design-based research that has

                                                     200  ·  © ISLS
                                               ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 2

attempted to leverage students' out of school expertise into the design of science instruction (Authors, 2007), we
have struggled with how to seriously connect this expertise with deep learning of discipline-specific content. In
this project, we take place as a construct that connects disciplinary learning around the ocean with students'
sense of place.  We  have   designed a 4-week    curriculum   called  My  Place   in Puget Sound    that begins  with
students situating themselves  in their   local neighborhoods,    communities,    and  cities, and  then  seeing the
connection between those places and the ocean (by which they all live in close proximity). They do this through
a mapping exercise in which they first map out their neighborhoods, then overlay topographical maps and maps
of waterways so that they can see how water might drain from their communities out to the ocean. This is
entryway into learning about watersheds, wastewater treatment, and environmental impacts of pollutants in the
Puget Sound. The unit empowers students to make positive change in their communities by engaging them in an
action project, in which they propose and carry out a community-based project that affects one aspect around
the health of Puget Sound.

Methods and Data
We situate this work under the umbrella of design-based research (Collins, 1992, Author 2004), in that we are
attempting to understand how to design a personally consequential science curriculum that highlights children's
everyday cognition at the same time that it engages children in systematic, authentic scientific practices. Under
the umbrella of design-based research, there is wide variation in the theoretical perspectives, methods, settings,
and purposes of the work. Author (2004) outlines some major distinctions between the types of design-based
research families in the literature, ranging from developmental psychology (c.f. Brown, 1992), to cognitive
science (White & Frederiksen, 1998), to cultural psychology (Cole, 1996). Bell also discusses design-based
research that integrates ethnographic methods into design research (Stevens, 2000).
       The data from this study come from observations of three classrooms enacting the My Place in Puget
Sound curriculum. Field notes of classroom activity and talk were taken and transcribed, and artifacts from the
students were collected.

Findings & Significance
Preliminary analysis of the data indicate two major findings: (1) that students need support noticing the places
where they live-especially as these places pertain to relevant features that might have environmental impacts
(businesses, green spaces, topographical features, etc), and (2) mapping is a powerful way to connect students'
sense of place with the science learning. This work has significance addressing environmental education for
social justice, as poor youth of color disproportionately live in the most polluted urban areas (Bullard, 2002) and
access to environmental education that empowers youth to make positive change in their local environments is a
civil rights issue that should be a focus of their science education.

References
Aikenhead, G. S., Calabrese Barton, A., & Chinn, P. W. U. (2006). Forum: Toward a politics of place- based
       science education. Cultural Studies of Science Education, 1, 403 ­ 416.
Basso, K.H.     (1996).    Wisdom Sits  in Places:     Landscape      and language    among    the Western  Apache.
       Albuquerque:     University of New Mexico Press.
Bowers, C. A. (1997). Culture of denial: Why the environmental movement needs a strategy for reforming
       universities and public schools. Albany, New York: State University of New York Press.
Brown, A. L., & Campione, J.C.(1998). Designing a community of young learners: Theoretical and practical
       lessons. In N. M. Lambert & B. L. McCombs (Eds.), Howstudents learn: Reforming schools through
       learner-centered education (pp. 153-186). Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
Brown,   J.S., Collins, A. & Duguid,   S. (1989).  Situated  cognition    and the culture  of  learning. Educational
       Researcher, 18(1), 32-42.
Bruner, J. (1987). Actual minds, possible worlds. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Bullard, R. (1990). Dumping in Dixie: Race, class, and environmental quality. Boulder, CO: Westview Press.
Calabrese Barton, A. & Tan, E. (accepted). We be burnin: Agency, Identity and Learning. Journal of the
       Learning Sciences. (Accepted Sept. 2009).
Casey, E.S. (1996). How to get from space to place in a fairly short stretch of time: Phenomenological
       Prolegomena. In S. Feld & K.H. Basso (eds). Sense of place (13-52). Santa Fe, NM: School of American
       Research Press.
Cole, M. (1996). Cultural psychology: A once and future discipline. Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press.
Cole, M., & Engstrom, Y. (1993). A Cultural-historical approach to distributed cognition. In G. Salomon (Ed.),
       Distributed cognitions: Psychological and educational considerations (pp. 1-37). New York: Cambridge
       University Press.
Collins, A. (1999). The changing infrastructure of education research: Issues in educational research. In E.C.
       Lagemann & L. S. Shulman (Eds.), Issues in education research: Problems and possibilities (pp.289-

                                                   201  ·  © ISLS
                                               ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 2

       298). San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Covitt, B., Tan, E., Tsurusaki, B., & Anderson, A. (2009). Students' Use of Scientific Knowledge and Practices
       When Making Decisions in Citizens' Role. Paper presented at the annual NARST Conference, Anaheim,
       CA.
diSessa, A. (2002). Why "conceptual ecology" is a good idea. In M. Limón & L. Mason (Eds.), Reconsidering
       conceptual change: Issues in theory and practice (pp. 29-60). Dortrecht: Kluwer.
Elmesky, R. (2003). Crossfire on the streets and into the classroom. Cybernetics and Human Knowing, 10(2),
       29-50.
Erickson,  F. (1986). Qualitative  methods   in research    on  teaching, pp. 119-145     (up  to "Data   analysis and
       reporting.") Monograph reproduced from M. Wittrock (Ed.), Handbook of Research on Teaching. New
       York: MacMillan.
Goffman, E. (1961). Encounters: Two studies in the sociology of interaction. Indianapolis, IN: The Bobbs-
       Merrill Company, Inc.
Gruenewald, D. (2003a). The best of both worlds: A critical pedagogy of place. Educational Researcher, 32(4),
       3-12.
Gruenewald,    D.  A. (2003b).    Foundations   of place:   A   multidisciplinary  framework      for place-conscious
       education. American Educational Research Journal, 40(3), 619 (636 pages).
Gruenewald, D. A. (2004). A foucauldian analysis of environmental education: Toward the socioecological
       challenge of the earth charter. Curriculum Inquiry 34(1), 71-107.
Gutiérrez, K. D. (2008). Developing a sociocritical literacy in the third space. Reading Research Quarterly
       43(2): 148-164.
Gutiérrez, K., &   Rogoff,  B. (2003). Cultural    ways  of learning:  Individual  traits  or repertoires of practice.
       Educational Researcher, 22(5), 19-25.
Holland, D. (1998). Identity and agency in cultural worlds. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
hooks, b. (1990). Yearning: Race, gender, and cultural politics. Boston: South End Press.
Jones, V. (2008). The Green Collar Economy. NY, NY: Harper Collins. Lave, J., & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated
       learning: Legitimate peripheral participation. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Lefebvre, H. & Enders, M.J. (1976). Reflections on the Politics of Space. Antipode, 8(2), 30-37.
Lim, M. & Calabrese Barton, A. (2006). Science learning and a sense of place in an urban middle school.
       Cultural Studies of Science Education, 1, 107-142.
Nasir, N.S., & Hand, V.M. (2006). Exploring sociocultural perspectives on race, culture, and learning. Review
       of Educational Research, 76(4), 449-475.
Nespor, J.  (1997). Tangled    up in School:  Politics,  Space,   Bodies, and    Signs  in the Educational   Process.
       Mahwah, New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Phelan, P., Davidson, A., Cao, H. (1991) Students' Multiple Worlds: Negotiating the Boundaries of Family,
       Peer, and School Cultures. Anthropology & Education Quarterly, 22(3) 224-250.
Pinar, W. F. (1991). Curriculum as social psychoanalysis: On the significance of place. In J. L. Kincheloe & W.
       F. Pina (Eds.), Curriculum as social psychoanalysis: On the significance of place (pp.165-186). Albany:
       SUNY Press.
Rodman, M.C.    (1992). Empowering Place:     Multilocality and Multivocality.     American     Anthropologist,    New
       Series, 94(3), 640-656.
Sanger, M. (1998). Sense of place and education. Journal of Environmental Education, 29(1), 4-8.
Smith, G. A. (2002). Place-based education: Learning to be where we are. Phi Delta Kappa, 83(8), 584-594.
Smith, N. & Katz, C. (1993). Grounding Metaphor: Toward a spatialized politics. In Keith, M. & Pile, S. (Eds.),
       Place and the politics of identity (pp. 67-83). New York: Routledge.
Sobel, D.  (1993).  Children's special places:  Exploring    the  role of forts,  dens, and   bush  houses   in middle
       childhood. Tuscon, AZ: Zephyr Press.
Sobel, D. (1996). Beyond ecophobia. Great Barrington, MA: Orion Society.
Strauss, A. & Corbin, J. (1998). Basics of Qualitative Research. California: Sage Publications.
Swidler, A. (1986). Culture in action: Symbols and strategies. American Sociological Review, 51(2), 273-286.
Wacquant,   L.J.D.  (1995). The   Ghetto, the State  and    the  New   Capitalist Economy.     In  Kasinitz, P.  (ed.),
       Metropolis: Center and Symbol of our Times (pp. 418-449). New York: New York University press.
White, B. Y., & Frederiksen, J. R. (1998). Inquiry, modeling, and metacognition: Making science accessible to
       all students. Cognition and Instruction, 16, 3-118.

                                                   202  ·  © ISLS
