                                                ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

  Changes in Teachers' Ability to Design Inquiry-Based Lessons
                    During a Two-Year Preparation Program

          Augusto Z. Macalalag Jr., Ravit Golan Duncan, Rutgers University, New Brunswick, N.J.
                       Email: azmjr@eden.rutgers.edu, ravit.duncan@gse.rutgers.edu

       Abstract: Current reforms require teachers to design effective inquiry-based lessons. This is a
       challenging task particularly for preservice teachers who may not have experienced inquiry
       learning, and who do not posses a large repertoire of teaching strategies, or knowledge of
       student thinking in the domain.       Here we report on the development of preservice teachers'
       lesson  designs in   the context     of a two-year    certification program with four    consecutive
       methods    courses. These  courses      included   multiple opportunities  to plan   and implement
       inquiry-based lessons and units. We analyzed the lesson-designs of 15 preservice teachers.
       These lessons were generated as part of clinical interview conducted at the end of each course.
       Analysis of lessons revealed growth in the teachers' ability to: (a) craft appropriate questions
       to gather  students' preconceptions      and drive    inquiry lesson, (b) anticipate students' prior
       knowledge and attend to the broader context of the curriculum, and (c) create more relevant
       investigations.

Introduction
Current reforms advocate teaching scientific inquiry, which "refers to the diverse ways in which scientists study
the natural world and propose explanations based on evidence derived from their work" (National Research
Council, 2000, p.1). Teaching science through inquiry is congruent with constructivist perspectives of a more
student-centered approach that promotes the learning of both science content and practices in a social setting
(Anderson, 2007).  However, over the past several decades, science educators and researchers have used and
defined inquiry differently in their classrooms, curricula, and research projects.   Historical definitions of
inquiry in the classroom have ranged from traditional hands-on laboratories to open ended student-driven
investigations (Windschitl, 2004). In this study we define model-based inquiry teaching as a form of inquiry that
emphasizes the role of models in scientific practice, in particular, the use of models to build, revise and argue
about scientific knowledge. Successful teaching of inquiry, model-based or otherwise, is challenging for most
teachers particularly preservice teachers (Schwarz & Gwekwerere, 2007; Windschitl & Thompson, 2006).            In a
study of preservice elementary teachers, Hayes (2002) found that preservice teachers struggled in their new
roles as teachers of inquiry. Specifically, he uncovered three major difficulties: letting go, going with students'
interests, and asking the right questions.  It was challenging for the teachers to let go of the didactic approach to
teaching and move toward more student-centered instruction.
       Teaching is a complex process that involves conceptualization of the teacher's intent and then the
execution of the plan in the context of the classroom given the particulars of student ideas and responses to the
plan. Lesson plans reflect teachers' thinking and the multiple decisions that teachers make before actual
instruction begins (Duschl & Wright, 1989). While lessons plans do not usually reflect the nuances and
complexities of implementation, they can provide a reasonable picture of the ways in which knowledge of
inquiry is applied to instructional design. In this paper, we examine the ways in which preservice teachers'
ability to plan (but not implement) inquiry-based lesson designs changes over the course of four consecutive
science Methods courses in a two-year preparation program.

Theoretical Framework
       Lesson planning and design are windows to teaching practices.         Planning refers to teachers'
conceptualization and formulation of courses of action in a lesson, which has a profound influence in teachers'
classroom behavior and students' learning (Shavelson, 1987).     In planning and preparation, teachers
demonstrate their knowledge of content and pedagogy, knowledge of students, selection of instructional goals,
knowledge of resources, design of coherent instruction, and assessment of student learning (Danielson, 1996).
       Several studies have explored aspects of experienced teachers' lesson planning process. Peterson,
Marx, & Clark (1978) investigated the relationship between teacher planning, teacher behavior, and student
achievement. The study focused on 12 experienced teachers who taught social studies lessons to three groups of
high school students. Findings from the analysis of planning statements of the teachers indicated that the largest
portion of planning focused on the content and selecting activities to be taught. A comparably small number of
planning statements concerned the materials and the learner, and a very small number of planning statements
mentioned lesson objectives. Brown (1988) conducted a case study of 12 middle-school teachers' yearly, unit,
weekly, and daily planning. Analysis of written plans, think-aloud, and a questionnaire, indicated that the
common factors that affect teachers' planning included student ability (very often), district curriculum guides,

                                                    199  ·  © ISLS
                                             ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

orderly transition between activities, student attention, standardized tests, and undergraduate training (rarely).
Brown (1993) conducted a longitudinal study of two novice secondary teachers' instructional planning. In this
study, she saw that cooperating teachers' planning practices, university professors' classes, textbooks, and
curriculum guides influenced lesson planning. Duschl and Wright (1989) investigated the teachers' decision
making models for planning and teaching of science of 13 high school teachers. They found that selection,
planning, and designing of instructional tasks were dominated by considerations about student development,
objectives set by the curriculum, and accountability pressures. However, teachers paid little attention to the
scientific theories involved. These studies pertain to in-service teachers and highlight the complexity of the
lesson design task and the different factors that influence teacher decision-making and planning.
        The state of affairs regarding preservice teachers' lesson planning is similarly complex. Several
research efforts to develop preservice teachers' ability to design lessons, specifically inquiry-based, have met
with mixed success (Friedrichsen, et. al., 2009; Schwarz & Gwekwerere, 2007). Friedrichsen, et.al, (2009)
analyzed the lessons developed by four teachers in a certification program: two interns and two full time
(alternative route) teachers, to investigate differences between the two groups. Their analysis of the lessons
revealed that both groups relied primarily on their subject matter knowledge and general pedagogical
knowledge to plan the lessons. Both groups of teachers lacked topic specific knowledge about learners,
instruction, curriculum, and assessment. Friedrichsen and colleagues found that a typical lesson for both groups
began with the teacher asking questions, followed by a lecture and guided practice designed to memorize and
practice the lecture material; these lessons were mostly teacher centered. Their research suggests that preservice
teachers, in either route, do not tend to take students' prior knowledge and curriculum into account when
designing lessons, nor do they have the necessary pedagogical content knowledge to address specific ideas that
students may have about the content.
        On the other hand, research by Schwarz and Gwekwerere (2007) suggests that by using highly
scaffolded frameworks for instructional design, preservice teachers can begin to develop lessons that are more
reform oriented. Schwarz and Gwekwerere (2007) used a guided inquiry and modeling instructional framework
(termed EIMA) to support K-8 preservice science teachers in developing lesson plans and units.     The preservice
teachers learned and used the EIMA framework for their instructional activities and lesson planning in one
science method course. Their findings suggest the framework was successful in helping teachers increase the
use of different models to engage students, and move toward a more reformed based approach to teaching (i.e.
conceptual change, inquiry, and guided inquiry). However, at the end of the semester, these researchers found
that the preservice teachers still struggled with the concepts of scientific models and modeling.
        In a different study, Windschitl, Thompson, and Braaten (2008) used the Heuristics for Progressive
Disciplinary Discourse (HPDD) framework to improve preservice teachers' epistemic discourses in science.
Their research showed that while most preservice teachers improved their knowledge of the function and nature
of models, they failed to incorporate it into their inquiry lessons. Windschitl et al., (2008) thus showed that with
appropriate scaffolding preservice teachers could improve their concepts of scientific models, concepts that
Duschl and Wright (1989) had previously found to be challenging for teachers. These studies highlight the
challenges that preservice teachers face when trying to use inquiry approaches in their instructional design.
        In our Methods courses, preservice teachers engaged in designing, revising, and implementing inquiry
based lessons in four consecutive courses. The intensive focus on lesson design was part of Methods II and
Methods III, which are described in the next section. We anticipated that our preservice teachers would increase
their attention to students' learning, curricula, and scientific models in their lesson plan and design over the four
courses. More specifically, we hypothesized that the initial lesson designs would focus on the selection of
activities from curricula and textbooks in ways that are similar to what Peterson, Marx, & Clark (1978) found in
their study. Given the findings from the studies by Brown (1988) and Duschl and Wright (1989), we predicted
that lessons would begin to focus on students' learning and development. Focusing on student ideas is
challenging for teachers to do but is central to the constructivist approach. In contrast to Duschl and Wright's
(1989) findings, however, we hypothesized that our preservice teachers might be better at focusing on scientific
knowledge building (models and theories); ideas that are at the core of scientific inquiry.

Methods

Study Context
A qualitative approach was used to understand the extent to which the preservice teachers' ability to design
lessons change over time. The participants are fifteen (4 male and 11 female) preservice teachers enrolled in a
two-year biological science teacher education/certification program in a large university in the north east of the
U.S. All preservice teachers have at least 30 credit hours in Biological Sciences before entering the program.
Specifically, one teacher has a PhD in Biology, four have Bachelors of Science in Biology, and ten are in their
forth year of a five-year Biological Sciences or related (e.g. Animal Sciences, Ecology and Natural Resources,
and Environmental Science) programs. Moreover, two teachers have extensive research experiences, one as a

                                                 200  ·  © ISLS
                                              ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

senior scientist and the other as a researcher/laboratory manager, in commercial laboratories and another two
worked as research assistants at the college during their undergraduate programs. As part of the certification
program, students completed four subject-specific Methods courses in consecutive semesters. All courses were
taught by one professor, the second author of this paper. In the first method course, Methods I, preservice
teachers were engaged in science inquiry activities, readings, and discourse that promoted their understanding of
scientific inquiry and theory development. During this course, the teachers, as a class, developed a framework
for model-based inquiry that was to inform their lesson development in the subsequent course. The second
course, Methods II, was a design-based course in which the teachers, in small groups, developed extended
model-based inquiry units about selected topics in biology. In this course, teachers were introduced to several
design frameworks including Learning for Use (Edelson, 2001) and Backwards Design (Wiggins and McTighe,
1999). At the end of this course they developed and implemented a single model-based inquiry lesson in their
observation placement classrooms. The third course, Methods III, was a weekly seminar associated with their
15-week student teaching internship. Teachers were placed in local middle and high schools with teachers who
may or may not have been familiar with reform-oriented science teaching. In this course, the teachers planned
and implemented numerous lessons. They were required to extensively reflect on two short inquiry based units
that they developed and implanted in their student teaching placements. In the final course, Methods IV,
teachers conducted action-research projects aimed to develop their skills as reflective practitioners. Teachers
used data collected during their student teaching to answer practical questions related to the use of the model-
based inquiry approach in the science classroom.

Data Sources and Analysis
We conducted clinical interviews with each teacher at the end of each of the four Methods courses.  The
interview protocol had four tasks that included defining model-based inquiry, critiquing a lesson, designing a
lesson, and evaluating students' written work examples.    In this report we focused on the analysis of the third
task: the lesson design. We created two comparable versions of this task for counterbalancing purposes and each
version was alternated across the four end-of-course interviews. Version A had three objectives for the topic of
photosynthesis, while version B had similar objectives for the topic of cellular respiration. The teachers were
given the objectives, asked to plan a lesson or short set of lessons that would address the objectives given to
them, and then prompted to explain their lesson. This design task lasted for about 5-10 minutes.
       Data analysis for this task began with the identification of essential features of inquiry-based lessons
(e.g. hook, procedures, investigations, and assessment) and the systematic description of interrelationships
among these features (Wolcott, 1994). The development of our coding schemes proceeded through an iterative
process of application to the data set and refinement of the codes to capture relevant emerging themes in the
data (Corbin & Strauss, 2008; Merriam, 1998).  The first coding pass gave us a list of the different activities in
the lesson (e.g. questions, investigations, student modeling, etc.) that teachers described in their interviews. We
then examined these to identify patterns of change.
       Through recurrent comparison of transcripts from interviews at different points in time we were able to
identify shifts in the nature and quality of teachers' lesson designs with regard to several dimensions: (a)
specificity and suitability of teacher questions, (b) student-centeredness of lesson, and (c) development of
investigations. We will describe these dimensions in detail in the next section. Within the first dimension, we
counted the specificity and suitability of the question to drive the need to know and students' prior knowledge in
the lesson. For example, the following questions were constructed by teachers to drive a lesson on
photosynthesis: (1) "how do plants grow, what do they need, what are they made up of, what are they made
from" and (2) "I pose a question to the students on how do plants and humans work together in order to
survive." In the first question, the teacher proposed specific questions to gather students' preconceptions about
photosynthesis using plants' growth, sources of energy, and its composition. On the other hand, the second
question was too broad and less suited to drive the lesson on photosynthesis. Students will most likely mention
plants as a source of food and shelter to answer the question, which are correct but beyond the topic of the
lesson. Moreover, the question did not clearly reflect the teacher's intention of using the question to deliver
concepts such as human consumption of oxygen from plants and plant use of carbon dioxide from humans.
       Within the second dimension, we coded the number of lessons that were procedural or activity
oriented. These lessons have a set of activities that were predetermined by teachers, have no indication whether
students' preconceptions will change the lesson, and reflected teacher-centered approach of teaching. We also
coded the number of lessons in which teachers' voiced students' ideas, for example, Nadia mentioned during
her planning that "[students] understand [energy being stored] and in carbohydrates, not only do they get how
the molecule is being synthesized but they also get why for the energy and this energy is stored in molecular
bonds," which indicated her sensitivity to students' knowledge. Furthermore, within the first dimension, we
coded the number of lessons in which there was attention to the broader context of curriculum and to students'
prior knowledge. These lessons contained careful sequencing of activities with respect to science content and
scaffolding of students' knowledge.

                                                  201  ·  © ISLS
                                Number of Teachers
                                                                              ICLS 2010       ·  Volume 1

         Lastly, within the investigations dimension we counted how many investigations were open or
unstructured (e.g. investigations that asked students to create their own experiments with minimal directions
from the teacher). We counted how many of the lessons had investigations that provided specific data to the
students, this included investigations using experimental data from a published science experiment or
purposeful teacher constructed data.

Results

Specificity and suitability of Teachers' Questions
Most teachers mentioned questioning as one of the essential parts of a science lesson. These questions were
often posed to students in the beginning of the lesson to serve as a motivator or hook, to guide the activities in
the lesson, and to ascertain students' preconceptions about the topic.                                        In analyzing the questions that the teachers
created for their lessons, we found that lesson questions from the interviews of the third and fourth Methods
courses were more specific and suitable for the topic than the questions generated from the interviews in the
first and second Methods courses.                          In other words, teachers' seemed better able to form more specific and more
suitable questions as the courses progressed (see Figure 1).

                                                   14
                                                                                           13            13
                                                   12

                                                   10
                                                                            9
                                                    8
                                                                                                                      Specific & more suitable
                                                                                                                      questions
                                                    6

                                                    4          4

                                                    2

                                                    0
                                                         Methods I     Methods II    Methods III   Methods IV
                                                                              Courses

                                                    Figure 1. Specificity and suitability of Teacher Questions

Clare's questions from the second and fourth Methods courses are provided below as illustrative examples. In
both cases Clare was designing a lesson on photosynthesis and her questions were posed at the beginning of the
lesson.

         First, have a discussion with the class and maybe a hand-out about the purpose of photosynthesis and
         maybe what the students think what the purpose is and umm call out students to write on the board the
         main ideas and the key players in this process (Clare, Methods II)

         [Ask students] how plants get their energy and see what generates from that. (Clare, Methods IV)

Clare's question in Methods II is problematic in that it requires that students know the term photosynthesis and
the idea of a biological process as having a purpose is somewhat teleological.                                        It is unlikely that such a question
would yield substantive participation from students; nor would it reveal relevant prior conceptions that, while
incorrect, may be suitable building blocks (as students may not associate these ideas with the scientific name for
the process). Her second question is couched in terms that students are likely familiar with (energy) and is more
likely to enlist broader class participation and useful insights about students' prior knowledge. While the first
question involves a more specific term (photosynthesis), it is the second question that specifically deals with the
objectives of the lesson, namely, understanding the process by which plants get their energy.

Student-Centeredness of Lessons
We also found shifts in the extent to which the designed lessons were student-centered. These changes included
a decrease in the number of procedural or activity-focused lessons, an increase in voicing students' ideas in the
lessons, and an increase in attending to broader context of the curriculum and prior knowledge of students (see
Figure 2).

                                                                                   202  ·     © ISLS
                                 Number of Teachers
                                                                        ICLS 2010    ·  Volume 1

                                                    16

                                                    14
                                                                                                                   Procedural/ Activity
                                                    12                                                             Oriented

                                                    10
                                                                                                                   Voicing Students' Ideas
                                                     8

                                                     6
                                                                                                                   Attending to broader
                                                     4                                                             context of curriculum &
                                                                                                                   prior knowledge of
                                                     2                                                             students

                                                     0
                                                          Methods I   Methods II   Methods III  Methods IV
                                                                            Course s

                                                             Figure 2. Student-Centeredness of Lessons

       Specifically, almost all the lessons (93% to 100%) that the teachers created in the first two courses
were procedural or activity-driven.                          For     instance,    Jackie's      lesson about   cellular     respiration     was primarily
teacher-driven with students engaging in some inquiry practices, like model building, but, even then, they work
with existing literature.

       Well, I think I would start with just a brief introduction of what cellular respiration is. And then I
       would have the students make a naïve model based on this pathway, like the overview that I give them
       of cellular respiration. And, in the model, I would want them to explain...[pause] from there I would
       probably give them literature. So then I would have them make ­ revise their naïve model based on that
       information. They will have to read about it, they will talk about it in small groups, possibly of two to
       three individuals in a group... discuss it, and make up a new model. (Jackie, Methods I)

Although Jackie included models and modeling in her lesson, there was no indication of how the students' naïve
models or revised models will influence the course of instruction or the sequence of activities in the lesson.                                      The
majority of lessons in interviews from Methods I and II were similarly teacher-centered.                                       In many cases, the
lesson was an amalgam of activities that the teacher was familiar with (often from their own experiences as
learners) without a clear connection to the lesson objectives and without any reference to students' expected
level of understanding or the broader curriculum context. In addition, while the teachers described activities and
practices that were inquiry-oriented, there was little consideration of students' prior knowledge or how the
students' models/explanation could influence the lesson.

       However, in the lessons designed during the interviews of Methods III and IV, 46% to 60% of teachers
voiced-out students' ideas in the lesson and they began to attend to broader context of the curriculum in terms of
what students might have already learned (and what prior knowledge they may have as a result). By "voicing-
out" students' ideas, we mean that the teachers would speculate what sorts of responses they may get from
students, often acting out student talk. Teachers also paid greater attention to potential difficulties that students
may have in an activity. Christine's lesson exemplified this case. She mentioned possible conceptions or ideas
that her students may have regarding where plants get their food.

       I would start by asking how plants get their food if they don't get it by eating things. The kids are going
       to be like "Venus flytrap eats flies" but that is the exception to the rule.                               So kind of get kids to think
       about how plants are stationary so how are they able to get food.                                     See if anyone knows that plants make
       their own food, so ask them to explain a little more along those lines. But I am pretty sure that kids in
       high school don't have a grasp on photosynthesis so umm after that, say let's take a look at things that
       plants do have access to, like sunlight, air, nutrients, soil, water and then, from there, break down air
       because it is a mix of gases.                        Get them to kind of isolate carbon dioxide plants make oxygen.
       (Christine, Methods III)

Christine's lesson is more student-centered compared to Jackie's lecture-based lesson and she actually voiced
out what students might say in response to her questions (Venus flytrap eats flies), and what knowledge they
may have that she can build on. In another example, Catherine viewed her line of questioning as contingent on
students' conceptions.

                                                                            203    ·  © ISLS
                                                                               ICLS 2010       ·  Volume 1

        First, I would have them do an initial model of, "how do animals get their energy?" And that would
        just be so they can get their ideas out there, and I can also see what they're thinking about this. I'm
        hoping that one of them would say, "food," because then, maybe I, with enough questions, I could pull
        out of them, "glucose." I'm assuming they've already learned about plants, with photosynthesis. And,
        so maybe I'd give them a data sheet, with information about .... [pause] or maybe my line of
        questioning might be, well, "what do chloroplasts store?" and try to get them along that line of thinking
        so maybe I can get them to come around and say, like, "oh, I guess maybe humans or other animals
        need glucose for energy."                                (Catherine, Methods III)

Like Catherine and Christine, teachers became not only cognizant of the students' prior knowledge and
experiences but also willing to change the lesson based on what students brought to the lesson. Lastly, a number
of teachers (26% to 40%) began to attend to the broader context of curriculum. This included consideration of
the sequence of topics in a unit (or over a semester) and references to prerequisite knowledge that students must
have prior to the lesson. In the following example, Nadia mentioned the concepts that her students learned
before the lesson, the knowledge that they have to contribute in the lesson.

        Of course how I start it depends on what they learned before that. And I just took an example that I had
        in school. We learned carbohydrates before that and I actually did that on purpose. I did the bio-
        molecules before and I would do that again because it is a nice flow. Throughout the bio-molecules,
        they get the idea about the energy being stored...                                        So they have this previous knowledge already and
        they know plants do that at least high school, they know plants do photosynthesis and build sugars and
        they mostly know that, at least in high school that is the case.                                              So it is not hard to ask the connection.
        (Nadia, Methods III)

Nadia's teaching experiences in Methods III helped her reflect on the sequence of topics and what students are
expected to know based on that sequence.

Nature of Investigations
Another dimension of change was the teachers' ability to design investigations for their students. These changes
included a decrease in open or unstructured activities, and an increase in providing data to students (see Figure
3).

                                                             12

                                                             10

                                                              8

                                                                                                                               Open/unstructured
                                                              6
                                                                                                                               Provide data to students

                                                              4

                                                              2

                                                              0
                                                                   Methods I    Methods II   Methods III   Methods IV
                                                                                       Courses

                                                                    Figure 3. Development of Investigations

Less than half (40%) of teachers in Methods I and II proposed investigations that were open-ended or ill-
structured. For example, Jake proposed a discovery-type of investigation in which the students, rather than him,
would design and execute relevant experiments.

        I am trying to think of something more specific [investigation] but I can't think of it.                                                         I mean in general
        I would have them do that [experiments with carbon dioxide and oxygen] and it wouldn't necessarily
        be something that I designed. But I mean I would definitely give them the tools and let them play
        around with it and see to see what they were able to come up with.                                                 (Jake, Methods I)

                                                                                   204       ·  © ISLS
                                          Number of Teachers
                                               ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

Interestingly, we noticed a decline in open-ended investigations in the interviews from the last two courses. We
believe that this may be due to teachers' realization (from to their experiences during their student teaching
internship) of how challenging it is to implement open or unstructured investigations in the classroom. Instead
of open-ended investigations, teachers tended to suggest investigations where teacher provides data to students
or teacher-guided investigations.
         In terms of providing data to students, we found that after Methods II, more than half of the teachers
(60%) suggested investigations that involve providing data to students. Jake in Methods III, chose to provide
data to his students, instead of giving them an open-ended problem, to address the same concept of energy in
photosynthesis. Jason mentioned the data he would provide, the purpose of activities and the target concepts of
the lesson. He also used an authentic problem context and data to motivate students to learn the material (the
fertilizer runoff problem).

         Then I would give them some data that when there is fertilizer runoff, the amount of algae in the lake
         increase and the fish are still alive. But as the amount of algae kept going up and the fish are still
         there... but as the algae increased some more, fish eventually drops off. And I would have them revise
         their model based on this and I would anticipate that the first one will say something about the fertilizer
         and the second one will be the algae that somehow killed them. And I would have them either ask them
         to do an experiment that when you put a plant in the light and one in the dark and put a pH indicator
         and blow in it, using bromothyl blue in it, and the light will filter back to blue cause it took the CO2 out
         and the dark it will turn the same or yellow to show that there is more CO2. (Jake, Methods III)

Providing data to students or finding data for students to look at allowed teachers to focus on concepts that they
wanted their students to learn, reduce open-ended or ill-structured activities, and promote other scientific
practices such as analyzing data and modeling.

Conclusion and Implications
The purpose of this study was to examine the changes of teachers' ability to design lessons as they progressed
through a teacher certification program. Based on our analyses of the lesson design task in their end-of-course
interviews, we characterized several dimensions along which there seemed to be shifts in teachers' abilities. The
first was an increase in their ability to craft specific and better suited questions to gather students'
preconceptions and drive the inquiry activities in their lessons. In the initial interviews, teachers' questions were
typically too broad, which mirrors findings of Friedrichsen, et.al. (2009). However, the teachers in our study,
given its longer duration, developed more specific and more suited driving questions in the last two Methods
courses.
         We also identified a trend of increased attention to student thinking and the boarder curriculum, and the
use of more student-centered instructional approaches. In the first and second Methods courses, our teachers
developed lessons based on selected activities similar to what Paterson, Marx, and Clark (1978) saw in study of
their twelve experienced teachers. However, in Methods III and IV, our preservice teachers started to attend to
students' prior knowledge and larger curricular context in designing their lessons. They started to voice-out
students' ideas in the lesson and they began to attend to broader context of the curriculum in terms of what
students might have already learned. This was similar to what Duschl and Wright (1989) found in high school
science teachers' attention to student development in their lesson planning and instructional decision making,
and what Brown (1988) found in the lesson planning of     middle school teachers. Moreover, the progression to a
more student-centered lesson and increased attention to the broader context of the curriculum suggests an
increase in teachers' knowledge of learners, knowledge of context, and pedagogical content knowledge (Abell,
2007; Friedrichsen, et.al, 2009). The last dimension of changes was found in the teacher-developed
investigations. These changes included a decrease in open or unstructured activities and an increase in providing
data to students. We believe that the decrease of unstructured activities was due to the teachers' realization of
how challenging it is to implement his kind activity. The shift of providing data to students allowed teachers to
focus on concepts that they wanted their students to learn and on other scientific practices (e.g. modeling and
data analysis).
         In terms of scientific inquiry in the lessons, we saw that preservice teachers used the strategy of having
students create naïve models (prior to any formal instruction) to gather their pre-conceptions about the question
and designed investigations based on student learning. The model-based inquiry practices were congruent with
the efforts of Schwarz and Wright (1989) and Windschitl, Thompson, and Braaten (2008). Analysis of Methods
courses showed that after Methods II, which focused on instructional design, we noted increases in specificity
and suitability of teachers' questions, and an increase in the number of lessons in which teachers provided
students with data to analyze. After Methods III and IV we observed increases in student-centeredness of
lessons (voicing of students' ideas and attending to broader context of the curriculum). Lastly, after Methods II,
we saw a decrease in unstructured activities and an increase in providing data to students as part of

                                                   205  ·  © ISLS
                                             ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

investigations. We believe that changes in Methods II were due to the extensive focus on instructional design
and multiple design frameworks in this course and the changes in Methods III occurred due to teachers'
teaching experiences, interaction with students, and analysis of students' works. This latter development is
congruent with the shift in focus from self (perceptions of one's capabilities as a teacher) to a focus on students
and learning (Darling-Hammond & Baratz-Snowden, 2005).

References
Abell, Sandra K.. (2007). Research on Science Teacher Knowledge. In Abel, S.K. & Lederman, N.G.
       Handbook of Research on Science Education. Mahwah, N.J.: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates,
       Publishers.
Anderson, Ronald .(2002). Inquiry as an organizing theme for science curricula. In Abell, S.K. & Lederman,
       N.G. Handbook of Research in Science Education. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates,
       Publishers.
Brown, D.S. (1988). Twelve Middle-School Teachers' Planning. The Elementary School Journal, 89(1),
       69-87.
Brown, D.S. (1993). Descriptions of Two Novice Secondary Teachers' Planning. Curriculum Inquiry, 23(1),
       63-84.
Corbin, J. & Strauss, A. (2008). Basics of Qualitative Research, 3rd ed. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Danielson, Charlotte. (1996). Enhancing Professional Practice: A Framework for Teaching. Alexandria,
       V.A.: Association for Supervision and Curriculum Development.
Darling-Hammond, L. & Baratz-Snowden, J. (2005). A good teacher in every classroom. San Francisco, CA:
       Jossey Bass.
Duschl, R.A. & Wright, E. (1989). A Case Study of High School Teachers' Decision Making Models for
       Planning and Teaching Science. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 26(6) 467-501.
Edelson, Daniel. (2001). Learning-for-Use: A Framework for the Design of Technology-Supported Inquiry
       Activities. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 38(3), 355-385.
Friedrichsen, P.J., Abell, S.K., Pareja, E.M, Brown, P.L, Lankford, D.M., & Volkmann, M.J. (2009). Does
       Teaching Experience Matter? Examining Biology Teachers' Prior Knowledge for Teaching in an
       Alternative Certification Program. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 46(4), 357-383.
Hayes, Michael. (2002). Elementary Preservice Teachers' Struggles to Define Inquiry-based Science Teaching.
       Journal of Science Teacher Education, 13(2), 147-165.
Jacobs, C., Martin, S., & Otieno, T. (2008). A Science Lesson Plan Analysis Instrument for Formative and
       Summative Program Evaluation of a Teacher Education Program. Science Education, 92, 1096-126.
Justi, R. & Gilbert, J. (2002). Science teachers' knowledge about and attitudes towards the use of models and
       modelling in learning science. International Journal of Science Education, 24(12), 1273­1292.
Merriam, S. B. (1988). Case Study Research in Education: A Qualitative Approach. San Francisco, CA:
       Jossey-Bass.
National Research Council. (2000). Inquiry and the National Science education Standards: A Guide for
       Teaching and Learning. Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
Peterson, P.L., Marx, R.W., & Clark, C.M. (1978). Teacher Planning, Teacher Behavior, and Student
       Achievement. American Educational Research Journal, 15(3), 417-432.
Sanchez, G. & Valcarcel, M.V. (1999). Science Teachers' Views and Practices in Planning for Teaching.
       Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 36(4), 493-513.
Schwarz, C. & Gwekwerere, Y. (2007). Using a Guided Inquiry and Modeling Instructional Framework
       (EIMA) to Support Preservice K-8 Science Teaching. Science Education, 91,158 ­ 186.
Shavelson, R. J. (1987). Planning. In Dunkin, M. (ed). The International Encyclopedia of Teaching and
       Teacher Education (pp. 483-486). Oxford, England: Pergamon.
Wiggins, G. Y McTighe, J. (1999). Understanding by Design. Alexandria, VA: Association for Supervision and
       Curriculum Development.
Windschitl, Mark (2004). Folk Theories of ``Inquiry:'' How Preservice Teachers Reproduce the Discourse and
       Practices of an Atheoretical Scientific Method. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 41(5), 481­
       512.
Windschitl, M., Thompson, J., & Braaten, M. (2008). How Novice Teachers Appropriate Epistemic
       Discourses Around Model-Based Inquiry for Use in Classrooms. Cognition and Instruction, 26,
       310-378.
Wolcott (1994). Transforming Qualitative Data: Description, analysis, and interpretation. Thousand Oaks,
       CA: Sage.

                                                 206  ·  © ISLS
