                                                ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 2

Supporting Young New Media Producers Across Learning Spaces:
                A Longitudinal Study of the Digital Youth Network
   Brigid Barron, Amber Levinson, Caitlin K. Martin, Veronique Mertl, Daniel Stringer, Maryanna Rogers
                                Stanford University, 485 Lausen Mall, Stanford, CA
       barronbj@stanford.edu, amlevinson@stanford.edu, ckmartin@stanford.edu, dstring@stanford.edu,
                                              maryanna@stanford.edu
                                         Kimberly Austin, Nichole Pinkard
  Urban Education Institute, University of Chicago, 1313 E. 60th St., Chicago, IL, npinkard@uei-schools.org
                                                 Kimberly Richards
        University of Illinois at Chicago, 1007 W. Harrison, Chicago, IL 60607, karich1979@gmail.com
                                                  Kimberly Gomez
                      University of Pittsburgh, 5105 Wesley W. Posvar Hall, Pittsburgh, PA

         Abstract: In this symposium, we will report on a mixed method, three-year longitudinal study
         that documented a learning environment intentionally designed to provide urban youth with
         tools and learning opportunities that would allow them to create, collaborate and communicate
         with   new  media   production  technologies.  The     design  of this in-school  and  after-school
         program was motivated by concern over growing divides with respect to access to learning
         environments   that can   support empowered      and   generative uses  of technology.  Through    a
         unique    program  that offered both  a  wide  array   of special interest after school clubs   (e.g.
         robotics, graphic design, digital broadcast and movie making, music recording and remixing,
         video game development) and mandatory media arts classes during the school day, learners
         were able to develop broad and deep experiences across the middle school years. The program
         of research involved an ethnographic study focused on the learning environment, nine case
         studies of young producers and their learning ecologies across home, school, and community,
         and quantitative tracking of the entire cohort over time. In this session, four papers will be
         shared that describe 1) the environment; 2) the theoretical framework guiding the research,
         research   questions,  and associated   methods;    3) the  development    of learners  as creative
         producers; and 4) the role of artist-mentors as media arts instructors. The contributions of the
         symposium include sharing a unique interdisciplinary collaboration and the results of a unique
         experiment designed to bridge divides while innovating a new ecological model of learning. !

Introduction!
When the 6th graders of today enter adulthood in 2020, what will it mean to be a productive, informed and
literate citizen? We contend that being literate in 2020 will require the need to fluidly use multiple modalities
(e.g. text, aural, graphic, cinematic,   and interactive)  to communicate    locally  and  globally for  personal and
professional uses. An informed and empowered citizen will need to be digitally literate, possessing the ability to
both  produce   and  critically analyze  media in  multiple   forms    in order to  fully communicate.   New    media
literacies, broadly defined by Jenkins (2006) as "a set of cultural competencies and social skills that young
people need in the new media landscape" include abilities to not only interpret, but also create using various
digital modalities. This shift in the communicative value of media objects beyond the field of entertainment
raises the question of how to ensure that all citizens, especially youth, are prepared to communicate effectively.
The national dialogue, in the form of calls for more technology in the classroom, more tech savvy teachers,
technology standards (NRC, 1999; ISTE, 2007), and a better prepared workforce (Levy & Murnane, 2004), has
apparently placed this task in the hands of schools, with communities and homes providing backup support. !
         On the surface this makes sense, as the development of students as literate beings has traditionally and
"officially" been the purview of the school. However, research shows that the literate practices of the home and
community have a predictive pattern in determining how literate a student will become (Neuman & Roskos,
1993). Thus, while schools do support youth in becoming literate, they have not routinely been able to close the
gap that is already apparent when students first enter school. In addition to the historical inability of schools to
close the literacy gap, we must also draw attention to the evidence that shows that schools traditionally have not
played a major role in the development of young people's new media and other 21st century literacies. The
accounts we have of "digital natives" reveals that their motivations, access, and mentoring is located most often
outside of  the school  through   their families, neighbors,    peers, and/or   summer    programs  even in  the most
advantaged of communities (Ito et al, 2008; Barron, 2004; Prensky 2001).
         While acknowledging the many challenges of assigning responsibility for the development of new
media literacies to schools, we must recognize that schools have assumed the role of developing youths' literacy

                                                    203  ·  © ISLS
                                                  ICLS 2010     ·  Volume 2

(text or digital) because they are the one institutional commonality for almost all American youth, and hence,
provide the best opportunity of ensuring all citizens access to literacy instruction. We contend that any solution
for the development of digital literacy for all must include the school to ensure that all youth can access learning
opportunities  in  addition to   computing    tools.  Our  challen ge    is to  create   learning environments     that apply
findings from     research on   digital  natives and  traditional    literacy   instruction and   that build   upon  previous
successes in digital media-based out-of-school programs in order to develop all youths' new media literacies,
especially those in underserved communities.
         In this symposium, we will report on a mixed method, three-year longitudinal study that documented
one learning environment intentionally designed to provide urban youth with tools and learning opportunities
that would allow them to create, collaborate and communicate with new media production technologies. The
design of this in-school and after-school program was motivated by concern over growing divides in access to
learning environments      that can  support  empowered         and generative   uses  of   technology.  Through    a  unique
program that offered both a wide array of special interest after school clubs (e.g. robotics, graphic design, digital
broadcast and movie making, music recording and remixing, video game development) and mandatory media
arts classes during the school day, learners were able to develop broad and deep experiences across the middle
school years. The program of research involved an ethnographic study focused on the learning environment,
nine case studies of young producers and their learning ecologies across home, school, and community, and
quantitative tracking of the entire cohort over time. In this session, four papers will be shared that describe 1)
the environment; 2) the theoretical framework guiding the research and associated methods; 3) the development
of  learners  as  creative  producers;    and  4)  the  role    of  the  artist-mentors   as media     arts instructors. The
contributions of the symposium include sharing a unique interdisciplinary collaboration and the results of a
unique experiment      designed  to  bridge   divides  while    innovating    a new   ecological  model     of learning. Our
discussant for the symposium section will be Roy Pea.

The Digital Youth Network Model (Pinkard & Gomez)

Digital Youth Network
DYN offers youth a collection of overlapping affinity spaces that challenge them to develop and use new media
literacies in their interactions with classmates, mentors, teachers, family, and friends in a variety of contexts.
The voluntary social networks formed around new media have been termed affinity spaces by Gee (2004),
participatory cultures by Jenkins (2006), and networked publics by Ito (2008). According to Jenkins (2006), the
key characteristics of participatory cultures are low barriers to individual expression and engagement, strong
support for creativity and sharing one's creations, and informal mentorship of less experienced participants. In
successful cultures  of participation,   individuals   believe     their contributions   matter and    care about  how   their
creations are viewed by others. Participatory cultures can support youth in the collaborative creation of new
media  artifacts  that serve    personally meaningful     goals--such      as   engaging  in media     exchanges   via  social
networks--while simultaneously developing new media literacies essential to 21st century citizenship. In recent
work, Ito (2008) has provided a window into how youth are participating in these social networks and how
participation affects their identities as individual consumers and producers of new media as well as citizens in
the world.
         Informed by these and other findings, the Digital Youth Network explicitly combines the affordances
of the different contexts where youth spend their time into a dynamic learning environment that both teaches
youth how to use new media literacies and creates meaningful opportunities for youth to use these new media
literacies. It is a model for the construction of a new youth-serving institution that is unbounded by time or
space. The core of the model spans the worlds of school, home, after-school, and online activities, and provides
youth with: (a) access and training in the use of new media literacy tools; (b) meaningful activities where the
development of new media literacies is essential for accomplishing goals and (c) a continuum of established
new media artist-mentors (high school through professionals) who develop students' technical skills, serve as
role models,  and   provide     students access  to   the communities       of  practice surrounding    digital media-based
careers. In addition, the program has a social agenda that recognizes the uniquely urban minority experiences of
the students and draws from, refers to, and uses these experiences as a means of challenging students to analyze
and  critique current  forms    of media   and   take reflexive    stances.   Students are  encouraged   to    use critique to
improve upon the existing content and form found in popular media and incorporate this knowledge into their
original media products.
         Opportunities for students to use their new media literacies include explicit connections to school-
based curricula, interest-based clubs, called "pods", that require youth to use new media literacies in order to
participate, and spaces and competitions (both virtual and place-based) where youth are supported in using new
media literacies to explore their own questions and push their imagination. The DYN program is structured into
two components: in-school media arts classes and after-school pods. The mandatory school-day media classes
ensure that   all students  are  exposed   to a  broad    set   of literacies  while the  optional after-school    pods  (e.g.

                                                       204    ·  © ISLS
                                              ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 2

including digital design, digital music, digital radio, digital video, digital queendom [a girls only space], spoken
word, video game design, and robotics) enable all students to build on the breadth of exposure received in
school and to identify skills of their choice to explore in-depth. The combination of in-school and out-of-school
programming allows teachers to embed digital literacy into instruction with a confidence that the students have
a base of knowledge and understanding with new media concepts and tools. Below are brief descriptions of two
key components of the DYN Model.

New Media Fluent Artist-Mentors
A key component of the DYN program is the use of practicing new media artists as teachers and pod leaders.
These artist-mentors are able to combine their work portfolio, technical fluency and their cultural capital to
develop learning spaces that often mimic professional studios and provide a contrast to traditional learning
environments  found in schools. While  artist-mentors    enter with  many     reso urces, the DYN    model provides
extensive professional development designed to guide them to take their knowledge of new media and present it
in learnable chunks for youth. In addition, all artist-mentors are asked to enact the DYN model of instruction in
order to provide youth some consistency across the DYN program.

RemixWorld: A Social Learning Network
Youth have access to virtual spaces for collaboration that address the need to provide diverse methods for
reaching a large number of youth. RemixWorld is DYN's private social networking and learning online space. It
is a community of active media producers and consumers made up of DYN youth participants and select adult
mentors. With a familiar interface and similar functionality to popular online communities, students are able to
easily share and critique videos, songs, podcasts, graphic     designs, and   more. Users     share perspectives and
dialogue through  regular blog  postings and  discussion    threads. While    the basic   skeleton  resembles many
existing social networking sites, customized adaptations (e.g. virtual currency, media rubrics, competency-based
new media leveling up system, self-paced online learning modules), targeted modeling of productive use, and
integration of the site in DYN activities, has positioned RemixWorld as a promising tool for scaffolding media
critique. We've been able to leverage the affordances of traditional social networking sites to increase student
engagement and extend youth and artist-mentor collaborative opportunities. Less outgoing students have found
it easier to share their voices online, and all students are able to immediately share their projects with peers and
experienced artists for immediate feedback.

Theoretical Framework and Research Methods (Barron & Martin)

Theoretical Framework
In order to capture the multiple, interwoven facets of the DYN program model, our theoretical framework draws
on ecological and developmental perspectives that draw attention to the many life spaces where learners spend
time that can all contribute to learning. These perspectives also highlight the important roles of social support in
developing and supporting their emerging interests and point to the role of the child in creating their own
learning opportunities (Barron, 2006; Bronfenbrenner, 1979). We also draw on theories of interest development
that conceptualize the evolution of topical interests as moving from temporary periods of fleeting attention to
more sustained interests that become stable and increasingly self-sustaining (Dewey, 1913; Hidi & Renninger,
2006). Finally, we draw on socio-cultural historical theories of learning that foreground the intertwining of
cultural practice, identity and the development of skills, knowledge, and expressive capacities (Lave & Wenger,
1991; Wenger, 1998). In particular we draw on positioning theory, which has developed to account for the
process by which people become socially identified with broader social categories (Harre & VanLagenhove,
1991; Nasir & Saxe, 2003). As described by Davies and Harre (1990), this process can include interactive
positioning, when one individual positions another, and reflexive positioning, when one positions oneself. These
theories broaden the scope of what has traditionally been considered as learning to go beyond knowledge or
expertise to include the ways that learners' conceptualize themselves, and they draw attention to the role of
social processes in positioning learners as particular types of contributors.

Methodological and Analytical Approach
Our research is designed to chart the varied ways adolescents choose to take up different media production
activities and to begin to understand the conditions under which students adopt goals for developing their own
creative work with digital media tools. Guiding questions for this study were exploratory and four-fold: 1)
Under what conditions do new media design projects lead to a diversification and enrichment of students'
learning ecologies across school, home, and community settings?; 2) What 21st century capacities are nurtured
through new media design projects and how can we assess these?; 3) How do design projects support students'

                                                  205  ·  © ISLS
                                                 ICLS 2010    ·  Volume 2

current and future identities as creators, authors, and critiquers of new media?; 4) Finally, what design principles
can be derived that might be shared with other sites?
          Renaissance Academy, one of several schools currently using the DYN model, is an inner-city charter
school  serving  approximately   140 6-8   graders    from    middle  to low-income    households,    most  of  whom   are
African American. Our research uses a longitudinal design to chart the growth of students' technology-based
interests, participation, and project work. We follow a whole cohort of 50 learners at Renaissance Academy
using quantitative metrics that gave us insight into their confidence, interest, expertise, access to tools and use of
learning resources, and carry out focused case studies with a subset of the students. For these students we have
constructed technobiographies (Barron, 2006) based on accounts provided in interviews, through observations,
and through analysis of project artifacts in order to chart learning activities across time and setting. We use
interviews to obtain an historical account from the learner's perspective of the emergence and evolution of
projects. Interviews   with mentors  provide    first  pers on   accounts  of  goals  for learning,   creation,  and   their
perceptions of student growth.
          Students were observed during DYN programs during and after school and on the Remix World virtual
space. Researchers used field notes to document students' skills, creation of media artifacts, artifact critiques,
and informal conversations about student experiences in the physical and virtual media consumer and producer
spaces.   Three researchers  observed   more    than   195    hours of  in school   classes  and   after school  pods  and
documented    this  observation   using   field notes.    Researchers    focused   on:   (1) instructional   delivery, (2)
opportunities   for production  and  presentation,    and  (3)  adult  and  youth  interactions  around   instruction  and
creation. Student work and video documentation of student projects collected by researchers and artist-mentors
offer additional data.

Positioning learners as creative and critical producers (Levinson, Mertl, Stringer, &
Rogers)
As part of our analysis of students' learning ecologies, our study looks at instructor practices as they position
learners in the DYN program. This section of the symposium explores in detail how students are positioned as
creative and critical producers. We describe examples of student creation in context, and how the DYN artist-
mentors position students not only to look critically at ideas presented to them, but also to create their own
responses to what they see and hear. We use the term "creative producers" to designate individuals who express
their own ideas by producing original artifacts. "Critical producers" is an adaptation of "critical consumers."
The latter are individuals who can analyze messages they receive in a critical way, understanding intent behind
them and recognizing the structures of manipulation or oppression they might contain. We use the term "critical
producers" to recognize individuals who do not only analyze messages but produce media that communicates
their own response.
          Positioning theory has developed to account for the process by which people become socially identified
with broader social categories, often to the detriment of those who hold less power (Harre & VanLagenhove,
1991;  Nasir  &  Saxe,  2003).  As  described   by    Davies  and   Harre  (1990),  positioning  can  include   interactive
positioning, when one positions another, and reflexive positioning, when one positions oneself. Our analysis is
based on a framework informed by Holland & Leander, who consider positioning a productive process that
allows  for  agency  on the part  of an   individual   who    may   not  agree with   an assigned   position (2004).   The
production or use of cultural artifacts such as songs, stories, or images can mediate positioning because they
persist over time and can be used as resources for either interactive or reflexive positioning (Holland & Leander,
2004).  The   mediated  nature  of  positioning    is particularly  relevant   for our   analysis, as we   show   that the
production of an artifact provides a basis for the repeated repositioning of girls as legitimate contributors to a
particular creative form. The artifact verbally articulates a rejection of a perceived position and evidences the
position's fallacy. Holland & Leander's work shapes how we consider positioning, providing us with a series of
underlying questions we use to understand how mentors support the development of students' creative agency.
          Our analysis uses two examples from the DYN program as a window into the positioning process - a
rap song written and recorded by a group of female students and a set of projects produced by an individual
student. In describing how student production was inspired, carried out and disseminated, we identify three
phases of positioning in the instructor practices: (1) inviting students to discourse, (2) guiding them through the
process   of creating  original artifacts as  statements    or  responses   in that   discourse, and  (3)  using  artifacts
produced to inspire and provoke further creations by the students. In addition, we observe that the instructors
use dominant    stereotypes  and   structures   of oppression    as   instigators  of discourse.   Beyond    the students'
interactions with the program artist-mentors, aspects of the program design such as specialized online sharing
forums augment the potential impact of these positions. The symposium presentation of this paper will include
examples of these processes and examples of work that we exclude here due to space limitations.

A collaborative group project case: Jappin'

                                                       206  ·  © ISLS
                                                 ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 2

          In the collaborative project case, a group of female students produced a rap song entitled "Jappin,'"
inspired by a conversation in the school-day New Media Arts class. In the first phase of the positioning process,
students were invited to discourse around "Merchants of Cool," a documentary screened in class. The film
presented "personas" ­ in this case, stereotypes of male and female teens that are often projected in mainstream
media. The    artist-mentor   then led a   discussion about    the  documentary,  where   students invited   to position
themselves in relationship to these figures, accepting, rejecting or renegotiating the personas in the film. The
classroom conversation became heated, as the boys in the class expressed approval of the female stereotypes
and the girls took the opposite viewpoint. A group of girls, inspired by the discussion itself and the journal
entries they were asked to write afterwards, responded to the boys' attitudes in the form of a rap song. At this
point, the second phase of positioning, guided production, began. All students were familiar with recording and
poetry/song techniques introduced during the Media Arts class and some students had additional knowledge
from the after school pods. Although the song was their own idea, the girls took advantage of the resources
available to  them   in the   DYN    program,  seeking    guidance   from the  artist-mentor teaching    the class, and
recording their piece in the DYN studio. Lastly, in the third stage, once the song had been written, performed
and recorded, the artist-mentors helped position the girls' work in such a way that it circulated within the school
community. Jappin' invited responses from other students online, in pods, and in classes, starting a new cycle of
critical production.

An individual student case: Maurice
Maurice, came into the sixth grade with only basic knowledge of computers and simple productivity software
but quickly emerged as one of the most active participants and creators in the DYN program. Just as the group
of students in the previous case were invited to discourse via the documentary screening, in school day and
after-school classes Maurice was invited to research or reflect on a range of topics including minstrel shows,
black pride and global warming, which formed the basis for some of the videos. In addition to the DYN artist-
mentors, Maurice's parents served as important "inviters" in this stage of positioning.
          Maurice  adopted    the  DYN   classes and  pods   as   a forum for  communicating   his  beliefs  and  ideas,
positioning himself as a creator and as a "student activist." On his own time, as well as for classes and pods,
Maurice created at least 13 digital videos and 4 Web sites, including a social networking site where he aimed to
"get people to be more open to new ideas, to redefine the 21st century." An artist-mentor reflected on the role of
the DYN program in Maurice's development as a creator:

          "Just watching him kind of as a creator... the influences I think DYN kind of had on him in
        the idea of the eye of the individual has the ability to change society through media if one
        takes agency. I think him being a part of this group, he really gets a platform to use his mind
          in a way where kids aren't like, ugh, why do you think like that or... Because giving him the
          agency to  not only   speak  his  mind,  but all   right, how  do  we  get this information   to the
        community? Through video, through posters and radio shows."

        Maurice's portfolio of work, similar to the Jappin' song and video, took on a life of its own within
DYN. The DYN community came to see Maurice as a video artist, talented musician, and a leader. When other
DYN students were asked who they admired or sought to emulate, Maurice was named by several of his peers.
Adults in  the DYN     community     often invited  Maurice    to  represent the school.  He spoke  at   a large school
community    event,  attended  conferences   and  events,    appeared on  radio  broadcasts, and   led a workshop    for
teachers interested in using online social networks in the classroom. These experiences positioned him as a
model student in the DYN program.
          The  three   phases of   positioning that emerged     during   student production  with  the  DYN     program
highlight the  important  roles   of mentorship   and  the   school  community    in student and   project  growth  and
development.   Throughout     these  three stages,  social   issues and  popular  culture emerge   as  impor tant   tools
mentors use to invite students to occupy, reject or renegotiate personas presented to them. Furthermore, the act
of positioning as creative agents proves to be an iterative process based upon the cultivation, exchange, and re-
articulation of ideas.
        The cases discussed in this section of the symposium also illustrate the tendency that emerges wherein
students learn several creative media and production skills through in- and after-school activities, and then take
these learnings outside the realm of assignments. Students build off of each others' ideas and initiate creative
projects on their own. Exchanging such boundary-crossing projects with mentors, teachers, and peers within the
DYN community creates a culture of sharing that important to students' creative growth. The structures of the
DYN program are designed to encourage students' creativity to spill over into their out-of-school experience,
where students can develop sustainable creative practices.

Artists as Mentors and Teachers (Richards & Austin)

                                                      207  ·  © ISLS
                                                    ICLS 2010    ·  Volume 2

In year two (2007-2008), the Digital Youth Network (DYN) expanded to include professional development
components as an intervention designed to create a DYN instructional model and framework. In addition to the
after school and in-school programming, this professional development component resulted in the DYN artist-
mentors needing to shift between in and out of school learning environments and structures. These structural
variations between the after school, in school and professional development contexts affected the positioning of
the artist-mentor to also include that of a teacher. In order to negotiate these various positionings within the
DYN model, the DYN artist-mentor had to be willing and able to adapt and shape-shift identity and knowledge
within these different networked spaces (Gee, 2004), related to artist, mentor and teacher stances. As a way to
help to facilitate and support the mentors through this programmatic shift into the school day, a professional
development    component    was   added   to    the    program     to encourage    artist-mentors   to develop   teacher   or
pedagogical stances within the school day space. Legitimate participation for the DYN artist-mentor in year
three required that besides fulfilling the role of artist, the artist-mentor also had to become a teacher (Lave &
Wenger, 1991). The teacher stance became a new identity and knowledge from which the artist-mentors had to
negotiate along with the artist stance as they shifted between the in school and after school spaces. Out of this
need to  adapt  shape-shifting   stances  to   space   and    to   become  legitimate   members   within   a community     of
practice, emerged tensions and struggles for specific artist-mentors. For some, the teacher stance would be an
accepted transformation, while for others, the teacher stance was resisted. These moments of transformation and
resistance  were made    visible in  the professional     development      spaces   where   mentors   became   legitimate  or
marginalized   members    within the   DYN     community        of practice  (Wenger,    1998). Examination     of  the DYN
learning environments and shape-shifting mentor stances can offer insights into 1) the relationship between the
learning environments     within in  school    and  out   of  school   spaces   and how   this  influences interactions    and
positioning between mentor and student within the DYN program; and 2) how mentors negotiated and resisted
these stances within a community of practice where pedagogical stance became mandatory for artist-mentors.
         Evidence of the shape-shifting stance as well as resistance to these stances emerged from three years of
ethnographic field notes and interviews of the artist-mentors using qualitative coding methods and discourse
analysis of  mentor  interactions    within    the  in  school,     after school   and   professional  development     spaces
(Ri chards, 2005;  Wells,  2006).   Out  of    this study     emerged     preliminary  findings that   suggest that  a  major
challenge for the DYN professional team was negotiating between shifting roles, identities and knowledge as
artist-mentors had to interact with youth in different in school and after school contexts. The ability to shape-
shift within different learning environments was linked to artist-mentor affinities to particular stances. Out of
seven DYN artist-mentors, four are included in this paper. The following cases have emerged: 1) Artist-Mentor-
Teacher:   one mentor  was   able   to negotiate    and   accept    all   three stances, 2) Mentor-Teacher:     one   mentor
developed an affinity to the mentor-teacher stance, and 3) Artist-Mentor: two mentors developed an affinity to
the artist-mentor stance.
         To fulfill their duties the artist-mentors had to adapt and shift between the artist-mentor-teacher stances
according to different learning environments. For example, the structural spaces between the DYN in-school
and after-school components afforded different learning opportunities that impacted the stance taken by the
artist-mentor. Classroom   time  was   50 minutes,      whereas     after school  pod  time was   90   minutes. Classrooms
consisted of 30 students, whereas pods consisted of five to ten students. In-school classes required mandatory
attendance,  while pods   were   attended   on  a   voluntary      basis, and   classroom  pedagogy    required grades     and
evidence of learning in contrast to pods, where evaluations were based on artifact production and role of critique
from other members.
         The   in-school  component    gave    more    studen ts    access   to DYN    and  new   media    literacy learning.
However, in the classroom, artist-mentors had to encourage learning and participation from students that did not
necessarily have an affinity to digital media. Additionally, there were up to 3-6 times more students within the
classroom space, and the artist-mentors had about half the time that they were afforded within the after school
context. Mentor-teacher    stances   were   based      on curricular    goals   rather than the  artist-mentor  stance     that
encouraged creative, youth-driven goals. The artist-mentors had to grapple with these shifting identities and
knowledge as they designed and implemented the DYN curriculum and as they made decisions about the nature
of their interactions with students.

Conclusion
The  DYN    program   provides   an    initial model      for supporting     youth  ­  specifically  minority   youth   in an
underserved inner-city area ­ to acquire 21st century skills and our research shows how this learning occurs in a
broader  ecological system. The four sections       of this symposium will be a window into       the initial findings of our
three-year study that address multiple viewpoints on student learning. From a program design perspective, we
will discuss the inspiration for and construction of this framework ­ the research and beliefs that informed it as
well as the structure chosen to implement it. The section on our theoretical framework and related empirical
methodology presents ways in which research can capture the varied contexts in students' lives, informing in
greater depth our knowledge of how students develop new media literacies. From the angle of student creative

                                                        208   ·  © ISLS
                                              ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 2

production, we show how students are positioned as creative and critical producers in activities that flow across
formal and informal learning spaces. Finally, we present a view from the perspective of the DYN artist-mentors,
and an  iteration in program   design  that facilitated   their movement    between learning  spaces in  order to
accompany youth more effectively across contexts.

References
Austin, Kimberly. (2008). "The Organization and Management of Informal and Formal Learning: Structure and
        language use in the Digital Youth Network model." Paper presented at the International Conferences
        on Learning Sciences: Amsterdam, Netherlands.
Barron, B. (2004). Learning ecologies for technological fluency: Gender and experience differences. Journal of
        Educational Computing Research, 31(1), 1-36.
Barron, B. (2006).   Interest and self-sustained  learning   as  catalysts of development:  A  learning ecologies
        perspective. Human Development, 49, 193-224.
Bronfenbrenner, U. (1979). The ecology of human development: Experiments by nature and design. Cambridge,
        MA: Harvard University Press.
Davies, B., & Harre , R. (1990). Positioning: The   Discursive Production of Selves. Journal for the Theory of
        Social Behavior 20(1):43­63.
Dewey, J. (1913). Interest and effort in education. Cambridge, MA: The Riverside Press.
Gee,J.P. (2008). Situated Language and Learning:A Critique of Traditional Schooling.New York:
        Routledge.
Hargittai, E. & Walejko, G. (2008). The participation divide: Content creation and sharing in the digital age.
        Information, Communication and Society, 11(2), 239-256.
Harre,, R. & Van Langenhove, L. (1991). Varieties of Positioning.      Journal for the Theory of Social Behavior,
        21(4): 391­407.
Hidi, S. & Renninger, K. (2006). The four-phase model of interest development. Educational psychologist,
        41(2).
Holland, D. and Leander, K. (2004.) "Ethnographic Studies of Positioning and Subjectivity." In ETHOS, Vol.
        32, Issue 2, 2004, pp. 127­139.
ISTE National Educational Technology Standards 2007. DOI=
        http://www.iste.org/inhouse/nets/cnets/index.html
Ito, M., Okabe, D., and Matsuda, M. (2005). Personal, Portable, Pedestrian: Mobile Phones in Japanese Life.
        MIT Press
Ito,M. (2005)."Technologies of the Childhood Imagination:Yugioh,Media Mixes and
        Everyday Cultural Production,"in Network/Netplay:Structures of Participation in Digital
        Culture,ed.J.Karaganis and N.Jeremijenko.Durham,NC:Duke University Press.
Ito,M. (2005). Personal,Portable,Pedestrian:Mobile Phones in Japanese Life.Cambridge,MA:
        MIT Press.
Ito, M., Horst, H., Bittanti, M., Boyd, D., Herr-Stephenson, B., Lange, P. G., Pascoe, C. J., & Robinson, L.
        (2008). Living and learning with new media: Summary of findings from the Digital Youth Project.
        Chicago, IL: The John D. and Catherine T. MacArthur Foundation Reports on Digital Media and
        Learning.
Jenkins, H. (2006). Confronting the Challenges of Participatory Culture: Media Education for the 21st Century.
        Occasional   papers.  Building the  Field of  Digital   Media  and   Learning. John D. and   Catherine T.
        MacArthur Foundation.
Lave, J., & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning: Legitimate peripheral participation. New York: Cambridge
        University Press.
Levy, F. & Murnane, R.J. (2004), The new division of labor: How computers are creating the next job market.
        New York: Princeton University Press and Russell Sage Foundation.
Nasir, N. S., & Saxe, G. B. (2003). Ethnic and academic identities: A cultural practice perspective on emerging
        tensions and their management in the lives of minority students. Educational Researcher, 32(5), 14-18.
National Research Council (1999). Being fluent with information technology. Washington, DC: National
        Academy Press.
Neuman, S. & Roskos, K. (1993). Access to print for children of poverty: Differential effects of parent
    mediation and literacy-enriched play settings on environmental and functional print tasks. American
    Educational Research Journal, 30, 95-122.
Peppler K., & Kafai Y. (2007). From SuperGoo to Scratch: Exploring creative digital media production in
        informal learning. Media, Learning, and Technology, 32(2), 149-66.
Pinkard, N., Barron, B., Martin, C., Rogers, M., & Gomez, K, Zywica, J. (2008). Digital youth network: Fusing
        school and after-school contexts to develop youth's new media literacies. Paper presented at AERA
        '08: American Educational Research Association Annual Meeting, New York, NY.

                                                  209   ·  © ISLS
                                             ICLS 2010       ·  Volume 2

Prensky, M. (2001). Digital Natives, Digital Immigrants. On the Horizon. NCB University Press, 9(5),
       October.
Richards, L. (2005). Handling Qualitative Data. London: Sage.
Wells, G. (2006). Dialogue in the Classroom. The Journal of the Learning Sciences. 15(3), pp. 379-428.
Wenger, E. (1998). Communities of practice. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.

Acknowledgments
This work has been made possible by a grant from the John D. and Catherine T. Macarthur Foundation to PI
Brigid Barron and Co-PI Kimberely Gomez. Data analysis was also supported by an NSF grant REC-0354453
as a part of the LIFE center (http://life-slc.org/). The authors would like to acknowledge the DYN coordinators,
students, and parents who contributed their time to the research.

                                                      210  ·  © ISLS
