                                                ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

     Effects of On-line Collaborative Argumentation Processes on
                                              Justifications
              Jingyan Lu, The University of Hong Kong,Pokfulam Road. HK, Jingyan@hkucc.hku.hk
                           Ming Ming Chiu, SUNY ­ Buffalo, mingmingchiu@gmail.com
                 Nancy Law, The University of Hong Kong,Pokfulam Road. HK, nlaw@hku.hk

         Abstract:   Justifications  (through  evidence     or  explanations)   are    central  to  productive
         argumentation.  This   study examines  how     the   participant structures  and   discourse moves   of
         students engaged in collaborative learning affect their justifications. Forty students working on
         Knowledge Forum, an on-line collaborative learning environment, posted 136 messages, which
         were coded and analyzed with an ordered logit,vector autoregression, system of equations. When
         students disagreed or made claims, they were more likely to use evidence. After a studentmade an
         alternative claim, the next  student posting   a   message was   less likely  to  use evidence.   When
         students made claims, disagreed, disagreed with other's justifications, or read more noet s, they
         were more likely to use explanations. Boysmade more claims than girls did, but otherwise, they
         did not differ significantly in their likelihood of using justificatio.nTogether, these results suggest
         that participant structures and discourse moves are linked to justifications.

Introduction
During argumentation, students can construct knowledge through their use of justifications to support their claims
and evaluations (Lipponen, 2000; Saab, van Joolingen, &van Hout-Wolters, 2005; van Amelsvoort, Andriessen, &
Kanselaar, 2007). The quality of their justifications depends on their evidence, their explanation(sClark & Sampson,
2008; Hakkarainen, 2003; Weinberger & Fischer, 2006), and the complexity of their reasoning (Hmelo-Silver &
Barrows, 2008).  Since justification is a critical activity while constructing knowledge, the way in which individual
learners use justifications to construct claims is an important issue(Kuhn, 2001). This is especially true in online
environments (Weinberger & Fischer, 2006) which can facilitate the construction of justified claims by providing
learners with more    time  to formulate  arguments (Marttunen      & Laurinen,     2001); in  contrast,  learners rarely
constructed justified claims on their own in individual argumentation due to time limitation(sKuhn, 1991).
         This study focuses on messages posted on an electronic forum by students in a secondary school geography
class. The students were discussing possible solutions to problems associated with global warming. The study
investigated how   the  discourse   moves of  the students    and   the   resulting participant structures  affecet d the
justifications they made during the online discussion.

Theoretical framework

Collaborative Argumentation and Knowledge Construction
Traditional theories of argumentation haveoften focused exclusively on the various stages of argumentation(Kuhn,
2001; Toulmin, 1958). Overly restrictive, they regard arguments as essentially a means to winning, overlooking its
highly interactive nature.  When students participate in collaborative learninghowever, they typically argue to learn
rather than to win. More recent approaches to argumentation have introduced the idea oifnteractive argumentation,
which is defined as a social and collaborative process directed at articulating informal reasoning(Perkins, Farady, &
Bushey, 1991) and constructing and advancing knowledge(Duschl & Osborne, 2002), rather than only justifying or
refuting particular points of view(Van Eemeren, Grootendorst, & Snoeck Henkemans, 2002.)
         As a collaborative learning format, knowledge construction hasshown that learners can engage in diverse
forms of interactive argumentation to advance shared understandings(van Boxtel, van der Linden, & Kanselaar,
2000). The activities involved in constructing knowledge include sharing, shaping, modifying, restructuring and
                                                                                                                       !"

"

                                                    207   ·  © ISLS
                                                  ICLS 2010    ·   Volume 1

abandoning knowledge; all of which are both cognitive and socio-cultural. Thus, learners need environments in
which they can discuss, share, evaluate, justify, and debate.
          Researchers  have   found  that learners  use   evidence    and   explanations during  argumentation      differently
(Brem & Rips, 2000; Kuhn, 2001). For instance, Kuhn (2001) found that young children failed to differentiate
between evidence and explanations, but     their ability to doso increased as they grew older. Brem and Rips(Brem &
Rips,  2000)  found   that  learners   could  differentiate    between  explanations     and  evidence    but still prefered
explanations over evidence due to social and pragmatic factors. What determines the preference for explanation or
evidence  during    argumentation?  One   view   is that  it   is determined   by "personal   characteristics,  or  a person's
epistemological beliefs concerning the way knowledge may be justified, nad the different roles of evidence and
theoretical explanation in the construction of knowledge"(Glassner, Weinstoc, & Neuman, 2005, p. 107). Moreover,
the availability and strength of evidence also determines how students use it to justify arguments(Brem & Rips,
2000; Kuhn, 2001). During argumentation, if students are provided with evidence, they tend to use it. Otherwise,
they tend to use explanations (Brem & Rips, 2000).
          Although many studies have shown that giving evidence and explanations to justify arguments is involved
in constructing knowledge, most have focused on individual rather than collaborative argumentation. Do discourse
moves, such as questions, claims, and evaluations influence types of justification? Do the characteristics of learners
influence the types   of justification they  use? The next     section  focuses   on discourse  perspectives   on   interactive
argumentation and their relation to discourse quality.

Discourse Moves, Participant Structures and Justifications
To examine how collaborative construction of knowledge occurs through constructive argumentation, consider two
central elements: discourse moves and participant structure (Hmel-oSilver & Barrows, 2008).
          Discourse moves are used here as units of analysis for investigating the soci-ocultural contexts in which the
cognitive processes of argumentation, such as justifications, are embedded. Discourse move,swhether written or
spoken,   typically involve   one participant    adder ssing one   or  more  participants  and   are characterized by  their
communicative    functions  (Tapper,   1996). For   instance,     Hmelo-Silver  and   Barrows   (2008) identify     questions,
statements, and regulations as three important discourse moves in knowledge building discourse. Thus, the discourse
moves that online learners use to justify arguments often elicit further discourse moves by other students.
          Question  types  are related  to   the use of   evidence     and  explanations  during  collaborative     knowledge
construction. The presence and nature of questions in the online discourse ahve been used as indicators for the level
of knowledge construction. Hakkarainen(1998) classified questions into factual-oriented and explanation-oriented
questions, specifying that the former should yield evidence, while the latter should yield explanations (Kuhn &
Pearsall, 2000). Making     claims   and  evaluating  different     points  of view   are  important   discourse    moves    in
argumentative discourse and are essential in the productive construction of knowledgeP. articipants make claims and
evaluations to express and examine diverse perspective,s and to negotiate shared understandings in light of prior
knowledge and new information(Andriessen, Baker, & Suthers, 2003; Teasley & Roschelle, 1993; Veerman, 2003.)
          Evaluations include full agreements, full disagreements and partial disagreements.         To minimize conflicts,
students typically express disagreements diplomatically through polite disagreements(Holtgraves, 1997) or unstated
partial agreements and partial disagreements(Pomerantz, 1984). Based on research on face-to-face conversations,
Pomerantz (1984) found that very often, agreements are preferredduring conversation.             Consequently, respondenst
usually preface  a  disagreement   with   an agreement    ("Yes,    ... but..."). This   type of  partial agree/disagreement
organization is often used to disagree. We will explore how evaluations affect justification in onlindeiscourse in this
study.    "
          Few  studies   have  examined   the relationship     between   discourse   moves    and types   of  justification. A
preliminary descriptive study showed that in a collaborative learning environment, learners tend to present evidence
and explanations when responding to disagreements while they tend to present more explanations when supporting
claims (Clark & Sampson, 2008). However, researchers have not systematically tested explanatory models of how
discourse moves or participant structures predict subsequent justifications (explantaion or evidence).
          The rise of collaborative learning has deepened awareness that the cognitive processes of learning are
rooted in and grow out of socio-cultural processes. These include complex structures of participation by which
learners constitute and are in turn constituted by communities of practice(Lave & Wenger, 1991). The notion of
participant structure was originally characterized as theways in which teachers arrange "verbal interactions with
students, for communicating different types of educational material, and for providing variation in the presentation
of the same material"(Phillips, 1972, p. 377).

                                                                                                                             #"

"

                                                      208    ·  © ISLS
                                                 ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

         The definition of participant structure focuses mainly on students' involvement or engagemen, twhich was
usually qualitatively defined or described. Participant structures in compute-rsupported collaborative knowledge
building discourse can be represented by means of social network analysis (SNA) which can measure both reading
and writing behavior (Zhang, Scardamalia, Reeve, & Messina, in press.) SNA represents social networks in the form
of directed graphs composed of nodes represenitng people, and links representing people reading or responding to
the messages of other participants. Online participants may write messages that build on the messages of other
participants or read messages of other participants. The positions of participants social networkare based on their
connections to other network participants.    Researchers     have  also  suggested    that  the  use  of  evidence  or
explanations are also affected by learning contexts and learner characteristics(Brem & Rips, 2000). We will also
explore them in this study.
         This  study  explores  the use  of discourse    moves  and   participant  structures to  predict two  kinsd of
justification (giving evidence and explanations) in online argumentative discussions. Specifically, it focuses onthe
following four questions:   1. Are general features, such as participants' gender, age, and topics related to types of
justification? 2. Are participant structures related to types of justification? Specifically, do participants with different
importance  to the  network  tend   to produce different    justifications?3. Are discourse  moves  related to types of
justification? E.g., will participantsgenerally use more explanations when making claims or giving evaluation? Do
different forms of disagreement involve different types of justification?4. Can discourse moves predict types of
justification of subsequent notes? E.g., can questions, claims and disagreements in eairelr messages be used to
predict types of justification in later messages?

Methodology

Data Sources
This study analyzes the online discourse of students in a secondary school in Hong Kong.For one semester, 40
Form  Three   students in the  humanities  course used   Knowledge    Forum     (KFTM) (Scardamalis,  2004), an  online
learning environment to support discussions. The teacher had students discuss energy problems from a number of
perspectives. Two topics that had provoked sustained discussion were selected for study. One top,ic"The Energy
Crisis," elicited 82  postings and  the other  topic, "There   are  More  Advantages    than  Disadvantages  for China
Developing Nuclear Energy," garnered 54 postings.

Coding Schema
Utterances were coded separately for discourse moves and types of justifications. Difference levels of coding are
applied for discourse moves. First, utterances are coded as claims, evaluations, questions, and information. Claims,
evaluations, and information are exclusive codes. Questions are coded separately. Thus, an utterance coded as a
claim, evaluation, or information may also be coded as a question. Claims mya be new claims or alternative claims.
Evaluation  may    be  agreement,  disagreement,   agreement    plus justification  or  disagreement   plus  justification.
Questions may be fact-oriented and explanation-oriented.
                  This study examined quality of argumentation by focusing on types of justification: evidence and
explanation in order to identify the extent to which students use them as warrants for claims or evaluations on
others' message. Explanations involve reasoning in justification but have no empirical data, peorsnal experience, or
references to an authority, e.g., "I don't agree with your opinion because I think wind and hydro power are more
environmental than coal and oil resources". Evidence involves empirical data, personal experience, or references to
an authority, e.g., "I don't agree with you that there is no danger of nuclear power. The ChernobyNluclear Power
explosion at Ukrainian in 1989 is an example". Notes that only have evidence are assigned 1 for evidence, and 0 for
explanation. Notes that onlyhave explanation are assigned 0 for evidence, and 1 for explanation. Notes that include
both evidence and explanation are assigned 1s for both evidence and explanation, and notes with neither evidence
nor explanation are assigned 0s for both evidence and expalnation. Coding was first done by the first author and then
recoded blindly by a research assistant.The inter-rater reliability, measured via agreement percentage ranged from a
low of 79% (claim) to a high of 94% (question).
         Various indicators were used to examine the participant structures of social networks (centrality, density)
and the positions of members (frequent responders with high outdegrees vs. popular members with high indegrees,
betweenness) in networks. Betweenness measured the extent of broekrs' importance between two actors connected
with him. Participants with high betweenness have more control over conversations.

                                                                                                                     $"

"

                                                     209  ·  © ISLS
                                                  ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

Analysis

Statistical analyses of group processes at the speaker turn level must overcome three difficulties. First, the outcome
variable is discrete, not continuous. Second, events are often similar to recent events in tim-eseries data (serial
correlation).  Third,  modeling  justifications  requires     modeling    multiple  outcome   variables  (explanation  and
evidence). We addressed these difficulties by using an ordered logit, vector autoregression (VAR, Kennedy, 2004),
seemingly unrelated regression (SUR) systems of equations(Goldstein, 1995). We entered the variables according
to time constraints, expected causal relationships, and likely importance.
         !iy = P(Yiy = 1) = 1 / {1 + exp[­(!0y + eiy)]}                                                 (1)
         !0y  are the grand  mean     intercepts Yiy, of speaker   turn i for  each   outcome variable  y   (Evidence and
Explanation). The residuals are eiy.
         !iy = 1 / {1 + exp[­(!0y + eiy + !vyViy + !wyWiy + !xyXiy + !zyZiy)]}                          (2)

         First, we entered a vector ofv speaker background variables: topic, age, gender, total number of messages,
SNA aspects, such as degreeness, closeness, and betweenness of reading and building on others' note(sV). A nested
hypothesis test ("2 log likelihood) indicated whether each set of explanatory variables was significantK(ennedy,
2004). Non-significant variables were removed. Then, we entered a vector of turn property variables: disagree,
polite disagree, disagree against justification, a claim,extended claim, question, interpret question(W). Next, we
tested for the property of the previous turns. We entered lag 1­ lag 4 variables of the above turn property variables
(X). To test for moderation effects, we added interactions among significanvt ariables (Z).
An alpha level of .05 was used.

Results

Test and Summary Statistics
Of the 136 messages, 134 were coded using our coding scheme. Of the tworemaining notes, one was blank, which
we assumed was a system error.   The other was an     off-task comment and since it was the only one in     the data set, we
ignored it. Among the 134 notes, three were composed by the teache,rand 115 notes were coded as evaluations or
claims. 16% of them were coded as having neither evidence nor explanation, 40% as havnig explanations only, 17%
as having evidence only, and 27% as having both. 51% of the messages were posed by girls.                    Disagreements
occurred in   25%  of the  messages.    Also,  justifications   occured more   often  during  disagreements   than during
agreements.   During  both  agreements   and  disagreements,     explanations  occurred   more often    than evidence  us.e
People also used justifications more when making a claim than when evaluating a claim. Please refer Figure 1 about
the effects of discourse moves and participant strucut re variables on evidence and explanation.

Explanatory model

Predict Evidence
         Boys were 33% more likely to express their ideaswith evidence than girls. Girls were 13% less likely to
make claims (Sobel z =    ­1.97). Taking into account the likelihood ofmaking new claims, girls' and boys' use of
evidence do not differ significantly.
         When learners disagreed, they were more likely to invite evidence. A disagreement in the current turn was
39% more likely to have evidence.      When learners made a claim, they preferred to use evidence. Controlling for
claims in current turns, the gender effect on evidence was reduced by 30%.
         Alternative  claims in the   previous turn   yielded   8% less   evidence in the current turn. When   a previous
learner Made an alternative claim, the next learner was 41% less likely to use evidence. The gender effect on
evidence no longer significantly controlled for alternative claims in previous turns.         Other variables were not
significant (e.g., discussion topic).

Predict Explanation
         Those who read more notes by other peoplewere more likely to use explanations when expressing their
ideas.

                                                                                                                       %"

"

                                                       210  ·  © ISLS
                                                    ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

        Disagreements in current turns were 78% more lki ely to have explanation.             Current turns' disagreements
against justification were 78% more likely tohave explanation.            Moreover, claims in current turns were 61% more
likely to have explanation. Other variables were not significant (e.g., discussion topic).

            "                                                                                            "
                     Alternative Claim (­1)""          "                        ­""1.66 *""           Evidence" "
    Girl" "    ­""0.85 *""                             "   New Clai"m"          +2.68 ***""
                                                       "
                                                                                +2.47 ***""
                                                       "      Disagree" "
                                                                                +4.56 ***""
                                                                                                         "
                                                        Disagree againstJustification" "+4.49 ***""Explanation" "
                                                                                +3.71 ** "
   Reading
  Frequency"                                                                    +0.12 *""

  Figure1: Path diagram of the final multivariate logit regression mdoel predicting Evidence and Explanation. Black
  lines and boxes indicate positive links. Red lines and boxes indicate negative links.        Thicker lines indicate larger
                                                            links."

Discussion

This study found that gender, disagreements, claims, and alternative cliams can predict the use of evidence. Claims,
disagreements,   disagreements      against justification, and   students'   reading frequencies  are linked  to   the use of
explanations. Messageswith alternative claims yielded subsequent notes with fewer explanations.
        Boys tended to use more evidence than girls in justification because they made more new claims than girls
did. Taking into account the number of claims, the likelihood of evidence use did not differ significantly among
boys and girls. Previous studies foundthat males engaged in more and longer online discussions than female,sand
that males tended to engage in greater levels of social exchange than females(Barrett & Lally, 1999). Females were
also found to make fewer qualified arguments than males(Meyers, Brashers, Winston, & Grob, 1997.) However,
past studies of gender differences did not differenitate evidence vs. explanations in argumentation.       Girls preferred
to evaluate the opinions of others or to add their own opinions to new claims. Encouraging girls to make new claims
or to state new opinions might lead to their greater use of evidence.
        Participants who read more messages by others were more likely to produce explanations, possibly because
they acquired more information from othersto use for their explanations. In addition, reading messagesfrom others
might also help them recognize the potent impact of justifications (e.g., to persuade others to agree, e.g. Chiu, &
Khoo, 2003).    In contrast, participant centrality (brokerage positions) did not correlate with types of justification.
The fact that brokerage positions were not related to disocurse moves may indicate that such positions in online
social networks do not function as they do in face-to-face social networks. Because learners in higher brokerage
positions neither control nor have more access to resources, they did not perform diffeerntly from learners in non-
brokerage positions.
        When people make claims, they typically provide evidence and explanations to support them (Figure 3).
For  instance,  when       learners make    claims, they   might    anticipate  disagreements    and  provide     justifications
preemptively, and thereby be more persuasive(Chiu & Khoo, 2003). Disagreements are alsooften accompanied by
evidence and explanations (especially compared with agreements) because when learners challenge each others'
ideas, they are more likely to provide evidence or explanations for persuasion than when they agree with them. This
finding is consistent with Clark and Sampson's (2008) study of online discussions of science issues. Furthemrore,
when learners challenge the validity of evidence or explanations offered for claims or evaluations, they are much
more likely to use explanations than when they challenge theses (Clark & Sampson, 2008; Erduran, Simon, &
Osborne, 2004). This differs from disagreeing with theses that do not attack the evidence or explanations. Learners
                                                                                                                           &"

"

                                                       211   ·  © ISLS
                                                  ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

use their own explanations to undermine the beliefs of other and to justify their own opinions. The preference for
explanations over evidence is consistent with previous claims that learners tend to use explanations in arguments
(Kuhn, 2001) and is sensitive to goals(Glassner, et al., 2005; Schwarz & Glassner, 2003)which in this case involves
disagreeing with something rather than proving it.
        Alternative claims provide new interpretations of problematic phenomena. They are claims that differ from
earlier claims  but do  not disagree   with  a specific aspect  of   the earlier claim. Unlike   notes disagreeing  with
justifications or with claims, notes containing alternative claims do not contain suchexplicit discrepancies. The
example in the results section shows that after student B's first alternative claim, student C provided a second
alternative  claim without  evidence.  It  could be that  people   do not  recognize  the conflict between  original  and
alternative claims, and without the conflict, people are less likely to use evidence after alternative claims. It could
also be that because there was no strong connection between the alternative claim and the preceding message,
student  C  was unable  to  follow the    argument and thus    was unable   to provide  a simple  agreement    or another
alternative claim.
        This study  has theoretical, methodological    and     practical implications for researchers  and practitioners.
Theoretically, it suggests that discourse moves and participant sturcture might influence the use of justifications. It
provides evidence that cognitive and social communicative processes are closely related and integrated in the online
discourse activities. Methodologically, this study used quantitative methods to analyezmessages in an online forum,
traditionally viewed as qualitative discourse data. It usedordered logit, vector autoregression, systems of equations
to analyze relationships among the multiple dimensions of online discourse thus modeling the discrete ouotcme
variables   and the  relationships among     the messages. More      practically, the   findings provide teachers   with
information  for   understanding   and    managing  online   discussions.  Teachers   usually have  difficulty examining
students' online discussions in detail and providing them with useful feedback.         If these results are validated in
future studies, then teachers can encourage students to read each others' notes to collect information and develop
their skills in providing justifications.

                                                                                                                      '"

"

                                                      212  ·  © ISLS
                                                ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

Reference
Andriessen, J., Baker, M. J., & Suthers, D. (2003). Argumentation, computer support, and the educational context of
        confronting cognition. In J. Andriessen, M. J. Baker & D. Suthers (Eds.)A, rguing to learn: confronting
        cognitions in Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning environment(pp. 1-25). Dordrecht,
        Netherlands: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Barrett, E., & Lally, V. (1999). Gender differences in an o-nline learning environment.Journal of Computer
        Assisted Learning, 15(1), 48-60.
Brem, S. K., & Rips, L. J. (2000). Explanation and evidence in informal argumentC. ognitive Science, 24(4), 573-
        604.
Chiu, M. M., & Khoo, L. (2003). Rudeness and status effects during group problem solving: Do they bias
        evaluations and reduce the likelihood of correctsolutions? Journal of Educational Psychology, 95(3), 506-
        523.
Clark, D. B., & Sampson, V. (2008). Assessing dialogic argumentation in online environments to relate structure,
        grounds, and conceptual quality.Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 45(3), 293-321.
Duschl, R. A., & Osborne, J. (2002). Supporting and promoting argumentation discourse in science education.
        Studies in Science Education, 38, 39-72.
Erduran, S., Simon, S., & Osborne, J. (2004). TAPping into argumentation: Developments in the aplpication of
        Toulmin's Argument Pattern for studying science discourse.Science Education, 88(6), 915-933.
Glassner, A., Weinstoc, M., & Neuman, Y. (2005). Pupils' evaluation and generation of evidence and explanation in
        argumentation. British Journal of Educational Psychology, 75, 105-118.
Hakkarainen, K. (1998). Epistemology of scientific inquiry and compute-rsupported collaborative learning.
        Unpublished Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of Toronto.
Hakkarainen, K. (2003). Emergence of progressive-inquiry culture in computer-supported collaborative learning.
        Learning Environments Research, 6(2), 199-220.
Hmelo-Silver, C. E., & Barrows, H. S. (2008). Facilitating collaborative knowledge buildingC. ognition and
        Instruction, 26(1), 48 - 94.
Holtgraves, T. (1997). YES, BUT ... Positive politeness in conversation argumentsJ.ournal of Language and Social
        Psychology, 16, 222-239.
Kuhn, D. (1991). The skills of argument. Cambridge: University Press.
Kuhn, D. (2001). How do people know?Psychological Science, 12(1), 1-8.
Kuhn, D., & Pearsall, S. (2000). Developmental origins of scientific thinkingJ. ournal of Cognition and
        Development, 1, 113-127.
Lave, J., & Wenger, E. (Eds.). (1991).Situated learning: legitimate peripheral participation. Cambridge, England:
        Cambridge University Press.
Lipponen, L. (2000). Towards knowledge building: From facts to explanations in primary students' computer
        mediated discourse Learning Environments Research, 3, 179-199.
Marttunen, M., & Laurinen, L. (2001). Learning of argumentation skills in networked and face-to-face
        environments.Instructional Science, 29(2), 127-153.
Meyers, R. A., Brashers, D. E., Winston, L., & Grob, L. (1997). Sex differences and group argument: A theoretical
        framework and empirical investigation.Communication Studies, 48(1), 19-41.
Perkins, D. N., Farady, M., & Bushey, B. (1991). Everyday reasoning and the roots of intelligence. In J. Voss, D.
        Perkins & J. Segal (Eds.),Informal reasoning and education(pp. 83-105). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Phillips, S. (1972). Paaicipant structures and communicative competence: Warm Springs children in community and
        classroom. In C. B. Cazden, V. P. John & D. Hymes (Eds.),Functions of language in the classroom(pp.
        370-394). New York: Teachers College Press.
Pomerantz, A. (1984). Agreeing and disagreeing with assessments: some features of preferred/dispreferred turn
        shapes In M. J. Atkinson & J. Heritage (Eds.),Structures of social action: Studies in conversation analysi.s
        Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Saab, N., van Joolingen, W. R., & van Hou-tWolters, B. H. (2005). Communication in collaborative discovery
        learning. British Journal of Educational Psychology 75, 603-621.
Scardamalis, M. (2004). CSILE/Knowledge Forum. In A. Kovalchick & K. Dawson (Eds.)E, ducation and
        technology: An encyclopedia (pp. 183-192). Santa Barbara, CA: ABX-CLIO Inc.
Schwarz, B. B., & Glassner, A. (2003). The blind and the paralytic: supporting argumentation in everyday and
        scientific issues. In Jerry Andriessen, Michael Baker & D. D. Suthers (Eds.), Arguing to learn: Confronting

                                                                                                                  ("

"

                                                    213  ·  © ISLS
                                                ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

        cognition in computer-supported collaborative learning environments(pp. 227-260). Dordrecht: Kluwer
        Academic Publishers.
Tapper, J. (1996). Exchange patterns in the oral discourse of international students innuiversity classrooms.
        Discourse Processes, 22(1), 25-55.
Teasley, S. D., & Roschelle, J. (1993). Constructing a joint problem space: The computer as a tool for sharing
        knowledge. In S. P. Lajoie & S. J. Derry (Eds.),Computers as cognitive tools(pp. 229-258). Hillsdale, NJ:
        Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Toulmin, S. E. (1958). The use of argument. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
van Amelsvoort, M., Andriessen, J., & Kanselaar, G. (2007). Representational tools in compute-srupported
        collaborative argumentation-based learning: How dyads work with constructed and inspected
        argumentative diagrams.Journal of the Learning Sciences, 16(4), 485 - 521.
van Boxtel, C., van der Linden, J., & Kanselaar, G. (2000). Collaborative learning tasks and the elaboratioonf
        conceptual knowledge.Learning and Instruction, 10(4), 311-330.
Van Eemeren, F., Grootendorst, R., & Snoeck Henkemans, F. (2002)A. rgumentation: Analysis, evaluation,
        presentation. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates
Veerman, A. (2003). Constructive discussions through electronic dialogue. In J. Andriessen, M. Baker & D. Suthers
        (Eds.), Arguing to learn: Confronting cognitions in computer-supported collaborative learning
        environments (Vol. 1, pp. 117-143). Dordrecht, the Netherlands: Kluwer AcademicPublishers.
Weinberger, A., & Fischer, F. (2006). A framework to analyze argumentative knowledge construction in comput-er
        supported collaborative learning.Computers & Education, 46(1), 71.
Zhang, J., Scardamalia, M., Reeve, R., & Messina, R. (in press).Designing for collective cognitive responsibility in
        knowledge building communities.Journal of the Learning Sciences.

"

                                                                                                                  )"

"

                                                    214  ·  © ISLS
