                                                     ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 2
                                                                                                      Historical Thinking    1

 Developing Students' Disciplinary Historical Thinking: The Role of
                              Textual and Instructional Resources

 Primary Author:     Darin Stockdill, University of Michigan, 4003 SOE, 610 E. University, Ann Arbor, MI               48105
                                                               daristoc@umich.edu
                    Byeong-Young Cho, University of Maryland, 2311 Benjamin Building, College Park, MD 20742,
                                                            choby@umd.edu
                              Avishag Reisman, Stanford University, 485 Lasuen Mall, Stanford, CA 94305,
                                                             areisman@stanford.edu
                         Amy Alexandra Wilson, University of Georgia, 309 Aderhold Hall, Athens, GA 30605,
                                                                aawilson@uga.edu
                    Discussant: Dr. Bruce VanSledright, University of Maryland, 2333 Benjamin Building, College
                                               Park, MD 20742, bvansled@umd.edu
                                                 Chair: Chana Shane-Sagiv, Hebrew University

         Abstract: Recent reports on adolescent literacy state that students must develop domain-specific
         reading  skills in   order to comprehend      the   complex    texts that  pervade secondary    and  tertiary
         education.   It has been argued that disciplinary historical thinking, in particular, because of its
         emphasis on evaluating and reconciling conflicting accounts, translates into the skills required for
         informed   citizenship. However,     the   research  on   historical thinking is marked  by  a  pronounced
         absence of (1) prolonged curricular interventions in real classrooms and that attempt to develop
         students'  historical  thinking;   (2)  transfer    studies  that examine    the application   of  students'
         historical thinking to digital resources and other texts with which students feel personally invested;
         (3)  the use   of multimodal    texts   in  fostering  students'  historical  thinking.   The   four papers
         presented   in  this symposium     address   these  gaps    by examining    the  development    of students'
         historical thinking across instructional contexts with various textual resources.

History education has been justified for over a century on the grounds that no subject is better suited to develop in
students  the capacity   for  judgment   that    is essential   for  democratic    citizenship (Bradley  Commission,     1988;
Committee    of Seven,   1899;  National  Council    for the    Social  Studies,  2007).  However, data from the National
Assessment of Educational Progress (NAEP) raise the question of how well we are carrying out this important task.
Only 32% of 12th graders scored proficient or advanced in school civics in the 2006 NAEP administration (Lutkus &
Weiss, 2007), and only 14% scored at the proficient or advanced level in history on the NAEP (Lee & Weiss, 2007).
In the wake of No Child Left Behind, the problem has been exacerbated as school districts have cut social studies
classes in an effort to raise literacy and math scores (Center on Education Policy, 2007). This unfortunate curricular
reshuffling flies in the face of a recent spate of national reports that insist reading instruction be tied to content and
involve domain-specific reading skills (Biancarosa & Snow, 2006; Heller & Greenleaf, 2007; National Institute for
Literacy, 2007; Shanahan & Shanahan, 2008).          Moreover, the digital age demands that students possess the skills to
evaluate the reliability of information sources and reconcile conflicting claims.
         Research on disciplinary historical reading practices has identified certain domain-specific reading skills
practiced by  expert  historians.   This same    body  of   research   has suggested   that novices--both    high  school  and
undergraduate students--do not spontaneously practice the same reading strategies that expert historians practice
automatically   and unconsciously    (Holt,   1995;  Rout   et  al. 1997;  VanSledright   & Kelly, 1998;    Wineburg,   1991a,
1991b).  Historians  wend     their way   through    the  documentary      record,  scrutinizing  the reliability of   sources,
corroborating information, and imagining the personal, social, political, and economic contexts of their historical
actors. Novices struggle in their attempt to interpret historical texts and have difficulty evaluating the reliability of
sources (Wineburg, 1991a).     Far from the closed presentation of facts that students encounter in their textbooks, the
discipline of history as historians practice it presents knowledge as open and dynamic and sees the past as ultimately
elusive and irretrievable.  Many students not only view history textbooks as an authoritative historical account, but
they also find the texts themselves disconnected from their lives (Bain, 2006).
         Having   established  the  difference   between    experts   and  novices,  the research on  historical  thinking has
largely focused   on prompting    students    to recognize   the    interpretive, constructed  nature of history  and  to  read
multiple documents intertextually (Britt & Aglinskas, 2002; Paxton, 2002; Rouet, Britt, Mason, & Perfetti, 1996;
Stahl, Hynd, Britton, McNish, & Bosquet, 1996; Wiley & Voss, 1999; Wolfe & Goldman, 2005). The findings from
these studies   suggest  that students   will respond    to  certain  instructional  manipulations  that make    apparent  and

                                                          21  ·  © ISLS
                                                 ICLS 2010    ·  Volume 2
                                                                                                 Historical Thinking     2

scaffold the epistemological  structure  and  constructed    nature  of the  discipline. For  example, researchers  found
effects for writing prompts that ask for an argument (Wiley & Voss, 1999), for the insertion of an author's voice in
an otherwise passive textbook (Paxton, 2002), for the explicit request for sourcing information (Britt & Aglinskas,
2002), and for the juxtaposition of two contrasting arguments about an historical event (Wolfe & Goldman, 2005).
         Yet, we believe this body of research has considered historical thinking on relatively narrow terms. With
two classroom interventions standing as exceptions (Nokes et al., 2007; De La Paz, 2005),        each approximately two
weeks long,  the  research on  historical thinking   lacks   the ecological   validity of the  classroom. In   most cases,
researchers  designed  laboratory conditions  and   students    individually  worked   their way through  computer-based
prompts or document packets.      Second, most of the studies were conducted with undergraduate students or high
school students who were already proficient readers, not with struggling readers who represent many of the students
in our nation's schools. Third, given researchers' claims that historical thinking should be widely transferable to
online resources, the materials used in the research on historical thinking have been surprisingly limited to primary
or secondary historical sources.  Similarly, because this body of research has largely grown out of the findings of
expert reading of written texts, the field has by and large ignored the other textual resources and multimodal forms
through which the discipline is represented in the classroom.
         The four papers in this symposium seek to broaden the foundation upon which historical thinking research
has developed to date. In particular, the papers in this symposium address on or more of the following questions:

         1.  What does an extensive historical thinking curriculum look like in real classrooms, with many students
             reading below grade-level? What are the effects of such a curriculum intervention?
         2.  What does historical thinking look like when students work with digital resources and other texts with
             which they feel personally connected?
         3.  In what instances can we broaden our definitions of historical texts to include multimodal forms of
             disciplinary representation?

         We believe the four studies we will present make a significant contribution to the field by broadening the
resources and contexts that have typically been considered in research on historical thinking. Our panel includes a
mixed-methods, experimental study comparing five treatment classrooms and five control classrooms involving over
200 11th grade students.   This   study looks   at the effects   of  a documents-based    curriculum,  featuring  modified
historical documents, on student reading comprehension and historical thinking. The second study asks how students
use processes  of historical thinking in  their engagement       with  online texts, using   verbal reading   protocol data,
recorded  reader-computer  interactions,  and content     analysis  of  students' graphic    representations. We  will also
present a design study looking to integrate disciplinary practices from history into a community action project after
school in an urban community.     This effort explores the application of historical thinking, research, and reading to
the engagement of youth in developing solutions to issues of concern in their community, using an iterative process
of design study to test and develop the model.      Finally, the panel includes a case study of three middle school
teachers' conceptualizations and uses of historical texts and representations in their classrooms.        This study asks
how teachers represent historical ideas and texts in their classrooms and relies upon qualitative data and constant
comparative analysis as well as video data analyzed through semiotic and multimodal analyses.
         This symposium will examine different applications of disciplinary practices in and around schools--from
middle school classrooms to high school classrooms to digital environments to after-school programs. We combined
our diverse research settings and methodologies to demonstrate the wide range of practices that can inform our
thinking and pedagogy in this area. By drawing from these studies of disciplinary practices across multiple settings,
we hope not only to expand the conversation around what it means to learn history, but we also hope to add to
conversations about collaborating across methodologies to study this important topic in education.

Individual Presentations

The Teen Empowerment through Reading, Research, and Action (TERRA) Project
Darin Stockdill, University of Michigan

The Teen Empowerment through Reading, Research, and Action (TERRA) Project involved a design study on the
implementation of an after-school historical reading and action research program for students in an urban school.
As a design study, the project was carried out with the goal of studying the initial effectiveness of the model and
refining its design as an intervention model for future research.       Twelve students were initially recruited to meet

                                                       22  ·  © ISLS
                                                     ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 2
                                                                                                      Historical Thinking    3

once  a week   during the  school   year  to take part  in   this  effort in an  urban  school located  in a primarily  Latino
community.
         The   instructional    approach   used  was   based    upon   disciplinary practices   in history   which   entail the
identification of an historical problem, the selection and analysis of historical evidence, and the production of new
historical accounts based upon this process (Bain, 2000).          Students engaged in group brainstorming and discussion
and  chose  to focus  their   study  on   environmental    and    infrastructure  problems  in  their community.      With  the
researcher as instructor and co-participant, the group then began the ongoing process of using disciplinary practices
and reading heuristics from history to explore the roots of particular manifestations of these problems.          In particular,
as they learned about the history and economics of the physical deterioration of their community, the participants
were  provided     disciplinary reading   instruction  as  they    analyzed  historical  evidence  through   the processes   of
sourcing, contextualizing, and corroborating evidence (Wineburg, 2001).             Through this type of critical reflection,
students engaged in the production of their own historical accounts of environmental decay in their community and
used this to initiate a process of participant action research in which their historical study is guiding informed action
(Cammarota, 2007; Morrell, 2006).       In this context, students began to see that historical reading and research can be
tools for community development and can take on important uses beyond their school classrooms.
         Data collection and analysis for this research focused on the process of developing and implementing this
instructional intervention.   Decisions made by the researcher, who was also the instructor, were carefully recorded
and analyzed.  Data was also collected in order to describe how students thinking and reading about historical topics
developed over the course of the program, with a focus on how the immediate context of the problem of study
played a role in setting purpose for their reading and learning.        In addition, the study also looked at the role played
by their prior knowledge of the community in this process.
         Initial analyses of field notes, discussion transcripts, and interview data demonstrated that students were
very excited about the project and wanted to learn about the problem.           For example, when asked what was different
about learning in this fashion, one young man stated that it seemed more important because, "It's about me, it's
about my    city." Nevertheless,  as   in many   after-school   programs,    consistent attendance   of participants became   a
concern in some cases despite student expressions of interest.        Also, some participants initially resisted the focus on
reading when   it  appeared   too much    like typical schooling.     However, when program adjustments were made to
include more discussion and active research such as surveying classmates and documenting the environment with
photography,   students showed      more  motivation   to engage    in  readings  which  they  viewed   as connected   to  these
experiences.   Over the course of the program, four participants in particular committed themselves to this learning
process and began to take on the role of researchers.         Their prior knowledge of the community helped to set the
purpose for their reading and research, but it was actually quite limited in an historical sense.          Nevertheless, after
being in the program for several months, they began to incorporate evidence from their research into their evolving
accounts of  urban   decay   in their  community.      As  the  program    ended,  they  used  their  accounts   to develop  an
educational presentation on solving the problem for other students and community members.
         This preliminary evidence suggests that after-school learning may be more effective when it incorporates
disciplinary approaches to learning with learning experiences less typical to conventional classrooms.              In addition,
the initial evidence  suggests    that disciplinary  approaches    to  historical learning can  be   effectively linked to  the
solution of real world problems and thus engage young people in meaningful, active learning.

Historical reasoning on the Internet: How do students read and learn about socially
controversial issues in new literacy environments?
Byeong-Young Cho, University of Maryland, College Park

This study describes reading strategies that students used to identify, comprehend, and evaluate Internet texts, and
explores promises and challenges in applying heuristics for historical reading into a conceptualization of reading for
learning with Internet texts. Twelve 11th-grade participants with established reading abilities individually located
and read websites deemed useful to learn about a self-selected socially controversial issue that required historical
reasoning.  Data   collection   and analysis   used  multi-methods     aimed   at triangulating participants'  verbal  reports,
recorded reader-computer      interactions,  and graphic   representations    of  their understanding   in order to  infer  their
Internet reading strategy use (Afflerbach, 2000)
         A  preliminary  data   analysis   indicates that historical   reasoning  strategies may   play  an  important  role in
critical reading on the Internet while students often have difficulties using these strategies. Internet reading requires
readers' constructive strategy use (e.g., constructing potential texts to read, learning text content, monitoring one's
reading processes, and evaluating different aspects of reading) in which historical thinking processes are broadly

                                                          23  ·  © ISLS
                                                  ICLS 2010     ·  Volume 2
                                                                                                      Historical Thinking    4

involved (Afflerbach & Cho, 2009). Internet reading demands intertextual modeling of text content, interrogation of
hidden meanings, and critical source evaluation (Rouet, Favart, Britt, & Perfetti, 1997; VanSledright & Kelly, 1998;
Wineburg,    1991b)   through  which   active   readers  learn    about    the world   by   responding   to  the new    literacy
environments (Bruce, 2000; Kress, 2003; Kuiper, Volman, & Terwel, 2005; Landow, 1992; Leu, Kinzer, Coiro, &
Cammack,    2004).   The analysis   of students' strategy    data  will   eventually inform    a role of historical  reasoning
strategies in reading multiple, digital texts and what knowledge, epistemology, and skills and strategies should count
in history instruction that fosters both students' domain expertise and literacy development.

Reading Like a Historian: A Document-Based History Curriculum Intervention with
Adolescent Struggling Readers
Avishag Reisman, Stanford University

In this mixed-methods     study, five  history  teachers'   urban   classrooms    implemented    a seven-month    documents-
based history  curriculum  with  eleventh-grade   struggling      readers. The   study asks  whether  the   findings on    expert
historical reading can be brought to bear in urban public school classrooms, where students read well below grade
level. With five treatment and five control classrooms, and over 200 eleventh grade students, this study was the first
of its kind in any major U.S. school district.
         The curriculum features modified historical documents, vetted reading instruction methods, and innovative
activity structures that provide the necessary supports for disciplined historical inquiry.         The curriculum rests on
three theoretical assumptions.    First, the  approach   views     historical  reading as   fundamentally    intertextual.  The
intervention  shifts the grammar    of the   history classroom,    from    one  where  a  single  document--the    textbook--
embodies all historical knowledge, to one where historical knowledge results from the interpretation and evaluation
of multiple documents.     The second theoretical assumption is that students must see cognitive strategies explicitly
modeled before they understand how to use and practice them.           Third, the curriculum radically modifies documents,
both lexically and syntactically. Though originals were available to all students, these adaptations were the only way
struggling readers could be exposed to the voices of historical figures.
         This  study  uses mixed    methods  to  capture    the effects   of the proposed   curriculum   on  student  historical
reading and   general reading  comprehension.    Four    measures    were    administered   to students  before  and  after  the
intervention:  1) A   30-question   multiple  choice   and     constructed-response    test of   historical thinking  that  was
developed,  piloted  and validated  by   the researcher;    2)  A nationally-normed    reading   comprehension    test  (Gates-
MacGinitie);   3) A   content  test comprised    of    released   multiple-choice    items  from   California's  state  history
assessment; 4) A 20-question transfer test that asked students to apply historical thinking skills to contemporary
issues and problems.   Because students were not randomly assigned to condition, pretests were used as covariates.
A MANCOVA analysis found statistically significant gains for treatment students on all four measures.
         Though the quasi-experimental nature of the study precludes causal conclusions, the fact that results were
consistent for the   treatment condition   across    a wide    range   of  school and  teacher   contexts,   suggests  that the
curriculum may have contributed to student gains in reading comprehension and historical thinking.             This paper will
discuss the features of the curriculum and contrast them with the textual resources and instruction in traditional
history classrooms.

Constructing History in Middle Schools: A Social Semiotic Analysis of Texts Used in
Three History Classrooms
Amy Alexandra Wilson, University of Georgia

This ten-month multicase study (Stake, 2006) documents the forms of representation used by three middle school
history teachers as part of their daily instruction. This study is framed in theories of social semiotics (Halliday, 1978;
Hodge & Kress, 1988; van Leeuwen, 2005), which posit that texts realize any given social system by "not merely
expressing it, but actively creating and maintaining it" (Halliday, 1978, p. 172). A semiotic conceptualization of
texts includes communication     in any  mode   or   combination    of  modes,   including  spoken    words,  gestures, written
words,  music, images,   and  more  (Kress,  2003).    According    to this  theoretical framework,   multimodal     texts used
within history classrooms realize the discipline of history by instantiating common disciplinary practices, norms,
problems, and epistemologies (cf. Brophy, 1996; McDiarmid, Ball, & Anderson, 1989).
         To study how the discipline of history was realized in three middle school classrooms, this study undertook
a close analysis of the types of texts that three middle school teachers used, the ways in which they combined them,

                                                         24  ·  © ISLS
                                                    ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 2
                                                                                                   Historical Thinking      5

and the goals toward which they employed them. Four types of data were collected over the course of ten months:
field notes from three to five hours of classroom observations per week; artifacts and photographs collected during
these observations (e.g., photographs of PowerPoint presentations); monthly interviews with the teachers regarding
their evaluation  of  the instructional materials   they used;    and three  videotaped  lessons from  each   teacher,  which
enabled a fine-tuned analysis of how different modes were integrated.
         The written data are currently being coded in accordance with a modified constant comparative method
(Smagorinsky, 2008), whose codes are designed to indicate discipline-specific patterns in the types of representation
that are used and the ways in which they are combined, while the video data are being transcribed and coded in the
form of a multimodal concordance chart (Baldry & Thibeault, 2006), which records how different modes (images,
gestures, written words, spoken words) are integrated and used for different purposes within any given stretch of
communication. Preliminary data analysis indicates that teachers often used photographs, maps, video, and other
iconic images to refer to observable events or phenomena, but they used written or spoken words to emphasize
intangible themes, such as power, governance, changes, or people's thoughts on events.
         For example, one eighth-grade history teacher (T1) showed video footage of fire fighters approaching the
Twin Towers and clips from the Disney movie Johnny Tremain to teach about tangible events that preceded a war:
the destruction of the Twin Towers and the Boston Tea Party. However, to raise questions of ethics surrounding
when it is appropriate to go to war, he held a classroom discussion that culminated in the students writing an essay
addressing when soldiers should be honored as heroes, drawing evidence from multiple instances when America had
been at war. As another example, a sixth-grade teacher (T2) showed photographs of the effects of air pollution and
acid rain in Mexico City, including statues whose faces had been eroded, along with pointing to maps including the
geographical   features   of Mexico    City that  trapped   the   pollution. In  talking about  intangible  themes   such   as
governance and power, however, T2's students held discussions comparing governmental structures across South
and Central America and the Caribbean. A third example, drawn from the final teacher who participated in this
study (T3), included using drawings of Cortez's landing in the New World to introduce the event of the landing;
students later wrote paragraphs evaluating whether or not the Colombian Exchange was ultimately beneficial or
harmful.
         The three history teachers also drew heavily from embodied representations, or representations in which the
students' or teachers' bodies represented a historical figure or object. For example, T3 asked one student to wear a
blindfold  and   walk to  the edge   of a  table to  demonstrate    what  Columbus    may  have  felt like in venturing    into
relatively unchartered    territory, whileT1's   class involved    students  who  dressed  up  as  Civil   War  soldiers   and
explained what life was like during their time period. In T2's classroom, students studied the histories of sports in
different Latin American countries and dressed in jerseys to indicate those countries' affinity for soccer. T3, in
teaching an enrichment lesson on reading maps, dressed as a pirate and asked her students to search historical maps
to begin   a "treasure  hunt,"  while   T1  and  his students   acted  in plays  that required  them   to  take the  place  of
immigrants    to America     in the  1800s.  Because     one   goal of   history is to   encourage  students    to read   both
empathetically and critically (Levesque, 2008), while recognizing that all texts convey a perspective shaped by the
author's context and group affiliations, these representations enabled teachers and students to embody history as
though they were actually living in that time and thinking from that perspective.
         In all, however, the teachers valued written words as being the primary source of information in history,
regardless of whether those written words were from primary source documents, textbooks, or self-created power
point presentations.   Though    the teachers viewed     other  representations  as vital to their disciplinary    goals, they
emphasized that history was characterized by a heavy reliance on written and spoken words as key mediators of
students' historical understandings and as primary purveyors of content. Written and spoken words enabled them to
discuss intangible themes, such as power or justifications for war, in ways that could not be conveyed through iconic
representations (or representations such as photographs that bear a physical resemblance to the item they represent).
These themes and ideas were more important to the teachers than the actual tangible and observable historical events
themselves.

Implications

Taken together, these four papers broaden the resources and contexts that have heretofore been considered in the
study of historical thinking.   We see two direct implications for the development of historical thinking in students.
The first emerges from the scholarship on adolescent literacy that argues that reading instruction must be embedded
in the content areas and integrate domain-specific ways for reading if students are to be prepared to comprehend the
complex    texts they  encounter  in  their upper-level  classrooms.     According  to   Massey  &  Heafner     (2004),   many

                                                         25  ·  © ISLS
                                                  ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 2
                                                                                               Historical Thinking    6

teachers "do not know how to help students develop the skills and strategies necessary for reading comprehension in
history classes" (p. 26). Several of the papers on this panel suggest new instructional approaches and alternative
resources that could be used to teach disciplinary reading in history classes.    The second implication emerges from
the earliest arguments for the inclusion of history education in high schools that emerged at the end of the 19th
century:  the study of history has the potential to develop the capacity for reason and judgment.    All the more so in
2009, as the deluge of data in the information age demands an unprecedented degree of discernment and judgment.
In the face of increasingly sophisticated marketing of products and ideas towards our youth, it is more important
than ever that young people think and learn critically from and about multiple forms of texts, that they can consider
opposing points of view and conflicting accounts, and make informed judgments about the world.         In the words of
Wineburg and Martin (2004), "in our age of new technologies, every crackpot has become a publisher.          The ability
to judge the quality of information can no longer be considered `extra credit'" (p. 42). We believe that the papers in
this symposium,  by  broadening    both the resources and   contexts  associated  with historical thinking, increase the
likelihood that youth will encounter opportunities to `judge the quality of information' and use their analyses in
productive ways.

References

Afflerbach, P. (2000). Verbal reports and protocol analysis. In M. J. Kamil, P. B. Mosenthal, P. D. Pearson & R.
         Barr (Eds.), Handbook     of reading   research  (Vol.  3,  pp. 163-179).   Mahwah,   NJ:  Lawrence   Erlbaum
         Associates.
Afflerbach, P., & Cho, B.-Y. (2009). Identifying and describing constructively responsive comprehension strategies
         in new and traditional forms of reading. In S. E. Israel & G. G. Duffy (Eds.), Handbook of research on
         reading comprehension (pp. 69-90). New York: Routledge.
Bain, R. B. (2000). Into the breach: Using research and theory to shape history instruction. In P. Stearns, P. Seixas,
         and S. Wineburg (Eds.), Knowing, teaching and learning history: National and international perspectives
         (331-353). New York: New York University Press.
Bain, R. B. (2006). Rounding up unusual suspects: Facing the authority hidden in the history classroom. Teachers
         College Record, 108, 2080-2114.
Baldry, A., & Thibault, P. J. (2006). Multimodal transcription and analysis: A multimedia toolkit and coursebook
         with associated on-line course. London: Equinox.
Biancarosa, C., & Snow, C. E. (2006). Reading next--A vision for action and research in middle and high school
         literacy: A report to Carnegie Corporation of New York (2nd ed.). Washington, DC: Alliance for Excellent
         Education.
Bradley Commission on History in Schools. (1988). Building a history curriculum:        Guidelines for teaching history
         in schools. In P. Gagnon (Ed.), Historical literacy: The case for history in American education (pp. 16-47).
         New York: Macmillan Publishing Company.
Britt, M. A., & Aglinskas, C. (2002). Improving students' ability to identify and use source information. Cognition
         and Instruction, 20, 485­522. Cognition and Instruction, 15(4), 85­106.
Brophy,  J. (1996). Introduction.  In J. Brophy   (Ed.), Advances    in  research on teaching:  Teaching  and  learning
         history (pp. 1-18). Greenwich, CT: JAI Press.
Bruce, B. C. (2000). Credibility of the Web: Why we need dialectical reading. Journal of Philosophy of Education,
         34(1), 97-109.
Cammarota, J.   (2007).   A social justice approach to achievement:      Guiding Latina/o students towards educational
         attainment with a challenging, socially relevant curriculum.    Equity & Excellence in Education 40:  87-96.
Committee of Seven. (1899). The study of history in schools: Report to the American Historical Association.        New
         York: MacMillan Company.
De   La Paz, S. (2005).   Effects of historical reasoning   instruction and writing  strategy mastery in culturally  and
         academically diverse middle school classrooms. Journal of Educational Psychology, 97(2), 139-156.
Halliday, M.  A. K.   (1978). Language    as social semiotic:    The social interpretation of  language  and  meaning.
         London: Arnold.
Heller, R., & Greenleaf, C. (2007).  Literacy instruction in the content areas:   Getting to the core of middle and high
         school improvement.   Washington, DC:     Alliance for Excellent Education.
Hodge, R., & Kress, G. (1988). Social semiotics. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
Holt, T. (1995). Thinking Historically: Narrative, Imagination, and Understanding. New York: College Entrance
         Examination Board.

                                                      26  ·  © ISLS
                                                 ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 2
                                                                                              Historical Thinking  7

Kress, G. (2003). Literacy in the new media age. New York: Routledge.
Kuiper, E., Volman, M., & Terwel, J. (2005). The Web as an information resource in K-12 education: Strategies for
         supporting students in searching and processing information. Review of Educational Research, 75, 285-
         328.
Landow, G. P. (1992). Hypertext: The convergence of contemporary critical theory and technology. Baltimore: The
         Johns Hopkins University Press.
Lee, J., and Weiss, A. (2007). The Nation's report card:     U.S. history 2006 (NCES 2007-474).    U.S. Department of
         Education, National Center for Education Statistics.   Washington, D.C.:   U.S. Government Printing Office.
Leu, D. J., Kinzer, C. K., Coiro, J. L., & Cammack, D. W. (2004). Toward a theory of new literacies emerging from
         the Internet and other information and communication technologies. In R. B. Ruddell & N. J. Unrau (Eds.),
         Theoretical models and processes of reading (5th ed., pp. 1570-1613). Newark, DE: International Reading
         Association.
Levesque, S. (2008). Thinking historically: Educating students for the 21st century. Toronto: University of Toronto
         Press.
Lutkus, A., & Weiss, A. (2007). The Nation's report card: Civics 2006 (NCES 2007-476).             U.S. Department of
         Education, National Center for Education Statistics.   Washington, D.C.:   U.S. Government Printing Office.
Massey, D.D., & Heafner, T.L.   (2004).   Promoting reading comprehension in social studies.   Journal of Adolescent
         and Adult Literacy 48(1): 26-40.
McDiarmid, G. W., Ball, D. L., & Anderson C. W. (1989). Why staying one chapter ahead doesn't really work:
         Subject-specific pedagogy. In M. C. Reynolds (Ed.), Knowledge base for the beginning teacher (pp. 193-
         205). New York: Pergamon.
Moje, E. B.   (2006). Motivating   texts, motivating contexts,    motivating adolescents:  examination of the role of
         motivation in adolescent literacy practices and development. Perspectives: 10-14.
Moje, E. B.  (2007).  Developing socially just subject-matter instruction:    A review of the literature on disciplinary
         literacy teaching. Review of Research in Education 31:     1-44.
Morrell, E. (2006). Critical participatory action research and the literacy achievement of ethnic minority youth.   In
         J. V. Hoffman, D. L. Schallert, C. M. Fairbanks, J. Worthy, and B. Maloch (Eds.), 55th Annual Yearbook of
         the National Reading Conference (pp. 1-18). Oak Creek, WI: National Reading Conference.
National Institute for   Literacy. (2007).  What  content-area      teachers should know   about   adolescent  literacy.
         Washington, D.C.
National Council for the Social Studies. (2007). NCSS calls for change as the nation's report card predicts trouble
         ahead for the next generation and of citizens and a healthy democracy.          Retrieved May 21, 2007 from
         http:/./www.ncss.org/newsItems/viewFullItem$1168.
Nokes, J.D., Dole, J. & Hacker, D.J. (2007). Teaching high school students to use heuristics while reading historical
         texts. Journal of Educational Psychology, 99(3), 492-504.
Paxton,  R. J.  (2002). The  influence of  author visibility   on high   school students solving a historical problem.
         Cognition and Instruction, 20(2), 197-248.
Rouet, J., Favart, M., Britt, M. A., & Perfetti, C. A. (1997). Studying and using multiple documents in history:
         Effects of discipline expertise. Cognition and Instruction, 15, 85-106.
Rouet, J., Britt, A. M., Mason, R.A., & Perfetti, C. (1996). Using Multiple Sources of Evidence to Reason about
         History.  Journal of Educational Psychology, 88(3), 478-493.
Shanahan, T. & Shanahan, C. (2008). Teaching disciplinary literacy to adolescents: Rethinking content-area literacy.
         Harvard Educational Review, 78, 40-61.
Smagorinsky, P. (2008). The method section as conceptual epicenter in constructing social science research reports.
         Written Communication, 25, 198-226.
Stahl, S., Hynd, C., Britton, B., McNish, M., & Bosquet, D. (1996). What happens when students read multiple
         source documents in history? Reading Research Quarterly, 31(4), 430 ­ 456.
Stake, R. E. (2006). Multiple case study analysis. New York: Guilford.
van Leeuwen, T. (2005). Introducing social semiotics. London: Routledge.
VanSledright, B. A., & Kelly, C. (1998). Reading American history: The influence of multiple sources on six fifth
         grades. The Elementary School Journal, 98, 239-265.
Wiley, J. & Voss, J. (1999). Constructing arguments from multiple sources: Tasks that promote understanding and
         not just memory for text.  Journal of Educational Psychology, 91(2), 301-311.
Wineburg, S. S. (1991a). On the reading of historical texts: Notes on the breach between school and the academy.
         American Educational Research Journal, 28, 495-519.

                                                      27  ·  © ISLS
                                                ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 2
                                                                                          Historical Thinking   8

Wineburg, S. S. (1991b). Historical problem solving: A study of the cognitive processes used in the evaluation of
       documentary and pictorial evidence. Journal of Educational Psychology, 83, 73-87.
Wineburg, S. S. (2001). Historical  thinking and other    unnatural acts: Charting the future of teaching the past.
       Philadelphia: Temple University Press.
Wineburg, S. (2004, March). Crazy for history. The Journal of American History, vol. 90, no. 4.  Retrieved
       October 30, 2006 from http://www.historycooperative.org/journals/jah/90.4/wineburg.html.
Wineburg, S. & Martin, D. (2004, September).   Reading and rewriting history.  Educational Leadership 62 (1): 42-
       45.
Wolfe, M. & Goldman, S. (2005). Relations between adolescents' text processing and reasoning. Cognition and
       Instruction, 23(4), 467-502.

                                                    28  ·  © ISLS
