                                           ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 2

       Motivation and affect in peer argumentation and socio-
                                       cognitive conflict
     Christa S. C. Asterhan (Organizer), University of Pittsburgh, USA. E-mail: asterhan@pitt.edu
              Baruch B. Schwarz & Ruth Butler, Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Israel.
                             E-mail: {msschwar, msbutler}@mscc.huji.ac.il
        Fabrizio Butera, Université de Lausanne, Switzerland. E-Mail: fabrizio.butera@unil.ch
       Céline Darnon, Clermont Université, France. E-Mail: Celine.Darnon@univ-bpclermont.fr
     Timothy Nokes, John Levine, Dan Belenky & Soniya Gadgil, University of Pittsburgh, USA.
                             E-mail: {nokes, jml, dmb83, smg58}@pitt.edu
          Lauren B. Resnick (Chair), University of Pittsburgh, USA. E-mail: resnick@pitt.edu
       Gale Sinatra (Discussant), University of Nevada, USA. E-mail: sinatra@unlv.nevada.edu

         Abstract: Whereas the cognitive processes and effects of collaborative learning have
         been intensively studied within the Learning Sciences, little attention has been paid
         to the way motivational and emotional factors may affect them. In this symposium,
         we present recent findings from three independent lines of research that focus on the
         way motivation and affect shape the interaction between peer learners and how this,
         in turn, affects cognitive gains from this interaction. All three presentations focus on
         learning within a socio-cognitive conflict task design, while drawing on different data
         sources, each highlighting different aspects of the interaction process: (1) Students
         self-reported perceptions of the self, the other and the interaction; (2) Epistemic and
         motivational  features  of  verbal  dialogue    content; and   (3) Interactants'  emotional
         reactions using  facial  signals   and  content-free   vocal parameters    of speech.   The
         findings shed new light on how motivational and affective factors may promote or
         inhibit productive interactions in the face of socio-cognitive conflict.

Symposium overview
         The study of peer collaborative learning has been a central theme in the Learning sciences.
Considerable  progress  has  been   made  in the  identification  of the  cognitive mechanisms     that  enable
learning in collaborative settings: For example, individual gains have been attributed to the fact that
group work promotes the construction of abstract representations (Shirouzu, Miyake, & Masukawa,
2002), provides the opportunity to obtain feedback on one's own ideas (Okita & Schwartz, 2006) and
primes learners to make productive use of subsequent experiences (Howe, McWilliam & Cross, 2005).
In addition, studies on the quality of peer-to-peer dialogue have found that the extent to which students
gain from   group  work  depends    on the  depth   and  the quality  of the  dialogue they    engage  in   (e.g.,
Asterhan & Schwarz, 2009a; Coleman, 1998; Webb, Troper & Fall, 1995). In spite of these advances, a
considerable amount of the variance in both group productivity as well as individual learning gains
remains  unaccounted   for.  Furthermore,    whereas   much    attention has  been  given   to the underlying
cognitive  mechanisms,   the  study  of collaborative    learning has   often neglected   the  socio-emotional
aspects of these inherently social settings.
         Motivation theory, on the other hand, has traditionally looked at the individual, focusing on
personality characteristics, individual dispositions, and the influence of external factors on the behavior
of the individual learner. For example, achievement goal theorists have extensively studied the relation
between individual learning behaviors and personal goal orientations on the one hand (e.g., Butler &
Neuman, 1995), or classroom goal structures on the other (e.g., Meece, Anderman & Anderman, 2006;
Turner,  Midgley,  Meyer,    Gheen,  Anderman,      Kang    &  Patrick,  2002). Until  recently,   the  role  of
achievement goals in small group interaction had not been studied.
         In this symposium,   we    aim  to  contribute  to  a rapprochement    between    these two   lines  of
research, by focusing on the role of motivational and emotional aspects of collaborative learning in
situations characterized by  socio-cognitive    conflict (Doise   &  Mugny,   1984).   In the design  of  group
tasks, socio-cognitive conflict  is often  stimulated by  pairing   collaborators who     have different  initial
ideas and conceptions, by providing them with different information sources or by presenting them
with data that contradicts their initial ideas. This incongruence between solutions or ideas introduces
doubt  concerning  the correctness   of one's   own    knowledge  (Doise    & Mugny,   1984),   which    is then
hoped to cause learners to reconsider, renegotiate and/or reconstruct this knowledge through reasoned
argumentation  (Asterhan    & Schwarz,    2007).  However,     when   this  incongruence   occurs  in  a  social
realm, it may also raise uncertainty about self-competence, especially in a competitive context (Butera
& Mugny,    1995). A   perceived  threat  to self-competence    may   cause   learners to  focus more    on  the

                                                211  ·  © ISLS
                                            ICLS 2010    ·  Volume 2

relational, rather  than the  epistemic    aspect  of the  conflict   (Darnon,    Muller,  Schrager,   Panuzzo   &
Butera, 2006). In order to avoid public exposure of lesser competence, learners may choose to comply
with their co-actors and seek a quick consensus without much cognitive engagement. Conversely, they
may focus on `winning the argument' at any cost, without genuinely trying to understand any of the
ideas proposed by others.
         The main goal of this symposium then is to come to a better understanding of the way learners
interact in and  learn  from    collaborative  learning  tasks   that are  designed   according   to  principles of
socio-cognitive conflict. We include three independent, yet complementary lines of research that focus
on the role of motivational and affective factors in these tasks. In each study, the effect of different
goals is  investigated,  both   on the   way   learners  regulate   the  interaction,  as well   as  on  individual
cognitive gains from these interactions. In addition, each paper investigates the interplay between the
individual and the group and between the cognitive and the social, while drawing from different types
of data that highlight different aspects of this interplay:
         In  the first paper,   Fabrizio Butera   and  Céline    Darnon    review  a  series of studies  they  have
conducted   on the  role of   individual   achievement     goals in socio-cognitive    conflict  regulation.  They
distinguish  between   two   types of  regulation, epistemic     and  relational,  and   show   that the goals  that
students pursue direct their attention towards different aspects of the interaction, leading to different
outcomes.
         In the second paper, Christa Asterhan, Baruch Schwarz and Ruth Butler focus on peer-to-peer
argumentation    as a   vehicle   for  learning   and    understanding     complex    scientific  concepts.   They
distinguish between argumentation as an activity of competitive debating and argumentation as a space
in which learners can critically, yet constructively examine different ideas. They examine how these
different types of dialectical argumentation can be elicited and measured, and what their relationship is
to conceptual learning.
         In the third paper, Timothy Nokes, John Levine, Dan Belenky and Soniya Gadgil report on a
study that   examines    the  relationship  between     different   debate  scenarios    and  individual   learning
outcomes. To get insight into the underlying cognitive and social processes that mediate these effects,
they focus both on epistemic content of the interaction, as well as measures of student engagement and
affect including, among others, behavioral indices and content-free vocal parameters of speech.

Socio-cognitive conflict and learning: past and present.
Fabrizio Butera & Céline Darnon

         In the present talk, we contend that dissent with others' points of view should be a customary
and promoted activity whenever learning is concerned. Indeed, dissent occurring during group or peer
learning  favours  cognitive    development    and knowledge      acquisition.    We  present  a theory   of socio-
cognitive conflict, which argues that dissent with one or several partners over a task in which learning
is concerned   may  stimulate   task-related   cognitive   activity and    result in progress   (Doise   & Mugny,
1984). Should, therefore, socio-cognitive conflict be prescribed in educational settings? We address
this question by drawing on research in which we found that socio-cognitive conflict is beneficial for
learning to the extent that conflict is regulated in an epistemic manner, that is, by focusing on the task
or on the knowledge at hand. On the contrary, socio-cognitive conflict can result in detrimental effects
whenever conflict is regulated in a relational manner, that is by focusing on status and on interpersonal
dominance (Darnon, Buchs, & Butera, 2002). A recent experiment illustrates these dynamics (Darnon,
Doll, & Butera, 2007). University students participated in a fictitious computer-mediated interaction
about a text with a bogus partner who introduced through her/his rhetoric either an epistemic conflict (a
conflict that referred  to the  content  of   the text), or a  relational   conflict  (a conflict that   questioned
participants' competence).     Results  indicated  that  compared     to   the epistemic  conflict,  the relational
conflict enhanced   threat and   reduced   the perceived    contribution   of  the partner.  Moreover,    when   the
conflict was  epistemic,   the  stronger the   perceived conflict,    the  more   participants  said  they worked
through the problem to understand it better and tried to integrate the two points of views, that is, the
more they regulated the conflict in an epistemic way. On the contrary, after a relational conflict, the
stronger the perceived conflict, the more participants said they tried to assert they were right and the
other person   was  wrong,   that  is, the more    they  engaged    in  a  relational regulation  of  the  conflict.
Finally, epistemic conflict elicited better learning than relational conflict.
         This  distinction   is of importance     with   respect  to   the question   of  the usability  of  socio-
cognitive conflict, as recent research has shown that the two forms of conflict regulation are predicted
by different achievement goals, goals that can be implemented in the classroom (Meece, Anderman, &
Anderman, 2006). Indeed, we have found that epistemic regulation is predicted by mastery goals (the
will  to acquire   knowledge    and    develop  competences),     and    relational   regulation  is  predicted  by

                                                  212  ·  © ISLS
                                              ICLS 2010    ·  Volume 2

performance goals (the will to demonstrate competence relative to others; Darnon et al, 2006). In this
study, French introductory psychology students ­ for whom mastery and performance self-set goals
had been recorded ­ were asked to imagine a discussion with another person who disagreed with them
about an experiment they had studied in class during the previous semester. They were then asked to
report to what extent during this "debate" they would try to regulate the conflict in an epistemic way or
a  relational   way.   Items  related    to epistemic      regulation    asked   students    to what    extent   when
disagreements occurred they would try (a) to think about the text again in order to understand better,
(b) to examine the conditions under which each point of view could help them understand, and (c) to
think of a solution that could integrate both points of view. Items related to relational regulation asked
students to what extent when disagreements occurred they would try (a) to show they were right, (b) to
resist by maintaining their initial position, and (c) to show their partner was wrong. Results indicated
that mastery goals positively predicted the reported amount of epistemic conflict regulation whereas
performance goals positively predicted the reportedamount of relational conflict regulation.
         Importantly, we have also found that achievement goals interact with socio-cognitive conflict
to predict actual learning (Darnon, Butera, & Harackiewicz, 2007). In this study, participants were led
to think they   interacted with    a partner  via a computer     sharing    opinions   about  a   text that they were
studying. Mastery and performance goals were manipulated. During the "interaction", they received
either disagreeing or agreeing answers from this bogus partner. Results showed that the condition in
which  mastery   goals  were    induced   led  to better   learning   than  the performance     goal   condition  only
when the partner disagreed. No differences between goal conditions were observed when the partner
agreed. In other words, when conflict is elicited during interaction, mastery goals have the potential to
make conflict constructive, and lead to better learning than performance goals.
         Notwithstanding the positive effects of mastery goals, in a further line of research we have
discussed the problem that education takes place in organisations that are concerned with formation
and selection. Because of this very functioning, a profound ambivalence is embedded in achievement
goal promotion in universities (Darnon, Dompnier, Delmas, Pulfrey, & Butera, 2009). Mastery goals
promotion is recommended by most researchers, and promoted in the discourse of most teachers. Thus,
the  student  who   strongly  endorses   mastery    goals    fulfils the teachers'   motivations    and  aims   and is
consequently    perceived    as  someone     who   is  appreciated      by  teachers.   This    is not  the  case  for
performance     goals,  which   are  not  valued   by  teachers      in their discourse.    However,    the  selection
processes through which the students have to go in their university career implicitly indicate that, in
order to  succeed,   they  not  only   have   to  improve    knowledge      but also get   better  grades   than other
students. Thus, not only mastery goals but also performance goals are seen by students as effective
tools to succeed at university (see also Dompnier, Darnon, Delmas, & Butera, 2008). In sum, it appears
that students   are aware  of   the  two functions    of   university,  namely   education    (apparent  in  teachers'
official discourse) and selection (hidden in the university structure). This means that self-presentation
concerns may interfere with mastery goals in shaping the students' social interactions and academic
achievement.
         The    finding that  students  are aware   of   this double    function  of   educational  organisations,  at
least as far as university is concerned, may shed light on puzzling but consistent result that mastery
goals positively impact achievement-related outcomes, but paradoxically hold an inconsistent relation
with academic achievement. Dompnier, Darnon and Butera (2009) hypothesized that this relationship
depends   on  why   students   endorse   mastery   goals--namely,        to garner   teachers'  appreciation    (social
desirability) or to  succeed    at  university (social   utility).   First-year psychology    students   completed   a
mastery   goal  scale   in a  standard    format,   with     social  desirability  instructions    and  social   utility
instructions. Participants'   grades   on   academic   exams     were    recorded    later in the  semester.   Results
indicated that students' perceptions of both social desirability and social utility related to mastery goals
moderated the relationship between mastery goal endorsement and final grades. The less participants
perceived these goals as socially desirable, the more the goals predicted grades. Conversely, the greater
their perceived social utility, the higher their predictive value. In other words, mastery goals appear to
be  related  to learning   to the    extent that  students    do   not  endorse   it for   self-presentation  reasons
(Dompnier, Darnon, & Butera, 2009). We conclude this talk by reflecting upon the goals promoted by
educational   organisations   that   may  favour   or  hinder the    constructive    effects  for  learning  of  socio-
cognitive conflict.

On competitive and co-constructive dialectical argumentation
Christa S. C. Asterhan, Baruch B. Schwarz and Ruth Butler

         Recent research seems to indicate that simply designing tasks according to principles of socio-
cognitive conflict   may   often   not be   sufficient for   students   to  capitalize on   the affordances   that are

                                                  213    ·  © ISLS
                                              ICLS 2010    ·  Volume 2

created in such task designs, and that this may be particularly true for learning that involves conceptual
change:  In  two   separate   experimental   studies,  students   who   were instructed  to engage    in dialectical
argumentation    on   the  topic of   natural selection    gained from   interaction  with  an  equal-status  peer,
whereas students that were not instructed to do so did not (Asterhan & Schwarz, 2007). Moreover, a
follow-up study showed that conceptual gains were dependent on the extent to which students engaged
in argumentation moves that are characterized by a dialectical and critical stance towards proposed
explanations (Asterhan & Schwarz, 2009a).
         However, further in-depth analyses of selected dialogue protocols seemed to indicate that not
all forms   of  dialectical   argumentation     may  have    the same   beneficial  outcomes    (Asterhan,   2007):
Learners    did not   seem  to gain   when   the dialogue    was  characterized  by   an adversarial,    debate-like
atmosphere. The dialectical argumentation of gaining dyads, on the other hand, was characterized by a
particularly pleasant and constructive, yet critical atmosphere. These dyads used several sophisticated
techniques   (such    as, for  example,   spontaneous      role-playing  and  posing   "What    if.." scenarios)  to
preserve  the   delicate  balance   between    critically  examining    each others'  ideas while     maintaining  a
pleasant and supportive atmosphere. Moreover, the episodes of critical examination were interspersed
with episodes of collaborative construction of explanations. We therefore called this type of dialogue
co-constructive, dialectical argumentation (Asterhan & Schwarz, 2009b). In the present presentation,
we aim to explore the following questions: (1) How can this particular type of peer dialogue be elicited;
(2) Can  co-constructive,     dialectical  argumentation     be reliably and  quantitatively   distinguished  from
adversarial  argumentation;    and    (3) Do   these different  types   of peer  dialogue  lead to    differences in
learning and understanding conceptual content?
         In   a  recent   series  of   studies   Darnon,   Butera   and    colleagues  investigated    the  role  of
motivational differences of individual learners' achievement goal orientations in academic situations
characterized by socio-cognitive conflict (e.g., Darnon et al, 2002, 2006, 2007).           These studies showed
that both existing as well as manipulated differences in achievement goals can predict learning from
short computer-mediated communication with a fictitious, disagreeing partner: Whereas mastery goals
(a focus on learning and personal improvement) positively related with learning, performance goals (a
focus on individual ability comparisons) did not. We sought to extend this research to the domain of
peer argumentation and learning that involves conceptual change. Unlike in the settings investigated by
Darnon,  Butera    and    colleagues,  in learning   tasks that target  particularly difficult scientific   concepts
students are    often uncertain  of   the correctness  of their   prior knowledge    and their  ability  to perform
well.
         In  a  first study,  we focused     on  the relation   between  students'  individual  achievement    goal
orientations   and  four  different   types  of  self-reported  collaborative   behavior   (Asterhan,   Schwarz   &
Butler, 2009). Undergraduates were situated within an educational setting in which they were asked to
solve and reveal their knowledge concerning an ill-structured, complex astronomy-related topic. They
were then asked questions concerning their behavior in a peer collaboration setting in which they were
to  discuss  their  solution   with   a disagreeing    peer. Four   different   categories  of  self-reported  peer
collaboration    behavior   were    assessed:   Quick     consensus seeking,    adversarial  argumentation,      co-
constructive dialectical argumentation and private dialectical deliberation. The results showed, among
others,  that   mastery    orientations    predicted   co-constructive     dialectical   argumentation,     whereas
performance-approach       goals predicted    adversarial    argumentation.  These    findings  encouraged    us  to
further explore the relation between goals, argumentation and conceptual learning in an experimental
set-up. In  addition,  since   certain  patterns of  peer  collaboration   behavior  are believed  to  mediate   the
relation between achievement goals and learning from socio-cognitive conflict, the verbal interactions
were analyzed with the help of a coding scheme that aimed to distinguish between adversarial and co-
constructive dialectical argumentation.

A description of the study
         Forty-two     undergraduates     (22 female,  20    male) without   any prior   formal education    on   the
topic of natural selection participated in this study. The general procedure and materials were based on
and adapted from Asterhan and Schwarz (2007). All students participated in the following sequence of
activities:  1)  Individual    pretest    to  assess   prior    evolutionary  understanding;    (2)    Instructional
intervention: screening of a 20 min instructional movie excerpt on natural selection; (3) Experimental
intervention: Students were randomly paired in same-sex dyads and instructed to engage in un-scripted,
computer-mediated peer argumentation on two novel transfer items, according to two different sets of
goal  instructions;   (4) Delayed     post-test  administered   a week   later. The   pre-  and delayed     post-test
contained equivalent items on different evolutionary phenomena. Following the movie, each participant
communicated     with     one  peer alias,   which   was   predefined   in the  instant  messaging     environment
(Yahoo! chat). All students received instructions to try and solve a particular transfer item themselves

                                                   214  ·  © ISLS
                                           ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 2

and then engage in `a critical discussion' on their explanations of the phenomena. Half of the dyads
were told that the goal of a critical discussion is to persuade the other to adopt one's own explanation
(emphasizing it as an interpersonal competition and a win-loose situation), and half of the dyads were
told that the goal is to gain a better understanding through discussion (emphasizing the importance of
co-constructive, yet dialectical argumentation). They were given several examples of different dialogue
moves, appropriate to each condition. Individual evolutionary understanding was assessed in terms of
(a) the mean quality of the explanatory schemas students used, and (b) the mean number of correct
Darwinian    principles that  students  explicitly  mentioned   in  their  written  explanations    of different
evolutionary phenomena.
         Two complementary, independent coding schemes were developed to analyze the computer-
mediated dialogue protocols. Both used turns as the unit of analysis and both were non-exhaustive: The
first distinguished between different epistemic activities (de Vries et al, 2002; Ohlsson, 1995) students
engaged in when trying to understand the concept of natural selection.          Only on-task dialogue content
was coded. Based on distinctions proposed by Asterhan and Schwarz (2009) it mainly distinguished
two categories of epistemic dialogue moves: those that reflect consensual construction and validation
of explanations (including, among other, elaborations, justifications and agreements; hereafter referred
to as   CCVE)    and those    that reflect critical-dialectical argumentation     (including,   among    others,
counterarguments,    rebuttals, challenges,   critical questions   and   oppositions; hereafter  referred to  as
CDA).
         The aim of the second coding scheme was to assess the extent to which the verbal dialogue
contained  overt markers   that indicated   the endorsement     of a competitive    interpersonal   goal  or the
endorsement of a collaborative interpersonal goal. It was applied to all dialogue turns. The scheme was
inspired by distinctions proposed by Chiu and Khoo (2003) and included the following: Competitive
markers  included verbal   content  that   overtly emphasized   the  interpersonal  conflict between    persons
instead of solutions (e.g., "You say that X whereas I claim that Y"), increase face threat (e.g., explicitly
stating that the other is wrong) and/or relate to the inferiority of the partner's abilities or explanations
(e.g., using sarcasm    when  evaluating   an  explanation  proposed     by partner).  Collaboration    markers
included overt verbal content that aimed at decreasing face threat when a conflict arises (e.g., using
smileys  and  other  positive  emoticons,   or  framing  disagreements     in a  neutral, non-personal    way),
emphasizing a common goal and shared responsibility (e.g., "We should find the right explanation")
and/or decreasing interpersonal competitiveness and potential differences in competence (e.g., hedging
explanations and complimenting partner).

Main findings and discussion
         No significant differences in conceptual gains were found between the two condition (framing
dialectical argumentation as a mechanism for learning or as a competitive activity). However, for both
measures of conceptual understanding an interaction effect was found for condition and gender, such
that female students significantly outperformed male students in the competitive framing condition, but
not in the `argumentation for learning' condition. The overall pattern showed that female students fared
better when  dialectical argumentation     was  framed   as a competitive   rather  than  as a co-constructive
activity, whereas for male students the competitive framing was detrimental for learning (no gains) and
the co-constructive framing resulted in moderate learning gains. The dialogue analyses shed some light
on these surprising findings. In spite of the competitive framing, the female dialogues in this condition
were actually characterized by co-constructive dialectical argumentation: They included a high number
of both CDA as well as CCVE dialogue moves. Moreover, whereas the dialogues included a relatively
high number of competitive dialogue markers, this was compensated for by an even larger number of
collaborative markers. The male dialogues in this condition, on the other hand, were characterized by
adversarial dialectical argumentation (a high number of CDA and competitive markers and virtually no
collaborative markers).
         Even  though   it is difficult to generalize  from   this first study, the data  seem   to support  the
claim that co-constructive dialectical argumentation fosters the learning of complex concepts, whereas
adversarial argumentation does not. However, it is also clear that either form of peer-to-peer dialogue is
not easily elicited and that goal instructions may have different effects for different types of learners
(e.g., male  and female).   Moreover,    manipulated    goals seem   to   have  a  lesser effect in  prolonged
activities that more closely resemble actual collaborative learning settings. The implications of these
findings for theory and future research will be discussed in the presentation.

Investigating        the      Impact       of  Dialectical         Interaction        on   Engagement,
Affect, and Robust Learning
Timothy J. Nokes, John M. Levine, Dan Belenky, and Soniya Gadgil

                                                215  ·  © ISLS
                                             ICLS 2010    ·   Volume 2

          Our work lies at the intersection of motivation, affect, social interaction, and learning. We are
interested in how dialectical interaction impacts conceptual learning vis-à-vis motivation and affect. In
this  research,  we  focus  on situations    in which   two   or  more    people  with  roughly    equal  status   but
alternative viewpoints either compete with one another or work together to accomplish some goal or
task, such as winning a debate or achieving consensus on a controversial issue. In this symposium, we
will  report some    of our  initial work   examining     the impact   of various  types   of  debate   scenarios   on
students' conceptual learning, engagement, and affect.
          This work builds on prior research investigating the relationship between cognitive conflict
and learning (e.g., Doise & Mugny, 1984), the links between motivation, affect, and cognition (e.g.,
Forgas, 2001; Schwarz & Clore, 2007), and the mechanisms underlying conceptual learning (e.g., Chi
&   Ohlsson,  2005;  Nokes   & Ross,     2007). Although      much prior   work   has   investigated  each   of these
areas separately,    few  studies  have  tried  to build  connections     across  all three.  We   hypothesize     that
conflict scenarios   that  increase  engagement,     arousal,  and positive   affect   will  facilitate participants'
deep    processing   of  discourse    through   a  variety    of  cognitive  mechanisms        including     inference
generation,  elaboration,    analogy,    and  the  framing    and  re-framing     of  the  information    discussed.
Participants in such scenarios are expected to develop more complex and coherent knowledge of the
issue and to learn both their own and their opponent's side of the issue. In contrast, conflict scenarios
that  decrease  engagement,    arousal,   and   induce  negative   affect  should  lead    to less robust    learning.
Participants  in  these scenarios    are expected  to  focus  on  their own   side   of the   debate, ignoring   their
opponent's view, and to engage in shallow cognitive processing strategies such as rehearsal of their
own argument.
          These   hypotheses   are   consistent  with  prior   research   on collaboration     showing    that  when
participants are more engaged in performing a task (as measured, for example, by their elaborations of
a peer's contributions) they show larger learning gains than do those who are less engaged (Meade,
Nokes, & Morrow, 2009). Similar findings have been shown in human tutoring (e.g., Chi, 2009) and
learning  from   intelligent tutoring    systems   (e.g., Baker,  Corbett,   Koedinger,     &  Wagner,     2004).   In
addition,   research has   shown   that  participants  in a   positive mood   are  more     likely to   rely on prior
knowledge and assimilate new knowledge into that understanding, whereas participants in a negative
mood show more bottom-up processing and less integration (e.g., Forgas, 2008). We aim to extend
these lines of research by examining the relationships that emerge between learning, engagement, and
affect under different debate scenarios.

Study Description
          To investigate these general hypotheses, we are conducting a study in which we manipulate
two aspects of a debate: the format (open-ended versus alternating) and the performance criterion on
which participants are evaluated (substance versus style of their arguments). We expect participants in
the open-ended condition to learn more and to show higher task engagement and arousal than those in
the alternating condition. Further, we predict that, compared to participants evaluated on the style of
their arguments, those evaluated on substance will learn more, will be more engaged, will show more
positive affect, will engage in deeper cognitive processing (inference generation, explanation, framing,
etc.), and will pay more attention to the logic, coherence, and consistency of their argument as well as
their opponent's     argument. In    addition,  we   predict   an  interaction    between     our  two  independent
variables, such that the participants in the style condition will benefit more from the open-ended debate
format than will participants in the substance condition. This prediction is based on the assumption that
participants evaluated on substance will focus on the content of their opponent's arguments regardless
of  the format   of  their debate,   whereas    participants  evaluated   on  style   will  process   more   of  their
opponent's argument in the open-ended than in the alternating condition.
          Fifty-two   undergraduates     at the  University    of  Pittsburgh  have     so far participated     in the
experiment for course credit (total sample will be 160).       The study uses a 2 (debate format: open-ended
vs.  alternating) X   2  (performance     criterion: substance    versus  style)  between-subjects      design     with
participants randomly assigned to one of the four conditions. Participants are run in dyads, and the
experiment is composed of three parts: a study phase, a debate phase, and a test phase. There are two
study booklets, one for each participant in the dyad. Both booklets have the same 1-page introduction
to the topic (the "Fall of the Ottoman Empire") and description of the historical significance of the
issue, along with a map of the Middle East. This is followed by two pages of text containing arguments
for  either external  or  internal   causes for the  fall of  the empire.   The   test  booklet   consists   of a  26-
question multiple-choice test assessing information contained in the study booklets and an open-ended
essay   question  in which   participants   describe  the reasons  for  the  fall of  the  Ottoman    empire.   Next,
participants complete the `Need for Cognitive Closure' scale (Kruglanski, Webster, & Klem, 1993).

                                                   216  ·  © ISLS
                                           ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 2

          Within each dyad, one participant is randomly assigned to the external causes condition and
the other to the internal causes condition. After studying the materials for their side of the issue for 15
minutes, participants are given instructions for the debate. In the "substance" condition, participants are
told they will be evaluated on the substance and the logic of their argument. In the "style" condition,
they are told they will be evaluated on the style of their arguments. All participants are told that their
goal is to win the debate. In the "open-ended" condition, participants engage in an 8-minute free-form
debate. In   the  "alternating"   condition, participants  speak  for  eight alternating one-minute     turns
(four/participant), which are timed by the experimenter. Immediately afterwards, participants are given
a brief questionnaire, assessing their subjective experiences and feelings in the debate. The winner (as
assessed by the experimenter) is then awarded a small prize, and participants are debriefed and thanked
for their participation.
          During the debate, participants are audio and video taped for later behavioral coding of their
arguments, task engagement, and affect. For example, we will analyze participants' verbal protocols to
determine instances of inference generation, explanation, elaboration, analogy making, and framing.
Moreover, we will assess participants' task engagement and affect by coding selected vocal qualities of
their speech (Fussell, 2002; Justin & Scherer, 2005).

Preliminary Results and Future Analyses
       Preliminary   results (based  on one-third   of our planned  sample)  suggest that,  on the multiple-
choice test, participants in the substance condition are learning more than those in the style condition.
In addition, participants are performing better on questions that assess their side of the argument than
their opponent's side. Finally, participants in the substance conditions are performing better than those
in the style condition   in  learning both their own   and their opponent's  argument.   So  far, we are not
seeing a clear trend in the findings regarding debate format.
       In the symposium, we will discuss results from the full sample and will report findings from the
full range of dependent measures that we are obtaining. We will provide an in-depth analysis of student
engagement    and  affect based   on both  questionnaire   measures and behavioral   indices.  We  will  also
analyze the content of the debates to gain insightinto the underlying cognitive and social processesthat
mediate the learning outcomes. We will conclude our presentation by discussing implications of our
work for instruction and pedagogy.

References
Asterhan, C. S. C. & Schwarz, B. B. (2009a). The role of argumentation and explanation in conceptual
     change: Indications from protocol analyses of peer-to-peer dialogue. Cognitive science, 33, 373-
     399.
Asterhan, C. S. C., &     Schwarz, B. B. (2009b). Transformation of robust misconceptions through peer
     argumentation.   In: B.  B.  Schwarz,   T.  Dreyfus,  &   R.  Hershkowitz  (Eds.)   Transformation   of
     Knowledge through Classroom Interaction (pp. 159-172). New York, NY: Routledge, Advances in
     Learning & Instruction series.
Asterhan, C. S. C., & Schwarz, B. B. (2007). The effects of monological and dialogical argumentation
     on concept learning in evolutionary theory.Journal of Educational Psychology, 99, 626-639.
Asterhan, C. S. C., Schwarz, B. B., & Butler, R. (2009). Inhibitors and facilitators of peer interaction
     that supports conceptual learning: The role of achievement goal orientations. In: N. A. Taatgen &
     H. van Rijn (Eds), Proceedings of the 31st Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society
     (pp. 1633-1638). Mahaw, N.J.: Erlbaum.
Baker,  R.   S., Corbett, A.  T., Koedinger,  K.  R.,  Wagner,   A. Z. (2004).  Off-Task    Behavior  in the
     Cognitive Tutor Classroom: When Students "Game The System". Proceedings of ACM CHI 2004:
     Computer-Human Interaction, 383-390
Butera, F.   &   Mugny,   G. (1995). Conflict  between   incompetences  and   influence  of a  low-expertise
     source in hypothesis testing. European Journal of Social Psychology, 25, 457-462.
Butler, R. & Neuman, O. (1995). Effects of task and ego achievement goals on help-seeking behaviors
     and attitudes. Journal of educational Psychology, 87, 261-271.
Chi, M. T. H. & Ohlsson, S. (2005). Complex declarative learning. In K. J. Holyoak & R. G. Morrison
     (Eds.), The    Cambridge     Handbook    of  Thinking   and   Reasoning  (pp.   371-399).    Cambridge
     University Press.
Chi, M.   T.  H.  (2009).   Active-constructive-interactive: a   conceptual  framework   for  differentiating
     learning activities. Topics in Cognitive Science, 1, 73-105.
Chiu, M. M. & Khoo, L. (2003). Rudeness and status effect during group problem solving: Do they
     bias evaluation and reduce the likelihood of correct solutions? Journal of Educational Psychology,
     95, 506-523.

                                                217  ·  © ISLS
                                         ICLS 2010    ·  Volume 2

Coleman, E. B. (1998). Using explanatory knowledge during problem solving in science. Journal of the
   Learning Sciences, 7, 387­427.
Darnon,  C.   &  Butera, F.,  &   Harackiewicz,  J.   (2007). Achievement    goals   in social  interactions:
   Learning with mastery vs. performance goals. Motivation and Emotion, 31, 61-70.
Darnon, C., Buchs, C., & Butera, F. (2002). Epistemic and relational conflict in sharing information
   during cooperative learning. Swiss Journal of Psychology, 61, 139-151.
Darnon, C., Doll, S., & Butera, F. (2007). Dealing with a disagreeing partner: relational and epistemic
   conflict elaboration. European Journal of Psychology of Education, 22, 227-242.
Darnon, C., Dompnier, B., Delmas, F., Pulfrey, C., & Butera, F. (2009). Achievement goal promotion
   at university: Social desirability and social utility of mastery and performance goals. Journal of
   Personality and Social Psychology, 96, 119-134.
Darnon, C., Muller, D., Schrager, S. M., Pannuzzo, N. & Butera, F. (2006). Mastery and performance
   goals predict epistemic and relational conflict regulation. Journal of Educational Psychology, 98,
   766-776.
De Vries, E.,, Lund, K., & Baker, M. (2002). Computer-mediated epistemic dialogue : Explanation and
   argumentation as vehicles for understanding scientific notions. Journal of the Learning Sciences,
   11, 63-103.
Doise, W., & Mugny, G. (1984). The social development of the intellect. Oxford: Pergamon Press.
Dompnier, B., Darnon, C., & Butera F. (2009). Faking the desire to learn: A clarification of the link
   between mastery goals and academic achievement. Psychological Science, 20, 939-943.
Dompnier, B., Darnon, C., Delmas, F., & Butera F. (2008). Achievement goals and social judgment:
   the performance-approach paradox. International Review of Social Psychology, 21, 247-271.
Forgas, J. P. (2001). (Ed.) Affect and social cognition. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Forgas, J. P. (2008). Affect and Cognition. Perspectives on Psychological Science, 3, 94-101.
Fussell, S.  R. (Ed.) (2002). The   verbal communication      of emotions:   Interdisciplinary perspectives.
   Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Howe, C., McWilliam, D. & Cross, G. (2005).      Chance favours only the prepared mind: incubation and
   the delayed effects of peer collaboration. British Journal of Psychology, 96, 67-93
Juslin, P. N., & Scherer, K. R. (2005). Vocal expression of affect. In J. A. Harrigan, R. Rosenthal, & K.
   R. Scherer (Eds.), The new handbook of methods in nonverbal behavior research (pp. 65-135).
   New York: Oxford University Press.
Kruglanski,   A. W.,   Webster, D.   M., &  Klem,     A.   (1993). Motivated    resistance and  openness  to
   persuasion    in the  presence or absence  of  prior    information. Journal  of Personality   and  Social
   Psychology, 65, 861-876.
Meade, M. L., Nokes, T. J., & Morrow, D. G. (2009). Expertise promotes facilitation on a collaborative
   memory task. Memory, 17, 38-48.
Meece,   J. L.,  Anderman,   E. M.,  &   Anderman,      L. H.  (2006).  Classroom    goal  structure, student
   motivation and academic achievement. Annual Review of Psychology, 57, 487-503.
Nokes. T. J., & Ross, B. H. (2007). Facilitating conceptual learning through analogy and explanation.
   In L. Hsu, C. Henderson, and L. McCullough (Eds.), 2007 Physics Education Conference (pp. 7-
   10). American Institute of Physics Conference Proceedings.
Ohlsson, S. (1995). Learning to do and learning to understand: A lesson and a challenge for cognitive
   modeling. In P. Reimann and H. Spada, (Eds.), Learning in humans and machines: Towards an
   interdisciplinary learning science (pp. 37-62). Oxford, UK: Elsevier.
Okita,   S. Y.,  Schwartz, D.   L.,  (2006) When      observation   beats doing:    Learning   by Teaching.
   Proceedings of the 7th International Conference of the Learning Sciences (ICLS) Bloomington,
   IN.
Perret-Clermont, A. N. (1980). Social interaction and cognitive development in children. New York:
   Academic Press.
Schwarz, N., & Clore, G. L. (2007). Feelings and phenomenal experiences. In A. W. Kruglanski & E.
   T.  Higgins   (Eds.), Social psychology:  Handbook      of basic  principles (pp. 385-407).  New    York:
   Guilford.
Shirouzu,   H., Miyake,  N., &  Masukawa,    H.  (2002).   Cognitively   active externalization for   situated
   reflection. Cognitive Science, 26, 469-501.
Turner, J. C., Midgley, C., Meyer, D., Gheen, M., Anderman, E. M., Kang, Y., & Patrick, H. (2002).
   The      classroom environment   and  students'    reports of   avoidance strategies   in mathematic:  A
   multimethod study. Journal of Educational Psychology, 94, 88-106.
Webb, N. M., Troper, J.D., & Fall, R. (1995). Constructive activity and learning in collaborative smal
   groups. Journal of Educational Psychology, 87, 406-423.

                                              218   ·  © ISLS
