                                                  ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

        Dispositions, disciplines, and marble runs: a case study of
                                               resourcefulness
 Margaret Carr, University of Waikato, Private Bag 3105, Hamilton, New Zealand, margcarr@waikato.ac.nz
           Jane McChesney, University of Canterbury, Private Bag 4800, Christchurch, NewZealand,
                                          jane.mcchesney@canterbury.ac.nz
 Bronwen Cowie, University of Waikato, Private Bag 3105, Hamilton, New Zealand, bcowie@waikato.ac.nz
    Robert Miles-Kingston and Lorraine Sands, Greerton Early Childhood Centre, Mitchell St. & Emmett St,
                                 Tauranga, New Zealand, lorraine.sands@elp.co.nz

         Abstract: In this paper, three researchers and two teachers have zoomed in on three `mid-
         level' episodes    of learning   in a  childcare   centre   and  analyzed  them   using  two    lenses: a
         dispositional lens    and a  disciplinary  (science)    practices lens. We    wonder   how  these   two
         perspectives could be combined, in order to provide a coherent and illuminating analysis of
         the learning and to have something to say about the transactional and progressive processes
         towards `being a competent learner' and `being a scientist' that might be at work here.             We
         have found the notion of `resourcefulness' to be a useful boundary object; it works differently
         in the   different lenses,   but  has  core  features   in  common.     We    look  back  across   three
         documented learning episodes and teacher reflections from an early childhood centre, and
         consider ways in which `resourcefulness' can provide a boundary-crossing concept that has
         value for discussions about learning across educational sectors.

Introduction
Traditionally, outcomes to do with attitudes towards learning, or dispositions, have been fore-grounded in early
childhood curriculum discussions, while subject- or discipline-based concerns with knowledge have been fore-
grounded in secondary curriculum discussions. Two of the authors of this paper are early childhood teachers,
one  of the university  researchers    has   a background     in early    childhood teaching,   and the   other  two  have
backgrounds in secondary school teaching of science and mathematics. We are all interested in zooming in on
particular episodes of learning and teaching in classrooms and early childhood centres, and then zooming out to
develop ideas about the ways in which learning trajectories or learning journeys might have been set in motion
or strengthened, and what learning opportunities appear to be particularly affording, inviting and engaging for
this educational purpose. We all enjoy seeing rich details and the broad patterns within which the details fit:
hoping to become both `tree-wise and forest-wise' (Moss, Phillips, Erickson, Floden, Lather, & Schneider, 2009
p. 504). The university researchers had two lenses on this - learning dispositions and disciplinary practices (in
this case of science). This paper focuses firstly on learning dispositions and we investigate troublesome notions
such as  transfer  and authoring.    Secondly,   a  lens  of  disciplinary   practices highlights  relationships   between
children and teachers and artifacts of the environment. We were interested that the early childhood teacher
authors appeared to shift easily from one lens to another and, in this paper, we are seeking some common ideas
across these two lenses, for analyzing the learning in ways that enrich our ideas about learning journeys and
learning pathways.
         Learning   dispositions   as a concept    usefully   starts with  Perkins,  Jay   &   Tishman's   (1993)  triad of
elements   for  a `thinking'   disposition:    inclination,   sensitivity to occasion,     and  ability. Using   the  triad,
dispositions can be summarized as being ready (inclined) willing (sensitive to occasion) and able (having the
ability or the  knowledge)   (Claxton   &    Carr, 2004).   Dispositions   turn  abilities into action   (Ritchhart, 2002):
abilities become actions when the learner is generally inclined to apply them, and sees that this might be an
appropriate occasion. They appear in the literature under various names: for instance, as habits of mind (Costa
& Killick, 2000), mindsets (Dweck, 1999, 2006), key competencies (Rychen & Salganik, 2003), and learning
power (Claxton, 2002). They have been seen as the building blocks of a learner identity:
         How shall we deal with Self? ..... I think of Self as a text about how one is situated with
         respect to others and towards the world ­ a canonical text about powers and skills and
         dispositions that change as one's situation changes from young to old, from one kind of
         setting to another (Bruner, 1996, p. 130)
Here we build on previous research that sets learning disposition into a sociocultural frame (Carr, 2001a, b;
Carr, Smith, Duncan, Jones & Lee, 2009), connecting them to situation and setting: to disciplinary practices,
and to resources or affordance networks.
         Disciplinary practices are specialized "ways of representing knowledge, and ways of thinking and
inquiring that come to count as knowledge" (Kelly, Luke & Green, 2008, p. viii). In science, for instance, a
valued practice of the discipline is to conduct an experiment and to repeat and refine as a means of generating
knowledge. Windschitl, Thompson & Braaten (2008) write about the scientific forms of inquiry associated with

                                                      215   ·  © ISLS
                                                ICLS 2010   ·   Volume 1

the `epistemic nature of knowledge'.    "Scientists create models in the form of analogies, conceptual drawings,
diagrams, graphs, physical constructions, computer simulations" and they use these models for the following
forms of inquiry:
         Meaningful learning in school science entails more than accumulating domain knowledge, it
         requires the appropriation of specialized epistemic discourses that allow students to organize,
         develop, and evaluate knowledge according to disciplinary standards. (Windschitl et al., 2008,
         p. 310)
Models are subsets of larger, more comprehensive systems of explanation (i.e. theories) that "provide crucial
frames  of reference"   for generating  hypotheses   or  working      theories for   testing, revising, conjecturing   and
explaining (p. 311-312)
         Guiding our analyses is the view that a learning activity is distributed over people, places, and things:
the learner as a "person-participating-in-a-practice" (Miller & Goodnow, 1995, p. 8). In order to represent the
multidimensional nature of situated activity we draw on Barab and Roth's definition of an affordance network
as the "collection of facts, concepts, tools, methods, practices, agendas, commitments, and even people ... that
are distributed across time and space and are viewed as necessary for the satisfaction of particular goal sets"
(2006,  p. 6)  (italics added).   A closely  related idea   is  the   notion   of a  learner  as   an "agent-acting-with-
mediational-means" (Wertsch, 1998, p. 24) where mediational means include language, signs and symbols, and
other tools and artifacts. Learners act with mediating tools by "recognising and activating a tool's affordances
that are suitable" for a particular purpose or context (McChesney & Cowie, 2008, p. 108). We describe and
discuss an episode about Chase rolling marbles down wooden tracks as a means of exploring how learning
dispositions  and disciplinary  practices might  inform     us  around   issues   of authoritative  competence    (Greeno,
2006).  For   example,  how   might   a perspective  based      on recognizing,      activating,  and adapting   resources
encapsulate mediated activity? Finally we highlight some issues around refining these concepts, discuss the
notion of `resourcefulness', and raise further questions that might be explored in different settings.

Background
The episodes that form the data for  this paper were  included     in the Final Report for a three-year research project
on strengthening a culture of question-asking and question-posing in an action research project by the teachers
and the children (Greerton Early Childhood Centre Team, Carr & Lee, 2008). This was part of a Centre of
Innovation programme, funded by the New Zealand Ministry of Education. Children who attend this childcare
centre are aged from infancy until the day they go to school (usually on their fifth birthday). Significant features
of the  centre's practice are:  a culture of reflection   and   critique, a  philosophy    of  shared  leadership, and an
environment that affords and promotes inquiry. An aspect of the latter is their use of Learning Stories as a
formative assessment mediating tool or artifact. Learning Stories are characterized by digital photographs being
taken, an episode of learning is described (in text, sometimes dictated by the learner), the learning is analyzed,
and suggestions for further work are made. Each Learning Story is digitally stored, printed as artifacts for
portfolios, re-visited with the children by the teachers, and sent home to parents and families (Carr, 2001a).
Sometimes they are written to the learner, as they were in this case. The Stories here are about Chase, who, by
the time he was four years old, owned a number of portfolios of learning episodes in which he was a participant,
sometimes working on his own, sometimes working in a group.
         The research study involved the sixteen teachers in this centre reflecting on their Learning Stories,
writing  alternative perspectives,  and   developing  a   framework     of  key   features    for the affordance  network
associated with their intention of question-asking and question-posing. The teachers dubbed this framework the
`Threads   of Inquiry'.  There  were   six: Continuity,   Listening    Dialogue,     Growing     Intelligence, Playfulness,
Surprise and  Uncertainty,   and  Real  Work.  The   data   for this  paper  came    from three   Learning Stories  in the
Thread of Inquiry entitled `Continuity' and Robert's reflections on Surprise and Uncertainty. Comments from
Robert and Lorraine also come from the concluding chapter of the Final Report.

Robert's Stories
For several months Chase has been exploring the making of `marble runs' with angled blocks (wedges), wooden
tracks and marbles. Robert, one of the teachers, writes two stories about these marble runs. In the first(What it
Takes to Get There) he (Robert) had introduced a `provocation', asking Chase whether the marble would run
into a wheeled cart if it was placed at the end of the run. He and Chase began to explore together, and the story
continues:
         Chase, you thought this experiment would be OK so we put the cart at the end. We found it
         too high so first we had to build up the end of the run high enough so the marble could drop
         into the cart. You tried the marble down the track. Because we had built up the end it ran out
         of steam before it could get into the cart.
Chase then takes over, and Robert comments:

                                                    216   ·  © ISLS
                                                 ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

         And here is where your keenness to experiment and your extensive knowledge of marble runs
         showed through. As you positioned a block and tried the marble, it still did not make it. You
         placed a block under the lower end, raising it up, which stopped the marble even further from
         the cart, this did not faze you at all but with confident persistence you continued to add a block
         then test, then another and test again until you had success and the marble made it into the cart.
         I was really impressed with your willingness to meet the challenge getting the marble into the
         cart, presented   even   when  it  took many   attempts.    Your  enthusiasm   (for) the  task showed
         through in the way you celebrated by excitedly jumping and laughing when the marble finally
         went into the cart.
In a second story (How Far Can We Go?), two months later, including photographs of a more complex marble
run, Robert writes:
         When I watch you creating one of these marble machines, it is very obvious to me, by the way
         you test and adjust again and again that you are always asking questions of yourself and your
         creation and then through testing answering them. ...
         Also it is not only myself that has noticed your talent at marble machines but also many of the
         other  children   as they  are emulating   your  work.  In  particular I  have noted  that Dominic's
         marble creations have a definite Chase influence about them.
He adds a `Teacher Reflection'; this time the comment is not directly addressed to Chase. Other teachers and
Chase's family will read these stories, and re-visit them with Chase.
         It is really great to watch how Chase is building complexity into his marble runs, and his
         knowledge of what is needed to make the marble follow the track he has created is growing
         with it. The persistence that is needed to test and retest is a disposition that will always be of
         use (for) problem solving whatever the task. The social side of the marble tracks cannot be
         ignored either. The more interesting the track you build, the more others will want to try it
         out or make one as well, so with limited blocks and space this provides many opportunities
         for negotiation, compromise, and tolerance.

Lorraine's Story
At about the same time as these stories about the marble runs, Lorraine Sands (the second teacher author of this
paper) wrote a story about three children, including Chase, rolling reels (empty electrical cable reels) down a
ramp handrail. She called this story `The Experimenters Continue'. She writes:
         Walking down the ramp is often a place of congestion. Only because it's a good place to experiment
         with reels and rolling. I think that today as Chase and Tom rolled and chased, rolled and chased, the
         appeal may have been motivated by their lengthy experimentation with pipes, marble rolling tracks and
         now   electrical  reels.  They (Chase    and  Tom)    were  building  their knowledge    base  as they worked
         together and alongside each other, calculating speed, distance and trajectory.
Her commentary on the learning that was happening here began with the following comment:
         I think we have experts (like Chase and Tom) who have spent long hours working out their
         theories, and apprentices (like Dominic) who get captured by the excitement, watch intently
         and   then start  experimenting     themselves.    But practice   is a key   element  to  building  a
         knowledge base that is shaped and re-shaped through experimentation, refinement and further
         risk-taking in related fields ­ hence the fluid movement between pipes, marble tracks and
         electrical reels.
Lorraine notes   in the    documentation    that  she  asked   Chase  for  his  `expert opinion'   about   why
Dominic's wider reel had veered (wobbled) off course.
         He  told me   immediately,     "Cos  it's too  fat  out".  And  he   was  exactly right. His   endless
         experimentation    had   given him   the  understanding    that the  inside width of  the reel  was a
         critical factor in the trajectory.

Learning dispositions
The teachers here were particularly interested in learning dispositions, which had been a feature of their early
childhood curriculum since 1996 (New Zealand Ministry of Education, 1996). The national early childhood
curriculum includes a strands `Exploration'. Learning outcomes (described as a combination of knowledge,
skills and attitudes) in this strand include: the ability to make decisions, choose their own materials, and set their
own problems; the attitude that not knowing and being uncertain are part of the process of being a good learner;
an expectation  that  they    take responsibility  for their   own  learning;  the knowledge   that trying   things out,
exploration, and curiosity are important and valued ways of learning.         At the same time this strand includes a
goal that says: "Children experience an environment where they develop working theories for making sense of
the natural, social, physical and material worlds" (p. 82), and the teachers were interested in thsi too.

                                                      217  ·  © ISLS
                                                  ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

In an   earlier project  Carr    and  colleagues    had taken   Perkins'  three elements   of  a `thinking'     disposition
(inclination, sensitivity to occasion and ability) into the `middle' space between the individual and the context,
calling on the work of Wertsch, who writes about `living in the middle'. He has said that "a focus on the
mediated action and the cultural tools employed in it makes it possible to live `in the middle' and to address the
sociocultural situatedness of action, power and authority" (Wertsch, 1998 p. 65).        We described three processes
of mediated action for the construction of learning dispositions, based on Perkins' triad: authoring, recognizing
opportunity, and connecting the knowing (Carr et al., 2009). These ideas build on Bourdieu's notion of habitus
(e.g. Bourdieu   1977,   1990)   and  owe   a considerable    debt to Greeno   (2006; Greeno   &   The  Middle    Schools
Mathematics     Through     Applications    Project  Group,   1998),  Gee  (2008)   and  Lemke    (2000).    In   his 2006
commentary in a special issue of the Journal of the Learning Sciences on transfer of learning, Greeno concludes
(p. 546) that "To act effectively in a way that counts as transfer, therefore, involves having or taking authority to
go beyond what has been taught", and we have argued that these three processes can include the seeds of
learning journeys over time.
         Authoring. Greeno (2006, p. 538) describes the conditions for authoring, authoritative and accountable
positioning, as aspects of interaction such as crediting individuals with ownership, initiating ideas and topics,
and challenging and questioning.       Robert emphasizes persistence as a learning disposition, and comments on
Chase's persistence that is needed "to test and retest", and, in a comment in the first story, `What it Takes to Get
There', he  says   "To   be  able to  enter  into a  task with   such enthusiasm  and   willingness  to experiment      is a
disposition that will make so many of life's challenges easier to meet".In a commentary for the research project
on the first story he commented on his observation that for Chase "a setback was just motivation to research
new ideas". He interprets Chase's work as "asking questions of yourself". In a commentary for the research
project on  the  What    it Takes  to  Get  There   episode,  Robert   comments  on   what kind  of an  affordance     is  a
provoking question, and whether in this case it had re-positioned Chase's authority.
         When    I first looked   at  this, I really had  to  question  myself. Did   my posing    a question     about   the
         possibility of the marble making (it to) the cart, actually support Chase in `question-asking' when it
         was myself not Chase who posed the question? .... I was just thinking about how glad I was that I held
         my tongue while I was working with Chase as he was trying to achieve the goal of getting the marble
         down the marble run and into (the trailer). I found this particularly hard when Chase started to build the
         run up in the wrong direction".
In a commentary for the research project on the second episode, How Far Can We Go, he said: "There is a
definite culture of metered intervention within the (childcare) centre. By this I mean that the teaching team here
are very conscious of when and by how much they project themselves into the children's learning. They may
choose to set a provocation, or work as a role model, or mentor".
         Recognizing opportunity. After Robert had increased the challenge in this activity he reminded Chase
that "You thought this experiment would be OK", and he connected the growing complexity of the marble runs
with Chase's growing `knowledge of what is needed': "His knowledge of what is needed to make the marble
follow the track he has created is growing with it". He points out that it is not only the teacher"that has noticed
your talent at marble machines but also many of the other children as they are emulating your work". Lorraine's
story revealed   that it was  probably   the  earlier  experience   by  Chase and  Tom   with  water  flows   (pipes)     and
marble runs that meant that they recognized the opportunity of combining some other resources - the electrical
cable reels and the ramp hand rails - for more investigations of rolling and slopes. They were re-cognizing the
resources. We have described this therefore as an example of `resourcefulness'. This depended on a range of
resources   being  available,  and   a `permeable'    curriculum   that gave  permission   for unusual    and   innovative
combinations and uses.
         Connected    knowing.    Both  teachers    commented    on the  months  of practising   and experimenting,       the
frequent episodes of exploring trajectories of rolling and flowing. They connected up the children's funds of
knowledge,   developed      over months  of   practice  with  running   water down   pipes  in the  sandpit,  and     rolling
marbles down marble-runs. Lorraine specifically connects the learning over time, as does Chase's portfolio of
Learning Stories.

Disciplinary practices of science
The   construction   of  models,  like  marble    runs, can   be starting points for  scientific forms    of inquiry      and
investigation. Windschtl, Thompson & Braaten (2008) comment that "Although different domains in science
have  their own    fundamental    questions,  methods,    and standards   for `what counts'   as evidence,   they     are all
engaged   in the   same     core  epistemological    pursuit  ­  the  development   of  coherent    and   comprehensive
explanations through the testing of models" (p. 313)
         In the above episodes, Chase has been developing marble runs as an interesting project, with a purpose
(sending the marble into a container along a more and more complex route). From a scientist's eye, these marble
runs are also models that afford scientific forms of inquiry and investigation.       Chase adjusts the position of the
wooden   tracks   by  placing    wooden  blocks   under   them.  This   adjustment  process appears    to be    a repeated

                                                      218   ·  © ISLS
                                               ICLS 2010  ·   Volume 1

sequence of  adding more      blocks (thereby adjusting   the tracks)  and  testing with   a marble  run.   Robert, the
teacher, identifies the activity as an experiment, and acknowledges Chase's fund of knowledge about marble
runs (González,  Moll &   Amanti,     2005).  Here is  Chase  as  scientist, engaged  in   a disciplinary    practice of
experimenting. He constructs a ramp and tries it out with a marble run. If unsuccessful, he changes parameters
such as the relative heights of the ends of the tracks, or the orientation where the tracks meet, and then tries
another marble run. The iterative process of adjusting and testing is at the heart of a valued scientific practice of
experimenting. This particular experiment also has a desired end goal. Success is when the marble rolls down
the track and drops into the wheeled cart placed at the end of the run. It is a `eureka' moment for Chase who
jumps and laughs when his goal is reached, and we would claim this excitement is also part of the human
activity of being a scientist, albeit not often acknowledged in popular images of scientists.
        Nested within this practice of experimenting are other aspects of scientific activity. Adjusting one end
of the track more than the other changes the angle of inclination so that the track becomes a sloping ramp. It is
not always a simple process of just adding blocks to raise one end of the track; depending on the conditions of
the context each end of the wooden tracks may need to be raised or lowered. Chase adjusts the ramp by adding
and removing different numbers of blocks at either end of the tracks. The process of adding blocks in order to
adjust the slope of the ramp     also  provides visual   information   for   Chase. We   claim    that this  process  of
adjustment or refinement is a disciplined practice of noticing, and noticing has focus and intention. Intentional
noticing is described by Mason as making "a distinction to create foreground and background, to distinguish
some `thing' from its surroundings" (2002, p. 33). We infer that Chase notices aspects of the physical artifacts
of the context; the wooden tracks, the marble, the blocks, and even the wheeled cart that was to receive the
marble, all have observable material attributes. These attributes are the width and length of the wooden tracks,
the design of the sides of the tracks, the roughness of the wooden track, and the size and smoothness of the
marble.
        Associated with the physical arrangement of the tracks as an inclined plane are the aspects of motion of
the marble. Chase has already noticed that the speed of the marble is an affordance of the track-and-marble
system because in one of his early attempts, the marble "ran out of steam before it could get into the cart".
Robert also comments in the second story:
        This latest design changes direction not once but two or three times; it will often go through
        tunnels and has a collection point that catches the marble at the end. To do this you explore
        the concepts of force, acceleration, deflection, trajectory and motion. You have worked out
        that the marble does not have to go fast and in fact this latest version pictured works best if
        the marble is rolling down just fast enough so that it will drop from one ramp to the next
        without overshooting. What I also find interesting about your marble runs, Chase, is that
        they not only function very well, but are also pleasing to look at. You seem to have a real
        sense for what is aesthetically pleasing.
There is more than noticing within Chase's activity. He is recognizing which attributes are important for his
experiment, such as the properties of the artifacts. Properties of tools are affordances and according to Pea
(1993), an affordance refers    to "the perceived  and   actual  properties  of a thing,   primarily   those functional
properties that determine just how the thing could possibly be used" (p. 51). The height and width of the blocks
afford different aspects of being a pillar or prop for the tracks, including any limits on the placement and
number of blocks used before the pillar becomes unstable. The wooden tracks afford a sloping ramp where the
tracks can direct the path of the marble, and the properties of the surfaces, wood and glass, affords motion.
Where each wooden track meets both affords and constrains the ramp of aligned wooden tracks. These are
affordances of the tools at hand for Chase and by activating the affordances he adjusts and re-adjusts the tools
until the marble run is successful. This is a reflexive process where he attends to how the blocks can raise or
lower the tracks, then shifts attention to the slope of the tracks, and then back to adjusting the heights of the
tracks. When he has constructed a track with the desired slope, then he shifts attention to the trajectory of the
marble.
        Here Chase is engaged with affordances of the track-and-marble system that are related to phenomena
that we identify as aspects of physics. He is noticing, recognizing and activating affordances of the tools or
resources that are suitable for his intention, and for his pursuit of scientific forms of inquiry. Recognizing the
affordances of a tool plays an important role for anyone adapting the design of a tool for a particular purpose or
context, as required in scientific and technological practice. It is a key to innovation and improvisation. "`Being
attuned to and activating affordances'   can  be   rephrased  as `resourcefulness',   that   is, noticing, recognising,
recruiting, and adapting the resources of a tool for particular contexts and purposes" (McChesney & Cowie,
2008, p. 109). Particular properties or affordances of tools provide resources, where a tool is activated or re-
sourced for further activity.

                                                   219  ·  © ISLS
                                               ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

Concluding comment
Episodes like these may be part of a documented journey about becoming a competent learner, and recognizing
what it is to be one. They are also part of a documented journey about becoming a scientist, and recognizing
what it is to be one. The marble runs discussed in this paper might be described instances of `everyday' science,
set in a context of an early childhood centre. The documentation process of Learning Stories, however, is an
opportunity for the `scientist's' view to be recorded in text and photographs. The introduction this new artifact
into the environment provides a resource that will be revisited by the learner and others, be read back to the
learner, and be a topic of conversations more likely to include a scientific discourse. Commentary by Lee,
Brown, Brickhouse, Lottero-Perdue, Roth & Tobin       (2007) reminds us that
         The repertoires of school are often compartmentalized so that students' otherwise relevant
         knowledge is not invited and evoked, and the continuity over time is lost to the urgency of
         the banal moments of everyday life in school, (p. 335)
This did not appear to be so here. The repertoires of this early childhood centre provided opportunities for
inviting, evoking, and provoking spaces for the learners' relevant knowledge and experience, foregrounding
continuity over time in action, dialogue, and document. As we explored different lenses on these episodes, we
came  to see a   common,   if differently  conceived,  element    of `resourcefulness'. This  provided  the common
ground between the learning dispositions in situation and participation in the forms of scientific inquiry such as
model-making,    testing and  refining working  theories   (aspects  of  the disciplinary practices of  science). The
commonalities were in the recognition of affordances and the re-cognizing of opportunity as a consequence of
the experience that developed strategies and knowledges in the domains of disposition and science.        The `play'
with pipes, marble runs, and reels provided a dispositional and scientific milieu that had the capacity to shape a
learning journey. In our view the episodes illustrated that being resourceful is the source of improvising and
reinterpreting opportunity. It is an action that is sited `in the middle' between the cognizing and re-cognizing
mind and the affording environment. And it can take learning across the boundaries of place and time.

References
Barab, S. A., & Roth, W-M. (2006). Curriculum-based ecosystems: Supporting knowing from an ecological
         perspective. Educational Researcher, 35(5), 3­13.
Bourdieu, P. (1977). Outline of a theory of practice (R. Nice, Trans.). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University
         Press.
Bourdieu, P. (1990). The logic of practice (R. Nice, Trans.). Cambridge, UK: Polity.
Bruner, J. (1996). The Culture of Education. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press
Carr, M. (2001a). Assessment in early childhood settings: Learning stories. London: Paul Chapman.
Carr, M. (2001b). A sociocultural approach to learning orientation in an early childhood setting. Qualitative
         Studies in Education, 14(4), 525­542.
Carr, M.,  Smith,  A. B.,  Duncan,   J., Jones, C.,  Lee,   W. &     Marshall, K.  (2009) Learning   in the Making:
         disposition and design in early education. Rotterdam: Sense Publishers.
Claxton, G. (2002). Building learning power: Helping young people become better learners. Bristol, UK: TLO
         Limited.
Claxton, G., & Carr, M. (2004). A framework for teaching learning: The dynamics of disposition. Early Years,
         24(1), 87­97.
Costa, A. L., & Killick, B. (2000). Discovering and exploring habits of mind. Alexandria, VA: Association for
         Supervision and Curriculum Development.
Dweck,   C. S.   (1999). Self-theories:  Their  role in  motivation,   personality and    development.  Philadelphia:
         Psychology Press (Taylor & Francis group).
Dweck, C. S. (2006). Mindset: The new psychology of success. New York: Random House
Gee, J. P. (2008). A sociocultural perspective on opportunity to learn. In P. A. Moss, D. C. Pullin, J. G. Gee, E.
         H. Haertel,  &  L.  Jones Young   (Eds.),   Assessment,   equity, and   opportunity to learn  (pp. 76­108).
         Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Greerton   Early Childhood    Centre   Team, Carr,   M.,   & Lee,    W.  (2008). A Question-asking    and   Question-
         exploring Culture. Unpublished manuscript. Hamilton, University of Waikato Wilf Malcolm Institute
         of Educational Research.
González, N., Moll, L. C., & Amanti, C. (2005). Funds of knowledge: Theorizing practices in households,
         communities and classrooms. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Greeno, J. G. (2006). Authoritative, accountable posiotining and connected, general knowing:Progressive themes
         in understanding transfer. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 15(4), 537­547.
Greeno, J. G., & The Middle School Mathematics Through Applications Project Group. (1998). The situativity
         of knowing, learning and research. American Psychologist, 58, 5­26.
Kelly, G. J., Luke, A., & Green, J. (2008). Introduction, What counts as knowledge in educational settings:
         Disciplinary knowledge, assessment, and curriculum. Review of Research in Education, 32, vii-x.
Lee,  Y-J,  Brown,  B.,  Brickhouse,   N., Lottero-Perdue,    P.,  Roth, W-M.,    & Tobin,   K.  (2007).  Discursive
         constructions of identity. In W-M. Roth & K. Tobin (Eds.), Science, learning, identity: Sociocultural
         and cultural-historical perspectives (pp. 325­337). Rotterdam, The Netherlands: Sense Publishers.
Lemke, J. L. (2000). Across the scales of time: Artifacts, activities, and meanings in ecosocial systems. Mind,
         Culture, and Activity, 7(4), 273­290.

                                                   220   ·  © ISLS
                                             ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

McChesney, J. & Cowie, B. (2008). Communicating, thinking and tools: Exploring two of the key competencies.
       Curriculum Matters, 4, 102-111.
Mason, J. (2002). Researching your own practice: The discipline of noticing. London: RoutledgeFalmer.
Miller, P. J., & Goodnow, J. J. (1995). Cultural practices: towards an integration of culture and development. In
       J. J. Goodnow, P. J. Miller, & F. Kessel (Eds.) Cultural practices as contexts for development (pp. 5-
       17). San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Moss, P. A., Phillips, D. C., Erickson, F. D., Floden, R. E., Lather, P., & Schneider, B. L. (2009). Learning from
       our   differences: A  dialogue  across  perspectives   on   quality  in education  research. Educational
       Researcher, 38(7), 501-517.
New Zealand   Ministry of   Education. (1996).  Te   whäriki.   He  whäriki mätauranga    mö ngä    mokopuna     o
       Aotearoa: Early childhood curriculum. Wellington, NZ: Learning Media.
Pea, R. (1993). Practices of distributed intelligence and designs for education. In G. Salomon (Ed.),Distributed
       cognitions: Psychological and educational considerations (pp. 47-87). New York: Cambridge
       University Press.
Perkins, D. N., Jay, E., & Tishman, S. (1993). Beyond abilities: A dispositional theory of thinking. Merrill-
       Palmer Quarterly, 39(1), 1­21.
Ritchhart, R. (2002). Intellectual character: What it is, why it matters, and how to get it. San Francisco: Jossey-
       Bass.
Rychen, D. S., & Salganik, L. H. (2003). Key competencies for a successful life and well functioning society.
       Cambridge, MA: Hogrefe & Huber.
Wertsch, J. V. (1998). Mind as action. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Windschitl, M., Thompson,    J., &  Braaten, M. (2008).   How    novice science  teachers appropriate epistemic
       discourses around model-based inquiry for use in classrooms. Cognition and Instruction, 26(3), 310-
       378.

Acknowledgments
We  acknowledge   funding   from  the New    Zealand    Ministry of Education    for the Centres of  Innovation
programme.

                                                 221  ·  © ISLS
