                                                ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

                       Reading in the Context of Online Games
                     Constance Steinkuehler, Catherine Compton-Lilly, & Elizabeth King
                 University of Wisconsin-Madison, 225 North Mills Street, Madison WI 53706
                    constances@gmail.com, comptonlilly@wisc.edu, emking29@gmail.com

         Abstract: Research suggests that text is an important component of videogame culture (Gee,
         2003; Leander, & Lovvorn, 2006; Steinkuehler, 2007), but we have few empirical assessments
         of what  kinds of  texts  are involved  or  youth's   reading   performance    on   them.  This paper
         presents a series of four    studies conducted    to examine:   What     texts are  a regular part  of
         videogame  play?   What   is  their nature, function,  and   quality?    And   what is the  nature  of
         adolescent reading performance within such contexts? Our results show that informational
         texts, comprised of 20% academic language and with an 11.8 average reading level, are the
         most prevalent text type used for gameplay. Reading performance on such texts is no different
         than on  school-related   texts when   topic   and   difficulty were  controlled.     However,  when
         struggling readers when allowed to choose the topic, they performed at "independent" level
         (94-97% accuracy) even on texts that were 7-8 grade levels above their head.

In their recent Reading at Risk report (Bradshaw & Nichols, 2004), the National Endowment for the Arts
documented a pronounced decline in reading in American youth and associated it with the equally pronounced
increase in the use of "electronic media" such as television, videogames, and the Internet. Such technologies,
the report authors claimed, "often require no more than passive participation" and "foster shorter attention spans
and accelerated gratification" (p. vii); thus, the authors identified them as one (perhaps the) underlying cause of
this new "risk" to reading among today's digital immersed youth. Emerging research on what youth actually do
while engaged in such technologies, however, reveals a rich array of digital and print literacy practices (Black &
Steinkuehler, 2007). They use text messages as a way to develop and sustain peer networks (Lewis & Fabos,
2005). They create elaborate textual representations of themselves on personal websites as an expression of
identity (Guzzetti, 2006). They use the given narrative structures of anime, for example, as fodder for the
articulation (and distribution) of their own stories (Black, 2008). And they engage in complex constellations of
reading and writing around the videogame titles they play (Steinkuehler, 2007).
         The goal of this investigation was to examine this latter phenomenon ­ reading related to naturally
occurring online  videogame   play.   Emerging   research   suggests  that   text is an  often-hidden  but  nonetheless
important   component   of participation  in  videogame     culture (Commeyras,       2009;    Gee, 2003;   Leander,   &
Lovvorn, 2006; Steinkuehler, 2006, 2007, 2008), but we have few empirical assessments of what kinds of texts
are involved  in  such activities, their quality  and   characteristics, or  youth's    reading performance     on them
compared to texts in other contexts. Precisely what kinds of texts are a regular part of videogame play? What is
the nature, function, and quality of such texts? And how does the reading performance of adolescents on such
game-related texts compare to their performance on school-related texts? Toward answering these questions, we
conducted a series of investigations designed to explore the claims popular in "games and learning" literature
that videogames do indeed entail rich forms of literacy. In this paper we detail a series of four studies we
conducted in order to answer the three questions articulated above: (1) a survey of the textual resources gamer
players used as a regular part of their gameplay; (2) a quantitative     and qualitative    evaluation   of the  nature,
difficulty, and quality of the text resources identified in study one; (3) a study comparing adolescent reading
performance   on  appropriately leveled   reading materials    in the  context    of games   versus  school;  and  (4) a
preliminary (yet suggestive) pilot study of videogame reading when difficulty level is not controlled. All four
studies were  conducted  using  the   massively  multiplayer   online    game World     of Warcraft  (WoW)    given  its
overwhelming   success  on  the    market (Woodcock,       2009), robust   online    textual community,     and general
popularity with adolescents and young adults. In what follows, we detail the method and findings of each study.

Study One: What Texts are a Regular Part of Gameplay?

Data Collection
Our first step in this investigation was to find out what texts were involved regularly in gameplay. Toward this
end, we interviewed 25 expert and 21 novice WoW gamers (n=46) about the textual resources they used for
gameplay. Each participant was asked to list to exhaustion any and all resources they used for the game and to
judge the importance of each text listed by classifying it as either a "core resource" (a text they consult regularly
and consider "core" to successful gaemplay), a "frequent resource" (a text they refer to frequently but do not
consider crucial) or an "infrequent resource" (a text they refer to but not with any regularity).

Findings

                                                    222  ·  © ISLS
                                              ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

Using the resources generated by participants as our basis, we then inductively developed the following five
categories of text based on function:
(1)  Information resources   are online  reference  materials providing   detailed information  about the   game,
     strategies for playing it, and the history of the game's lore. The three most common resources referenced
     were wowhead.com, wowwiki.com, and thotbot.dom, which are database backed websites that organize
     information about in-game materials and quests that are written, harvested, and then discussed, revised, and
     scrutinized by the players themselves. Such sites are structured as encyclopedic, dynamically generated,
     online reference books and function as user manuals to the game that are created and maintained by those
     who play.
(2)  Discussion forums, sponsored by the game company or various public or private sub-communities within
     the game, host text-based, asynchronous collective problem solving about complex systems in the game ­
     activities which evidence informal science literacy characteristics such as evidence-based argumentation
     and model-based reasoning (Steinkuehler & Duncan, 2009).
(3)  Group organization resources are online tools and texts that help groups within the game (such as guilds or
     raid groups) organize their collaborative gameplay, providing detailed instructions for specific activities,
     scheduling information and sign-up tools, for example.
(4)  UI mod sites (short for "user interface modifications," also called "add on's") are online hubs for freely
     downloadable, player-generated bits of software that change the user interface of the game in some way
     (e.g., wowcurse.com) to enhance performance or player experience. Prior case study work suggests that, for
     some players, the use of such tools transitions into critique, debugging and "beta testing" practices that
     provide an important gateway into software development practices (Steinkuehler & Johnson, 2009).
(5)  Finally, fandom media include creative fiction and non-fiction digital media literacy artifacts such as You
     Tube movies, fan fiction about the game, fan artwork, and other creative "literary" resources that the player
     community creates around the game.
     Table 1 presents  the each  functional  category   of resource   by number    of unique members   that   were
referenced during the interviews, their importance rating, the average number of references per member of the
category, and an average weighted score of their importance calculated as [(number of core ratings)*10 +
(number of frequent ratings)*3 + (number of infrequent ratings)*1] / (total number of references)].

Table 1: Game-related texts by functional category and rating of importance to gameplay.

                                              Importance Rating                        Average        Average
      Category         UniqueMembers                                                   Number         Weightedof ReferencesImportance
                                      Core   Frequent      Infrequent    Total      per Member        Rating

 InformationResources    31           52         55           77          185           5.97           4.11

 DiscussionForums        31           11         13           32          56            1.81           3.23

 Group
 Organization            34           31         15           21          48            1.41            7.8
 Resources

 UI Mod Sites            16           18         9            18          45            2.81            5.0

 Fandom Media              9           9         4            7           20            2.22           5.45

        Information resources were by far the most common, with participants referencing unique members
within this category three times more frequently than any other type of resource (roughly six citations for each
member on average compared to two). In contrast, group organization resources were rated as more important
to regular gameplay with an average weighted importance rating (7.8) followed by player production and UI-
Mod resources (5.45 and 5.0 respectively), and finally information resources and discussion forums (4.11 and
3.23 respectively). Figure 2  below   shows  the proportional  make    up of the "constellation of  literacy" that
comprises online gameplay (Steinkuehler, 2007). Thus, information resources comprise the majority of the texts
related to games but group organization resources are viewed as more important to regular gameplay. The result
is a complex picture where the main body of game-related text consists of standard expository and procedural
text with the most valued resources being for in-group coordination.

                                                  223  ·   © ISLS
                                              ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

    Figure 1. Proportional breakdown of the "constellation of game-related texts" by functional category.

Study Two: What is the Nature and Quality of Game-Related Texts?

Methods
Using the list of resources obtained in the first study, we identified the top three resources used by gamers as
part of their play based on the total number of references: thotbot.com, wowwiki.com, and wowhead.com. All
three similarly structured, database-backed websites function primarily as information resources. In order to
assess the nature and quality of such texts, we randomly selected 50 pages total across the three identified
resources for quantitative assessment (grade-referenced reading level, lexical analysis) and one representative
page for detailed qualitative (multimodal, structural, and genre) analysis. Quantitative assessment of the 50-page
random  sample  included statistical   calculation of    average reading   level using  three  separate statistical
approaches ­ Flesch-Kinkaid reading level (Flesch, 1948), Fry Readability (Fry, 1968), and SMOG reading
level (McLaughlin, 1969) ­ and a lexical analysis (Laufer & Nation, 1995) to highlight the range of vocabulary
used in such texts. Qualitative analysis of the single representative page included a survey of the modes of
information used, the structure of the information presented, and the genres of text included.

Findings
The average reading level of the 50-page random sample was M = 10.86 (SD = 2.30) on the Flesch-Kinkaid, M
= 12.98 (SD = 2.08) on the Fry, and M = 11.56 (SD = 2.56) on the SMOG test. Thus, the most prevalent texts
related to WoW are written at an average grade level of 11.8, placing is somewhere between Sports Illustrated
(grade 11) and Time Magazine (grade 12). Although there is some variation in the reading level of game-related
texts (roughly 2 grade levels), overwhelmingly such information resources require reading skills at the high
school or high school graduate level.
        Lexical analysis of the same 50-page sample reveals that 70% of the vocabulary used within the texts
were words found within the most common 1000 words of the English language (K-1 words). A full 20% of the
vocabulary used were  "academic  words"     (Academic      Word  List words)  ­   vocabulary   common   to school
textbooks across a range of academic disciplines such as "compensation," "implication," and "obtainable". Only
4% consisted of game-related "specialized discourse" (Gee, 2003)­ highly specialized terms relevant only to
WoW gameplay itself such as "respec," "frost," "crit," (Off-List words). Thus, as predicted by Gee (2003) and
others, game-related texts appear to be a useful bridge into academic forms of language.
        Qualitative assessment of the one page representative sample nature reveals that such game-related
texts are dense and complicated information sources in at least three ways. Figure 2 gives a simplified diagram
articulating some of this complexity. First, symbolic information is thoroughly multimodal, including images,
icons, symbols, color and font demarcations to specify information type, and hyperlinks to additional details
(which display as call-out boxes on one's cursor) or link to related pages within or beyond the site itself.
Second, only tacit page layout characteristics are    used  to cue   the reader  as to the source of information
contained within a given page. The center of the main page features information "harvested" from the game
engine automatically through site-related UI mods or "add-ons" that automatically users voluntarily use while
playing. These "add-ons" collect information about the game and contribute those data back to the website

                                                  224  ·  © ISLS
                                               ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

database to be aggregated automatically as content within the main pages. The bottom of the page, however,
features multiple tabbed    sections including crucial threaded   commentary     and  discussion of the  information
harvested and then re-presented in the main body of the page. In effect, the bottom half of the page provides
human interpretation and analysis of the machine-generated data presented in the top half, creating a complex
"split attention" effect (Mwangi & Sweller, 1998) requiring readers to synthesize information from two sources
quite disparate in terms of multimodal tendencies, page layout formats, and underlying source or author.
         Third and finally, such texts are particularly complicated due to their mix of genre. While the primary
genres of  game-related   information  resources  are  expository  and   procedural,  each page   within   such sites
actually features multiple forms ­ including transactional, narrative, and persuasive text as well as expository
and procedural ­ with few clear demarcations among them. For example, a description of a single in-game quest
very often begins with details about where the activity begins and ends (expository text), then shifts to quoted
text delivered orally by the relevant "quest giver" character in the game world (narrative, first person text),
followed by step-by-step instructions on how to complete the quest (procedural text), which are then quickly
succeeded by player-written, collaborative arguments for why a given quest is important or not important to
complete (persuasive texts), and finally, drifting conversation where players best one another in reports of how
easy a given quest was overcome (transactional texts). Thus, if structural cues are one tool a reader uses to help
predict and parse the content of a given text (Coiro & Dobler, 2007; Goldman & Rakestraw, 2000; Weaver &
Kintsch,  1991),  then  multimodal,   multi-authored,  and   multi-genre   texts such  as these  present   interesting
challenges, even for strong readers.

       Figure 2. A schematic overview of the game-related sample page selected for qualitative analysis.

Study Three: How Does Reading Performance Compare on Game-Related
Texts versus School-Related Texts?

Methods
Our third step in  this  investigation was  to examine    adolescent   WoW   players'  reading   performance  (Clay,
1993/2002;  Ekwall  &    Shanker,    1993; Goodman,    Watson,   &  Burke,  2005)    and  comprehension    strategies
(Pearson & Johnson, 1978; Taylor, Graves, & van den Broek, 2000) on game-related text versus school-related
text. Seventeen adolescent boys participated in the study, all of whom played WoW. Participants' reading levels
were first assessed using the Qualitative Reading Inventory (QRI) (Leslie & Caldwell, 2006). They then read
two texts aloud:  (1)  a passage  from  a  social studies    textbook, and (2)   a game-related  text that had  been
downloaded  from   one   of the resources  identified  in study one.   Each of   the two  texts were  chosen by  the

                                                   225  ·  © ISLS
                                              ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

resarchers to match the "instructional reading level" of the participant as determined by the QRI and the order of
the two test texts were counterbalanced to mitigate ordering effects. The activity took about 90 minutes on
average. Data included running records (Clay, 1993/2002) which noted the various reading behaviors of the
students including substitutions  they made   in text, self-corrections,  repetition of words   and sentences,  and
attempts at word solving. Text retellings and responses to comprehension     questions were used to assess   reading
comprehension.   Finally, short interviews were conducted with each student to assess students' attitudes toward
the texts and their perceived potential uses in the lives of students.

Findings
Table 3 shows the quantitative findings from study three. All 17 adolescent boys who participated in this study
read at or below grade level (n=10 and n=7, respectively). With reading selection calibrated to match each
participants' reading level as determined by the QRI, there were no statistical differences between participants'
accuracy or comprehension on the game related text (M = 0.96, SD = 0.03) versus the school related text (M =
0.97, SD = 0.02). Overall then, reading performance was remarkably consistent across the two texts.

Table 2. Participants' reading performance on the QRI, the game-related text, and the school related text.

                                                             QRI
                                  QRI            QRI         Text:        Game       Game        School       School
                                 Reading         Text:      Compre-        Text:     Text:       Text:        Text:
 Student    Age     Grade     Assessment      Miscues       hension        Level     Miscues     Level       Miscues
 Andy        11       5            5             0.95         0.75          8         0.94          7          0.89
 Ben         13       7           7­8            0.94         0.90          8         0.89          7          0.96
 Carl        13       7            6             0.98         0.87          8         0.97          7          0.98
 Dexter      12       7           7­8            0.98         0.80          8         0.95          7          0.98
 Ed          14       8            5             0.95         1.00          8         0.92          7          0.94
 Fred        14       8            6             0.95         0.87          8         0.94          7          0.97
 Gary        14       9            6             0.99         0.87          8         0.99          7          0.98
 Harry       14       9           7­8            0.97         1.00          8         0.95          7          0.93
 Isaac       16       10          7­8            0.97         0.90          8         0.95          7          0.96
 Jack        16       10           HS            0.97         0.90          10        0.99          7          0.99
 Kurt        16       10           HS            0.98         0.80          11        0.99         12          0.98
 Lee         16       10           HS            0.99         0.90          11        0.99         12          0.98
 Mark*       16       11           6             0.98         0.75          8         0.97          7          0.96
 Ned         16       11           HS            0.98         0.70          10        0.98          7          0.96
 Otto        17       11           HS            0.98         0.80          11        0.99         12          0.98
 Pete*       16       11           HS            0.98         0.90          11        0.99         12          0.98
 Quincy      18       12           HS            0.95         0.80          11        0.96         12          0.98

         We then identified two contrasting cases from within our data set (see asterisked rows in Table 3) for
more   detailed qualitative exploration  in order  to    explore potential   differences in    participants' reading
comprehension strategies and how they positioned themselves relative to the two text types. Pete (pseudonym)
was in grade 11 and appropriately reading at the high school level; Mark (pseudonym) was also in grade 11 but
reading at only the sixth grade level. While Pete scored 0.90 on the QRI measure of reading comprehension,
Mark only scored 0.75. We transcribed and reiteratively coded each boy's retelling of the QRI text, the game
text and the school text to identify similarities and differences between the two participants.
Both Pete (stronger reader) and Mark (struggling reader) used the structure of each reading to organize their
retelling, but Pete adhered to school expectations when retelling school text, providing sundry details on each
and given  concise  overviews  at the  beginning  of   each retelling   episode. In  contrast, Mark   provided  only
inaccurate and sparse details on each reading and gave unclear and inconcise overviews for each text. Even
when Mark (struggling reader) seems to understand the content of what was read, he had a hard time conveying

                                                  226  ·  © ISLS
                                              ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

it to tester. Both participants use I-statements in relation to the gaming text, but Pete (stronger reader) took on
the role of "text analyst" of sorts, readily assuming an analytic position toward both texts and freely giving his
opinion on the authors' craft. In contrast, Mark (struggling reader) did not position himself as an evaluator or
critic of text except in relation to his own purposes and needs for the content the text contained. For example,
while discussing the school-related textbook excerpt,    Pete (stronger  reader) states,  "I thought   it was quite
informative, used fairly simple and straight forward vocabulary and um, sentence structure and the like. So it
was easy to understand, easy to tell it's from a textbook." (Pete, stronger reader) In contrast, Mark (struggling
reader) discusses the purpose of the text only when directly queried, stating, "Our vocabulary...um, cause there
were a lot of words in here that you had to try at" except when that assessment related to his own purposes and
needs. When his own interests are evoked, his responses and evaluations become more elaborated. For example,
when asked the purpose of the game-related text, he states "to explain the use of duel wielding - off-handed,
one-handed, two-handed. To explain damage meters, whether DPS is better with two weapons or one two-
handed weapon. To help you with the numbers I was gonna use it on my um, warrior and then my rouge to, like,
go through different weapons I have in my bags and see which ones are better." Thus, one notable difference
between the two boys who contrasted in terms of reading comprehension performance was the extent to which
each positioned himself as a critical consumer of the text: Mark (stronger reader) analyzed and critiqued the
text's composition and rhetoric without restriction while Pete (struggling reader) only engaged in such analysis
when it was directly related to his own interests, preferences, and uses of the content of the text.

(Pilot) Study Four: How Well Do Struggling Readers Perform on Difficult
(Game-Related) Texts of Their Own Choice?

Methods
Based on the qualitative differences found in study three ­ with contrasting readers (Mark and Pete) positioning
themselves differently toward the text except when individual interests, preferences, and uses of the text content
were evoked ­ we decided to conduct a follow-up study that might take individual choice (and therefore agency)
better into account. In study three, we chose the text participants read and ensured that each text (school-related
or games-related) was appropriately leveled to their reading ability as determined by the initial QRI. In study
four, currently only in pilot phase [1], we allowed the participants to choose the topic of the text and did not
artificially lower its difficulty (recall that the average reading level of game-related texts was found to be 11.8).
         Three struggling readers from study three   were   recruited  for participation. We    asked  each  boy to
specify three game-related topics he was interested in reading about. We then selected one reading for each boy
that met the following criteria: (i) it was on a topic the given participant expressed interested in, (ii) it was from
one of the three most frequently cited information resources identified in study one, (iii) was at least as difficult
as game-related text generally (i.e., reading level of 11.8 or higher), and (iv) was at least two grade levels above
the participants current reading level (as determined by the QRI in study three). Each participant answered
preliminary questions assessing their attitudes toward reading generally and prior knowledge about the topic and
then read the text aloud while the researcher took a running record (Clay, 1993/2002) using the same procedures
as in study three. Participants were  then asked     to  give a  retelling of the text    (used to   assess reading
comprehension) and to answer two follow-up questions assessing attitudes toward the text topic itself.

Findings
Table 3 presents the pilot findings of this fourth and final study. All three participants were struggling readers
with two participants reading three levels below their grade in school and one participant reading five levels
below their grade in school. The game texts used ranged from grade level 12 in difficulty to grade level 14
(college), meaning that the boys were asked to read text that was seven to eight grade levels above their current
reading level. Despite this large difference between text difficulty and current reading level, however, all three
boys read at the "independent" level with an accuracy rate of 94-97%.

Table 3. Participants' reading performance on difficult game-related text when individuals chose the topic.

                             QRI Reading      ! (Grade ­          Game        ! (Text Level ­
 Student    Age    Grade      Assessment      Reading)           Text Level   Reading Level)           Accuracy
    Ed      14       8              5                -3              12             +7                    94.0%
   Fred     14       9              6                -3              13             +7                    98.0%
   Mark*    16       11             6                -5              14             +8                    97.0%

                                                 227  ·   © ISLS
                                              ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

Of  those errors that were   made, the majority    consisted  of vocabulary  words   that were  unfamiliar   to the
participants (e.g. "coup d'etat") or words they had read silently before but had never heard aloud (e.g. "subtle").
All three  readers exhibited a  high percentage   of  self-correction rates (37%, 31%,    and  57%   respectively),
suggesting that one potential source of the performance difference between study three (assigned texts, reading
difficulty controlled) and study four (texts on topics of their choice, reading level substantially higher than their
current purported ability) is an increased willingness to correct errors during reading performance. In other
words, in the face of challenge or difficulty, it may be that increased interest in the content of the text results in
increased persistence in the face of frustration leading to higher overall achievement.

Conclusions
While it may sometimes be tempting to see "electronic media" like videogames as something distinct from
reading and in competition with it, a view expressed unequivocally within the Reading at Risk report (Bradshaw
& Nichols, 2004), our findings suggest that games (and perhaps similar media) are not replacing text reading but
rather sit in a complex and productive ecology with them. Perhaps like all new media before them, games
simply highlight the enduring importance of text and text based literacy practices to everyday life. In study one,
we found that, while group organization resources were considered the most important form of textual resource
for regular WoW gameplay, information resources were the most prevalent type of text used. Closer analysis of
such information resources in study two revealed that such materials read at the high school graduation level
(11.8), which  places them   in terms  of overall  difficulty somewhere     between  Sports  Illustrated and Time
Magazine. This higher level of difficulty stems not from the use of highly specialized "gamer" discourse (which
accounted for only 4% of the text overall) but rather from frequent use of academic vocabulary (20% of the text
sample)   and densely  multimodal,   multi-authored,  and    multi-genre nature.  In study   three, we   examined
adolescent reading  performance   on  such texts   versus  adolescent  reading performance    on school   textbook
samples of comparable difficulty in order to ascertain whether or not there were any differences between these
two contexts. Quantitatively, we found surprising consistency across both texts types in terms of accuracy and
comprehension. Subsequent qualitative contrasting case analysis revealed no notable contrasts in the way one
strong versus struggling reader positioned themselves toward the text and task except when the reader's own
interests, needs, and uses for the text were evoked. Therefore, we conducted a fourth and final study (in pilot
phase at the time of this writing) in which participants were able to choose the topic of the text and where we
did not artificially ensure that its difficulty would be appropriate to their reading level. What we found was
surprising in some ways yet predicted (Gee, 2003): All three "struggling" readers, when allowed to choose the
topic, read text seven to eight grades above their reading level (as diagnosed by the QRI) with 94-97% accuracy
rate ­ the highest level of mastery: independent.
         Together, a picture emerges from these findings in which the reading activities that occur as a regular
part of videogame play entail informational texts that include academic language and are structurally complex.
Reading such game-related materials appears to entail the same reading performances and processes of reading
activities required in classrooms. However, the fact that that activities related to them are interest driven appears
to give them a serious edge over assigned and selected (school type tasks), potentially in particular for readers
who are otherwise "struggling." This notion is not all that new, although this may be the first empirical evidence
for it of this particular ilk. Scholars who study games and learning have noted that children and young adults,
within their affinity spaces (Gee, 2004), often read text that is far more complicated and difficult than what they
(are willing to) read in school. If such is the case, and our preliminary findings suggest it is, then we need to ask
ourselves to what extent we are testing "interest" and calling it "ability." We may also need to consider whether
the most powerful aspect of "games based learning" is not the complex system simulations they entail or the
rules or roles or systems that constitute them but rather the fact that they are, in a way, Trojan horses for
bringing interest-driven learning back into the frame of what we, as educators and learning science researchers,
might think worth serious consideration.

Endnotes
[1] At this time, we have completed only the pilot study with three participants; the full study (n=20) will be
    conducted in early November 2009, after submission of this paper but before the final conference event.

References
Black, R.W. (2008). Adolescents and Online Fan Fiction. New York: Peter Lang.
Black, R. W. & Steinkuehler, C. (2009). Literacy in virtual worlds. In L. Christenbury, R. Bomer, & P.
         Smagorinsky (Eds.), Handbook of Adolescent Literacy Research (pp. 271-286). New York: Guilford.
Bradshaw, T., & Nichols, B. (2004). Reading At Risk: A Survey of Literary Reading in America (Research
         Division Report No. 46). Washington, DC: National Endowment for the Arts.
Clay, M. M. (1993/2002). An observation survey of early literacy achievement. Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann.

                                                  228  ·  © ISLS
                                             ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

Coiro, J. & Dobler, E. (2007). Exploring the online reading comprehension strategies used by sixth-grade
       skilled readers to search for and locate information on the Internet. Reading Research Quarterly, 42(2),
       214-257.
Commeyras, M. (2009). Drax's Reading in Neverwinter Nights: with a tutor as henchman, eLearning, 6(1),
       43!53.
Ekwall, E. E., & Shanker, J. L. (1993). Ekwall/Shanker reading inventory (3rd ed.). Boston, MA: Allyn &
       Bacon.
Flesch, R.(1948). A new readability yardstick. Journal of Applied Psychology, 32, 221-233.
Fry, E. (1968), A readability formula that saves time. Journal of Reading, 11(7), 265-71
Gee, J. P. (2003). What videogames have to teach us about learning and literacy. New York: Palgrave
       Macmillan.
Gee, J.P. (2004). Situated language and learning: a critique of traditional schooling. New York: Routledge.
Goldman, S.R., & Rakestraw, J.A. (2000). Structural aspects of constructing meaning from text. In M.L. Kamil,
       P.B. Mosenthal, P.D. Pearson, & R. Barr (Eds.), Handbook of reading research (Vol. 3, pp. 311-335).
       Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Goodman, Y., Watson, D. & Burke, C. (2005). Reading Miscue Inventory: From Evaluation to Instruction.
       Second Edition. Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann.
Guzzetti, B. J. (2006). Cybergirls: Negotiating social identities on cybersites. eLearning, 3(2), 158-169.
Laufer, B., & Nation, P. (1995). Vocabulary size & use: Lexical richness in L2 written productions. Applied
       Linguistics 16(3), 307-322.
Leander, K., & Lovvorn, J. (2006). Literacy networks: Following the circulation of texts and identities in the
       school-related and computer gaming-related literacies of one youth. Curriculum & Instruction, 24(3),
       291­340.
Leslie, L., & Caldwell, J. (2006). Qualitative reading inventory - 4th edition. Reading, WA: Allyn and Bacon.
Lewis, C., & Fabos, B. (2005). Instant messaging, literacies, and social identities. Reading Research Quarterly,
       40(4), 470-501.
McLaughlin, G.H. (1969). SMOG grading: A new readability formula. Journal of Reading, 12(8) 639-646.
Mwangi, W. & Sweller, J. (1998). Learning to solve compare word problems: The effect of example format and
       generating self-explanations. Cognition & Instruction, 16(2), 173-199.
Pearson, P. & Johnson, D. (1978). Teaching reading   comprehension. New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston.
Steinkuehler, C. A. (2006). Massively multiplayer online videogaming as participation in a discourse. Mind,
       Culture, & Activity, 13(1), 38­52.
Steinkuehler, C. (2007). Massively multiplayer online gaming as a constellation of literacy practices. eLearning,
       4(3) 297-318.
Steinkuehler, C. A. (2008). Cognition and literacy in massively multiplayer online games. In J. Coiro, M.
       Knobel, C. Lankshear, & D. Leu (Eds.), Handbook of Research on New Literacies (pp. 611­634).
       Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Steinkuehler, C. & Duncan, S. (2009). Informal scientific reasoning in online virtual worlds. Journal of Science
       Education & Technology. DOI: 10.1007/s10956-008-9120-8.
Steinkuehler, C. & Johnson, B. Z. (2009). Computational literacy in online games: The social life of a mod. The
       International Journal of Gaming and Computer Mediated Simulations, 1(1), 53-65.
Taylor, B., Graves, M. & van den Broek, P. (2000). Reading for meaning: Fostering comprehension in the
       middle grades. New York: Teachers College Press.
Weaver, C.A., III, & Kintsch, W. (1991). Expository text. In R. Barr, M.L. Kamil, P. Mosenthal, & P.D.
       Pearson (Eds.), Handbook of reading research (Vol. 2, pp. 230-244). White Plains, NY: Longman.
Woodcock, B.S. (2009). An analysis of MMOG subscription growth 23.0. Retrieved April 21, 2009 from
       http://www.mmogchart.com

Acknowledgments
This work was made possible by a grant from the MacArthur Foundation. We would like to thank Seann
Dikkers and Sean Duncan for their assistance in data collection in Study One. We would also like to thank Esra
Alagoz, Aysegul Bakar, Sarah Chu, Yoonsin Oh, David Simkins, and, Bei Zhang for their assistance in data
collection in Study Three and Study Four.

                                                 229  ·  © ISLS
