                                                   ICLS 2010    ·   Volume 2

          Using Visualization to Link Abstract Science and Everyday
                                                    Experience

                               Chair: Marcia C. Linn, University of California, Berkeley
                                                    Discussant: TBD
                                          Organizers: Ji Shen, Hsin-Yi Chang

         Abstract:    This  interactive   poster symposium         features   research  groups     investigating   how
         visualizations  and  aligning  instructional   approaches     promote   students'   deep   understanding   of
         physical  sciences. The   participating   studies  take    advantage   of  computerized    visualizations  to
         bridge  abstract  science concepts    and  students'      intuitive ideas of   physical  phenomena.     These
         studies reveal how the visualizations help students improve their understanding of science over
         time by employing mixed methods such as data from student performances on pre-post tests and
         student practices during the learning process. These posters provide insights about how students
         learn  from  visualizations  and  propose  effective      design    approaches to  augment     the impact  of
         computerized visualizations.
!
Introduction
A major challenge that educators face is that student learning and understanding of subject areas often occurs at a
superficial level (e.g., Krajcik & Blumenfeld, 2006). Many teachers and researchers recognize the difficulty of
promoting  meaningful    learning  and  deep   understanding       due to limited  time,   resources,   tools and  instructional
strategies. However, with the rapid development of technology, research has emerged to provide promising evidence
for how   advanced   technology   tools can  effectively   transform    teaching   and  learning   practice   to benefit student
learning  and   promote  deep   understanding    (e.g., Blumenfeld,     Fishman,    Krajcik,  &    Marx,   2000;  Goldstone   &
Wilensky, 2008; Linn, Clark, & Slotta, 2003; Wieman, Adams, & Perkins, 2008). Specifically, this collection of
studies examines the role of computerized visualizations in supporting students' understanding of physical sciences.
Computerized visualizations such as simulations and dynamic models allow students access to unseen processes and
abstract  concepts  in   science.  These   external     visualizations    and  models   can   help   students    form    complex
understandings of a given concept or phenomenon (Buckley, 2000). However, the process of student interacting
with visualizations   to  form  integrated   understanding      is not  straightforward.   Students'    prior knowledge      may
influence their  perception  of phenomena      and understanding       of the  external  models    (Rohr   &  Reimann,    1998).
Moreover,  students   need  to  integrate multiple  types     of   knowledge    and skills  in    order to  make   sense  of the
visualizations and successfully perform their learning tasks using the visualization. Students often need guidance to
interact productively with visualizations. In this symposium, eight studies investigated how students developed
coherent understanding of science using computerized visualizations with various types of support. This symposium
will engage participants in discussing diverse viewpoints concerning the roles, effective strategies, and beneficial
features of computerized visualizations to promote deep science learning.
!
Purpose and Objectives
We organize this interactive poster symposium to provide a platform for the presenters and the audience to discuss
how computerized visualizations can promote strong conceptual connections between classroom science and the
physical  world.  Research   suggests   that many   natural     science concepts    (e.g., atomic   interactions,  acceleration,
electricity) are abstract and challenging for students because they cannot meaningfully connect these concepts to real
observations  and  concrete  experiences.    A wide     range   of computerized    visualizations   has  been    created to  help
students  learn these difficult concepts.    Many  of   these   visualizations  show    effectiveness   in  improving    students'
science understanding. Through the collection of the studies we aim to answer the following questions surrounding
the use of computerized visualizations in science classrooms:
·    How   can  dynamic    visualizations  make    science    relevant    to  students' life?  Students    encounter  everyday
     experience such as heat and temperature, electric circuits, and physical motions. The visualizations presented in
     the symposium    aim   to  embed   abstract   disciplinary    science   knowledge     (e.g., atomic    models, Newtonian
     mechanics) in contexts that are familiar with students.
·    How can visualizations help students distinguish spontaneous ideas gained from everyday experiences and
     scientific ideas learned in class? As students form intuitive ideas to explain observations they make about the
     world, visualizations can help students distinguish and link the spontaneous ideas from scientific ideas by

!                                                                                                                             "
                                                        228   ·  © ISLS
                                                    ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 2

    providing access to unseen processes (e.g. molecular interactions) and unattainable situations (e.g. frictionless
    worlds).
·   How to facilitate students in developing deep understanding and inquiry skills necessary in solving complex
    problems? The studies in the symposium use complex problems in the physical world such as the mechanism of
    airbags, global warming, and hydrogen fuel cell cars. Associated dynamic visualizations offer opportunities for
    students to formulate, investigate and experiment with variables, construct and evaluate explanatory models,
    and collaborate with peers to tackle complex problems.
To investigate these questions about using visualizations in learning science, the researchers employed different
combinations of a variety of scaffolding strategies. These include sequencing physical experiments with virtual
experiments, combining students' drawings with computer models, critiquing visualizations, overlaying gameplay
dynamics    with   formalized representations,   coordinating    multiple  visualizations, and embedding    key   prompts.
Through the interactive symposium, we further seek the answers to the question "what are the criteria of using
different supporting strategies under certain conditions in different science content areas?"

Session Structure and Participating Presentations
The session is planned as an interactive poster session, chaired by Prof. Marcia Linn. She will briefly introduce the
session (~5m). Each presenter will then summarize their own research in one minute (~10m). Attendees will then
circulate and interact with individual presenters (~50m). Presenters will bring computer-based demonstrations of the
technologies used in their research. After the interaction between the presenters and the attendees, the discussant
will comment on the presentations (~10m) and moderate a conversation that allows presenters and attendees to share
their insights (~15m). The following section will summarize each individual presentation and list participants.
!
            Investigating the Role of Physical and Virtual Experiments in Developing
               Integrated Understanding of Thermal Conductivity and Equilibrium
                                            Hsin-Yi Chang and Kun-Chen Tsai
                                          National Kaohsiung Normal University
Understanding science requires students to integrate multiple types of knowledge and abilities to form a coherent
structure  (National Research    Council  [NRC],    1996;  Olsen,  2003).  One   indicator of integrated understanding  is
students being able to integrate scientific concepts with everyday events (NRC, 1996). Indeed, when learning the
concepts of thermal conductivity and equilibrium students may show resistance to change ideas stemming from
personal experience of heat and temperature (Clark & Linn, 2003; Paik, Cho, & Go, 2007). For example, students
often think that metal objects have lower temperatures than wood objects and resist the idea that objects eventually
become the same temperature as the room's temperature (Clark & Linn, 2003). A second indicator of integrated
understanding is students being able to explain a phenomenon or scientific process in light of its mechanism. For
example, when explaining thermal conductivity a core concept involves understanding of heat transfer by collisions
of atoms and molecules (American Association for the Advancement of Science [AAAS], 1993). However, many
middle   or  high  school students  have  little or fragmented    knowledge   of  atoms   and molecules   (Lee,  Eichinger,
Anderson, Berkheimer, & Blakeslee, 1993; Nakhleh, Samarapungavan, & Saglam, 2005). It is unclear how to best
support students in learning the mechanism of heat conductivity and equilibrium at the molecular level.
          In  this study  we  used    a week-long     Web-based    Inquiry   Science Environment     [WISE]     module on
thermodynamics     that has been    proven  effective to  students'   science understanding   (Clark  &  Linn,  2003)  and
argumentation abilities (Clark & Sampson, 2007). We particularly examine one physical and one virtual experiment
activities to discern the  roles of  physical versus  virtual    experiments  in developing   different aspects of student
understanding of thermal conductivity and equilibrium. In the physical experiment students are guided to choose six
objects made of different materials to predict and measure their temperature in the classroom. We hypothesize that
this physical experiment provides direct experiences and evidence for students to connect and sort scientific and
personal ideas. In the virtual experiment students are guided to change parameters such as different materials to
observe what happens to the atoms and molecules when heat transfers from one object to another. We hypothesize
that this virtual experiment supports students in building their understanding of the mechanism of heat transfer. We
implemented    the  Chinese   version  of the module   in  five   eighth-grade   classes (n=154)  in South  Taiwan.   Data
collected include pre-post test data, and learning process data including students' written responses to the prompting
questions embedded in the activities, and students' action and discussion videos when students worked on the
activities. Pretest to posttest gains indicate medium to large effect sizes of the module, similar to what was found in
the American runs (Chang & Linn, in preparation). In-depth examination of the learning process data indicates the
patterns   of students'  strategies in  the physical  and     virtual experiments, the    aspects and   extents of student

!                                                                                                                       #
                                                       229  ·  © ISLS
                                                   ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 2

understanding mediated by the physical and virtual experiments, and the relationships between the learning process
and pre-posttest phases.
!!
     Promoting Links and Developing Students' Criteria for Visualizations by Prompting
                                                Judgments of Fidelity
                                                      Jennifer L. Chiu
                          University of California, Berkeley, e-mail: jenchiu@berkeley.edu!
Chemistry students struggle to bridge molecular, symbolic, and molecular representations of chemical phenomena.
For example, students view chemical equations, such as 2H2 + O2 ! 2H2O as math problems to solve instead of
breaking and forming bonds among atoms (Krajcik, 1991). Research demonstrates that powerful visualization tools
can help students add normative ideas about phenomena on a molecular level (Pallant & Tinker, 2004). However,
students need support to connect these ideas to symbolic and everyday ideas, develop criteria for these ideas and sort
and refine the links among ideas to build coherent understandings of complex phenomena (Linn & Eylon, 2006).
Past  studies show   that  students have    rich intuitive abilities  to  critique representations,  do well reacting  to
representations in design settings but have trouble articulating their ideas (diSessa, 2002). We hope to build upon
these existing capabilities to help students link pre-designed, interactive visualizations to the real world and promote
the development of criteria for these connections.
        This poster investigates how prompting students to judge and explain how strongly the visualization relates
to the real world can help students connect molecular visualizations to macroscopic ideas as well as develop criteria
about visualizations. Approximately 140 high school chemistry students from two teachers participated in a week-
long technology-enhanced curriculum unit about chemical reactions. As part of this curriculum, students interacted
with molecular visualizations from Molecular Workbench and greenhouse effect visualizations in NetLogo. After
each visualization step, students were prompted to judge the visualization as "not at all related", "somewhat related"
or "very related" to the real world and then explained their choice. Significant gains from pretest to posttest items
demonstrate students made connections among molecular and macroscopic levels. Analyses of students' embedded
explanations  show   that many  students     judge visualizations  as  related to  the real  world  because of particular
examples, such as specific chemicals or reactions. Many students also articulate ideas about the fidelity, usability,
and  learnability of  the  visualizations.   Overall, the  data  suggests   that   students make   connections from   the
visualizations to the real world but but need support to build from their rich intuitive ideas and develop more
sophisticated criteria for visualizations.!
!
                   SURGE: Intended and Unintended Learning in Digital Games
              Douglas B. Clark, Brian C. Nelson, Cynthia M. D'Angelo, Kent Slack, and Mario Martinez
                                Vanderbilt University and Arizona State University
Well-designed video games can support learners in building accurate intuitive understandings of the concepts and
processes embedded in the games due to the situated and enacted nature of good game design (Gee, 2007). Most
commercial games fall short as platforms for learning, however, because they do not help students articulate and
connect their evolving intuitive understandings to more explicit formalized structures that would support transfer of
knowledge to other contexts. In Thought and Language, Vygotsky (1986) discusses the potential for leveraging
intuitive understandings from everyday experience ("spontaneous concepts") with instructed scientific concepts to
build robust understandings. The SURGE project (Scaffolding Understanding by Redesigning Games for Education)
focuses on    integrating and overlaying     popular  gameplay    dynamics   with   formal   physics representations and
visualizations (see Figure 1 (a) for a snapshot). The design combines cognitive processing-based design and socio-
cognitive scripting with design principles and mechanics of popular commercial video games such as Mario Galaxy,
Switchball, Tiger Woods PGA Tour, Orbz, and Portal.
        The first SURGE study analyzed 24 university students playing SURGE. The pre-post test data support the
potential of games for learning, but also underscore their potential to reinforce alternative conceptions. The game
actually resulted in a significant pre-post test decrease ("2 = 4.75, p = .029) in correct answers for one question by
unintentionally focusing students' attention on another physics relationship (we had not yet added all of the intended
functionality to the interface relevant to projectile motion and the independence of the x and y components of an
object's velocity), but the students demonstrated significant (p = .037) gains on the rest of the posttest.     In post-
interviews, students' understanding   of    the concepts   and  vector representations  demonstrate   the ways in which
students' ideas evolve during the game. The results suggest that players learn about the formal instructed concepts in
a manner that transfers to Force Concept Inventory items (Hestenes, Wells, & Swackhamer, 1992; Jackson, 2007),
but the results also caution that the ideas that students take away from games aren't always the ones intended by the

!                                                                                                                     $
                                                       230  ·  © ISLS
                                                 ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 2

designers. A second study in November 2009 will analyze 330 students in Taiwan and Minnesota playing SURGE.
Students  will be randomly   assigned   to conditions  that   display or remove   the  overlaid  vector representations.
Interview data will explore how the students make use of the vector representations and visualizations within the
game as well as the ways in which the game connects with students' other interests and identities outside of school.

                  Figure 1. (a) Screenshot of SURGE environment         (b) A sample item from FCI.
!
                     How Do Interactive Graphing Tools Help Students Interpret
                              Virtual Experiments about Car Collisions?
                                                Kevin W. McElhaney
                          University of California, Berkeley Graduate School of Education
This study   examines  how   experimentation  using  a   visualization  featuring coordinated   animated  and  graphical
representations of motion can help students reach sophisticated insights about car collisions. Airbags: Too Fast, Too
Furious? is a one-week high school physics investigation about airbag safety that addresses students' understanding
of motion graphs. The design of Airbags builds on research that recommends using visual representations to scaffold
inquiry-based learning (Quintana et al, 2004), particularly investigations concerning motion (White, 1993). Airbags
incorporates dynamic visualizations that aim to help students understand events in a car collision that occur too
quickly to be observed in real time. The visualizations present coordinated animated and graphical representations
that are each designed to help support students' understanding of the other (Ainsworth, 1999; Kozma, 2003).
          I designed the final Airbags visualization (Figure 2a) to model the crash test videos (Figure 2b) students
observe   in previous activities. Students  use this  visualization   to experiment    with   three motion variables to
investigate what factors put drivers at increased risk for injury. The visualization allows students to categorize trial
outcomes and view the graphs of multiple trials to aid in the interpretation and comparison of trial outcomes.

                                    (a)                                          (b)
               Figure 2. (a) Experimentation visualization (b) Crash test video used in early activities

          Students (n = 168) in five diverse high schools studied Airbags in dyads. Students responded to pretests and
posttests on  motion  graphs and   embedded   assessments   about   the  airbags  situation. We  also videorecorded  the
experimentation   of  12 dyads,   capturing  their discussions   and   gestures   during the   experimentation activity.
Significant pretest to posttest gains on understanding of motion graphs demonstrate that students were able to
generalize knowledge about motion graphs in Airbags to other situations. Reponses to embedded assessments show
that many students achieved a sophisticated understanding of the airbags situation that involved the role of threshold

!                                                                                                                    %
                                                     231  ·  © ISLS
                                                  ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 2

values in determining collision outcomes. This poster will present case studies that illustrate how the interactive
graphing   tools helped    students interpret their experiments    in  meaningful   ways  that extended    their everyday
understanding of airbags.

                     Transformative Modeling in Learning Current Electricity:
                                    A Case Study of Preservice Teachers
                                           Ji Shen, and Rutchelle Enriquez
                              University of Georgia, Athens, GA 30605; jishen@uga.edu
Research finds that students have many ideas on electricity not aligned with scientific notions (e.g. Eylon & Ganiel,
1990; Thacker, Ganiel, & Boys, 1999; Osborne, 1983; Shen, Gibbons, Wiegers, & McMahon, 2007; Shepardson &
Moje, 1994). It is challenging to change these conceptions.        Different strategies have been employed by science
educators to help students learn current electricity (e.g., Benseghir & Closset, 1996; Shaffer & McDermott, 1992;
Gibbons et al., 2003; Shen & Linn, submitted). This paper presents a teaching experiment that incorporates a variety
of environments including computerized modeling tools (e.g., WISE, Phet), hands-on activities, role playing, and
formative assessments (see Figure 3). The activities are designed based on the transformative modeling framework
(TM)  used  to   describe, analyze,  and  inform learning   processes  (Shen,   submitted).  TM  delineates  learning and
teaching as a process of modeling the natural world through chains of operations on materials. At the center of the
operations are a set of transformations that alter the nature of physical or symbolic objects by adding or suppressing
information (Shen, in press; Shen & Confrey, 2007). The transformed materials, as well as the operations on these
materials, render potential for future learning (Shen, submitted).

                                                                                                        !
                                     Figure 3. Students' work on current electricity.

         The   participants  include  18  preservice   middle   grades teachers    (17 female, 1 male).     Their  science
background is weak based on the results of a pretest measuring general physics knowledge (25% correct). The
teaching  experiment  lasted  2 weeks    (15hours   in a total). We   collected online  responses,  videotapes,  students'
artifacts and formative assessment results to examine the learning processes. Preliminary findings suggest, among
many others, the following message. The transformations among different forms of representations of knowledge
challenge  students to   understand  the  underlying   mechanism    of  scientific processes (e.g., transforming   from a
physical set-up to a computerized circuit to an electrical diagram to role play). Different models inform each other
and together   they help   students  form scientific   understanding.  The  breakdowns    of transformative  links  create
conceptual  difficulties for students  on  the  on  hand,  and   provide  teachable    moments  on  the   other hand. The
mechanism, types, and characteristics of these transformations and their implications in classroom teaching will be
discussed.

    Using Interactive Models to Support Content Learning through Scientific Reasoning
                                                       Keisha Varma
                                                University of Minnesota

!                                                                                                                       &
                                                       232  ·  © ISLS
                                                 ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 2

This work examines how students learn scientific concepts related to the greenhouse effect by participating in
scientific reasoning activities with an interactive model.   A longstanding issue in science education research is the
tension between    teaching scientific  content   vs. scientific   process or   reasoning.      Following instruction and
experience, students are able to engage in valid scientific reasoning in familiar or simple contexts (Chen & Klahr,
1999, Kuhn & Angelev, 1976).      However, there is still concern about overtaxing students' cognitive resources when
they are required to engage in activities that involve using scientific reasoning strategies to learn new scientific
content. Models are "dynamic representations and provide a visual explanation of the underlying causal mechanisms
and processes underlying scientific phenomena which are not directly observable because of their scale" (Gobert,
2005).  Using interactive models to teach science can help address the content versus process issue by allowing
students to practice reasoning about scientific phenomena in rich contexts.     In this study, students use an interactive
model to learn about the greenhouse effect.      Instruction prompts them to use a control variables strategy as they
conduct multiple   experiments   with the  model.  The    main  goal of  this work   is to measure   changes  in students'
content knowledge and scientific reasoning skills following a model based instruction experience.
        In this work, 190 middle school students use an interactive model of the greenhouse effect. Pre-post tests
measure content learning prior to and following the instruction experience.      A subset of the items was designed to
measure scientific reasoning.    Additionally, log data documents how students' reasoning strategies change over
time. Students engage in "simulated discovery tasks" (Zimmerman, 2000) as they use the model to conduct multiple
experiments.  They investigate the roles of solar energy, infrared energy, greenhouse gases, clouds, and Albedo in
the greenhouse effect.  Students are instructed to change only one variable at a time so that their experiments can
provide valid information about the variable they are investigating.     Supporting students to engage in this type of
model-based instruction is an effective instructional strategy (Penner, Lehrer, & Schauble, 1998). Overall, students'
understanding of the scientific content improves (t (189)=8.66, p < .001).     The log data show that they use multiple
reasoning strategies.  Some closely follow the instruction to engage in the control of variables strategy and use it
consistently in their experiments with the model.      Some    use the strategy after   initial random exploration of  the
model.  Others systematically manipulate two variables at a time to make comparisons.               Ongoing analyses are
looking at   the range of reasoning   strategies  involved   in experimentation   and   evaluating  correlations between
students' scientific reasoning and changes in their content knowledge. This work informs researchers interested in
using model-based   instruction  that combines content learning and  scientific reasoning.   A  more detailed presentation
of the findings will extend the discussion of the complexity of supporting both of these learning goals.
!
                        Abstraction and Re-representation in Visualizations:
                                Understanding Where the Learning Occurs
                  Eric N. Wiebe, Mike Carter, James Minogue, Lauren Madden, and John Bedward
                                           North Carolina State University
Graphic  representations  (i.e., visualizations) have   a  long  history   as a tool    to promote   learning in  science.
Historically, a "craft-based" approach has been the primary strategy used to design and evaluate visualizations for
use in instruction (e.g., Tufte, 1983). That is, heuristics based on practice are used to create representations that
communicated, in the designer's eyes, the necessary information for student learning. More recently, a number of
frameworks based on current understandings in the learning sciences have been applied to better guide visualization
design and to understand why some designs are more effective than others. This paper will present an approach
developed from semiotic theory (Hartshorne & Weiss, 1960) and the knowledge integration framework (Linn, 2006)
for science meaning-making to develop strategies for visualization development and use in classrooms. Focusing on
the knowledge-integration's component of making scientific phenomena visible, the presented work will look at the
interplay of phenomena visible in the natural world with unaided senses with the conceptual and phenomenological
elements of science learning that live in invisible, abstract layers. Semiotics is used to understand re-representations
that move    between  the same    level of abstraction  and    new   representations that   move   toward  or away    from
abstraction.
        Student work in elementary science (Grades 2-5) was used as data source for validating this new approach
to understanding student meaning-making through visualizations. A stratified sample of notebooks (M=7) were
taken from 7 classrooms (4 Grade 2 and 3 Grade 5) for a total of 45 notebooks. From these notebooks, student
entries for all activities relating to two science kits (EDC, 2004; FOSS, 2008), one per grade, were analyzed--a total
of 1195 pages. Student entries were coded based on dimensions related to the context of the work (science learning
goal, phase of inquiry), and the type of entry (text, graphic, mixed). For the graphic entries, the level of abstraction,
how the abstraction was represented in the graphic, and the relationship of the graphic to complimentary text were
coded in order to chart the moves in relation the meaning-making goals, as defined by the curriculum. This analysis
will provide insight for the design of future, computer-based systems and how they may differ from those currently

!                                                                                                                      '
                                                      233  ·  © ISLS
                                                 ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 2

being designed for later school grades. Better understanding these moves and their role in learning provides new
approaches to the creation of computer-based visualizations specifically designed for elementary science contexts.

            Exploring Drawing and Critique to Enhance Learning from Visualizations
                                                   Helen Z. Zhang
                                          University of California, Berkeley
Many chemistry students struggle to make sense of chemical phenomena at the molecular level (Johnstone, 1993).
They have difficulty visualizing a chemical equation (e.g., 2H2+O2!2H2O) as a chemical reaction that involves
atom  rearrangement   and  bond  breaking   and   formation   (Krajcik, 1991).  As   a  result,  they cannot  form  deep
understanding of chemical concepts by linking ideas at the molecular, symbolic, and observable levels. Dynamic
visualizations have potential to meet this challenge by demonstrating changes at the molecular level. Nevertheless,
many visualizations are confusing (Tversky, Morrison, & Betrancourt, 2002), and often students are beguiled by
their deceptive clarity (Chiu & Linn, in press). They need support to add ideas at the molecular level and connect
with ideas at other levels. My previous research (Zhang & Linn, 2008) has suggested that creating drawings is an
effective approach to promote student learning. Yet it requires more instructional time and may not be efficient.
Critique may be another candidate to effectively support students' learning. In this study we explore this two ways.
         This study reports student learning with a dynamic visualization embedded in an inquiry-based WISE
curriculum unit entitled Hydrogen Fuel Cell Cars (Linn & Hsi, 2000).      In the project, students first learned chemical
reactions by interacting with the visualization showing molecular interactions during hydrogen combustion. They
then drew four pictures to represent intermediate phases of the reaction (drawing condition), or critiqued two sets of
pre-made drawings aiming to demonstrate the same information (critique condition). The drawings to be critiqued
were designed to capture various ideas held by students from previous studies (Zhang, 2007). At the end of the
project, students need  to use  integrated  ideas about  atomic    reactions, cars, and  fuel    economy to  analyze  the
advantage and disadvantage of hydrogen fuel cell cars.
         High  school  chemistry  students  (N=73)   participated   in this study   (critique condition: n=48;    drawing
condition: n=25). Both groups of students gained significantly [drawing group: p<.001, effect size=2.17; critique
group: p<.001, effect size=1.73] after the project. Students were able to integrate ideas such as bond breaking and
formation with prior knowledge and use these ideas to explain observable phenomena and other chemical reactions.
There was no significant difference in the two groups of students' posttest scores after controlling for pretest scores
[t(70)=.17, p=.87].  Further analysis  of  students' embedded      assessments  and  log files   of  interaction with the
visualization suggests that drawing supports learning by enabling students to distinguish among ideas and recognize
gaps in their knowledge. Students are prompted to revisit the visualization for nuanced information. Critique, in
contrast, requires students to distinguish their own ideas from the ideas they critique. Students also revisit the
visualization to solve conflicts between ideas.

References [Selected]
Ainsworth, S. (1999). The functions of multiple representations. Computers and Education, 33(2-3), 131-152.
Blumenfeld, P. C., Fishman, B. J., Krajcik, J., & Marx, R. W. (2000). Creating usable innovations in systemic
         reform:  Scaling    up  technology-embedded        project-based   science  in  urban     schools.  Educational
         Psychologist, 35(3), 149-164.
Buckley, B. (2000). Interactive multimedia and model-based learning in biology. International Journal of Science
         Education, 22(9), 895-935.
Chen, Z.,   & Klahr, D. (1999).  All  other things   being  equal:  Children's acquisition    of the control of  variables
         strategy. Child Development, 70 (5), 1098-1120.
Chiu, J. & Linn, M.C., (in press) The Role of Self)Monitoring in Learning Chemistry with Dynamic Visualization ,
         A. Zohar, & Y. J. Dori (Eds.), Metacognition and Science Education: Trends in Current Research. London:
         Springer)Verlag.
Clark, D., & Linn, M. C. (2003). Designing for Knowledge Integration: The Impact of Instructional Time. The
         Journal of the Learning Sciences, 12(4), 451-494.
Clark, D., B., & Sampson, V. (2007). Personally-seeded discussions to scaffold online argumentation. International
         Journal of Science Education, 29(3), 253-277.
Gee, J. P. (2007). Good video games and good learning: Collected essays on video games, learning, and literacy.
         New York: Peter Lang.

!                                                                                                                      (
                                                     234  ·  © ISLS
                                                   ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 2

Gobert,  J. (2005).   Leveraging  technology   and   cognitive   theory on   visualization to  promote students'    science
         learning and literacy. In Visualization in Science Education, J. Gilbert (Ed.), pp. 73-90. Springer-Verlag
         Publishers, Dordrecht, The Netherlands.
Goldstone,   R.  &  Wilensky,  U. (2008).    Promoting  transfer   through  complex   systems  principles. Journal   of the
         learning sciences, 17 (4), 465-516.
Jackson, J. (2007). Simplified Force Concept Inventory. In preparation.
Johnstone, A. H. (1993). The development of chemistry teaching: A changing response to changing demand. Journal
         of Chemical Education, 70(9), 701­705.
Kozma, R. (2003).     The material features of multiple representations and their cognitive and social affordances for
         science understanding.   Learning and Instruction, 13 (2), 205-226.
Krajcik, J. (1991). Developing students' understandings of chemical concepts. In S. Glynn, R. Yeany, & B. Britton
         (Eds.), The psychology of learning science (pp. 117-147). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Krajcik, J. S., & Blumenfeld, P. C. (2006). Project-based learning in . K. Sawyer (Ed.), The Cambridge handbook of
         the learning sciences : 317-333.
Kuhn, D.    & Angelev, J.    (1976). An experimental study of the development of formal operational thought.          Child
         Development, 47 (3), 697-7006.
Lee, O., Eichinger, D. C., Anderson, C. W., Berkheimer, G. D., & Blakeslee, T. D. (1993). Changing middle school
         students' conceptions of matter and molecules. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 30, 249-270.
Linn, M. C. (2006). The knowledge integration perspective on learning and instruction. in . K. Sawyer (Ed.), The
         Cambridge handbook of the learning sciences (pp. 243-264). New York, Cambridge Press.
Linn, M.C., Clark, D.B. & Slotta, J.D. (2003). WISE design for knowledge integration. Science Education, 87, 517-
         538.
Nakhleh, M. B., Samarapungavan, A., & Saglam, Y. (2005). Middle school students' beliefs about matter. Journal of
         Research in Science Teaching, 42, 581-612.
Osborne,    R.  (1983).  Towards     modifying  children's    ideas   about  electric current. Research    in  Science   &
         Technological Education, 1(1), 73­82.
Paik, S.-H.,   Cho, B.-K.,   & Go,   Y.-M.   (2007). Korean     4-  to 11-Year-Old    Student  Conceptions    of Heat   and
         Temperature. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 44, 284-302.
Pallant, A.,  &  Tinker,  R. (2004).  Reasoning  with   atomic-scale    molecular dynamic    models. Journal     of Science
         Education and Technology, 13(1), 51-66.
Penner, D. E., Lehrer, R., & Schauble, L. (1998). From physical models to biomechanics: A design-based modeling
         approach. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 7, 429­450.
Quintana, C. et al. (2004). A Scaffolding Design Framework for Software to Support Science Inquiry. The Journal
         of the Learning Sciences, 13(3), 337-386.
Rohr, M., & Reimann, P. (1998). Reasoning with multiple representations when acquiring the particulate model of
         matter. In M. W. van Someren, P. Reimann, H. P. A. Boshuizen & T. de Jong (Eds.), Learning with
         multiple representations. Oxford: Elsevier Science Ltd.
Shaffer, P.,   & McDermott,    L.    (1992). Research  as  a    guide  for curriculum  development:  An    example    from
         introductory electricity. part ii: design of instructional strategies. American Journal of Physics, 60(11),
         1003­1013.
Shen, J. & Confrey, J. (2007). From conceptual change to transformative modeling: A case study of an elementary
         teacher in learning astronomy. Science Education, 91 (6), 948-966.
Shepardson, D. P., & Moje, E. B. (1994). The nature of fourth graders understandings of electric circuits. Science
         Education, 78(5), 489­514.
Thacker,  B.,   Ganiel,  U., &  Boys,   D.   (1999). Macroscopic       phenomena  and   microscopic  processes:     Student
         understanding of transients in direct current electric circuits. American Journal of Physics, 67(7), 525­531.
Tversky, B., Morrison, J. B., & Betrancourt, M. (2002). Animation: Can it facilitate? International Journal of
         Human-Computer Studies, 57, 247-262.
White,   B.Y.  (1993).  ThinkerTools:  Causal  Models,  Conceptual     Change,  and   Science  Education.  Cognition    and
         Instruction, 10(1), 1-100.
Zhang,   Z. &   Linn,  M. (2008).    Using drawings  to support    learning  from dynamic     visualizations. International
         Perspectives in the Learning Sciences: Creating a Learning World. Proceedings of the 8th International
         Conference on the Learning Sciences, vol. 3, 161-162.
Zimmerman, C.    (2000).  The development of scientific reasoning skills.     Developmental Review, 20, 99-149.
Wieman, C., Adams, W.K., & Perkins, K.K. (2008). PhET: Simulations that enhance learning. Science, 322, 682-
         683.

!                                                                                                                        *
                                                       235  ·  © ISLS
