                                          ICLS 2010    ·  Volume 1

               Group Awareness of Social and Cognitive behavior
                                        in a CSCL Environment

        C.Phielix & F.J. Prins, Utrecht University, P.O. Box 80.140, 3508 TC Utrecht, The Netherlands,
                                          C.Phielix@uu.nl, F.J.Prins@uu.nl
               P.A. Kirschner, Open University, P.O. Box 2960, 6401 DL Heerlen, The Netherlands,
                                                 P.A.Kirschner@ou.nl

        Abstract: This study investigated whether a peer feedback tool and a reflection tool would
        enhance group performance in a computer-supported collaborative learning environment. The
        underlying assumption was that group performance can be positively influenced by making
        group members aware of how their social and cognitive behavior is perceived by themselves,
        their peers, and the group as a whole. Participants were 120 fourth-year high school students
        working, with or without the tools, in dyads, triads and groups of 4 on a collaborative writing
        task.  Results  show    that groups  using  tools perceived  their team  as being   better developed,
        experienced higher levels of group satisfaction and lower levels of conflicts, than groups not
        using   the tools.   Results  demonstrate    that awareness,    stimulated by  peer  assessment   and
        reflection tools, enhances the social performance of a CSCL-group.

Introduction
Collaborative  learning,  often  supported    by   computer networks    (computer   supported   collaborative  learning,
CSCL) is enjoying considerable interest at all levels of education. Collaborative learning, defined as the "mutual
engagement of participants in a coordinated effort to solve the problem together" (Rochelle & Teasley, 1995, p.
70) has, among other things, been found to enhance the learners' cognitive performance (Johnson & Johnson,
1999)  and  to stimulate  them   to  engage in   knowledge  construction   (Stahl, 2004).   The rapid   development  of
information and communication technologies (ICT), has led to many computer applications (e.g., e-mail, chat,
discussion  forums, video    conferencing,  simulations, 3-D    models,  visualizations and  external   representations)
which have proven to be useful tools or widgets tosupport collaborative learning (Janssen, Erkens, Kanselaar, &
Jaspers, 2007).
Several researchers   report  cognitive   and social   benefits for groups  in CSCL    environments   as  compared   to
contiguous (i.e., face-to-face) groups. With respect to cognitive aspects of collaboration, researchers have found
that students working in CSCL-environments report higher levels of learning (Hertz-Lazarowitz & Bar-Natan,
2002),  make   higher   quality decisions,  deliver  more complete   reports,  participate  more equally  (Fjermestad,
2004; Janssen, Erkens, Kanselaar, & Jaspers, 2007), and engage in more complex, broader, and challenging
discussions  (Benbunan-Fich,     Hiltz, &   Turoff, 2003)  than  do  students  working  face-to-face.   With  respect to
social aspects, students working in CSCL-environments report higher levels of satisfaction compared to students
in contiguous groups (Fjermestad, 2004).
There  are, however,    also contradictory   results.  Concerning   the cognitive  aspects  of  collaboration, students
working in CSCL-environments sometimes perceive their discussions as more confusing (Thompson & Coovert,
2003), less productive (Straus, 1997; Straus & McGrath, 1994) and needing more time to reach consensus and
make decisions (Fjermestad, 2004) than students working face-to-face. Also, students in CSCL-environments
have been found to show lower levels of participation (Lipponen, Rahikainen, Lallimo, & Hakkarainen, 2003),
and to  experience  higher   levels  of   conflict (Hobman,  Bordia,    Irmer, &   Chang,   2002), lower  levels group
cohesiveness   (Straus,  1997;   Straus   & McGrath,     1994)  and  lower  levels  of satisfaction  (Baltes,  Dickson,
Sherman, Bauer, & LaGanke, 2002). In other words, students working in CSCL-environments do not always
reach their full potential. Two important reasons for the disparity between the potential of groups working in
CSCL-environments and their performance lies in (1) the design of the CSCL-environment, and (2) the social
and cognitive behavior of the group members.
With   respect to design,  CSCL      environments   often concentrate   on functionality,  focussing  on the   cognitive
processes needed to accomplish a task and/or solve a problem (Kreijns & Kirschner, 2004). These functional
CSCL   environments     coerce  (Kirschner, Beers,   Boshuizen,  &  Gijselaars, 2008)   group  members   to  limit their
actions to cognitive processes to the detriment of socio-emotional processes. These socio-emotional processes,
which   are the   basis for  group   forming   and   group  dynamics,   are  essential  for developing   strong  social
relationships, strong group cohesiveness, feelings of trust, and a sense of community among group members
(i.e., for creating a sound social space). Without such a sound social space, the group will not reach its full
potential (Jehng, 1997). Groups in CSCL environments that lack social functionalities will ultimately perform
poorly (e.g., Kreijns & Kirschner). For instance, despite technological advances, most CSCL still use text-based
computer mediated communication (CMC) systems based on email, chat and/or discussion boards, which cannot
easily convey   visual  nonverbal    cues (Kreijns,  Kirschner, &   Jochems,   2003). The   absence  of these  cues can

                                                                                                                     1
                                              230    ·  © ISLS
                                           ICLS 2010      ·  Volume 1

cause specific problems for effective communicationand interaction between group members since this removes
possibilities for exchanging socio-emotional and affective information, and decreases information about group
members'   presence,    self-image,   attitudes, moods,     actions and   reactions (Short,   Williams,  &  Christie,  1976).
According to Short et al. the functions of these nonverbal cues are in some way related to forming, building or
maintaining social relationships. Therefore, CMC can have negative effects on impression formation and group
members' social behavior (e.g. Garton & Wellman, 1995; Walther, Anderson, & Park, 1994).
Second, group members form interpersonal perceptions during interaction (Kenny, 1994). Based on what they
see and  experience,    they form   impressions   (e.g.,    norms,  values, beliefs)  about   themselves,   the  group, other
group members, and what the other group members think of them. These self-, other- and meta-perceptions are
based on the cognitive behaviors (e.g., productivity) and social behaviors (e.g., dominance and friendliness) that
they perceive during interaction. Based upon these perceptions, group members determine their own social and
cognitive behavior, and develop social relationships with each other. However, research has shown that group
members' perceptions of their own performance (i.e., self-perception) and of group performance are generally
unrealistically positive, resulting in an illusion of group productivity (Stroebe, Diehl, & Abakoumkin, 1992).
This tendency to believe that their group is performing effectively, while it often is not, can result in a reduction
of effort by group members, a phenomenon also known as social loafing (Williams, Harkins, & Latané, 1981),
which further undermines the groups' social and cognitive performance. However, group members are often not
aware that they are loafing, or are unwilling to admit to it (Karau & Williams, 1993).
To overcome this obstacle to social and cognitive performance, CSCL environments can be augmented with
computer tools or widgets that act as social contextual facilitators relevant for the learner's social interaction
(Kirschner,   Strijbos, Kreijns,   &  Beers, 2004).       These tools, also  known   as  `social  affordance    devices', can
positively affect social  and   cognitive  performances in        a CSCL    environment    (Kirschner,   et al., 2004).   Two
operationalizations of such tools are used in this research, namely a peer feedback tool to make groupmembers
aware of the social and cognitive behavior of themselves, their peers, and how this is perceived by others, and a
reflection tool to stimulate group members to reflect upon their individual behavior, why their peers see them
the way they do, and to also reflect collaboratively (i.e., co-reflect) on the performance of the group as a whole.
The aim of these tools is to make group members aware of their social and cognitive behavior and to enhance
their social and cognitive performance and that of the group. The next sections deal with aspects central to these
tools, namely peer feedback and reflection.

Peer feedback
Feedback can be described as information provided to an individual to increase performance (Kluger & DeNisi,
1996). In a learning situation, this information can come from many sources such as teachers, computers, fellow
students, and so forth. This study centers on peer feedback; information provided by fellow learners which is
intended to increase performance. This information can be provided on the outcome performance (i.e., outcome
feedback),  or on  how   one    is performing    (i.e., process   feedback).   Feedback  can   be given    by  individuals or
groups, and   can also  be   received  by individuals      or groups.  In this study,   peers provide   process  feedback  at
individual and   group   level, in  order to enhance        interpersonal behavior.  It is expected    that enhancement    of
interpersonal behavior will have a positive effect on a group's social performance (Geister, Konradt, & Hertel,
2006; McLeod & Liker, 1992; Phielix, Prins & Kirschner, in press), as well as an indirect positive effect on a
group's cognitive performance (Kreijns, Kirschner,& Jochems, 2003).
Process feedback can include cognitive or task-related information (e.g., task behaviors, actions and strategies),
or social or non-task related information, such as information about interpersonal behavior (e.g., dominance and
friendliness) or  teamwork   (Geister,   Konradt,    &    Hertel, 2006).  McLeod    and  Liker  (1992)   found   that process
feedback at the group level on the interpersonal behavior of student group members, such as dominance and
group  orientedness,    changed    the dominance        behavior of    individual   group  members.     Two     other studies
investigating individualized peer feedback on interpersonal behavior of group members (e.g., communication
and collaboration),  found   that   such feedback    led    to increased  cooperation,  communication,      satisfaction and
motivation in group members (Dominick, Reilly, & McGourty, 1997; Druskat & Wolff, 1999).
Based upon these ideas, an individualized peer feedback tool (Radar) was developed and studied in which group
members individually provide information about the social and cognitive behavior of themselves, their peers,
and the group as a whole. The premise behind this tool is that it will positively alter the social and cognitive
behavior of   individuals  and  group.   Because     group   members    tend to overestimate     their social  and cognitive
behavior (Kenny, 1994), this peer feedback tool also included the peer perspectives on the social and cognitive
behavior of themselves, their peers and the group as a whole. This information should be gathered by use of a
self and peer assessment, and based on specific traits because there is strong evidence that peer perceptions are
formed  by  unconscious      or tacit  `rating'  of  other   group   members   on   several   traits, such  as  `dominance',
`friendliness' and `reliability' (Brok, Brekelmans, & Wubbels, 2006).

                                                                                                                           2
                                                 231    ·  © ISLS
                                          ICLS 2010    ·  Volume 1

Reflection
Simply  providing   group  members'    with information      on their cognitive  and     social behavior   is not enough to
positively alter their behavior (Prins, Sluijsmans, & Kirschner, 2006). Group members also need to process this
information and ask themselves whether they understand, accept, and agree with the feedback. In other words,
they must reflect upon the feedback. Reflection is the intellectual and affective activities individuals engage in
to explore   their experiences  (e.g., behaviors,     ideas, feelings)   in  order    to reach    new   understandings      and
appreciations (Boud,    Keogh,  &  Walker,  1985).    The    feedback  receiver   needs     to be challenged   to   reflect on
his/her own  performance,   and determine     whether    the feedback    provides     clues for behavioral    change  (Prins,
Sluijsmans, & Kirschner, 2006). Therefore, it is expected that peer feedback in combination with reflection will
even be more effective than feedback alone (e.g., Schön, 1987).
According to Boud, Keogh, and Walker (1985), reflection can lead to new perspectives on experience, changes
in behavior, readiness for application, and commitment to action. Therefore, reflection on peer feedback should
make  group   members   more   aware   of their own    individual   behavior,   how    their   behavior  affects  others, and
whether they should alter their behavior. Awareness can be defined as the "understanding of the activities of
others, which provides a context for your own activity" (Dourish & Bellotti, 1992, p. 107). In order to make the
group aware of its behavior, group members need to reflect collaboratively (co-reflect) on their cognitive and
social performance. Co-reflection is defined as "a collaborative critical thinking process involving cognitive and
affective interactions  between two   or  more  individuals   who     explore   their experiences    in order  to reach   new
intersubjective understandings and appreciations" (Yukawa, 2006; p. 206).
Based upon these ideas, a shared reflection tool (Reflector) was developed and studied in which group members
individually  reflect  and provide    information     on  (1) their   own    individual   perspective    on   their  personal
performance,  (2)  differences between    their self  perception  and    the perception   of   their peers concerning   their
personal performance, (3) whether they do or do not agree with the perceptions of their peers concerning their
personal  performance,    and  (4)  their  own   individual perspective       on  group     performance.    Because   group
performance is determined by the individual effort of all group members, this tool also (5) stimulates group
members to collaboratively reflect (co-reflect) on the group performance and reach a shared conclusion about
this. Based on their shared conclusion, group members will (6) set goals in order to improve group performance.

Research Questions
This study investigated whether a peer feedback tool and a reflection tool would enhance group performance in
a CSCL-environment. To this end, an existing CSCL-environment was augmented with two independent, but
complementary, tools. The first was an individualized peer feedback tool - Radar - which was meant to stimulate
and provide group members with information about the social and cognitive behavior of themselves, their peers,
and the group as a whole. This information was presented from both the perspectives of the group members
themselves (i.e., self perceptions), their peers (i.e., peer perceptions) and the group as a whole. The second tool
was a shared reflection tool - Reflector - which was meant to stimulate group members to reflect on and provide
information  about  their  own  behavior   and  how    this  behavior    was  perceived     by  their peers,  their  personal
perspectives on the group's performance, as well as to co-reflect on the group performance and reach shared
understanding on this.
The following research questions will be addressed:
1)  Do groups with Radar and Reflector perform better socially than groups without Radar and/or Reflector? In
    other  words,   do  groups  using    Radar   and   Reflector    develop   better,    have   higher   group   satisfaction,
    experience lower levels of group conflict, and a have more positive attitude towards collaborative problem
    solving than groups without Radar and/or Reflector?
    Expected is that both Radar and Reflector will positively affect the social behavior in the group, leading
    increased social performance of the group. A combination of the both tools should be most effective.
2)  Do    groups   with Radar   and   Reflector   perform    better   cognitively   than    groups   without  Radar   and/or
    Reflector? In other words, do groups with Radar and Reflector produce a group product of higher quality
    than groups without Radar and/or Reflector?
    Expected is that both Radar and Reflector will positively affect the social behavior in the group andthat this
    should indirectly lead increased cognitive performance of the group, A combination of both tools should be
    most effective.

Method
Participants
Participants were   120   fourth-year  students   (66  male,  54    female)   from    an  academic    high    school in   The
Netherlands.  Students  came   from   four  classes   and were   enrolled    in the   second    stage of the  pre-university
education  track   which   encompasses    the   final three   years   of high   school.     Prior to  the  experiment,      the
participating students were randomly assigned by the teacher to dyads, triads and groups of four, and randomly

                                                                                                                            3
                                              232   ·  © ISLS
                                          ICLS 2010   ·   Volume 1

assigned  by  the  teacher  to one   of the  three  conditions  (see  Design).   Therefore,  group  compositions    were
heterogeneous in ability and gender.

Design
For this  study  two   experimental   conditions    and  one control   condition  were   used.  The  first experimental
condition (n = 69) received the tools at the beginning (T1), halfway (T2) and at the end (T3) of the collaboration
process. The second experimental condition (n = 24) received the tools halfway (T2) and at the end (T3). The
control condition (n = 27) did not received tools during collaboration but only completed them at the end (T3).

Measures
Cognitive performance. The grade given to the groups' collaborative writing task (i.e., the essay) was used as a
measure   of cognitive  performance.    The  essays  were   graded  by two  researchers,  both  experienced   in grading
essays. The inter-rater reliability was high (Cronbach's ! = .86).
Social  performance.   To   measure   social  performance,    previously    validated instruments   (Strijbos, Martens,
Jochems,   & Broers,   2007)   were translated  into  Dutch and   transformed    into 5-point Likert scales  (1 = totally
disagree,  5 = totally agree).   The  Team   Development      scale  (k = 13, ! = .88)   provides  information    on  the
perceived level of group cohesion. The Group-process Satisfaction scale (k = 9, ! = .79) provides information
on the perceived satisfaction with general group functioning. The Intra-group Conflicts scale (k = 10, ! = .88)
provides  information   on   the   perceived level   of  conflict   between   group   members.  The  Attitude    towards
Collaborative  Problem   Solving    scale (k = 9,  ! = .78)  provides  information    on the  perceived  level of   group
effectiveness and how group members felt about working and solving problems in a group.

Task and procedure
The students collaborated in dyads and groups of three or four on a collaborative writing task in sociology.
Every student worked at a computer. Each group had to write an essay on a highly relevant current-events topic.
Prior to this collaborative writing task, students collaborated for one month choosing the topic, searching for
relevant sources, writing a short paper and giving a class presentation. Therefore, the sources required to write
the essay were available for all groups. The collaborative writing task consisted of three 45-minute sessions over
a period of one week. The groups collaborated in a CSCL environment called Virtual Collaborative Research
Institute (VCRI;   Jaspers,  Broeken,   &   Erkens,   2002), which    is a  groupware    program  designed   to  support
collaborative learning on research projects and inquiry tasks. VCRI will be further described in the Instruments
section.  Students were  instructed  to use  VCRI     to communicate     with the other  group  members    and   to make
complete   use of  the tools   for peer feedback    and  reflection  when   the  experimental   condition  allowed   this.
Students  received   content information    and definitions  regarding   the  six traits on  which  they   had to   assess
themselves and their peers. Students were told that they had three lessons to complete the task, that it would be
graded by their teacher, and that it would affect their grade for the course. The introduction to the task stressed
the importance    of  working  together   as a  group    and pointed   out  that each  individual  group   member    was
responsible  for  the  successful  completion   of  the  group  task.  To  successfully  complete   the task,  all  group
members had to participate.
While groups used the tools, groups without tools continued working on their collaborative writing task. Time-
on-task (writing the essay) was equal for all conditions. At the end of the final session (T3), the peer feedback
tool and reflection tool became available for all conditions so that all participants could assess their peers and
reflect on their  behaviors.   Finally, all participants  completed    a 30-item  questionnaire   measuring    the  social
performance of the group.

Instruments
Virtual Collaborative Research Institute (VCRI)
The  Virtual  Collaborative    Research   Institute (VCRI)   is   a groupware    program   that supports   collaborative
working and learning on research projects and inquiry tasks (Jaspers, Broeken, & Erkens, 2004). VCRI contains
more than 10 different tools, but only 5 were used for this experiment (see Figure 1). The Co-Writer (top left) is
a shared word-processor for writing a group text. Using the Co-Writer, students can simultaneously work on
different parts of their texts. The Chat tool (top center) is used for synchronous communication between group
members. The chat history is automatically stored and can be re-read by participants at any time. Notes (bottom
right) is a note pad which allows the user to make notes and to copy and paste selected information. Radar for
peer feedback (bottom left) and Reflector for reflection (top right) will be described in the following sections.
Windows of the available tools are automatically arranged on the screen, when students log on to the VCRI.

Peer assessment tool (Radar)
VCRI was augmented with a peer feedback tool for stimulating and facilitating information of group members'
social and cognitive behavior. This information is visualized in a radar diagram; therefore the peer feedback tool

                                                                                                                      4
                                              233   ·    © ISLS
                                           ICLS 2010    ·   Volume 1

is named `Radar' (see Figure 2). Radar provides users with anonymous information on how their cognitive and
social behavior is perceived by themselves, their peers, and the group as a whole. The information gathered is
based on specific traits that have been found to tacitly affect how one `rates' other people (Brok, Brekelmans, &
Wubbels, 2006). Radar provides information on six traits that are important for assessing behavior in groups.
Four are related to social or interpersonal behavior, namely (1) influence; (2) friendliness; (3) cooperation; (4)
reliability; and two are related to cognitive behavior, namely (5) productivity and (6) quality of contribution.
These  traits are derived   from  studies  on interpersonal    perceptions,    interaction, group  functioning, and   group
effectiveness   (e.g., Bales,  1988;  Brok,  Brekelmans, &     Wubbels;      Kenny,    1994). These traits, as  well as the
reasons for their choice, are discussed in Phielix, Prins, and Kirschner (in press).

Figure 1. Screenshot of VCRI                                          Figure 2. Output group assessment

In Radar, group members are both assessors and assessees. As assessor, to-be-assessed peers in the group can be
selected and her/his profile will appear as dotted lines in the center circle of the radar diagram. Each group
member is represented by a specific color. The assessor rates her/himself and all of the other group members on
each of the six traits using a continuous scale ranging from 0 to 4 (0 = none - 4 = very high). Every range, (e.g.,
from  0 to  1)  contains   10  points,  so every  scale   contained  40     points of  assessment.  To make    sure  that all
assessors interpret the six traits in the same way, assessors saw a text balloon with content information and
definitions when     they moved   the  cursor across    one of the   traits in the tool. For  example,  when    the assessor
moves the cursor across `influence' a balloon pops up with the text `A high score on influence means that this
person  has   a big  influence on what   happens    in  the group,   other  group  members    behavior, and  the form   and
content of the group product (the essay)'.
For groups of 3 and 4 members, the assessment is anonymous. Group members can see the assessments of the
other group members, but not who entered the data. To stimulate students to complete Radar, they can only gain
access  to  the  individual and  average    assessments     of their peers   after  they have  completed    the assessment
themselves. When all group members have completed their self assessments and peer assessments, two modified
radar  diagrams   become    available.  The   first -   Information   about    yourself  -  shows  the output   of  the self
assessment    (e.g., Chris about  Chris)   along with   the average   scores   of  the peer assessments  of  her/him  (e.g.,
Group about Chris). The self assessment is not taken into account for computing the average scores. To provide
more information about the variance in the average score of their peer assessment, students can also choose to
view the individual peer assessments about their own behavior (e.g., Group members about Chris). The second -
Information about the group (see Figure 2) - represents the average scores of the group members, so that group
members can get a general impression about the functioning of the group.
All group members are represented as a solid line in the diagram, each with a different color. The student can
include or exclude group members from the diagram by clicking a name in the legend.

Reflection tool (Reflector)
VCRI   was  also  augmented    with   a reflection  tool  (Reflector) containing    five reflective questions   designed  to
stimulate reflection on different aspects of the group processes taking place. The questions were:
1.  What is your opinion on how you functioned in the group? Give arguments to support this.
2.  What differences do you see between the assessment received from your peers and your self assessment?

                                                                                                                          5
                                               234    ·  © ISLS
                                         ICLS 2010    ·  Volume 1

3.  Why do you or do you not agree with your peers concerning your assessment?
4.  What is your opinion on how the group is functioning? Give arguments to support this.
5.  What    does  the group  think about  its functioning   in general?    Discuss and formulate   a conclusion    that is
    shared by all the group members.
6.  Set specific goals (who, what, and when) in order to improve group performance.
The first four questions are completed in the Reflector, with completion indicated by clicking an `Add'-button.
This allows the student to share her/his answers with the rest of the group and allows her/him to see the answers
of the others.  Students   can only gain  access  to  the answers   of  their peers after they   have  added    their own
answers so as not to be influenced by one another.The fifth and sixth questions are completed in Co-Writer, in a
specific section named Co-Reflection, which allows writing a `shared' conclusion and formulating goals. The
responses made by the students in the Reflector are not scored or evaluated.

Data Analyses
To  examine    whether   Radar  and  Reflector  lead  to   higher   social performance,   a  one  way   between-groups
ANOVA (two-tailed) with planned comparisons is conducted with the dependent variables `team development',
`group   satisfaction', `level of  group  conflicts',   and `attitude  towards     collaborative problem   solving',    as
measured by the questionnaire at the end of the experiment.
To  examine   whether   Radar  and  Reflector  lead  to higher  cognitive   performance,  a  one  way   between-groups
ANOVA (two-tailed) with planned comparisons is conducted with the grade on the essay as dependent variable.

Results
Impact   of tools  on   social performance.   A   one   way    between-groups    ANOVA      (two-tailed)  with   planned
comparisons    was conducted    to compare    scores on  `team  development',    `group  satisfaction',  `level of group
conflicts', and `attitude towards collaborative problem solving', across each of the three conditions. Groups in
Condition   1 used  the  tools from  the beginning    (T1)  of collaboration   process until the  end   (T3); Groups in
Condition 2 received and used the tools halfway (T2) and at the end (T3); and Groups in Condition 3 did not use
the tools during collaboration, but only completed them at the end (T3). Except where noted, tests were two-
sided. The rule of thumb (Cohen, 1988) for effects sizes (!2) was small " .01, medium " .06, and large " .14.
Table 1 shows means and standard deviations for social performance scales per condition.

Table 1.  Means and Standard Deviations for Social Performance Scales per Condition

                               Condition                                     N            M              SD
 Team development              1 ­ tools available at T1, T2 and T3           63          4.06           .57
                               2 ­ tools available at T2 and T3               24          3.47           .61
                               3 ­ tools available at T3                     25           3.80           .37
 Group satisfaction            1 ­ tools available at T1, T2 and T3           62          3.98           .56
                               2 ­ tools available at T2 and T3               24          3.56           .64
                               3 ­ tools available at T3                     25           3.71           .59
 Intra-group conflict          1 ­ tools available at T1, T2 and T3           62          1.95           .59
                               2 ­ tools available at T2 and T3               24          2.41           .66
                               3 ­ tools available at T3                     25           2.23           .50
 Attitude towards              1 ­ tools available at T1, T2 and T3           62          3.79           .59
 collaborative problem         2 ­ tools available at T2 and T3               24          3.56           .61
 solving                       3 ­ tools available at T3                     25           3.65           .55

As expected, groups that used the tools during the complete collaboration process (Condition 1), perceived their
team as being better developed, F (1, 68) = 6.10, p = .02, partial !2 = .16, experienced higher levels of group
satisfaction,  F (1, 108) = 3.83,   p = .05,  partial   !2 = .09,   and    experienced   lower    levels  of    conflicts,
F (1, 108) = 4.07, p = .05, partial !2 = .10, than students not using the tools (Condition 3).
Compared to groups that received the tools halfway(Condition 2), groups in Condition 1 perceived their team as
being  better  developed,    F (1, 68) = 17.02, p = .00,    partial !2 = .16,  experienced   higher   levels    of group
satisfaction, F (1, 108) = 9.02, p = .00, partial !2 = .09, experienced lower levels of conflicts, F (1, 108) = 10.68,
p = .00,  partial  !2 = .10,   and  had  a    more   positive   attitude   towards   collaborative   problem    solving,
F (1, 108) = 2.77, p = .05, partial !2 = .03 (one-tailed).
Compared    to groups   in Condition  3, groups   in  Condition   2  perceived   their team  as  being  less  developed,
F (1, 38) = 5.40, p = .03, partial !2 = .16, compared to students not using the tools (condition 3).

                                                                                                                        6
                                              235  ·  © ISLS
                                            ICLS 2010     ·   Volume 1

Table 2.   Means and Standard Deviations for Cognitive Performance per Condition

                                                                 Cognitive performance (grade essay)
 Condition                                        N              M                SD            Min            Max
 1 ­ tools available at T1, T2 and T3             69             6.81               .71         4.0            8.5
 2 ­ tools available at T2 and T3                 21             6.54             1.04          4.5            8.5
 3 ­ tools available at T3                        27             6.36             1.61          4.0            8.5

Impact of tools on cognitive performance. Table 2 shows means and standard deviations for performance per
condition as measured by the essay grades. No significant effects of Radar and Reflector were found.

Discussion and Conclusion
The first aim of this study was to examine whether the use of a peer feedback tool (Radar) and reflection tool
(Reflector) would lead to higher social performance, measured by: team development, group satisfaction, level
of group conflict, attitude towards collaborative problem solving. As expected, groups using the tools perceived
their team   as  being  better  developed,    experienced     higher  levels  of group    satisfaction and  lower  levels of
conflicts,  than groups   not  using   the tools  or  groups  using   the tools  since halfway   the collaboration    process.
Groups using the tools also experienced a more positive attitude towards collaborative problem solving, than
groups receiving the tools halfway. Surprisingly, groups receiving the tools halfway perceived their team as
being less developed compared to groups not using the tools. An explanation could be that Radar and Reflector
made group members aware of their unrealistic positive perception on team development.
The   second   aim   was  to examine     whether    the   use of Radar    and Reflector   would  lead   to higher  cognitive
performance, measured by the grade given to the essays. No significant effects of Radar and Reflector were
found for grade given to the essays.     The lack of asignificant effect is probably due to the short period of time in
which the groups had to collaborate in order to accomplish the task. Therefore, further studies will examine the
effects of Radar and Reflector during a longer period of time (i.e., three months).
In conclusion, the effects of Radar and Reflector are very promising. They show that social group performance
in CSCL     environments,    such  as  team   development,     group  satisfaction, and   level of  group  conflicts, can be
enhanced by adding this easy to complete and easy to interpret peer feedback tool and reflection tool.

References
Bales, R. F. (1988). A new overview of the SYMLOG system: Measuring and changing behavior in groups. In
         R. B. Polly, A. P. Hare, & P. J. Stone (Eds.), The SYMLOG practitioner: Applications of small group
         research (pp. 319-344).
Baltes,  B. B.,  Dickson,    M.  W.,   Sherman,    M.   P., Bauer,  C.  C.,  &  LaGanke,   J.  (2002).  Computer-mediated
         communication       and   group decision     making:  A   meta-analysis.   Organizational   Behavior  and    Human
         Decision Processes, 87(1), 156-179.
Benbunan-Fich,     R., Hiltz,   S. R.,  &  Turoff,    M.   (2003).  A comparative     content  analysis of  face-to-face  vs.
         asynchronous group decision making. Decision Support Systems, 34, 457-469.
Brok, P. den, Brekelmans, M. & Wubbels, Th. (2006). Multilevel issues in studies using students' perceptions of
         learning environments: the case of the Questionnaire on Teacher Interaction. Learning Environments
         Research, 9, 199-213.
Cohen, J. (1988). Statistical power analysis for the behavioural sciences (2nd ed.). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Dominick,    P.  G., Reilly,  R.   R., & McGourty,      J.  W.  (1997). The   effects  of peer  feedback   on team member
         behavior. Group & Organization Management, 22, 508-525.
Dourish,   P., & Bellotti,   V.  (1992).   Awareness      and coordination   in shared  workspaces.    In  M. Mantel,  &  R.
         Baecker (Eds.), Proceedings of the 1992 ACM conference on Computer-supported cooperative work
         (pp. 107­114). New York: ACM Press.
Druskat, V. U., & Wolff, S. B. (1999). Effects and timing of developmental peer appraisals in self-managing
         work groups. Journal of Applied Psychology, 84, 58-74.
Fjermestad, J. (2004). An analysis of communication mode in group support systems research. Decision Support
         Systems, 37, 239-263.
Garton, L., & Wellman, B. (1995). Social impacts of electronic mail in organizations: a review of the research
         literature. In B. R. Burleseon (Ed.), Communication yearbook (Vol. 18) (pp. 438­453). Thousand Oaks,
         CA: Sage.
Geister, S.,   Konradt,  U., &   Hertel,   G. (2006).   Effects  of Process   Feedback    on Motivation,   Satisfaction, and
         Performance in Virtual Teams. Small Group Research, 37, 459-489.
Hertz-Lazarowitz,     R., &   Bar-Natan,      I. (2002).   Writing  development     of  Arab    and  Jewish   students using
         cooperative learning (CL) and computer-mediated communication (CMC). Computers & Education,
         39, 19-36.

                                                                                                                          7
                                                  236   ·   © ISLS
                                             ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

Janssen, J., Erkens, G., Kanselaar, G., & Jaspers, J. (2007). Visualization of participation: Does it contribute to
         successful computer-supported collaborative learning. Computers & Education, 49, 1037-1065.
Jaspers, J., Broeken, M., & Erkens, G. (2004). Virtual Collaborative Research Institute (VCRI) (Version 2.0).
         Utrecht: Onderwijskunde Utrecht, ICO/ISOR.
Jehng, J.J. (1997). The psycho-social processes and cognitive effects of peer-baded collaborative interactions
         with computers. Journal of Educational Computing Research, 17(1), 19-46
Johnson,   D.  W.,    &  Johnson,   R.  T.   (1999).  Learning   together  and   alone:  Cooperative,    competitive,   and
         individualistic learning (5th ed.). Boston: Allyn and Bacon.
Karau, S., & Williams, K. (1993). Social loafing: A meta-analytic review and theoretical integration. Journal of
         Personality and Social Psychology, 65, 681-706.
Kenny, D. A. (1994). Interpersonal perception: A social relations analysis. New York: Guilford.
Kirschner, P. A., Beers. P. J., Boshuizen, H. P. A., & Gijselaers, W. H. (2008). Coercing shared knowledge in
         collaborative learning environments. Computers in Human Behavior, 24, 403-420.
Kirschner,    P., Strijbos, J., Kreijns,   K., &   Beers,  P. J. (2004).  Designing     electronic   collaborative learning
         environments. Educational        Technology Research and Development, 52(3), 47­66.
Kluger, A. N., & DeNisi, A. (1996). The effects of feedback interventions on performance: A historical review,
         a meta-analysis, and a preliminary feedback intervention theory. Psychological Bulletin, 119, 254-284.
Kreijns,   K.  &   Kirschner,    P. A.,    (2004). Determining     sociability,  social  space  and    social  presence  in
         (a)synchronous collaborating teams. Cyberpsychology and Behavior, 7, 155-172.
Kreijns, K., Kirschner, P. A. & Jochems, W. (2003a). Identifying the pitfalls for social interaction in computer-
         supported     collaborative    learning environments:     a review   of  the  research.   Computers   in  Human
         Behavior, 19, 335-353.
Lipponen, L., Rahikainen, M., Lallimo, J., & Hakkarainen, K. (2003). Patterns of participation and discourse in
         elementary     students'  computer-supported      collaborative learning.  Learning   and   Instruction,  13, 487-
         509.
McLeod, P. L., & Liker, J. K. (1992). Process feedback in task groups: An application of goal setting. Journal of
         Applied Behavioral Science, 28, 15-52.
Phielix, C., Prins, F. J., Kirschner, P. A. (in press). Awareness of group performance in a CSCL environment:
         Effects of peer feedback and reflection. Computers in Human Behavior.
Prins, F. J., Sluijsmans, D. M. A., & Kirschner, P. A. (2006). Feedback for general practitioners in training:
         quality, styles, and preferences. Advances in Health Sciences Education, 11, 289-303.
Rochelle, J., & Teasley, S. (1995). The construction of shared knowledge in collaborative problem solving. In
         C.   O'Malley    (Ed.),  Computer-supported       collaborative learning   (pp. 69­97).   New   York:    Springer-
         Verlag.
Schön, D. A. (1987). Educating the reflective practitioner. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Short, J., Williams,    E., &   Christie,  B.  (1976). The  social psychology    of telecommunications.      London:   John
         Wiley & Sons.
Stahl, G.  (2004).    Groupware     goes  to  school:  Adapting   BSCW     to the  classroom. International    Journal   of
         Computer Applications in Technology, 19(3/4), 1­13.
Straus, S. G. (1997). Technology, group process, and group outcomes: Testing the connections in computer-
         mediated and face-to-face groups. Human-Computer Interaction, 12, 227-266.
Straus, S. G., & McGrath, J. E. (1994). Does the medium matter? The interaction of task type and technology on
         group performance and member reactions. Journal of Applied Psychology, 79(1), 87-97.
Strijbos, J.W., Martens, R. L., Jochems, W. M. G., & Broers, N. J. (2007). The effect of functional roles on
         perceived group efficiency during computer-supported collaborative learning: a matter of triangulation.
         Computers in Human Behavior, 23, 353­380.
Stroebe, W.,   Diehl,   M.  &   Abakoumkin,    G.  (1992).  The illusion  of  group effectivity.   Personality and  Social
         Psychology Bulletin, 18, 643-650.
Thompson,     L.  F.,  & Coovert,   M.    D.  (2003).  Teamwork    online: The   effects  of computer    conferencing    on
         perceived confusion, satisfaction and postdiscussion accuracy. Group Dynamics, 7, 135-151.
Walther, J. B., Anderson, J. F., & Park, D. (1994). Interpersonal effects in computer-mediated interaction: a
         meta-analysis of social and anti-social communication. Communication Research, 19, 460­487.
Williams,  K.     D., Harkins,  S.  G., &  Latané,   B.  (1981). Identifiability as a   deterrent  to social  loafing: Two
         cheering experiments. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 40, 303-311.
Yukawa,    J. (2006).   Co-reflection   in online  learning:  Collaborative   critical thinking   as  narrative. Journal of
         Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 1, 203-228.

                                                                                                                         8
                                                 237   ·  © ISLS
