                                                ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 2

      The Educative and Scalable Functions of Authoring Tools to
                        Support Inquiry-based Science Learning
  Itay Asher, Samira Nasser,Lina Ganaim, Iris Tabak, Ben Gurion University of the Negev, Beer Sheva, Israel
         asher.itay@gmail.com, nassersamira@yahoo.com, lena_gnaim@hotmail.com, itabak@bgu.ac.il
                  Vassilis Kollias, University of Thessaly, Thessaly, Greece, Vkollias@uth.gr
    Eleni A. Kyza, Iolie Nicolaidou, Frederiki Terzian, Andreas Hadjichambis, Dimitris Kafouris, Cyprus
                                  University of Technology, Limassol, Cyprus
             Eleni.Kyza@cut.ac.cy,iolie.nicolaidou@gmail.com, a.chadjihambi@cytanet.com.cy,
                           freda.terzian@yahoo.com, dimitris_kafouris@yahoo.co.uk
         Andreas Redfors, Lena Hansson, Maria Rosberg, Kristianstad University, Kristianstad, Sweden,
                      andreas.redfors@hkr.se, lena.hansson@hkr.se, maria.rosberg@hkr.se
               Sascha Schanze, Ulf Saballus, Leibniz Universtiät Hannover, Hannover, Germany
             schanze@chemiedidaktik.uni-hannover.de, saballus@chemiedidaktik.un-ihannover.de

         Abstract: Specialized authoring tools enable non-programmers to develop computer-based
         learning environments    that reflect  a particular  task  model. Larg-escale   implementation   of
         novel but pedagogically sound environments is made possible if the resulting environments
         reflect the    intended  essential  pedagogical   features.   We  explore  the   balance   between
         constraints and generativity throughfive teams' experiences with a specialized authoring tool,
         STOCHASMOS. We hope to spark a critical discussion of the role of specialized authoring
         tools in scalability. We also suggest that future research examine the educative function of
         these tools.

Symposium Goals and Overall Focus
There is general consensus over theneed to orchestrate learning in the disciplines around rich experiences where
students engage   in  first-hand activities  relevant to  future application  contexts   (Edelson, 2001). Yet,  such
learning environments, often supported through technology, typically require innovativematerials that draw on
a wealth  of intellectual  and   tangible resources.  Thus,   transferability and scalability are  inseparable  from
pedagogical considerations and goals. We aim to advanceour understanding of issues of scale-up by examining
the role of specialized authoring tools (Bell, 1998) in this process.
         Specialized authoring tools pose one type of strategy for scaling-up science education reform efforts,
by making it easier to produce a wide-range of inquiry-based learning environments that capture the essential
features of  environments   that  were    developed,   studied   and found    porductive within a  research  context.
However, this potential can only be realized if the use of such authoring tools results in the development of new
environments that reflect such essential features.This is especially true when these features relate to discipline-
specific needs, such as combining molecular diagrams and equations in chemistry, or explicitly supporting the
integration of evidence in scientific argumentation.Yet, it is just as important that these tools provide enough
flexibility to allow for the creation of new problems,so that a range of curricular topics, learning goals, and
learning contexts can be served by these new learning environments, rather thanserve the narrow production of
isomorphic problems. Thus, there is a tension betweenthe two criteria for effective scale-up: rigidity in the
authoring tool that preserves essential features and malleability in the authoring tool that allows for generativity
and variation.
         We will present case studies fromfive teacher-researcher teams each working with the same authoring
tool, STOCHASMOS (in Greek: reflection), to design different problem scenarios aimed at engaging students in
evidence-based reasoning around socio-scientific issues. These teams, each from a different partner country, are
part of a broader project calledDigital Support for Inquiry, Collaboration, and Reflection on Soci-oScientific
Debates  (CoReflect,    http://www.coreflect.org)  funded    by  the   European   Commission's Seventh     Research
Framework Programme (FP7). Each case study exploreskey affordances and constraints surrounding their use
of STOCHASMOS, how this exposes the tension between rigidity and malleability, andwhat implications there
might be for the roles that specialized authoring tools may play in scalability. Mainly we have found that such
tools can serve as boundary objects (Star & Griesemer, 1989) and as educative materials (Davis & Krajcik,
2005) that convey pedagogical and technological knowledge.We aim to engage the audience in a critical
discussion of these roles and their implications, as we describe in the symposium structure section. Our broader
goals are to   initiate a conversation    in the  community    on  the  ways   in which   authoring  tools  can foster
collaboration and professional development beyond their utility in technical efficiency.

Rationale and Background
The past few decades have been marked with the creation of compute-rbased learning environments that are
intended to help young science learners contendwith rich problems. As a field, we have accrued considerable

                                                    236  ·  © ISLS
                                                ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 2

knowledge about the types of representations and modes of interaction that can be incorporated in these learning
environments   to    productively support   collaborative     scientific inquiry(e.g.,   Edelson,   2001;   Kali, 2006).
However, developing such learning environmentsis very resource intensive. This is especially true, because
they often include unique representations, simulations, and interface structures that scaffold novice reasoning.
Recent   research  has  examined  not  only   how  to   develop     particular learning   environments    geared   toward
overcoming particular learning challenges or toward meeting particular learning goals, but also how to reduce
the time and cost involved in developing such learning environments. These initiatives aim to capitalize on
existing knowledge and encourage its reuse(Roschelle, Kaput, Stroup, & Kahn, 1998).
          Efforts in this direction include, but are not limited to, researchon open source (e.g., Scharff, 2002),
learning objects (e.g., Graaff, Laat, & Scheltinga, 2004), and authoring tools (e.g.,Murray, 1999). Of these
three, authoring tools impose the least demands on end-users in terms of requisite programming knowledge,
which   makes  them   quite apt  for providing   non-programmers       access to  the  development    of computer-based
learning environments. The realm of authoring tools includes a wide spectrum. At one end of the spectrum are
general-purpose tools (e.g., Adobe Authorware or Moodle) that only alleviate the need to program, btuthat do
not provide any guidance about the structure of appearance of profitable learning environments for particular
disciplines of study. Another genre of authoring toosl, midway through the spectrum, are authoring tools that
reflect a  particular pedagogical    approach   and/or  group   of   target  tasks, so   that they  provide  pedagogical
guidance. Thus, end-users can only createa particular class of environments, butthis class of environments is
open to multiple problem definitions andallows for some flexibility in the design of the flow of interaction.
Finally, at the other end of the spectrum are authoring tools that present a fixed structure so that the nature of the
activity is preset and development consists only of inserting new content.
          In this symposium,    we   focus  on  authoring     tools of the  mid-range    genre, which    we  refer   to as
specialized authoring tools. As we have noted, the efficacy of specialized authoring tools hinges on the tension
between rigidity that preserves essential features and malleabiliyt that allows for generativity and variation. We
examine    how different  teams   used the  same  specialized   authoring     tool  to  develop different   proble-mbased
scenarios in an effort to gauge the extent to which it was possible to develop problems that differ from a
prototype in more than just surface features, while not posing too great a departure from a prototype so as to
lose its essential pedagogical features.

STOCHASMOS and its Use in the CoReflect Project

The STOCHASMOS Specialized Authoring Tool
The CoReflect project uses a specialized authoring tool calledSTOCHASMOS (Kyza & Constantinou, 2007) to
develop a set of computer-based learning environments that support learners in investigating soci-oscientific
problems. STOCHASMOS lets teachers or designersbuild a multi-modal web-based environment that can
support learners in coordinating theory and evidence(e.g. analyze data as they relate to hypotheses,) in
constructing evidence-based explanations and arguments, and in planning, monitoring and evaluatingthese
actions.

Overview of Underlying Pedagogy
STOCHASMOS was designed to develop learning environments that support reflective inquiry.We define
reflective inquiry   as a set of  practices that  help the    inquirer adopt   acritical orientation,  such as planning,
monitoring and evaluating one's inquiry-related actions (Loh et al., 1998). Based on prior research (Kyza &
Edelson, 2005), a key part of supporting this process lies in supporting students in developing and sustaing
common     ground,   and  in making   sense  of  data  rich   environments.STOCHASMOS           was    designed   to help
designers implement learning environments that include specific supports for these processesT.he tool provides
structured workspaces that reflect some of the epistemic games (Collins & Ferguson, 1993) associated with
scientific inquiry.  These   workspaces  can   be shared    between    users  and   are  integrated withcommunication
devices such as forums and chats. This is one of the ways that STOCHASMOS makes thinking visible and
shared, thus supporting the construction of common ground. The approach to supporting sen-sme aking includes
a combination     of context-dependent   prompts  that  can   compensate      for limited  background    knowledge,     and
context-independent     prompts  that can   encourage  adoption     of general    data  interpretation and  management
practices.

Underlying Pedagogy as Realized in the STOCHASMOS Authoring Tool
The functions and design featuresof STOCHASMOS are accessed throughtabs (see Figure 1): Project,
Templates, InquiryEnvironment, Add Group, Review, Group Piaring, Partnership, and Forum.Designers access
different functions and design features as the names of the tabs imply. The "Inquiry Environmenta"b allows
designers to add content to the basic environment the students will use. The "Templates" tab enables the design
of template pages that are later accessible to students through the WorSkpace area. Thesetemplates can help

                                                    237  ·  © ISLS
                                                 ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 2

structure student work around important    ideas,   such  as connecting data   to hypotheses.   The WorkSpace also
provides guidance in the form of prompts and articulation boxes, which are also customizable at the level of
access of the individual teacher.The "Add Group", "Group Pairing", and "Partnership" tabs enable teachers to
setup collaboration patterns and rules.   The "Review"     tab allows teachers synchronous    and asynchronous access
to their students' ongoing   inquiry work onSTOCHASMOS.           Other  authoring   features, such as a generic graph
tool, the customizable glossary, and the history     log are accessible from a  side menu.  Teachers also have the
ability to control the timing, presentation, and d-eactivation of pages in the inquiry environment and the
WorkSpace templates, and are thus able to control what their class will have access to, according ttoheir
progress.

                                  Figure 1. The STOCHASMOS Authoring Tool.

         Teachers who choose to create or import an existing inquiry environment have the ability to import
WorkSpace templates or create their own templates to accompany the students' investigation.             Thaectivation of
other features     can  support  the  design    of   a   more   flexible  and   customized   environment,     within   the
STOCHASMOS framework, to address teaching and learning needs. For example, the teacher has the ability to
use the inquiry environment or the WorkSpace environment of theSTOCHASMOS platform separately, or use
both of them by default.    This possibility allows flexibility in the case that a teacher wants to use the WorkSpace
area with other web pages that already exist in     cyberspace, or even   a desktpobased software application.    In this
case, the image capture tool remains available to enable the user to transfer screen shots of their work from any
other application    on their computer    (e.g. from   a  database   or spreadsheet    program).   Another customizaebl
feature is the glossary: teachers can add glossary definitions according to the age group and cognitive needs of
their students; these definitions are not global and will only appear in the specific inquiry project.         The project
management features of STOCHASMOS allow teachers asynchronous access to their students' work.                         This
means that a teacher can review a group's work and add comments to their WorkSpace pages, thus providing
feedback the students can view and use at the beginning of their next invesigt ation session.          Furthermore, the
history log of the tool can give teachers information on which inquiry environment pages the students have
visited and the time between accessing each of the we-bpages stored in the STOCHASMOS system.

The CoReflect Project Structure and Teacher-Researcher Working Groups
The overall goal of the CoReflect project is to advance scientific literacy among youth in Europe by cultivating
evidence-based     reasoning  skills around     socio-scientific issues.  There    are seven  partners   from different
institutions who focus on the development, enactment and study of learning environments that support these
overall goals. These partners represent six different European and associate state countriesA. n eighth partner
focuses primarily on dissemination goals of the project.The seven partners who are involved in the design and
development aspects lead teacher-researcher teams that are referred to as Local Working Groups (LWG). Each
LWG is charged with developingand enacting a problem scenario concerning a socio-scientific issue using the
STOCHASMOS platform.
         As part    of this development   process    each  LWG,    based  on   its local culture, local school  structure,
national  learning   goals, group expertise  and     interests chose  a  target domain,   issue   and grdae level for its
problem scenario. The project conducted a number of meetings that included workshops that introduced the
authoring  tool,   provided  instructions on    its use, and   included  some   hand-son  practice. In  these meetings,
partners reached some commonground concerning their approaches to science education, inquiry, collaboration,
motivation and additional pertinent themes,but, each partner was free to explore their own fine-rgrained stance
and interpretations of these issues. The resultant learning nevironments span a range of disciplines, such as
physics, chemistry and life sciences, as well as a range of ages from elementarythrough middle to high school
levels, and cover different socio-scientific issues such as genetically modified crops, and expolration of extra-
terrestrial life.

                                                      238  ·  © ISLS
                                              ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 2

How the Collective Presentations Fit Together
In line with the different topics, learning goals, and group composition of the different participating design
groups,   each LWG    underwent  different design and      team  collaboraiot n processes. Each LWG     interpreted
STOCHASMOS        in  subtly different ways, and orchestrated     work  around    the tool in different ways.This
variability makes comparison possible, while the partners' affiliation with the CoReflect project and its broad
aims lends a sense of coherence to this comparison that may not have been possible if we were to examine
completely unrelated projects. Of particular importance is the shared aspect of teache-researcher teams, which
are not necessarily the norm in every learningenvironment design team, but which turned out to be a key point
for identifying contributions of specialized authoring tools that extend beyond their technological streamlining
utility. Thus, this unique study contextprovides an opportunity to explore nuances of use and to consider their
analytical implications.

Major Issues Addressed by the Collective Work
Any computer-based learning environment design effort entails a process of translating pedagogical ideals and
practices into content structures, process flows, and representations in the software. This in turn leads to an
explication of  often tacit  pedagogical approaches,    and when   diverse teams    are involved, such   as teach-er
researcher collaborations this can be a setting in which these approaches are anobject of negotiation. Each
LWG contributing to this symposiumconsidered instances where the inbuilt features ofSTOCHASMOS have
facilitated the bringing forth of important pedagogical issues when the LWG was discussing design decisions.
Similarly, they considered instances where conceptualized design directions may have been constrained by the
authoring tool, as well as the processes that were involved in resolving these dilemmas and their associated
solutions. These instances were distilled to a set ofanalytical points that carried generalizable significance
concerning the broader role of specialized authoring toolsT. his has led us to considerfour main issues:
     !       The importance of exposureof the design teams to past implementations to the efficacious use of
     specialized learning environments.
     !       The contribution of specialized authoring tools forprompting and guiding pedagogically-focused
     design discussions.
     !       Costs and benefits of the inclusion or exclusion of process-flow support in a specialized authoring
     tool.
     !       Costs and benefits of the complementary design of offline activities to augment the compute-r
     based learning environment.

Symposium Structure
The symposium will be conducted as a structured poster session. We will open with a 1-0minute introduction to
the session and to STOCHASMOS. In the next 40 minutes, the audience will be invited to visit the different
poster sites around the room. Each poster will present the dilemma or insight encountered by that group pointing
to implications about the educative and scalable functions of STOCHASMOS, the authoring tool. Following
this, we will reconvene for a 10-minute commentary from a discussant. The remaining 30 minutes will be
devoted to a structured discussion with the audience that will draw on the commetnary and on a set of analytical
questions. We will present a set of overarching questions that arise from the case examples in the various
posters, such as:
        !  Are there pedagogical aspects (such as task flow) that are best left unde-rdetermined in specialized
           authoring tools? Would this maximize tailoring to local contexts?
        !  Do specialized authoring tools require an accompaniment of prior implementation cas-eexamples in
           order to produce learning environments that are consistent with the intended vision?
        !  Should future research examine how authoring tools can suggest the nature of "of-lfine" activities
           and  supports  that can complement    and    maximize   the potential   of the  compute-rbased learning
           environments?
These questions as well as questions gleaned rea-ltime from the discussant's commentary will initiate and guide
the closing discussion with the audience.
          The session will be chaired byIris Tabak. Our discussant will beElizabeth A. Davis.

Potential Significance of the Contributions
This session can help reconceptualize the ways in which specialized authoring tools are conceived of in the
learning sciences as conveyors of knowledge with functions beyond those of technical efficiency. In particular,
it illustrates various functions that such tools perform in facliitating collaborative design processes in mixed-
expertise groups. This reconceptualization can inform the use of specialized authoring tool as well as their
future design. In addition, it can initiate a line of research that examines the educative(Davis & Krajcik, 2005)

                                                  239  ·  © ISLS
                                                 ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 2

role that   specialized authoring    tools  can  play,  and    how   this might affect   scalability    in  terms   of  broad
development and adoption of computer-based learning environments.
         Brief   descriptions   of each  of  the poster   presentations    included    in hte symposium      appear  in the
concluding section below.

A Specialized Authoring Tool in Use: Cases and Lessons Learned
The  following    set  of individual   posters   present   examples   of   design   tensions,   dilemmas,      insights  and
serendipitous design plans associated with our use of STOCHASMOS. We aim to synthesize and extrapolate
from these cases in order to inform the design of specialized authoring tools, and to better understand the
communicative and educative functions of these tools.

Knowledge of prior implementations leverages authoring tool efficacy: The case of
the Cyprus University of Technology team (CUT)
The case of Cyprus University of Technology, like most of the cases included in this session, combinseissues
related to a participatory design process withissues related to the use of a specialized authoring tool. The c-o
evolution of these processes gave rise to the educative role that such authoring tools might play. Members of the
Cyprus University of Technology team were previously involved in the develpoment of the prototype learning
environment upon whichSTOCHASMOS is based. Thus, some of the members of this team entered the new
design  tasks  of  the  CoReflect    project  with   a  rich   understanding   of   the  features,    structures,  and  tools
encapsulated in STOCHASMOS and the roles that they play in particular problem scenarios. However, this
knowledge was not shared by all participants.
         This  discrepancy      surfaced early   in the   design process    when    it became       evident that  considering
scientific data with the purpose of creating a base of evidence to service the firs-thand investigations of learners
in  an inquiry-oriented   computer-based     learning  environment    differed  from    the   perspective   of  answering    a
scientific question or creating typical activities for science lessosn. Thus, it became evident to the group leader
that the LWG needed to reach some common ground before the design efforts could continue productively.
Based on the group leader's general experience in developing computer-based learning environments, and her
intimate experience with STOCHASMOS, she introduced written, top-down design guidelines tailored to the
affordances   of STOCHASMOS.           The  guidelines    were  augmented    by   several     presentations    of  the tool's
capabilities and the evolving team design. Gradually, the team came to frame the design alternatives in terms of
the best way to take advantage of the tool's functions.This seems to have resulted in strong coherence between
the  teams'  envisioned   conceptions    of  inquiry   and   pedagogical    supports    and   their implementation     using
STOCHASMOS.        This   is exhibited   in part by  their use   of  templates to   support   collaboration,   critique and
reflection.
         The   participatory    design process   was   evident   in  the  two-way   interaction     between    teachers and
researchers, which in   the  end took  advantage of the expertise    and  diversity of the LWG      members.    For instance,
the design of the accompanying activity sequence was highly influenced by the epistemology of the enacting
teacher: the teacher sought to integrate hands-on experiments with the work conducted on STOCHASMOS to
enable students' deep comprehension of pr-erequisite biological concepts she felt could not be delivered through
STOCHASMOS         alone.    At  the same   time  this  collaborative  process    and   the   enactment     of the  desgined
environment with students allowed the participating teacher to grasp the ideas behind the integration of learning
technologies  in  her teaching   and   helped  her  confront   newly-realized  anxieties      over  the loss   of control of
students' actions.
         Team: Kyza, E. A., Nicolaidou, I., Terzian, F., Hadjichambis, A., Kafouris, D.

Using STOCHASMOS to scaffold studentsin discussing key issues while retaining
ownership of their learning processes: The case of the Kristianstad team (HKr)
The Kristianstad team had a strong investment in supporting collaborative processes in scientific inquiry usinag
kind of Fostering Communities of Learners (FCL) approach. Their domain of focus was astrobiology, a content
area that entices questions in students in relation to their worldview (Cobern, 1996). The emphasis on fostering
a community of learners, and the recognition that worldviews may be quite variable and salient in this context,
prompted this team to elicit explicit discussion of presuppositions of science at the onset of the learners'
experiences. This suggested particular curricular sequences. STOCHASMOS does ont provide direct or explicit
support for process-flow. In the case of HKr this proved to be an asset, as they were able to easily maintain their
pre-existing commitment to FCL.
         Nonetheless, working with the authoring tool enabled them from the start to ahve an initial image of
what the learning environment would look like in practice and what features it might have. Consequently, they
decided to employ particular software features to augment and enhance their conceptions of collaborative and
inquiry-flow processes. These included three main features: (1) Organizing students infunctional triads taking a
pre-test of worldviews into consideration, but keeping group functionality foremost(2) Having the teacher use

                                                      240  ·  © ISLS
                                                  ICLS 2010   ·    Volume 2

the notes tool to comment on group work between work sessions. A form of teacher-student interaction which
the participating teacher had noted was welcomed but novel toher. (3) Using the chat tool and sharing of
workplace pages to try to sustain continuous group work and collaboration.
         Team: Redfors, A., Rosberg, M., Hansson, L., Lundh, I.

Specialized authoring tool as boundary object: The case ofthe Ben Gurion team
(BGU)
The Ben Gurion University (BGU) team consists of some individuals who have prior experience in developing
computer-based learning environmentsand some who do not. Developing educational software requires one to
think of pedagogical moves andinstructional supports in terms of software features and interface objects.In
creating software "from scratch," this requires one to imagine and envision what these feautres and consequent
user interactions might look like once a prototype is created. Such visualization may be difficult or impossible
without  prior  experience.    Specialized authoring   tools    display the   main   features    and  software   interactions
(devoid  of content)   of    the intended  learning environment,       and    provide a    concrete  object  around   which
pedagogical discussions can occur. This alleviates some of the need to engage in visualization and mental
translation of pedagogical     moves   to  software interactions.     Some    ofthe team's    design  discussions   used the
language of the STOCHASMOS tools and interface features to discuss the problem structure, student activities
and supports (e.g., the "role tab", or "the template").Thus, the translation from pedagogy to interface rpeceded
and guided the design considerations and discussion.
         This figured most prominently in considering how to deal with anticipated student difficultiesT. he
team's interpretation ofSTOCHASMOS and its features was that assistance could be supportde mainly through
the features of the "template" and the "hints."Often the team would envision ambitious analysis on the part of
the student, followed by a wave of strong concern over students' ability to contend with these tasks in light of
their current background knowledge and skills. This, in turn, was followed by consideration of what forms of
scaffolding and guidance could bridge these gaps. Our considerations were framed in terms of "hints" and
"templates." When the team did not frame their suggestions in terms of a hint or a template, one of the team
members, usually the main hands-on developer of the learning environment, would respond with a question of
how the suggestion could be implemented as a hint or template. So, theefatures of STOCHASMOS acted as a
translational  device   translating    pedagogy     into  interaction       with  computational      media. In   this  way,
STOCHASMOS,        facilitated   the design   process, and     served  as   a boundary     object  bridging  between    team
members    who    had prior   experience  in software    development    and   those   who   did  not.  One   of the  broader
implications or questions for the field lies in determining the relative costs and benefits between facilitating the
translation process   from    pedagogy    to software  interaction    and    conrsat ining the space   of software-realized
scaffolding to the authoring tools' existing features.
         Team: Tabak, I., Asher, I.,Nasser, S., Gnaim, L., Fried, M., Katz, I., Weinstock, M.

Design foreclosure and the proliferation of offline activities

The case of the Leibniz Universität Hannover team (LUH)
In the case of Leibniz Universität Hannover (LUH,)issues pertaining to the use of the specialized authoring tool
were conflated with issues concerning the participatory design approach adopted in the CoReflect porject. The
participatory design approach asks to merge different kinds of experiences offered by teachers and researchers.
Stringently adhering to the tenets of this approach calls for negotiating and reconciling the different viewpoints.
The researchers seemed to provide presuppositions based mainly on published educational research and theory,
whereas teachers seemed to draw on classroom experiences and their emergent intuitive theories, as well as their
conceptions    of best practices     that also  seemed    to    be anchored    in their    prior experiences.    The  design
requirements of using STOCHASMOS made these tacit distinctions surface, because a direct importation of
prior best practices into the learning environment was not possible. This instigated an explicit discsusion of
what activities are desirable and why.
         The STOCHASMOS learning environment seemed to project to the participating teachers an image of
instruction as based on texts and data sheets inside a computer. This was in contrast to the teachers' strong
commitment     to hands-on     experimentation    (wet   labs;  i.e. laboratory   experimentation      using chemicals, or
biological  matter,   etc.). This  commitment     stems   from     both disciplinary    and    instructional considerations.
Chemistry   is an  experimental    science   and there is   a   longstanding   tradition   to focus  chemical   education  on
hands-on   experiments  rather    than "chalkboard     chemistry."    From    an  instructional   perspective,   the  teachers
believed that  the  hands-on     experiments    provided  insights   that   could not be    derived   from  declarative  data
sources, and that they would need to engage in experimentation in roder to deal well with core concepts. In
addition, they believed that the students would explicitly ask for these hand-son activities. Simulations, videos
and pictures   seemed   to   be  regarded    as competing     with   we-tlabs on  classroom      time, and   as offering  an
instructionally inferior alternative. Therefore, the participatory design team's decision was to provide students

                                                      241  ·   © ISLS
                                                 ICLS 2010    ·  Volume 2

with  both  learning   opportunities:   hands-on    experiments,     as   well as pictures  and   descriptions  of  these
experiments inside theSTOCHASMOS-based learning environment.
          Findings from    a pilot   study   reveael d mixed     results.  Students  made  little use   of the  hands-on
opportunities, reporting that theSTOCHASMOS pages were sufficient for understanding the basal concepts.
However, the analysis of the students' learning products revealed a lack of integration of these concepts. The
team   is  currently   working     on   this  issue,   discussing     additional  withi-nSTOCHASMOS         and  out-of-
STOCHASMOS activities to foster the integration of scientific concepts mediated by the xeperiments to be
tested in Spring 2010.
          Team: Schanze, S., Saballus, U., Neumann, A., Manske, M., Sieve, B., Söhlke, M., Janßen, O.

The case of the University of Thessaly team (UTH)
The University of Thessaly team was dedicated to fostering conceptual change and a scientific approach to the
ways in which students explain physical phenomena, focusing onthe topic of evaporation and condensation of
water. These goals coincided with strong prior commitments to activities that are not explicitly supported in
STOCHASMOS. They also had expectations about how students might engage in inquiry. As a result, there
were  instances   where   they   had  a hard   time    mapping      their envisioned  curriculum  to  the  authoring  tool
implementation. For example, they were concerned thatSTOCHASMOS afforded more degrees of freedom and
autonomy than their students were equipped to handle.Consequently, they devised a framework for teacher
moves   in which   the  teacher    manages    the    flow   of  the   investigation  based  on    awareness  of students'
misconceptions, and on the quality of student argumentation. Generally, in CoReflect we adopt a distributed
scaffolding stance that posits that support cannot be achieved through a single means, and that offline activities
and supports are an essential part of the overall learning environment. Thus, designing offline activities does not
in and of itself subvert the essence of intended designs underlyingSTOCHASMOS. However, one question to
contend   with is whether    there is a  point   at which     a proliferation  of offline activities obviates  rather than
augments the technological supports.
          Team:   Kollias,   V.,  Matos,     A.,  Davaris,      A., Karnavas,    A.,  Daropoulos,    A.,   Zaganas,   K.,
Christodoulopoulos, V., Tsaknia, Th.

References
Bell, B.  (1998).  Investigate and    decide  learning  environments:      Specializing  task models  for  authoring  tool
          design. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 7(1), 65-105.
Cobern, W. W. (1996). Worldview theory and conceptual change in science educationS. cience Education,
          80(5), 579-610.
Collins, A. M., & Ferguson, W. (1993). Epistemic forms and epistemic games: Structures and strategies to guide
          inquiry. Educational Psychologist, 28, 25-42.
Davis, E. A., & Krajcik, J. S. (2005). Designing educative curriculum materials to promote teacher learning.
          Educational Researcher, 34(3), 3-14.
Edelson,   D.  (2001). Learning-for-Use:      A   Framework      for  the   Design   of Technology-Supported    Inquiry
          Activities. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 38(3), 35-5385.
Graaff, R. d., Laat, M. d., & Scheltinga, H. (2004). CSCL-ware in practice: Goals, tasks, and constraints. In J-.
          W. Strijbos, P. A. Kirschner, R. Martens & R. L.Martens (Eds.), What We Know about CSCL and
          Implementing it in Higher Education(pp. 201-220). Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Kali, Y. (2006). Collaborative knowledge building using the Design Principles Database International Journal of
          Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 1(2), 187-201.
Kyza, E. A., & Constantinou, C. P. (2007).STOCHASMOS: A web-based platform for reflective, inquiry-based
          teaching and learning: Cyprus: Learning in Science Group.
Kyza, E., & Edelson, D. C. (2005). Kyza, E,. & Edelson, D. C. (2005). Scaffolding middle-school students'
          coordination of  theory    and evidence.     Educational    Research    and   Evaluation,  11  (6).Educational
          Research and Evaluation, 11(6), 545-560.
Loh, B., Radinsky, J., Russell, E., Gomez, L. M., Reiser,B. J., & Edelson, D. C. (1998). The Progress Portfolio:
          Designing reflective tools for a classroom context. InProceedings of CHI 98 (pp. 627-634). Reading,
          MA: Addison-Wesley.
Murray, T. (1999). Authoring Intelligent Tutoring Systems: An Analysis of the State of the Art. International
          Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education, 10, 98-129.
Roschelle, J., Kaput, J., Stroup, W., & Kahn, T. M. (1998). Scaleable Integration of Educational Software:
          Exploring The Promise of Component ArchitecturesJ. ournal of Interactive Media in Education, 98(6).
Scharff, E. (2002). Applying Open Source Principles to Collaborative Learning Environments. In G. Stahl (Ed.),
          Computer Support for Collaborative Learning: Foundations for a CSCL Community(pp. 499-500).
          Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.

                                                       242  ·  © ISLS
                                             ICLS 2010    ·  Volume 2

Star, S. L., & Griesemer, J. R. (1989). Institutional ecology, 'translations,' and boundary objects: Amateurs and
       professionals in Berkeley's museum of vertbrate zoology, 190-739. Social Studies of Science, 19(3),
       387-420.

Acknowledgments
CoREFLECT    (217792) is  funded by the European          Commision's Seventh Framework   Research  Programme
(FP7) under the 'Science in Society' Initiative. Opinions,  findings, and conclusions are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the funding agency.

For more information about the CoReflect project please ivsit http://www.coreflect.org

                                                   243  ·  © ISLS
