                                            ICLS 2010    Volume 1

The Impact of a Media-Rich Science Curriculum on Low-Income
                       Preschoolers' Science Talk at Home
 William R. Penuel, SRI International, 333 Ravenswood, Menlo Park CA 94025, william.penuel@sri.com
        Lauren Bates, Education Development Center, 96 Morton, NY, NY 10014, lbates@edc.org
        Shelley Pasnik, Education Development Center, 96 Morton, NY, NY 10014, sp@edc.org
     Eve Townsend, Education Development Center, 96 Morton, NY, NY 10014, etownsend@edc.org
           Lawrence P. Gallagher, SRI International, 333 Ravenswood, Menlo Park CA 94025,
                                        lawrence.gallagher@sri.com
  Carlin Llorente, SRI International, 333 Ravenswood, Menlo Park CA 94025, carlin.llorente@sri.com
      Naomi Hupert, Education Development Center, 96 Morton, NY, NY 10014, nhupert@edc.org

        Abstract:   While   research  suggests  that  educational  television shows   can   contribute
        positively  to a  range  of   developmental    outcomes   for preschoolers,   few   preschool
        curricula make use of digital content to teach science. This study explored the impact of a
        curriculum   that integrated  hands-on   activities with   digital content  from  two  public
        television shows aimed at introducing preschoolers to science, Peep and the Big Wide
        World and Sid the Science Kid. Impact was measured using parent reports of 398 low-
        income   children's science   talk using a   random   assignment    design, where   preschool
        teachers were   assigned  to  implement   either  the  media-rich   science  curriculum or a
        literacy curriculum. Results indicated that the science curriculum had a positive impact
        on caregivers'   reports of  children's talk  about  science. Though    the study's  outcome
        measure is an indirect measure of learning, the study suggests the potential for this and
        other media-rich curricula for introducing preschoolers to science.

Context for the Study
Learning scientists are increasingly interested in preschool children's science learning. Learning scientists
have  examined   young    children's conceptual  development     (Gelman    &   Lucariello, 2002;  Gelman   &
Brennamen, 2004), the roles that caregivers play in encouraging young children's talk about science at
home that encourages curiosity and fosters the development of explanations (Crowley et al., 2001), and the
effects of specific curricula that target preschoolers in developing children's inquiry skills and conceptual
understanding (Clark-Chiarelli, Gropen, Chalufour, Hoisington, & Eggers, 2009). To date, however, there
have been few studies exploring the role that digital media can play in supporting young children's science
learning or that focus specifically on science learning of low-income children. This gap is noteworthy,
since a significant focus  of learning  sciences  research   has been  on   the role technology   can  play in
supporting science learning in K-12 settings (Pea & Collins, 2008) and on the requirements for enacting
inquiry approaches to teaching science in low-income communities (Songer, Lee, & Kam, 2002).
        There are several obstacles to designing and undertaking such studies in preschool settings. First,
the use of technology in preschools has been controversial. Critics have argued that adults should not
promote the use of video or computers by young children, arguing that these technologies make children
passive and reduce their opportunities to learn from interacting with adults and peers (Healy, 2003). In
preschools where staff members believe technology is likely to harm children, it may be difficult to recruit
study participants. In addition, curricula that use technology can also be hard for teachers to implement,
since many preschools have limited access to technology and teacher training opportunities (Davidson,
Fields, & Yang, 2009). Thus, fielding a study of media-rich curriculum materials would require researchers
to provide extensive technical and professional support. Third, there are few standards-based outcomes for
researchers to use. Those few that have some evidence of validity and reliability are only available to those
researchers involved in their development. As a result, researchers wishing to study outcomes will have to
develop measures that are instructionally sensitive, yet not so closely aligned to curriculum content as to
have limited value in persuading others of the objectivity of the measure.
        This study investigates whether low-income preschool-aged children can learn from a media-rich
curriculum that combines hands-on investigations with digital content from public television programs and
games. Researchers at Education Development Center Inc. designed the curriculum used in the study,
which was part of the Ready to Learn Initiative, a program to develop educational television programming
and outreach activities that increase school readiness for 2- to 8-year-old children living in low-income

                                                238     ISLS
                                               ICLS 2010    Volume 1

households. In 2005, the U.S. Department of Education awarded one of two Ready to Learn programming
grants  to  the  Corporation   for  Public  Broadcasting    (CPB)   and  PBS.   The    award required   an impact
evaluation of the Ready to Learn Initiative's target audience of low-income children.

Theoretical Background
The premise behind the curriculum in this study is that preschool teachers can implement a curriculum that
integrates digital content from public television preschool science programs with hands-on activities in
ways   that promote  early science    learning. The    curricular design is  grounded   in the literature on  early
science learning and on how and when young children can learn from digital media.

Approaches to Promoting Early Science Learning
As is  true  for learning  across   a variety  of domains   and   ages, young   children's  prior  experiences  are
important for learning. Because children have every day experiences with life science and earth science
phenomena,      many   preschool    science   curricula   draw    from  these  fields.  For  instance,  Rule   and
Guggenheim's (2007) science curriculum centers on clay partly because young children often have prior
experience working with clay. The curriculum progresses from using art clay to experimenting with mud,
clay, and sands. Gelman and Brenneman's (2004) curriculum embeds the scientific method and vocabulary
into lessons devised with familiar objects like the apples, seeds, baby pictures, and shoes of various sizes,
all of which demonstrate the concepts of growth and change. The idea behind both curricula is young
children can be introduced to science concepts by using familiar objects and phenomena.
         Hands-on investigations of these phenomena enable students to develop critical skills for inquiry,
including making observations and predictions. Because hands-on activities make observations concrete
and more comprehensible to preschoolers, science curricula routinely call for children to experiment with
objects  by  using  the senses   to explore   and manipulate   them.    Many  preschool    science curricula  teach
students to record observations with drawings and then make predictions based on the observations (e.g.,
Chalufour & Worth, 2003). Long-term activities also promote deeper exploration of a topic by allowing
preschoolers to observe, predict, verify predictions, and reflect on observed changes over time (Gelman &
Brenneman, 2004). Such investigations also support the earliest stage of scientific thinking, false belief
understanding, which occurs when a child realizes her observations or beliefs may be different from others'
and that beliefs may even be false (Wellman, Cross, & Watson, 2001). False belief understanding is the
first step towards the ability to falsify a theory (Kuhn & Pearsall, 2000).
         In early childhood, encounters with science can help children cultivate students' interest in science
and develop ways for talking about science and learn scientific vocabulary, two skills that correspond to
important   strands of  proficiency   in  science  (National  Research   Council,   2009).  According   to French
(2004),  children's  interest in science   activities can support   the formation   of mental  representations  of
complex phenomena and promote communication about these phenomena. For example, preschoolers can
verbally describe the inside and outside of an apple, describing the apple's color, texture, temperature, and
lack of sound while the teacher records the information on a chart (Gelman & Brenneman, 2004).
         To date, little research has focused on science learning for low-income preschoolers; an exception
is a recent pair of studies focused on children's science learning in Head Start by Greenfield and colleagues
(Greenfield et al., 2009). In one study, the researchers compared the developmental scores of Head Start
children using the Galileo observational system (which rates children's skills in a range of domains). They
found that in a cohort of more than 2,000 children, children's ratings and gains in science were significantly
lower than in the other 7 domains measured (e.g., literacy). In another study, they found that many teachers
reported low perceived self-efficacy with respect to teaching science and had trouble integrating science
into their schedule. A third study was a quasi-experimental study of the ECHOS curriculum, which uses a
combination of direct instruction and guided discovery to teach science skills. Relative to a control group,
students in  classrooms   implementing     the  ECHOS     curriculum    were  rated higher  on four  of   the eight
domains of the Galileo observational system.

Young Children's Learning Using Digital Media
         Research on young children's learning from digital media has been an area where there is a long
history of research, including for low-income students (for a review, see Pasnik, Strother, Shindel, Penuel,
&  Llorente,  2007).  For  example,    in  the earliest  days  of public television    programming   for  children,
producers   used  research to  study   children's  engagement     and  learning (Fisch,  Truglio,  & Cole,    1999;
Morrow, 2005). A pair of experimental studies conducted by the Educational Testing Service in the first

                                                   239     ISLS
                                               ICLS 2010      Volume 1

and second years of production for Sesame Street (Ball & Bogatz, 1970; Bogatz & Ball, 1971) found that
children encouraged to watch the show grew in skills targeted by the show and were rated as more ready
for school by their teachers than students assigned to a control group. A limitation of these and many of the
other studies of the effects of educational television, including those that employed random assignment
designs, is that they have been conducted in laboratory settings (Thakkar, Garrison, & Christakis, 2006).
The lack of field-based studies is significant because achieving similar results in field settings (e.g., homes,
day care facilities, or early childhood education centers) requires that a coherent sequence of curricular
activities be enacted, something care givers in these settings may find challenging.
          With the increasing availability of computers came developments in computer-assisted instruction
that targeted young children's learning, primarily in the area of literacy. For this age group that is not yet
reading,  software programs    facilitate  the reading   process   by  having   the computer    speak letter  sounds,
phonemes, and words to students as they read or interact with the computer. An intervention designed to
increase phonological awareness (Olson, Wise, Ring, & Johnson, 1997) is fairly typical of such programs.
In their software program, one set of tasks asks children to change the onset or rime of a word presented on
a screen to match what the computer says (e.g., if the computer shows "buzz" and the computer says
"fuzz," students must replace the "b" with an "f"). Another set of tasks requires children to try spelling
words. The computer pronounces students' spellings back to them, providing them with feedback they can
use to adjust their spelling. Studies of the effectiveness of these programs (e.g., Foster, et al. 1994; Baker &
Torgesen, 1995) have found strong, positive effects on children's phonological awareness.
          More recently, a number of interventions have been developed based on the idea that different
media can be used synergistically (Neuman, 1995) to enhance children's learning. Interventions designed to
promote learning from media synergy encourage co-viewing (watching and interacting with the television
program   with  a peer, parent,    or teacher) coordinate     media   viewing   with   non-media  activities  such as
listening to a story, reading a book with a parent, teacher, or older sibling, or working on a practice activity
related to skills targeted in the intervention. An intervention described by Prince and colleagues (Prince et
al, 2002) provides a representative example of a media synergy intervention in practice. Teachers in that
study were provided with a comprehensive Between the Lions curriculum that included whole episodes of
the program,   books related   to  themes   covered   during   the   program and    enrichment   activities. Teachers
participated in   intensive, daylong   workshops     to  familiarize   themselves    with  the  resources    and learn
strategies for using them to supplement the literacy curricula already in place in their schools. During the
school year, participating preschool, kindergarten, and first grade children viewed at least two Between the
Lions episodes, read a book related in some way to the content of the episode viewed, and then participated
in a hands-on activity that reinforced the skill or theme stressed in the episode. This and other studies (e.g.,
Chambers, et al., 2006) have found small, but positive, effects on children's reading skills. Similarly, recent
evaluations  of preschool    math  curricula   that include    computer-based    math   games   revealed  significant
student math achievement gains (Clements & Sarama, 2008; Starkey, Klein, & Wakeley, 2004).

The Public Media-Produced Science Curriculum
The  10-week    media-rich   early science   curriculum    studied   integrated video  from  educational     television
programs and associated online games with classroom activities to foster skills for later success in science
learning.  Researchers  randomly      assigned teachers    to  the early science    or an  early literacy    condition.
Teachers played a leading role in every aspect of the curriculum, guiding students through whole-group
hands-on   investigations,   small-group    experiences,    and   individual exploration,    as  well as     mediating
children's experiences   with  digital    content  through    active co-viewing.    The   curriculum  combined    full
episodes of Sid the Science Kid (produced by KCET/Los Angeles with Jim Henson Productions) and self-
contained  "focused  viewing"      segments    from  Peep     and  the  Big  Wide    World   (produced   by   WGBH
Educational  Foundation).    Over     the 10   weeks,   the   children  participated   in 25 hours   of the   science
curriculum, including time spent actively watching TV episodes and segments, playing online games, and
participating in small and large group activities.

Integration of Different Media and Formats for Learning
Video from Sid the Science Kid and Peep and the Big Wide World anchored the curriculum activities.
Teachers   showed  entire  episodes    of Sid  the  Science   Kid  to  introduce  a  weekly  in-class investigation,
periodically interrupting the video to highlight key science vocabulary and ideas. Students also viewed self-
contained segments from Peep and the Big Wide World that engaged target content, vocabulary, and skills.
Online games created by the producers provided additional support for the curriculum by targeting the

                                                    240     ISLS
                                              ICLS 2010      Volume 1

same   instructional  strands. Both   programs    are intended  to  develop    the early   scientific knowledge   of
preschool children, the target age for the study. Researchers also adapted the hands-on activities suggested
on the programs' websites for inclusion in the curriculum. Teachers led hands-on activities in whole group,
small group, and individual settings.

Focal Skills
The curriculum addressed the development of four instructional strands in early science: science content,
vocabulary,   skills, and  scientific thinking.   In  conjunction   with   students'   prior knowledge,     hands-on
exploration, and observations, each strand is essential for later scientific development. These strands align
with  three of the    National Research   Council's   recommended      strands for   science  learning   in informal
environments: 1)   Experience excitement, interest, and motivation to learn about phenomena in the natural
and physical world; 3) Manipulate, test, explore, predict, question, observe, and make sense of the natural
and  physical  world;   and 5) Participate in scientific   activities  and learning    practices with  others, using
scientific language and tools (National Research Council, 2009). Teachers guided children in exploring
science content    that was conceptually   linked  to   "Transformation    and Change,"      the topic of  the 5 Sid
episodes selected for the study. Instructional content addressed freezing, melting, growth, decay, reversible
change, and irreversible change. Activities were based on everyday experiences easily observable with the
five senses. Teachers taught preschoolers science vocabulary words related to these science concepts. They
also  learned  vocabulary   for  science  skills, such    as observing,    collecting, sorting,  and   investigating.
Teachers supported children in learning the science skills needed to make observations using their senses,
and record them in drawings. Long-term investigations allowed children to make predictions and check
them over time. Children practiced scientific thinking by comparing their observations with those of their
classmates, as well as by participated in memory games.

Teacher-Led Viewing
The curriculum called for early childhood educators to engage children in active viewing of segments and
episodes. When showing video to the children, teachers introduced the key content and vocabulary, paused
the video to encourage active processing of information, and reflected on areas of learning embedded in the
video.  After viewing    each  week's  Sid episode,    teachers supported   children    in repeating   the  hands-on
investigations performed by the characters, such as planting a seed to watch it grow.

Opportunities for Repeated Practice
The curriculum sequence gave children multiple opportunities to develop and practice focal skills. They
watched whole episodes and focused viewing segments several times and participated in repetitive teacher-
led, small-group, and individual activities. Review and repeated focused viewings occurred on consecutive
days and over the course of the 10-week curriculum so that content, vocabulary, and skills introduced in
earlier weeks were revisited in following weeks.

Intensive Support for Implementing Early Childhood Educators
Preschools participating in the science curriculum received teachers' guides containing daily scripts and 10
weeks of activities, as well as materials such as potting soil, science journals, and a stipend for perishable
items used during investigations. To increase the depth and quality of implementation, teachers received
ongoing professional development from an instructional coach. This training began with two two-hour
orientations to familiarize teachers with the curriculum and materials. Coaches subsequently provided on-
site support  that included   modeling   examples    of good   teaching  practice,  observation,   and   constructive
feedback, as well as general assistance with implementation. Coaches made an average of eight visits to
each class during implementation. The average visit was about two hours long. Between visits, coaches
provided support by telephone and e-mail.

The Current Study
The research question investigated was: Can a media-rich science intervention implemented by teachers in
early childhood centers positively impact low-income children's talk about science with their caregivers?
        The researchers conducted a randomized experiment to test the impact of the curriculum. They
randomly    assigned  preschool  teachers  in each    participating center  to either  a treatment    or comparison
group. The treatment group of educators implemented the science curriculum, while the comparison group
implemented a literacy curriculum of the same duration and with rich media components. The use of the

                                                  241      ISLS
                                              ICLS 2010    Volume 1

literacy curriculum   was  to  facilitate clear interpretation  of  findings; evaluators  wanted   to avoid    the
possibility that results could be explained by children's excitement about media use.

Sample
Eighty classes at 47 different early childhood education centers participated in the study. Some of these
centers were some part of large-scale programs like Head Start, some were run by school districts, others
were small, privately run facilities, some of which were home based. More than two-thirds of the early
childhood educators (69%) had a postsecondary degree.
         A total of 398 children (mean age at pretest, 4 years, 9 months) participated in the study. Fifty-
three percent of the children were Hispanic, and 28 percent were African American. A majority (60%) of
these children spoke English at home, and a third (31%) spoke Spanish at home. Some (8%) spoke both
languages at home. Over all the children in the sample, 20 different languages were spoken at home.
Seventy-nine percent were low-income, as indicated by the fact that their families were eligible for a
subsidy to help them pay for tuition costs.

Outcome Measure
A key challenge in measuring outcomes of preschool curricula in science is the paucity of measures of
student learning (Greenfield et al., 2009). Given the resources of this study, it was not feasible to directly
measure the impacts of the science curriculum by individually assessing children. Instead, the study team
relied on a single measure of caregiver reports of children's talk about science. More intensive analyses of
children's science talk in the home indicate the home is a site where children's interests are expressed and,
in some cases, developed with the help of caregivers (e.g., Tenenbaum, Snow, Roach, & Kurland, 2005).
Our measure aligned with Strand 1 of the NRC's (2009) informal science learning guidelines and sought to
capture children's excitement, interest, and motivation to learn about science topics. Caregiver reports are a
less precise way to learn about children's expressed interests, but they are more readily collected than
discourse data for large-scale studies such as this one.
         The measure used was a single index comprised of the sum of caregivers' response to 8 items. The
study team asked caregivers to report on whether or not children reported in recent weeks that they had:
pretended to be a scientist or science teacher, talked about doing investigations or experiments, expressed
curiosity about the natural world, expressed an interest in why things change, expressed an interest in how
things work, talked about freezing and melting, talked about decay, and talked about heat and change.

Procedure
After random assignment had been completed, the study team provided training to coaches. The training for
coaches included a review of the curriculum's goals and activities, as well as guidance regarding how to
support teachers in learning how to implement the curriculum. The training also included a review of a
weekly log form that coaches were to complete and that provided information on teachers' implementation
of the curriculum. The team supported coaches' work by providing weekly opportunities to review progress
and challenges with a coach coordinator, one in New York and one in California.
         After coach training had been conducted, coaches established contact with classroom teachers to
set up   an orientation session to the    curriculum. During   the  orientation session, coaches   reviewed    the
curriculum goals, activities, and strategies, as well as expectations for implementation. In addition, the
coaches reviewed materials that had been shipped to teachers and that included all the digital and print
content needed to implement the curriculum. In the first 4 to 5 weeks, coaches led activities that had been
scheduled   that day,  co-led them with    teachers,  or observed   as teachers implemented  the   activities. In
subsequent weeks, the study team gave coaches discretion as to how many times to visit sites, though they
continued to make weekly contact with sites to complete implementation logs.
         Within   four  weeks  of completing    the   10-week   curriculum, the  study team  began    contacting
caregivers  to conduct  the   survey. The   team  made   up  to  20  attempts to reach   parents, caregivers,  or
guardians who had given consent for their children to participate in the study. Response rate for the parent
survey was 56 percent, which was high for parent surveys in general and for this population in particular.

Approach to Analysis
In the study, children were nested within classrooms; classrooms were the unit of treatment assignment for
the study. Because of the multilevel nature of the data, and because a significant proportion of the variance
for each of the four outcomes was associated with classrooms, the study team employed hierarchical linear

                                                  242     ISLS
                                            ICLS 2010       Volume 1

modeling (Raudenbush & Bryk, 2002) to estimate treatment effects. After fitting a fully unconditional
model to the data to estimate variance at each level (96% at Level 1, 4% at Level 2), two models were fit:
one that included only the treatment indicator as a predictor and a second that examined the impact of the
parent respondent on outcomes (whether the respondent was the father or another caregiver).
        Prior to modeling, the study team conducted a factor analysis and analyzed the reliability of the
outcome measure. These analyses suggested a single-factor structure, and together, the items had a modest
internal reliability of ! = 0.75. Since scores were skewed, the team used a bootstrap resampling method to
calculate the standard deviation of parameter estimates and transformed the outcome data (using the square
of the measure). Squaring   the outcome measure         did  not  produce different model results, so outcome
measure for all subsequent analyses was the mean score for the 8 items, to facilitate interpretation.
        Because there were missing data, the study team used data for all children in the study, namely
their gender, ethnicity, and family income level, to determine whether the students' caregivers with missing
data differed in any way from those for whom their caregivers did complete surveys. The results of this
analysis indicated that there were no differences between the group for whom complete data were available
and the group for whom data were missing on any background characteristics. The science and comparison
curriculum groups were also equivalent on these background measures and a measure of early literacy.

Results
There was a statistically significant treatment effect of the science curriculum on science talk for both
models fit to the data (p < .05). In Model 1 (Table 1), the mean outcome score of the science curriculum
children was 0.712, compared with 0.634 for the comparison group children. The magnitude of the effect
was 0.30 standard deviations. There was no statistically significant relationship between child gender and
scores on the outcome measure.

Table 1: Impacts of the Curriculum on Science Talk: Model Results.

                          Model 1                           Model 2
Intercept                 0.634                             0.614
Treatment is              0.078*                            0.111**
Science                   (0.0335)                          (0.0332)
Respondent is                                               0.161**
Father                                                      (0.0545)
Respondent is Other                                         0.000
                                                            (0.171)
Treatment X Father                                          -0.281*
                                                            (0.1199)
Treatment X Other                                           -0.101
                                                            (0.23484)
r2                        0.022                             0.052
Adjusted r2               0.018                             0.014
* p < .05, ** p < .01

Model 2 in Table 1 presents a slightly different picture of the results and shows that when the mother was
the caregiver responding to the survey, the average score for children in the science condition was 0.725
and for comparison children it was 0.614. When the father was the caregiver responding to the survey,
scores were higher for both treatment and comparison groups. Moreover, when fathers are respondents,
scores of children in the literacy classrooms are significantly higher than scores of children participating in
the science curriculum. The data do not permit the research team to analyze why the effect is different for
fathers, but this could be a topic for future research.

                                                243        ISLS
                                                ICLS 2010     Volume 1

Discussion and Conclusion
This study   provides preliminary    evidence   that   preschool    teachers can implement      a media-rich   science
curriculum   that can impact     caregiver  reports    of   children's  talk about    science. Caregiver    reports of
children's talk reveal something of what children find interesting and memorable enough to relay about
their experiences in preschool. Preschoolers' reports of recent events are not easily recalled, so the finding
that children in the study talked about topics in the curriculum is especially significant.
        A    key  limitation of  the study   is the  outcome     measure,    which  is only  an   indirect measure  of
children's interest in science and not a good measure of what they may have learned from the curriculum.
Future studies will require additional resources to implement testing of children individually, as well as
better measures of learning aligned to the curriculum's goals. Although some measures are now under
development, published results of validation studies are not yet available.
        One conclusion that can be drawn is that the potential of this and other curricula merit further
investigation. Such studies should focus not only on the outcomes or impacts of curricula but also on the
processes by which students learn from them. Studies that can identify ways that hands-on activities and
interactions with  video   and   online games     complement        one another  would   be    of particular  interest.
Differences  among    learners  are  likely to  arise, and    in the context  of field-based    studies, so, too, will
differences in preschool teachers' ability to implement the curriculum under varying levels of coaching
support. In addition to understanding impacts of curricula on student learning, developing an understanding
about who learns what, and under what circumstances, are important goals for learning sciences research.

Acknowledgments
Funding  for this  research  comes   from   cooperative     agreements   with   the U.S. Department      of Education
(U295A005003      and U295B005003)      and     with   the  National    Science Foundation     (OMA-0835854).       All
opinions and findings expressed herein are the sole responsibility of the authors.

References
Anderson, D. R., Huston, A. C., Schmitt, K. L., Linebarger, D. L., & Wright, J. C. (2001). Early childhood
        television viewing and adolescent behavior. The recontact study. Monographs of the Society for
        Research in Child Development, 66(1), 264.
Barker, T.,  &   Torgesen,   J. K.  (1995).  An  evaluation      of computer-assisted   instruction in   phonological
        awareness with below average readers. Journal of Educational Computing Research, 13(1), 89-
        103.
Ball, S., & Bogatz, G. A. (1970). The first year of Sesame Street: An evaluation. Princeton, NJ: Educational
        Testing Service.
Bogatz, G. A., & Ball, S. (1971). The second year of Sesame Street: A continuing evaluation. Princeton,
        NJ: Educational Testing Service.
Chalufour, I., & Worth, K. (2003). Discovering nature with young children. St. Paul, MN: Redleaf Press.
Chambers, B., Cheung, A., Madden, N. A., Slavin, R. E., & Gifford, G. (2006). Achievement effects of
        embedded multimedia in a Success for All reading program. Journal of Educational Psychology,
        98(1), 232-237.
Clark-Chiarelli, N., Gropen, J., Chalufour, I., Hoisington, C., & Eggers, P. (2009, March). Creating a
        successful professional development program in science for Head Start teachers and children:
        Understanding      the   relationship   between     development,     intervention,   and   evaluation.  Paper
        presented at the SREE Second Annual Conference, Crystal City, VA.
Clements, D. H., & Sarama, J. (2008). Experimental evaluation of the effects of a research-based preschool
        mathematics curriculum. American Educational Reseach Journal, 45(2), 443-494.
Crowley, K., Callanan, M. A., Jipson, J., Galco, J., Topping, K., & Shrager, J. (2001). Shared scientific
        thinking in everyday parent-child activity. Science Education, 85(6), 712-732.
Davidson,  M.  R.,  Fields,  M.  K., &  Yang,    J.  (2009).   A    randomized  trial  study of a  preschool  literacy
        curriculum: The importance of implementation. Journal of Research on Educational Effectiveness,
        2, 177-208.
Fisch, S. M. (2004). Children's learning from educational television:Sesame Street and beyond. Mahwah,
        NJ: L. Erlbaum Associates.

                                                   244       ISLS
                                              ICLS 2010       Volume 1

Fisch, S. M., Truglio, R. T., & Cole, C. F. (1999). The impact of Sesame Street on preschool children: A
         review and synthesis of 30 years' research. Media Psychology, 1(2), 165-190.
Foster, K.  C.,   Erickson, G.  C.,   Foster,   D. F.,  Brinkman,    D.,  &    Torgesen,   J. K.  (1994). Computer
         administered  instruction    in phonological       awareness:  Evaluation    of  the DaisyQuest   Program.
         Journal of Research and Development in Education, 27 (2 ), 126-137
French,  L. (2004).   Science  as  the   center of  a  coherent,   integrated   early childhood   curriculum. Early
         Childhood Research Quarterly, 1(1), 138-149.
Gelman, R., & Brenneman, K. (2004). Science learning pathways for young children. Early Childhood
         Research Quarterly, 19(1), 150-158.
Gelman, R., & Lucariello, J. (2002). Role of learning in cognitive development. In S. S. Stevens & H. E.
         Pashler (Eds.), Stevens' handbook of experimental psychology: Learning, motivation, and emotion
         (Vol. 3). New York: Wiley.
Greenfield, D. B., Jirout, J., Dominguez, X., Greenberg, A., Maier, M., & Fuccillo, J. (2009). Science in the
         preschool   program:   A   programmatic       research   agenda    to  improve    school readiness.  Early
         Education and Development, 20(2), 238-264.
Healy, J. M. (2003). Cybertots: Technology and the preschool child. In S. Olfman (Ed.), All work and no
         play...: How  educational     reforms  are    harming   our  preschoolers    (pp. 83-111).   Westport, CT:
         Praeger.
Kuhn, D., & Pearsall, S. (2000). Developmental origins of scientific thinking. Journal of Cognition and
         Development, 1, 113-129.
Linebarger, D. L., & Walker, D. (2005). Infants' and toddlers' television viewing and language outcomes.
         American Behavioral Scientist, 48(5), 624-645.
Morrow,   R.  W.  (2005).   Sesame  Street  and    the reform    of  children's television.   Baltimore, MD:  Johns
         Hopkins Press.
National Association   for  the Education    of  Young      Children (2005).   NAEYC     Early  Childhood  Program
         Standards and Accreditation Criteria. Washington, DC: Author.
National Research Council. (2009). Learning science in informal environments: People, places, and
         pursuits. Washington, DC: National Academies Press.
Neuman, S. B. (1995). Literacy in the television age: The myth of the TV effect. Norwood, NJ: Ablex.
Pasnik, S., Strother, S., Schindel, J., Penuel, W. R., & Llorente, C. (2007). Report to the Ready To Learn
         initiative: Review of research on media and young children's literacy. New York, NY and Menlo
         Park, CA: Education Development Center and SRI International.
Pea, R. D., & Collins, A. (2008). Learning how to do science education: Four waves of reform. In Y. Kali,
         M. C. Linn & J. E. Roseman (Eds.), Designing coherent science education (Vol. 3-12). New York:
         Teachers College Press.
Prince, D. L., Grace, C., Linebarger, D. L., Atkinson, R., & Huffman, J. D. (2002). A final report to
         Mississippi Educational Television. Washington, D.C.
Raudenbush, S. W., & Bryk, A. S. (2002). Hierarchical linear models: Applications and data analysis
         methods (2nd ed.). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Rule, A.  C., &    Guggenheim,     S.  (2007).  A   standards-based     curriculum    for clay  science.  Journal of
         Geoscience Education, 55(4), 257-266.
Starkey, P.,  Klein,  A., &   Wakeley,    A.  (2004).   Enhancing    young     children's  mathematical   knowledge
         through a pre-kindergarten mathematics intervention. Early Childhood Research Quarterly, 19(1),
         99-120.
Songer, N. B., Lee, H.-S., & Kam, R. (2002). Technology-rich inquiry science in urban classrooms: What
         are the barriers to inquiry pedagogy? Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 39(2), 128-150.
Tenenbaum,    H.  R., Snow,     C. E.,   Roach,    K., &    Kurland,   B. (2005).  Talking    and  reading  science:
         Longitudinal  data   on   sex   differences   in   mother-child  conversations    in  low-income  families.
         Journal of Applied Developmental Psychology, 26, 1-19.
Thakkar,  R.  R., Garrison,  M.   M.,  &  Christakis,   D.    A. (2006).  A systematic    review  for the effects of
         television viewing by infants and preschoolers. Pediatrics, 118, 2025-2031.
Wellman, H. M., Cross, D., & Watson, J. (2001). Meta-analysis of theory-of-mind development: The truth
         about false belief. Child Development, 72(3), 655-684.

                                                   245       ISLS
