                                           ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 2

                       Terra Nova Toward Terra Firma:
                   Data On Games For Science Learning
             Douglas B. Clark, Mario Martinez-Garza, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN
                Email: doug.clark@vanderbilt.edu, mario.m.martinez@vanderbilt.edu
                   Noel Enyedy, UCLA, Los Angeles, CA, enyedy@gseis.ucla.edu
             Constance Steinkuehler, Kurt Squire, Mingfong Jan, UW-Madison, Madison WI
                       Email: constances@gmail.com, kurt.squire@gmail.com
          Daniel T. Hickey, Joshua Danish, Eun Ju Kwon, & Michael K. Filsecker, Indiana
                                   University, Bloomington, IN
             Email: dthickey@indiana.edu, mfilseck@indiana.edu & ejkwon@indiana.edu
          Brian C. Nelson, Cynthia M. D'Angelo, Kent Slack, Younsu Kim, Cecile Foshee,
                                Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ
               Email: Brian.Nelson@asu.edu, yskim4@asu.edu, cecile.foshee@asu.edu,
                              cmdangel@asu.edu, kent.slack@asu.edu
        Diane Jass Ketelhut, Catherine Schifter, Deepti Mudegowder, David Majerich, Melanie
             Wills, Angela Shelton, Patrick McCormack, Tera Kane, Zoe Freeman, Temple
                                    University, Philadelphia, PA
                   Email: djk@temple.edu, css@temple.edu, tub61298@temple.edu,
                  dmajerich@temple.edu, mwills@temple.edu, tub46847@temple.edu,
                 tuc13648@temple.edu, tlkane85@hotmail.com, freeman@temple.edu
                       Eric Klopfer, Chuan Zhang, Judy Perry, Josh Sheldon;
                       Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA
          Email: klopfer@mit.edu, czhang86@mit.edu, jperry@mit.edu, jsheldon@mit.edu
             Jody Clarke-Midura & Eugenia Garduno, Harvard University, Cambridge, USA
                  Email: jody_clarke@mail.harvard.edu, eugeniagarduno@gmail.com

       Abstract.  Much  enthusiasm  but   less data     has often accompanied    games  for  science
       learning. This session brings together several researchers who investigate the potential of
       games for science learning and invites audience members to consider the evidence, raise
       their own  questions and  concerns, and     form  their own  conclusions   regarding  several
       current projects. This interactive symposium will combine a structured poster session
       with a discussion session led by Yasmin Kafai. In particular, the session explores three
       questions. Does the  data support   the  claims    that the games     can effectively support
       valuable science learning? What types of skills, concepts, and processes do the games
       and virtual worlds most effectively teach? What other data could and should be collected
       to support more definitive claims?

Session Overview
According to the National Research Council (2005) and international comparison studies (e.g., TIMSS),
science is often taught at a superficial level of definitions.Digital games and virtual worlds offer a potential
medium to allow students richer access to deeper authentic understandings of science. This session brings
together researchers who investigate the potential of games for science learning and invites respondents and
audience members to use the evidence to form their own conclusions.The goals of this symposium will be
to shed light on the following issues in terms of several current projects:

   ·   Do data support the claim that games can effectively support valuable science learning?

   ·   What types of skills, concepts, and processes can video games and virtual worlds most effectively
       teach and what types prove more challenging?

   ·   What other data could and should be collected to support more definitive claims?

The format of this interactive symposium will be in three parts. First, each of our poster teams will briefly
introduce the major aspects of their projects to the audience. This will be followed by an open time for

                                               244  ·  © ISLS
                                                ICLS 2010   ·   Volume 2

attendees to explore each of the posters and interact with the presenters, focusing on discussing the major
issues and evidence in their projects. This open time will be structured to move attendees in a semi-
organized manner through a set of mini-sessions at the posters of their choosing. The final section of the
symposium will be devoted to discussion led by Yasmin Kafai and a lively interaction between presenters
and attendees focusing on issues of data collection and analysis in research on games for science learning.

The Role of Embodiment and Symbolization in Supporting Physics
Learning with Games and Virtual Worlds for Young Children
Noel Enyedy, UCLA, Joshua Danish, Indiana University

Research   Goals   and   Theoretical   Framework.     Newtonian     mechanics  is  not typically    taught to first and
second grade students.      In fact, these concepts are even difficult to teach to high school students (White,
1993).   However,      the Semiotic    Pivots and  Activity   Spaces  for  Elementary     Science   Project (SPASES)
overcame this barrier using technology to transition students from embodied games to scientific modeling.
This transition was supported by the use of embodiment as a tool for representing students' ideas (Danish,
2009), and then helping students refine their ideas by progressively symbolizing them and then refining
those symbols (Enyedy, 2005).

Game Context and Methods. SPASES was a 15 week, 2 days a week, force and motion unit piloted with
children aged    6-9   (n=49).   The   curriculum  leveraged    embodiment    and  symbolization     by  using   motion
tracking technology     to  follow   students  as  they  physically   enacted  their   ideas, and   then   feeding  this
information  into  computer     simulation  tools.  Video case studies will be used to demonstrate the process
through  which     the SPASES     tools  supported  learning    gains which   will be  presented    using  quantitative
analyses of a pre- and post-test based on the FCI.

Data Results and Significance. First, we present analyses of the pre- and post-test gains which demonstrate
significant improvement on the questions related to forces in 2-dimensions. For example, the proportion of
students who accurately predicted the path of a puck that was moving and then struck by a force in a
direction perpendicular to it's current motion increased from 0.10 to 0.69.          The difference in proportions is
significant,(!2  =24.61(1,     N =  39),   p<0.0001.    We    then  present  analysis  of  two   game   activities  that
supported  students    in  making   this shfit from   common     misconceptions    about   force  to more   normative
scientific conceptions.    In the first game, students used their physical orientation combined with a simple
worksheet to refine their understanding of vector arithmetic in 1-dimension.           In the second game, students
modified  their  symbols    and  then   used  them   in a   computer  simulation   to  refine  and  demonstrate    their
understanding    of    2-dimensional   motion.  The     results will  demonstrate    the  role of    embodiment     and
symbolization in supporting young children in engaging with complex science concepts.

Model Based Reasoning & Use in Massively Multiplayer Online Games
Constance Steinkuehler, UW-Madison

Research   Goals    and    Theoretical   Framework.     (Massively)      multiplayer  online  games   (MMOs)       have
recently emerged as a technology with potential for science education. As simulations of complex systems,
they   allow participants   to   digitally inhabit  a virtual   world    and engage    in join activity    with  others.
Innovative projects such as Quest Atlantis (Barab, Sadler, Heiselt, Hickey, & Zuiker, 2007) and River City
(Ketelhut, Dede, Clarke, Nelson, & Bowman, 2007) offer proof of the concept that such technologies can
foster powerful    forms   of   science  learning  in   formal  instructional  environments.    What    is  even  more
surprising, however, is that commercial games with no intention to teach may have potential. In a cognitive
ethnography     of the  MMO      Lineage,   Steinkuehler    (2005)   observed  teens   who    decided   to  test every
combination of resources available against a given problem, tabulated the results in Excel , created simple
mathematical equations to explain them, and then argued with one another about whose model was most
accurate. Subsequent studies found that such practices were more prevalent than first suspected: Across a
random sample of MMO forum discussions posts, Steinkuehler and Duncan (2009) found that 86% of the
discussions were social knowledge construction with 58% focused on complex systems, 11% providing
models to explain those systems, and 28% providing evidence to support their claims. The goal of this
study  was   to further   this line of research by    examining   not  the finished   models   that gamers    posted to

                                                    245   ·  © ISLS
                                            ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 2

discussion forums but rather the processes and resources they used in order to construct and justify them.

Game Context and Methods. This study was conducted in the context of an after school lab using the online
game World of Warcraft to engage adolescent "at risk" males (n=25) in literacy practices. Participants were
asked to construct and justify their best model (a "build") for how the in-game "priest" class could be
specialized using the in-game "talent" system (Figure 1). Each was given a laptop to access any online
game-related resource materials they chose and instructed to "think aloud" to reveal their problem-solving
process. Researchers asked probing questions ("why did you do that?") during any lapses of thinking aloud
and videotaped participants' activities (including computer use), took fieldnotes, and collected resulting
artifacts. Participants also completed a simple pretest and posttest to measure reported prior experience
(pretest), interest (pretest/posttest) and beliefs of success (posttest).

Data Results and Significance. Participants used a complex set of multimodal expository and procedural
texts as the basis for their problem-solving and solution justification. In order to find the best-fit solution to
then given problem of multiple constraints, they made heavy use of both commercially provided and user-
generated online modeling tools that enable the individual to review the functional outcomes of various
choices among resource allocations before committing to any one "build." Curiously, the main tools they
chose to complete the problem were user-generated and multimodally complex, with concepts articulated
not only through "technical verbal language but also mathematical, graphical, diagrammatic, pictorial, and
a host of other modalities of representation" that, ironically, typically make reading comprehension in more
traditional domains particularly challenging (Lemke, 1998, p.247).

Current Evidence of Engagement, Understanding, and Achievement in the
Taiga Curriculum in Quest Atlantis.
Daniel T. Hickey, Eun Ju Kwon, & Michael K. Filsecker, Indiana University

Research Goals and Theoretical Framework. Prior annual design research cycles of a 13-hour ecological
science curriculum refined the way students drafted and revised in-game assignments, and the way the
game and the teacher provided   formative feedback.    Substantial incremental   improvements in  scientific
discourse, conceptual understanding, and science achievement were obtained (Barab et al., 2007; Hickey, et
al., 2009). In this most recent cycle, new insights about participatory assessment (Hickey & Anderson,
2007; Hickey et al., in press) led to new reflective prompts for the assignments, and a 30-screen formative
feedback routine was reformulated as FAQs. These and other refinements were coordinated using new
insights about consequential and critical engagement (Gresalfi et al., 2009).

Game Context and Methods.      The Taiga virtual park is a world in the Quest Atlantis MUVE. Students play
the role of field investigator, interacting with non-player characters, each other, and their teacher. Players
draft and submit "quests" to the ranger/teacher while investigating declining fish populations.     The same
sixth grade teacher who had implemented Taiga in three previous cycles implemented it in all four of his
classes. Impact was examined primarily by analyzing the discourse in submitting and refining quests, and
secondarily using an open-ended performance assessment and a random sample of achievement items
aligned to targeted standards.

Data Results and Significance. Analysis of initial and final quest submissions, feedback exchanges with
the teacher, and log files of FAQ access showed impact of these refinements, and students enlisted more
domain formalisms in  their quests and did so more accurately.   These and     other refinements resulted in
even larger gains on the performance assessment  from    the previous year (from   1.4 to 1.6, SD). While still
statistically significant, the average achievement gain of 0.5 SD was smaller than the 1.0 SD gain the
previous year; this was partly due to one anomalous class whose achievement scores actually declined. We
concluded that (1) the new features were promising and worthy of further refinement, (2) the notions of
consequential and critical engagement were helpful for coordinating such refinements and for game-based
assessment more broadly, and (3) the performance assessment should be refined to more explicitly afford
such engagement.

                                                246  ·  © ISLS
                                             ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 2

SURGE: Intended and Unintended Science Learning in Games
Douglas B. Clark, Mario Martinez-Garza, Vanderbilt University,
Brian C. Nelson, Cynthia M. D'Angelo, Kent Slack, Arizona State University

Research Goals and Theoretical Framework. This poster considers data from two studies and highlights the
potential for both intended and unintended student learning in games. School science, with its focus on
explicit  formalized  knowledge   structures,  seldom    connects   to  or  builds   upon students'   tacit intuitive
understandings. Well-designed commercial video games, however, are exceptionally successful at helping
learners build accurate intuitive understandings of the concepts and processes embedded in the games due
to the situated and enacted nature of good game play. Most commercial games fall short as platforms for
learning, however,    because  they do   not  help students     articulate and  connect   their evolving    intuitive
understandings to more explicit formalized structures that would support transfer of knowledge to other
contexts. In  Thought   and   Language,  Vygotsky     (1986)  discusses    the potential  for  leveraging   intuitive
understandings from everyday experience ("spontaneous concepts") with instructed scientific concepts to
build robust  understandings.   The question   remains     whether  or  not  the intuitive   spontaneous    concepts
developed  in  games   can  be  successfully  leveraged    into  robust instructed   concepts   in the format    and
terminology of academic assessment and across domains recognized as central by the scientific disciplines
themselves.

Game Context and Methods. SURGE (Scaffolding Understanding by Redesigning Games for Education)
focuses on design principles for connecting students' intuitive "spontaneous concepts" about kinematics
and Newtonian mechanics into formalized "instructed concepts." SURGE integrates research on conceptual
change,   cognitive  processing-based    design, and  socio-cognitive      scripting with  design   principles   and
mechanics   of popular  commercial    video   games   such  as   Mario  Galaxy,    Switchball,  Orbz,  and    Portal.
Students' intuitive "spontaneous concepts" are measured in SURGE through their performance in actual
game  levels.  Their  understanding  of   formal  "instructed    concepts"  is  measured     using items    from the
simplified Force Concept Inventory developed by physicist Hestenes and colleagues (e.g., Hestenes, Wells,
& Swackhamer, 1992).

Data, Results, and Significance. Our first study analyzed 24 undergraduate and graduate students playing
SURGE. The data strongly reinforce the potential of games to help students learn, but also underscore their
potential to reinforce alternative conceptions as well as normative conceptions. The game actually resulted
in a  significant decrease  (!2 = 4.75,   p  = .029)  in   students  who   answered   one    question correctly  by
unintentionally focusing students' attention on another physics relationship (we had not yet added all of the
intended functionality to the interface relevant to projectile motion and the independence of the x and y
components   of   an object's velocity), but the  students  demonstrated     significant  (p =  .037) gains   on the
concepts posttest when that question was excluded. The game therefore showed itself to be effective in
changing how students thought about questions from the Force Concept Inventory, but care must be taken
to ensure that the ideas that students take away from the game are the ones intended by the designers.

Learning Argumentation through a Role-playing Game-based Curriculum
Mingfong Jan & Kurt Squire, University of Wisconsin

Research Goals. Argumentation plays a key social and intellectual role in the construction of knowledge,
but how we may socialize students into the practice of argumentation in schools is less explored. To
address this issue, this design-based research (Barab & Squire, 2004; Brown, 1992) project investigates
three middle school students' experience and their argumentative discourse in a 10-day game-based
learning curriculum designed for argumentation.

Theoretical Framework. To teach argumentation, I propose a situated argumentation design framework that
foregrounds four aspect of argumentation design: epistemological, cognitive, social, and material. This
design framework guides the conceptualization of game-based learning approaches, mainly role-playing
simulation, open-ended challenges, authentic resources and tools, in creating a designed experience
(Squire, 2006) for dialogic and collaborative arguments.

                                                  247  ·  © ISLS
                                            ICLS 2010  ·   Volume 2

Game Context and Methods. We designed Saving Lake Wingra, a 10-day game-based learning curriculum
for argumentation based on the situated argumentation design framework.        The curriculum aims at
restructuring classroom discourse for argumentation through three phases. The first phase (days 1- 4) aims
at reconditioning classroom discourse patterns from a usually teacher-centered and turn-taking pattern to a
student-centered, dialogic, and collaborative format. The second phase (days 5-8) engages students in
extended practices of dialogic and collaborative arguments as teams of three professionals. In the last phase
(days 9-10), students present arguments collaboratively and individually to argue for the best interest of
Lake Wingra.

Data Results and Significance. The results indicate that all three middle school students participating in this
study were socially and intellectually engaged in practicing and developing arguments about the future of
Lake Wingra. Some constructed claims with supporting evidence and even countered claims proposed by
peers, though the degree to which each participant was able to argue differed. Role-playing and open-ended
knowledge representation empowered students to express personal opinions supported by evidence. The
findings suggest that (1) conceptual understanding plays a key role in constructing evidence-based claims
and (2) the situated argumentation design framework can be improved by foregrounding the importance of
conceptual understanding in constructing arguments.

Virtual Environment-based Assessments of Science Content and Inquiry:
The SAVE Science Project
Brian C. Nelson, Younsu Kim, Cecile Foshee, Arizona State University
Diane Jass Ketelhut, Catherine Schifter, Deepti Mudegowder, David Majerich, Melanie Wills, Angela
Shelton, Patrick McCormack, Tera Kane, Zoe Freeman, Temple University

Research  Goals  and   Theoretical  Framework.      The    SAVE     Science  project is  focused    on   creating,
implementing,  and evaluating  assessment   modules    designed     to capture  evolving   patterns   of scientific
understanding among middle-school students based on data collected from their interactions in a virtual
environment. In this  presentation, we  report on   findings   from  implementations    of  our first assessment
module. In particular, we focus on how the module can reveal misconceptions held by students about
scientific phenomena, and describe student perceptions of virtual environment-based activities designed
primarily as assessments rather than as learning environments.

Game Context and Methods. In SAVE Science, students try to uncover likely contributors to a host of
problems facing a virtual world. To accomplish this, students must apply knowledge and skills studied in
their classroom-based science curricula through multiple assessment quests over the course of a school
year. We are looking to see if learning outcomes on district and state assessments by learners in SAVE
Science differ from those in control classes not participating in the project. The module in the current study
assessing understanding of adaptations and structure/function asks students to investigate possible causes
for poor survivability among   a flock   of sheep   recently   moved     to the farm    from a  far-distant  (and
environmentally distinct) location.  In completing     the assessment    task, students  can  interact   with two
computer-based characters (a farmer and his brother). For healthy indigenous or failing new sheep, students
can measure legs, bodies, and can access weight, age, and gender data.

Data and Results. This presentation will focus on results from our pilot and first year of implementations.
We conducted our pilot in spring 2009 with nineteen 7th grade science students who participated in the first
SAVE   Science  assessment  module,   assessing  understanding      of  adaptation   of organisms     to  a local
environment. Automatically collected data lends insight to student actions and understanding. For example,
all students gathered data before reaching conclusions, indicating that students understand the concept of
evidence-based inferences. Some students asked questions of the two non-player characters multiple times,
and all observed sheep characteristics. Further, students used their observations to support their responses
to questions from the farmer. The data also helped illustrate student misconceptions of inference versus
observation and other science concepts.  At the same time, students     in  the pilot study noted a strong  sense
of engagement while completing the assessment module activities. One student said, "[I] like how the
people talk. [I] like the sound. [I] like how you can move yourself around. [IT'S] MORE FUN THAN A
REGULAR TEST." This student's sensory experience in the virtual world made for an enjoyable, effective

                                                248  ·  © ISLS
                                               ICLS 2010    ·  Volume 2

learning experience.

Significance. Initial analysis indicates that we are able to differentiate between students who understood
and used the appropriate methods in their inquiry from those with had misconceptions about the content or
inquiry processes. Further, and perhaps not surprisingly, we found that students perceived the assessments
as engaging    and game-like    (rather than  stressful  and   test-like). The findings,  while   tentative,  provided
useful  information  for the  redesign   of   the first assessment     module  that  we  are   now  implementing    in
multiple classrooms.

GameBuilder: Does Reduced Software Complexity Allow More Time on
Task?
Eric Klopfer, Chuan Zhang, Judy Perry, Josh Sheldon; Massachusetts Institute of Technology

Research Goals and Theoretical Framework.          To allow for greater student engagement and learning as a
result of  involvement   with   augmented     reality (AR)     games,  several   programs   are   underway    in which
students,  not teachers  or researchers,   develop    their   own  AR   games.   Previous   tools for developing   AR
games had very complex user interfaces. As a result, the team developed GameBuilder, an AR editor with a
much simpler interface, under the assumption that such a tool would allow for more focus on the game to
be built  and  learning  components     to be  included     in the  game.   This   research is designed   to  test that
assumption.

Game Context and Methods. A protocol was developed to test the abilities of middle-school aged children
to engage with the game design and content of their games, as opposed to spending effort managing the
software. Participants were randomly assigned to two groups, one that would use the more complicated AR
game editor, and one that would use GameBuilder. Each group was asked to complete a tutorial on using
the assigned software, and then asked to build a simple game, with a topic of their own choosing, using that
software. A researcher observed each study participant through both the tutorial and the free design session,
and participants were then asked to rate their satisfaction with the software and the experience overall.

Data Results and Significance. Results from the free-design period and surveys show that participants were
equally able to use the two pieces of software to develop their own games, after completing the tutorial. It
is interesting to note, however, that participants using the more complex game editor, which had a number
of features in which they were not trained, did not take advantage of any of these more advanced features.
In addition, though the surveys did not reflect any additional dissatisfaction with the tool, the researcher
observing use of the more complex software saw that in a number of cases, users inadvertently opened
parts of the software they did not mean to and were distracted for some period of time trying to get back to
their planned task. This suggests that the simplified interface is beneficial. Further research should test the
ability of users to complete basic tasks without the benefit of the initial tutorial.

MUVEs and Meta-Knowledge
Jody Clarke-Midura & Eugenia Garduno, Harvard University

Research   Goals   and   Theoretical    Framework.      Numerous       researchers  have    emphasized   the   role of
metacognitive processes in inquiry learning (White & Frederiksen, 1998, 2005; Kuhn, Black, Keselman, &
Kaplan, 2000; Kempler, 2006; Kuhn & Pease, 2008).              As an example, White et al offer a framework for
inquiry  learning, the  meta-knowledge      framework,      which   contains  four  primary    processes:  theorizing,
questioning  and   hypothesizing,  investigating,     analyzing    and synthesizing  (White    &  Frederiksen,    1998;
White, Frederiksen, Collins, in press). As part of this framework, they claim there is a meta-processing
level where one evaluates not only what process should be carried out but how well it is being carried out.
Similarly, research on games and multi-user virtual environments (MUVEs) suggest curricula delivered via
these  technologies  have   the potential  to  offer  more     authentic   science inquiry  learning  that reflect  the
processes in White et als framework (Gee, 2003; Dede, 2009, Clark et al, 2009).                We are studying how
curricula delivered via immersive technologies have the potential to create learning experiences that (1)
allow  for authentic  inquiry   learning (2)  enable    metacognitive    processes  laid  out  by  White   et al.  The
research   questions we   will  address    in this poster     are: what    aspects of learning    influence   students'

                                                    249  ·  © ISLS
                                              ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 2

metacognitive    processes?  What   aspects  of   MUVEs     allow     for students    to engage   in metacognitive
processes?

Game Context and Methods. In order to answer our research questions, we conducted a series of studies in
2008.   We used a MUVE-based science curriculum, River City, with 5218 middle school students within
classes taught   by 87  teachers.   MUVEs     are online    digital   contexts  where    multiple  participants  can
communicate and collaborate on shared challenges.        A participant takes on the identity of an avatar, one's
digital persona in a 3-D virtual world, and communicates via text chat and non-verbal gestures.              In this
particular curriculum, students take on the role of a scientist and investigate a disease outbreak in a virtual
city.
         Specific instruments have been developed to measure metacognitive processes explicitly in the
context of  science  inquiry   (Kempler,  2006).  The    constructs   measured     by these  instruments   are often
referred to as describing children's "thoughtfulness of inquiry" (Patrick et al, 2000; Fredricks, Blumenfeld
& Paris, 2004). We used a scale developed by researchers at the University of Michigan to measure the
extent to which students employ deep-level learning and self-regulatory strategies in inquiry-based science
(Kempler, 2006).    The University of Michigan studies reported an internal consistency reliability of .79
(Kempler,   2006).  Students   were  administered   surveys    online   prior  to  and   after participating in  the
curriculum.  The    surveys  contained   two  sections:    (1) an   affective  sub-scale,  which   measured     their
thoughtfulness of inquiry (TOFI); and (2) a content sub-scale, which measured their inquiry and content
knowledge.   Multiple-choice   were  analyzed  using  multi-level   regression.    Open-end responses were first
coded using open coding, allowing codes to emerge inductively from participants (Strauss & Corbin, 1998).
A second round of coding was done to search for themes related to the research questions (Geertz, 1973).

Data Results and Significance. We found that students who felt like a scientist (t(3625)=6.99, p=.0001), felt
like they were conducting an experiment (t(3625)=6.28, p=.0001), and enjoyed working as part of a team of
scientists (t(3625)=2.74, p=.001)   were  more  thoughtful     of their   inquiry.  We found that teachers' self-
identified teaching styles, in terms of the types of activities conducted in science class in general, had no
significant effect on students' thoughtfulness of inquiry.      Furthermore,    a  teacher's prior experience    with
teaching the River City curriculum showed no significant effect on students' thoughtfulness of inquiry.           In
this poster we will present more detailed results of our studies, including case studies of students who
demonstrated high and low thoughtfulness of inquiry in the curriculum.
         Metacognition   is an important component of      inquiry learning.   As research   on games   and MUVEs
in science education grows, it is important for researchers to understand what variables and design features
help foster metacognitive and inquiry processes.

References
Barab, S. A., Sadler, T., Heiselt, C., Hickey, D., & Zuiker, S. (2007). Relating narrative, inquiry, and
         inscriptions:  A   framework    for socio-scientific    inquiry.  Journal    of  Science  Education     and
         Technology, 16(1), 59­82.
Barab,  S., Sadler, T., Heiselt,   C., Hickey,  D., &    Zuiker,   S.   (2007).   Relating  narrative,  inquiry, and
         inscriptions:  A   framework   for  socioscientific   inquiry.     Journal   of  Science  Education     and
         Technology, 16, 59-82.
Barab, S.A. & Squire, K.D. (2004). Design-based research: Putting a stake in the ground. Journal of the
        Learning Sciences, 13(1), 1-14.
Bargh,  J.  A., & Schul,  Y.   (1980). On  the  cognitive   benefits  of  teaching.   The  Journal   of Educational
         Psychology, 72(5), 593-604.
Brown, A. (1992). Design experiments: Theoretical and methodological challenges in creating complex
         interventions in classroom settings. The Journal of Learning Sciences, 2(2), 141-178.
Danish, J. A. (2009). BeeSign: a Design Experiment to Teach Kindergarten and First Grade Students About
      Honeybees From a Complex Systems Perspective. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the
      American Educational Research Association.
Dede, C. (2009). Immersive interfaces for engagement and learning.Science, 323, 5910 (2nd Jan), 66-69.
Enyedy, N. (2005). Inventing Mapping: Creating cultural forms to solve collective problems. Cognition and
      Instruction, 23(4), 427-466.
Fredericks, J., Blumenfeld, P. & Paris, A. (2004). School engagement: Potential of the concept, state of the
         evidence. Review of Educational Research, 74(1), 59-96.

                                                  250  ·  © ISLS
                                            ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 2

Geertz, C. (1973). The interpretation of cultures. New York: Basic Books.
Gresalfi, M., Barab, S., Siyahhan, S., & Christensen, T. (2009). Virtual worlds, conceptual understanding,
         and me: designing for consequential engagement. On the Horizon, 17(1), 21-34.
Hestenes, D., Wells, M., & Swackhamer, G. (1992) Force Concept Inventory. The Physics Teacher, 30,
   141-158.
Hickey, D. T., & Anderson, K. T. (2007). Situative approaches to student assessment: Contextualizing
         evidence to support practice. (P. Moss, Ed.)Yearbook of the National Society for the Study of
         Education: Evidence and Decision Making, 106(1), 264­287.
Hickey, D. T., Honeyford, M. A., Clinton, K. A., & McWilliams, J. (inpress).    Participatory assessment  of
         21st Century proficiencies. In V. J. Schute & B. Becker (Eds.),Innovative assessment in the 21st
         century: Supporting educational needs. Springer.
Hickey, D. T., Ingram-Goble, A. A., & Jameson, E. M. (2009). Designing assessments and assessing
         designs in virtual educational environments. Journal of Science Education and Technology, 18(2),
         187-208.
Kempler, T. M. (2006). Optimizing students' motivation in inquiry-based learning environments: The role
         of instructional practices. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor.
Ketelhut, D. J., Dede, C., Clarke, J., Nelson, B., & Bowman, C. (2007). Studying situated learning in a
         multi-user virtual environment.    In E. Baker,   J. Dickieson, W.   Wulfeck,   & H. O'Neil (Eds.),
         Assessment of problem solving using simulations. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Klopfer, E. (2008). Augmented Learning: Research and Design of Mobile Educational Games. Cambridge,
         MA: MIT Press.
Kuhn, D., & Pease, M. (2008). What needs to develop in the development of inquiry skills? Cognition and
         Instruction, 26(4), 512 - 559.
Kuhn, D., Black, J., Keselman, A., & Kaplan, D. (2000). The development of cognitive skills to support
         inquiry learning. Cognition and Instruction, 18(4), 495-523.
Lemke, J.L. (1998a). Multiplying meaning: Visual and verbal semiotics in scientific text. In J.R. Martin &
         R. Veel (Eds.), Reading Science, (pp. 87-113). London: Routledge.
Patrick,  H.,  Middleton,   M.,  Taines,  C.   (2000).    Urban   Students'  Motivation,  Collaboration,  and
         Thoughtfulness During Science Inquiry. Paper presented at AERA 2000.
         References
Squire,  K. D.  (2006). From    content  to context:    Video   games as designed  experiences. Educational
         Researcher, 35(8), 19-29.
Steinkuehler, C. & Duncan, S. (2009). Informal scientific reasoning in online virtual worlds. Journal of
         Science Education & Technology. DOI: 10.1007/s10956-008-9120-8.
Steinkuehler,  C. (2005).   Cognition   and learning    in massively  multiplayer online   games: A  critical
         approach. Unpublished dissertation. University of Wisconsin­Madison.
Strauss, A., & Corbin, J. (1998). Basics of qualitative research: Techniques and procedures for developing
         grounded theory. Thousand Oaks: Sage.
Vygotsky, L. S. (1986). Thought and language (Abridged from 1934; A. Kozulin, Trans.).Cambridge, MA:
   MIT Press.
White, B. (1993). Thinker tools: Causal models, conceptual change, and science education. Cognition and
   Instruction, 10(1), 1-100.
White, B., & Frederiksen, J. (1998). Inquiry, Modeling, and Metacognition: Making Science Accessible to
         All Students. Cognition and Instruction, 16(1), 3-118.
White, B., & Frederiksen, J. (2005). A Theoretical Framework and Approach for Fostering Metacognitive
         Development. Educational Psychologist, 40(4), 211-223.
White, B., Collins, A., Frederiksen, J. (in preparation). The Nature of Scientific Meta-Knowledge.

                                                 251  ·  © ISLS
