                                            ICLS 2010     Volume 2

      Energy across the Curriculum: Cumulative Learning Using
                            Embedded Assessment Results
Vanessa Svihla, Libby Gerard, Kihyun (Kelly) Ryoo, Elissa Sato, Tammie Visintainer, Hillary Swanson, Marcia
           Linn, School of Education, Tolman Hall, University of California, Berkeley, 94720-1670
       vsvihla@hotmail.com, libby.gerard@gmail.com, khryoo@berkeley.edu, elissa.sato@gmail.com,
                  tammievis@gmail.com, hswanson@berkeley.edu, mclinn@berkeley.edu
      Hee-Sun Lee, Tufts University, Paige Hall Room 201, Medford, MA 02155, heesun.lee@tufts.edu,
                  Ou Lydia Liu, ETS, 660 Rosedale Rd, Princeton NJ 08541, lliu@ets.org,
       Chad Dorsey, Concord Consortium, 25 Love Lane, Concord, MA 01742, cdorsey@concord.org

        Abstract: This symposium reports research investigating the design and implementation of
        curriculum, assessment, and professional development to promote cumulative understanding
        of energy. Using    energy as  a core idea,   we  link topics in 6th  and  7th grade including
        thermodynamics, plate tectonics, global climate change, and photosynthesis. We explore new
        forms  of  assessment   called   MySystem      and  Energy    Stories  to  capture  cumulative
        understanding. Synthesis of findings across studies illustrates the trajectory of student learning
        and clarifies the elements of the curriculum that promote coherent views.

Symposium Goals
This symposium synthesizes research exploring cumulative learning of energy concepts across disciplinary
project, reflecting the conference theme, Learning in the Disciplines. We define cumulative learning following
the Taking Science to School report that calls for organizing the curriculum around a few key ideas that "connect
to many  related scientific ideas" (Duschl, Schweingruber,     &    Shouse, 2007).  Using  energy transfer    and
transformations as a core idea, we link topics in 6th and 7th grade including thermodynamics, plate tectonics,
global climate change, and photosynthesis. To address this research question the eight posters investigate the
design of curriculum and new assessment techniques to emphasize cumulative learning. We also study the
impact of professional development and explore effective methods for documenting cumulative learning.
        The current curriculum is fragmented and incoherent. The most commonly used middle school science
textbooks cover too many topics and neglect connections between topics (Linn, Lewis, Tsuchida, & Songer,
2000; Stern & Roseman, 2004). Furthermore, studies show that textbooks introduce the same topics year after
year and neglect links from one year to the next (Roth & Garnier, 2006; Schmidt, McKnight, Valverde, Houang,
& Wiley, 1997). High-stakes tests reinforce this practice and reward recall of isolated ideas (Au, 2007). Critics
argue that widespread use   of multiple-choice items   deters  development    of  coherent arguments (National
Research Council, 2003).
        Our assessments, curriculum materials, and professional development are aligned using the patterns
and principles developed to support knowledge integration (Kali & Ronen, 2005; Linn, 2006). We design
curriculum using the Web-based Inquiry Science Environment (WISE), a technology-enhanced software system
(see Figure 1) that both delivers instruction and keeps track of student responses (see Slotta & Linn, 2009). We
incorporate technology tools, visualizations, and simulations created by the Concord Consortium. The WISE
system of delivery ensures that teachers can track student progress in real time with embedded assessments, and
allows instruction and assessment to be integrated. It supports numerous forms of teacher-student and peer-to-
peer learning including interactions with probeware, visualizations, simulations, and virtual experiments.

                    Figure 1. The Web-based Inquiry Science Environment for Thermodynamics

        To measure the cumulative learning of energy ideas, we are exploring two new forms of assessment:
Energy Stories and MySystem (see Figure 2). Energy Stories ask students to create explanatory narratives about

                                                252     ISLS
                                               ICLS 2010       Volume 2

energy phenomena related to the project, such as how plants use light to grow. MySystem, a computer-based
modeling environment, enables students to visually represent connections between energy sources, energy
transformations, and energy transfer.

            Energy Stories                                               MySystem

            Figure 2. Examples of Energy Stories and MySystem from the Photosynthesis Project

         We are     implementing    the units  in the classrooms     of  twenty  middle  school  teachers and study
approximately 1500 students annually. These studies provide evidence in support of organizing the curriculum
around core ideas, and explore affordances of incorporating the real world activities and connecting to students'
everyday experiences. The symposium will be chaired by Marcia Linn, and discussed by Doug Clark.

Promoting Cumulative Learning
Marcia Linn, University of California, Berkeley; and Chad Dorsey, Concord Consortium
Today most students are tested on the topics they studied in the latest unit and often quite superficially. There is
seldom the expectation of applying concepts learned in prior units to the next topic or course. To remedy this
situation, Cumulative Learning using Embedded Assessment Results (CLEAR) is leveraging cyberlearning to
make science learning more cumulative. Defining cumulative learning raises many issues such as: What sorts of
ideas should be retained? What sort of understanding do we desire of students after several years of instruction?
How do students use the knowledge gained in one day, topic, or course when they encounter the next day, topic,
or course? How      can instruction enable  students  to     appreciate  the ubiquitous role of fundamental  science
concepts like energy? How can we help students understand the dependencies and connections across science
topics and disciplines? From our prior work on knowledge integration we know that students come to science
class with a repertoire of disconnected and often contradictory ideas. We want to spur students to develop more
coherent ideas.   We   would like   to  enable students    to  integrate their ideas and promote   the most fruitful,
generative, and useful ideas. We hope to help students distinguish new ideas from existing ideas and reconcile
discrepancies with scientific evidence. We expect that cumulative learners will test and refine their ideas by
applying them in situations they encounter in their lives. Ideally cumulative learners would continue to expand,
refine, and integrate their understanding all during their lives. This poster defines key features of instruction and
assessment for cumulative learning and provides case studies from student work to illustrate how students
respond. We argue that all students can become cumulative learners.

Teacher Perspectives on Cumulative Learning
Libby Gerard, University of California, Berkeley
This study explores how teachers use the CLEAR curriculum and assessment materials to foster cumulative
learning. What ideas do teachers link? What parts of the curriculum do they revisit? What do they learn about
student thinking from the new assessments? And how does that information help guide their teaching?
         We report on how the 16 teachers implemented CLEAR inquiry projects (see Table 1). Each project
takes between five and fourteen fifty-minute class periods. Energy Stories, MySystem, and other activities are
embedded in each project to serve as learning events and assessments. All teachers have a minimum of four
years of prior experience teaching with technology-enhanced inquiry science curriculum.

Table 1. Participants, Grade and Projects Taught

 Participants (n)  Grade   Projects
      10           6th     Eliciting Ideas, Thermodynamics, Plate Tectonics, Global Climate Change
       6           7th     Eliciting Ideas, Photosynthesis

                                                    253       ISLS
                                                   ICLS 2010    Volume 2

          Teachers    were interviewed    at the   beginning  of the  year  and   after implementing   a project   in     their
classroom. They responded to questions about their views of cumulative learning, teaching, and assessment
strategies.  All teachers  also  participated    as partners  in a five-day     workshop,   in which  they used    student
assessment    data from  Energy  Stories     and MySystem     to inform   the   design  of CLEAR     curriculum    projects.
Teachers responded in writing at the end of each day of the workshop to four reflection questions focused on
analysis of student data, ideas for the curriculum, and anticipated support needs for classroom implementation.
The impact of the emphasis on cumulative learning is apparent (see Table 2). Teachers have begun to revisit
student ideas when teaching non-CLEAR topics.

Table 2. Data Sources and Teachers' Views

    Data
   Source                                                  Teachers' Views
  Baselineinterview,WorkshopReflectionsEager to prioritize students' cumulative learning about energy.Have done little to support cumulative learning in past due to use primarily of textbook for instructionSurprised when analyzing student Energy Stories and MySystem by students' non-normative energyideasPlan to revisit student ideas about energy transformations in CLEAR and non-CLEAR topics
                Guided students to revisit ideas from CLEAR virtual experiments and simulations when teaching
                energy in other contexts
                Added embedded assessments from CLEAR projects to teacher generated end-of-unit and end-of-
                semester tests to assess students' cumulative learning about energy
                Energy Stories and MySystem provide a valuable summative assessment of the connections students
                can make whereas explanation questions capture more of learning process
  Post          Energy Stories and MySystem are more open ended than traditional explanations, so they showed how
  Project       students apply what they learned
  Interviews    Energy Stories generated longer answers from students than traditional explanations because had to
                explain the whole journey of energy from one point to the end
                MySystem and Energy Stories forced students to assess their own understanding and identify gaps more
                so than specific explanation items
                Students needed more icons in MySystem (e.g. for energy lost)
                Students needed opportunities to see other MySystem and Energy Stories in a different topic before
                doing their own because they lack experience using systems and stories in science

          Teachers report revisiting elements of the CLEAR units such as virtual experiments and simulations to
make connections to new topics. For example, when teaching the Plate Tectonics project, one 6th grade teacher
commented that she frequently referred back to a simulation of conduction in the Thermodynamics project to
help students understand why heat moves from the core to the mantle and to the Earth's plates. Teachers see the
potential of MySystem and Energy Stories as assessments. For example, one teacher remarked:

           "the  MySystem    forces  [students]     to  make    choices,  to    ask what   direction is  energy
          moving...and have a conversation, you get kids saying well I don't think that should be there,
          and well why not, and then they have to explain it which really makes them assess what they
          know and don't know. A lot of times students think they get it but they don't so MySystem
          diagrams help because it's not just answer a question but create something and then they
          have to explain it again in the story."

          Teachers also offered valuable ways to improve the diagrams such as adding icons and giving students
a model    of an Energy    Story and     MySystem    to critique prior   to generating   their own.  Teachers'  views      on
cumulative learning and assessment can improve the quality of curriculum materials by identifying which ideas
from a project students use to help them understand a new topic. Teachers' views can also help us understand
how Energy Stories and MySystem can be strengthened and embedded in the projects to guide students to
monitor their understanding.

Eliciting Energy Ideas in Thermodynamics
Hilary Swanson, University of California, Berkeley
To explore the impact of typical instruction on student ideas about energy, we asked students to articulate their
ideas in assessments administered early in the school year. This embedded activity elicited ideas, the first step in
the knowledge integration framework (Linn, 2006). Students articulate their repertoire of ideas and develop
criteria to guide the construction of coherent approaches to understanding scientific phenomena. Pretests show
that although eighth grade students had greater technological fluency and higher literacy levels than sixth

                                                       254     ISLS
                                              ICLS 2010    Volume 2

graders, their ideas about energy were not significantly more coherent than the sixth graders' ideas.
       Students then participated in a four-day WISE project on thermodynamics, working in dyads (N= 49
dyads). Assessments embedded in the activity were scored using the knowledge integration rubric. In addition a
list of specific ideas consistent with Minstrel's facet analysis was identified (Minstrell, 1992). Seventy-four
percent of the responses to the first thermal equilibrium prompt were normative, whereas ninety-three percent of
responses to a final assessment were normative. For example, on the final assessment, most students correctly
identified the sun as the original energy source, and conduction as the means of heat transfer from an object
heated by the sun to an object in contact with it. However, some students explained their reasoning by arguing
that heat rises. They would correctly or incorrectly answer questions about conduction based upon the relative
orientation of the heat source (i.e., hot cup on top of counter vs. hot asphalt under bare feet). This non-normative
idea elicited by the WISE project will be leveraged by the teacher in subsequent projects, which contrast types
of energy transfer as they are introduced.

Redesigning Plate Tectonics for Cumulative Learning
Elissa Sato, University of California, Berkeley
Plate tectonics is currently taught as an earth science unit in sixth grade in the state of California. It has
traditionally been a difficult concept for middle school students (Gobert & Clement, 1999), requiring students to
learn about abstract processes and phenomena that lie outside of their direct experience and to integrate spatial,
causal and dynamic information (Gobert, 2000). The California state standards require students to learn that
various geological phenomena are different manifestations of a plate movement (Curriculum Development and
Supplemental Materials Commission, 2003). To leverage the unifying concept of energy we frame plate
tectonics as a disciplinary context for learning about thermal energy transfer by convection. We sought to make
connections between previous instruction on energy, students' existing knowledge, and current instruction
featuring convection without fragmenting the curriculum. We report on initial teacher concerns: many sixth
grade earth science teachers felt it would be difficult to integrate more in-depth coverage of convection into the
plate tectonics curriculum when instruction typically focused on geologic events and features on a mechanistic
level. Some teachers also questioned how emphasizing energy concepts in plate tectonics would help students
make connections with energy concepts in other domains given the abstract nature of the topics.
       To investigate students' understanding of energy concepts in plate tectonics, we conducted two pilot
studies (N=100) in six middle school classes taught by the same teacher. After completing an existing plate
tectonics project, students were asked to write stories about and draw or annotate diagrams to describe how
energy causes changes in the mantle, where the energy came from, where the energy goes, and how the energy
moves and changes form. Student responses were analyzed using a grounded coding methodology. Most
students correctly identified the core as the source of thermal energy within Earth, although several responses
attributed the Sun as being the source. Most students were unable to describe the process of convection. Many
instead described thermal energy transfer within Earth as a series of pressure-induced bursts of energy escaping
from the core without any flow of matter involved. Many students also isolated the movement of thermal energy
within Earth as being limited to heat transfer from the core to the mantle.
       These results informed the subsequent redesign of the Plate Tectonics project. Based on these studies
we strengthened the convection component of the curriculum and the connections between convection and other
concepts in plate tectonics and other disciplines. We incorporated multiple activities to help students make
connections between the surface and sub-surface processes, as well as between concrete, mechanistic processes
and abstract processes involving energy. Whereas the processes involved in convection were described in a
single paragraph in the original project, we expanded the section to allow students to explore and visualize the
process of convection at both macro- and micro- levels, to contextualize their understanding of convection to
plate tectonics, and to extend their understanding of the principles involved in convection to other contexts such
as lava lamps and hot air balloons. Preliminary results suggest that the revised project is effective in supporting
students' learning of convection and its underlying processes. Students increased their understanding of the
processes underlying convection, made connections between thermal energy transfer and surface geologic
processes, and reasoned how concepts underlying convection can manifest      in different contexts. Many students
made references to the role of conduction as an additional means of thermal energy transfer in Earth, suggesting
that students were making connections to energy concepts encountered in previous instruction. Future iterations
of the Plate Tectonics project will focus on supporting students in building on previous instruction by
incorporating activities that will help them better distinguish between conduction and convection.

Redesigning Global Climate Change for Cumulative Learning
Tammie Visintainer and Vanessa Svihla, University of California, Berkeley
To strengthen cumulative learning we redesigned an existing Global Warming project, incorporating concepts
of energy and increasing the personal relevancy of the project for students by building on their initial ideas.   The
goal of the new project design is to present information in a way that will more effectively facilitate an

                                                  255     ISLS
                                             ICLS 2010     Volume 2

understanding of the relationship between the mechanisms associated with global climate change and student's
energy consumption.  The new project explores ways to leverage energy stories, advisory roles, and energy
consumption surveys to better elicit students ideas based on their everyday experiences.   In this way we can
push our thinking of cumulative learning beyond the bounds of the science classroom by incorporating how
students' social and cultural backgrounds inform their ideas about science phenomena such as global climate
change, and the evidence that they use to support these ideas.
          A pilot study was conducted in the Spring of 2009 involving four classes of middle school students
taught by the same teacher prior to making revisions of the Global Warming project.      Students were asked to
write stories and draw energy pathways that included where energy comes from and goes, how it changes form,
and how energy travels from place to place.  Student responses were analyzed using a grounded coding
methodology.   The majority of students said energy goes to plants, animals, or the ground, and many said that
energy travels through the food chain. Most students only referred to energy in the forms of ultra violet and
infrared radiation and had difficulty describing mechanism by which energy changes form.      No students
mentioned human contributions or the role of their energy consumption when describing how energy affects the
atmosphere.  Revisions to the existing Global Warming project incorporated findings from this pilot study.
          We then conducted a pilot study of the new Global Climate Change project in February 2010 with four
classes of 6th grade students, including pre and post interviews with five students. Initial analyses of open-ended
responses and interviews suggest that the majority of students believe that pollution or gases cause global
climate change and that human actions are sources of this pollution.   Students cited ice melting, environmental
damage, and temperatures rising as evidence of  the occurrence of global climate change.    Understanding the
specific mechanisms driving global climate change as well as the energy transformations that occur during these
processes continue to provide challenges for students.   Students commonly mentioned exhaust from vehicles as
causes of global climate change, but litter which is tangible to 6th graders as a source of pollution, was also
commonly mentioned.    Students also tended to group all types of environmental issues together (e.g. ozone
layer depletion, acid rain) as causes of or evidence of global climate change.
          Further redesigns of the Global Climate Change project will build on students' ideas about the causes
of global climate change and the evidence they cite to support their ideas. Activities intended to make explicit
the mechanisms behind global climate change and why certain types of pollution contribute to this phenomenon
while others does not will be added including comparing and researching different human actions.     Likewise,
activities will be added to make explicit the energy transformations that occur as energy travels from the sun
through different pathways to end products (e.g. food sources, electricity) that are tangible to middle school
students. Additionally, students will take home and discuss with their families an Energy Consumption Survey
containing items that middle school students can relate to such as transportation to school and recycling and
then complete an on-line activity related to the project in school. By examining global climate change from an
energy consumption perspective and incorporating activities that make explicit the mechanisms and energy
transformations involved with this issue, it is our hope that we will increase students' awareness of how their
lives connect to greater science phenomena.

New Assessments of Cumulative Learning in Photosynthesis
Kihyun (Kelly) Ryoo, University of California, Berkeley
The role of energy in photosynthesis challenges students because of its complexity and abstract nature. We
designed the photosynthesis project using animations, simulations and virtual experiments to make the role of
energy more    comprehendible.    We  report on student    learning  from   pretest  to posttest and the potential
advantages  of using the   new assessments,   Energy   Stories and   MySystem    (Figure  2). Two   middle  school
teachers taught photosynthesis to eight classes of seventh grade students (N=220) using our CLEAR curriculum
for approximately two weeks. Students generated pre- and post-project Energy Stories and MySystem diagrams
about how energy is involved in photosynthesis. New extended Knowledge Integration rubrics were developed
to score the Energy Stories and MySystem. The rubrics have seven levels including full link (one scientifically
valid link between energy source, energy transformation, energy storage, and energy transfer), complex link
(two scientifically valid links), and advanced complex link (three or more scientifically valid links). In addition
to the Knowledge Integration score, we also captured the specific ideas students generated in their Energy
Stories and MySystem.
          Overall, paired t-tests revealed that students showed significant improvement in their understanding of
energy concepts in photosynthesis in both narrative explanations and visual representations (Figure 3). On the
pre-project Energy Stories, students demonstrated a limited understanding of energy concepts in photosynthesis
(M = 3.96, SD = 1.12). Twenty-eight percent of the students listed fragmented ideas about energy in
photosynthesis, such as "the light energy moves to the plant." Although 40% of the students provided one
scientifically valid link between energy ideas, most identified the sun as the energy source for photosynthesis
but were unable to describe energy transformation and energy transfer during photosynthesis. They also
presented a wide range of alternative ideas related to energy in the Energy Stories, such as "plants releasing

                                                 256      ISLS
                                          ICLS 2010    Volume 2

energy through oxygen" or water as the energy source for photosynthesis. On the post- project Energy Stories
(M= 5.02, SD=0.78), students showed a significant gain (t(219) = 10.26, p < 0.05) and this effect was large
(Cohen's d = 1.10), meaning that they provided two or three scientifically valid connections between ideas.
Students not only articulated more integrated ideas about energy sources, transformation, and transfer in
photosynthesis, but they also provided more detailed examples of this process.
       Consistent with the results of Energy Stories, on the pre-project MySystem, students showed some
relevant ideas about energy sources in photosynthesis but did not make any correct links between ideas (M =
3.41, SD = 0.94). Many students made arrows between irrelevant ideas or provided incorrect labels for correct
links (Figure 3). By the post-project MySystems, students demonstrated a more coherent understanding of
energy flow in photosynthesis by providing more correct links between energy concepts and elaborated
descriptions for each link (t(109) = 14.71, p < 0.05), and this effect was large (Cohen's d = 1.38). Students
demonstrated a more coherent understanding of energy flows in photosynthesis by linking different energy
concepts and elaborated descriptions for each link (M = 4.86, SD = 1.10). These results show how a
technology-enhanced inquiry curriculum can improve students' integrated understanding of abstract concepts in
science and potential advantages of explanatory narrative and visual representation as an assessment tool to
document student progress in understanding energy concepts.

       Figure 3. Knowledge Integration Scores of Energy Stories and MySystem on the Pre- and Post-tests

Measuring Cumulative Understanding: Item Formats
Hee-Sun Lee, Tufts University & Ou Lydia Liu, ETS
To measure the learning progression of science ideas, assessment developers have used student alternative
conceptions to create multiple-choice items (Alonzo & Steedle, 2009; Briggs, Alonzo, Schwab, & Wilson,
2006; Sadler, 1998; Treagust, 1988). In contrast, we designed multiple-choice items where choices represented
various levels of knowledge integration: non-normative ideas, fragmented normative ideas, and integrated
normative ideas in order to study whether multiple-choice items can measure students' ability to reason with an
increased number of normative and relevant ideas in scientific problems (Lee, Liu, & Linn, in press).
       For this study, we selected 10 multiple-choice items from released TIMSS item sets (International
Association for the Evaluation of Educational Achievement, 1995, 1999, 2003). These items addressed energy
sources, transformation, transfer, and conservation concepts embedded in middle science topics such as heat
conductivity, food web, water cycle, plate tectonics, chemical reactions, digestion and respiration. We created a
paired item format by adding an explanation part to each of the ten selected multiple-choice items. We designed
the explanation part either as selection of an explanation from six choices that represent common student
knowledge integration explanation patterns found from a previous study (Lee & Liu, 2010) or as generation of
open-ended explanations after a generic prompt, "Explain your choice." We created two online test forms each
of which included 10 paired items with alternating selection and generation explanation parts and randomly
assigned the two test forms to 794 sixth and seventh grade students.
       We used descriptive statistics and a Rasch analysis based on the Partial Credit Model to investigate the
compatibility between selection and generation of explanations in measuring knowledge integration. Results
show that (1) there appears no systematic advantage for selection explanation items over generation explanation
items on the preceding multiple-choice items, (2) student performance on selection explanation items is more
aligned when correct answers were chosen in the preceding multiple-choice items than when incorrect answers
were chosen, and (3) locations of item thresholds for the fragmented normative idea and the integrated idea
explanations are different between generation and selection explanation items. As a result, knowledge
integration levels were measured higher when using selection explanation items than generation explanation
items. These results indicate that the ability to select an explanation in multiple choice items is not the same as
the ability to write one's own explanation. Therefore, relying on multiple choice items to measure knowledge
integration will not be accurate and may overestimate students' knowledge integration ability.

Measuring Cumulative Learning Across Disciplines
Vanessa Svihla University of California, Berkeley

                                              257     ISLS
                                              ICLS 2010      Volume 2

Prior research has established effective and reliable ways to measure the coherence of student's repertoire of
energy ideas with respect to specific contexts (Lee, et al., in press; Liu, Lee, Hofstetter, & Linn, 2008) and there
are promising options for extending these methods of measurement to new open-ended assessment formats
(specifically, Energy Stories and MySystem (Ryoo, this session). This poster explores cumulative learning for
dyads and methods for resolving individual trajectories of cumulative learning.
         Initial analysis of two projects shows that dyads add new ideas and form new scientifically valid links
between ideas as they complete a project. For each project, dyad performance on a late, integrative question was
modeled    as a linear combination  of   two  prior questions,   an   early question   asking   students to explain  a
phenomenon after learning about a type of heat transfer e.g., (conduction or convection) and a later question
asking students to provide a more mechanistic explanation of the phenomenon (e.g., conduction relates to rate of
heat transfer or heat energy is related to density). A full score on the integrative question would require students
to link the description of the heat transfer to the cause.
         For the thermodynamics project, modeling the integrative question as a linear combination of prior
answers resulted in a significant increase over using the mean (F (2,59)= 6.98, p<0.05) and a positive but not
strong relationship (r2=0.191). For the   plate  tectonics   project, modeling  the integrative  question  as  a linear
combination of prior answers resulted in a significant increase over using the mean (F (2,62)= 18.28, p<0.05)
and  a positive relationship (r2=0.371). Including  student    pretest  scores related  to thermodynamics     does not
explain significant variance (F (2, 59)=0.994, p>0.05). This finding suggests that regardless of starting point,
students have potential to learn using these projects, and supports our assertion that all students may become
cumulative learners. For the global climate change project, much of the learning is dependent on understanding
models in the project. In this case, the integrative question can be modeled as a linear combination of pre-test
scores and score on a question reflecting on the first of a series of climate models (F (2,64)= 7.70, p<0.05) and a
positive but not strong relationship (r2=0.194).
         Exploring student learning across projects is challenging because students work in different dyads for
each project. One approach to analyzing such data is to apply a 2-mode affiliation network approach, identifying
clustering across  individuals and  events  (Field, Frank,    Schiller,  Riegle-Crumb,     &   Muller, 2006).  We  are
developing models of individual student performance taking into account their various memberships in dyads
during the course of the school as they completed CLEAR projects, allowing us to explore the extent to which
each   individual ensures the   relative success   of  a   dyad  in   reaching  coherent   understanding    of energy
transformation. Alternatively, this may be framed as exploring benefits of heterogeneous pairing (Gerard, Tate,
Chiu, Corliss, & Linn, 2009; Madhok, 1992; Varma, 2008).

Conclusions
Through these studies, we have demonstrated a design-based approach, incorporating findings from teachers as
well as evidence from student pilot data that highlight ways to support cumulative learning of energy ideas.
Findings from this initial year of the study include the following:

    !    Teachers were empowered to support their students in becoming cumulative learners by helping them
         make further connections across CLEAR and non-CLEAR projects
    !    Teachers endorsed using personal relevance as a means to increase cumulative learning, a perspective
         currently being empirically tested
    !    Pretests show little difference between sixth and eighth grade students in terms of coherence of ideas
         about energy
    !    Students show an increase in percent normative ideas over the course of a project
    !    Students achieve significant gains in developing coherent ideas related to energy across projects

Taken  together,  empirical  evidence from   these  studies   suggests   that  designing   for cumulative  learning is
promising, but that traditional measures are insufficient for assessing it. Furthermore, cumulative learning as we
have framed it provides a means to curricular efficiency, allowing students to learn about a core idea in science
with increasing depth. This research, which is in its inaugural year, has potential as an exemplar for practical
ways to address challenges common to many educational systems.

References
Alonzo, A. C., & Steedle, J. T. (2009). Developing and assessing a force and motion learning progression.
         Science Education, 93(3), 389-421.
Au,  W.  (2007).   High-Stakes  Testing   and    Curricular  Control:   A   Qualitative  Metasynthesis.  Educational
         Researcher, 36(5), 258.
Briggs, D., Alonzo, A., Schwab, C., & Wilson, M. (2006). Diagnostic Assessment With Ordered Multiple-
         Choice Items. Educational Assessment, 11(1), 33-63.

                                                   258      ISLS
                                            ICLS 2010     Volume 2

Curriculum Development and Supplemental Materials Commission (2003). Science Framework for California
        Public  Schools Kindergarten   Through  Grade      Twelve. Sacramento,   CA:  California Department   of
        Education.
Duschl, R., Schweingruber, H., & Shouse, A. (2007). Taking Science to School: Learning and Teaching Science
        in Grades K-8: National Academies Press.
Field, S., Frank, K., Schiller, K., Riegle-Crumb, C., & Muller, C. (2006). Identifying positions from affiliation
        networks: Preserving the duality of people and events. Social Networks, 28(2), 97-123.
Gerard, L., Tate, E., Chiu, J., Corliss, S., & Linn, M. C. (2009, July). Collaboration and knowledge integration.
        Paper presented at the CSCL, Rhodes, Greece.
Gobert, J. (2000).  A  typology   of causal models     for plate   tectonics: Inferential power  and barriers to
        understanding. International Journal of Science Education, 22(9), 937-977.
Gobert, J., & Clement, J. (1999). Effects of student-generated diagrams versus student-generated summaries on
        conceptual understanding of causal and dynamic knowledge in plate tectonics. Journal of Research in
        Science Teaching, 36(1).
International Association for the Evaluation of Educational Achievement (1995). TIMSS 1999 science items:
        Released set for population 2 (seventh and eighth grades). Chestnut Hill, MA.
International Association for  the  Evaluation of Educational      Achievement   (1999).   TIMSS science items:
        Released set eighth grade. Chestnut Hill, MA.
International Association for  the  Evaluation of Educational      Achievement   (2003).   TIMSS science items:
        Released set for eighth grade. Chestnut Hill, MA.
Kali, Y., & Ronen, M. (2005). Design principles for online peer-evaluation: Fostering objectivity.
Lee, H.-S., & Liu, O. L. (2010). Assessing Learning Progression of Energy Concepts Across Middle School
        Grades: The Knowledge Integration Perspective. Science Education.
Lee, H.-S., Liu, O. L., & Linn, M. C. (in press). Validating measurement of knowledge integration in science
        using multiple-choice and explanation items. Applied Measurement in Education.
Linn, M. C. (2006). The knowledge integration perspective on learning and instruction. In K. Sawyer (Ed.), The
        Cambridge handbook of the learning sciences (pp. 243-264). New York: Cambridge University Press.
Linn, M. C., Lewis, C., Tsuchida, I., & Songer, N. (2000). Beyond fourth-grade science: why do US and
        Japanese students diverge? Educational Researcher, 29(3), 4-14.
Liu, O., Lee, H., Hofstetter, C., & Linn, M. C. (2008). Assessing Knowledge Integration in Science: Construct,
        Measures, and Evidence. Educational Assessment, 13(1), 23.
Madhok, J. (1992). The effect of gender composition on group interaction.
Minstrell, J. (1992). Facets of students' knowledge and relevant instruction. In R. Duit, F. Goldberg & H.
        Niedderer (Eds.), Research in physics learning: Theoretical issues and empirical studies (pp. 110-128).
        Kiel: IPN.
National Research Council (2003). Knowing what students know. Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press.
Roth, K., & Garnier, H. (2006). What science teaching looks like: An international perspective. Educational
        Leadership, 64(4), 16.
Sadler, P. (1998). Psychometric models of student conceptions in science: Reconciling qualitative studies and
        distractor-driven assessment instruments. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 35(3), 265-296.
Schmidt, W., McKnight, C., Valverde, G. A., Houang, R. T., & Wiley, D. E. (1997). Many visions, many aims.
        Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Kluwer.
Slotta, J., & Linn, M. C. (2009). WISE Science: Web-Based Inquiry in the Classroom. New York: Teachers
        College Press.
Stern, L., & Roseman, J. (2004). Can middle-school science textbooks help students learn important ideas?
        Findings from Project 2061's curriculum evaluation study: Life science. Journal of Research in Science
        Teaching, 41(6), 538-568.
Treagust, D. F. (1988). Development and use of diagnostic tests to evaluate students' misconceptions in science.
        International Journal of Science Education, 10(2), 159-169.
Varma, K. (2008, June). Supporting Students' Experimentation Strategies with Dynamic Visualizations. Paper
        presented at the 8th International Conference of the Learning Sciences, International Perspectives in
        the Learning Sciences: Cre8ting a Learning World, Utrecht, The Netherlands.

Acknowledgments
We would like to acknowledge members of Marcia Linn's research group for review comments which greatly
improved this proposal. This research is funded by NSF grant (DRK-12 0822388). The views expressed here are
not necessarily those of the NSF.

                                                259     ISLS
