                                                   ICLS 2010  ·   Volume 1

 Arguing with Peers: Examining Two Kinds of Discourse and Their
                                            Cognitive Benefits

                         David Shaenfield, Teachers College ­ Columbia University
                             525 W. 120th St., New York, NY, 10027, United States
                                               des2020@columbia.edu

          Abstract:  This   study   examines   the extent    to which   meta-level  regulation     of argumentive
          discourse goals and strategies relates to improvement in argumentive discourse skill.               A 7-
          month intervention was designed to provide dense experience in argumentive discourse and to
          promote  meta-level    regulation  of  discourse.     Pairs  of  academically   disadvantaged     eighth
          graders conducted electronic dialogs with opposing pairs on a series of social topics. Analysis
        of intra-dyad discussion over the course of the intervention showed that participants producing
        a   high  proportion   of   meta-level  u tterances     were  more   likely to   show  improvement       in
          argumentive skill.   This finding suggests that enhanced meta-level awareness of the strategies
          and goals  of     argument,  along   with  rich     engagement     in argumentation,     promote    skill
        development.

Introduction
          The idea  that students    profit from   collaborative    learning continues    to gain   popularity,   and some,
although not extensive, empirical evidence exists to support it.        The mechanisms involved, however, have not
been well established. I seek to learn more about these mechanisms in the present work. The domain in which I
conduct the work, argumentation, is one based in collaborative social interaction.           Indeed, this social exchange,
as suggested  elsewhere     (Kuhn,   Goh,   Iordanou  &    Shaenfield,  2008,   Sampson     & Clark,    2009),  serves as a
promising path to development of the individual expository argument skills that figure prominently in academic
contexts.
          The present work includes an additional layer in this collaboration by asking two peers who share the
same position on a social issue to collaborate in argumentive discourse with a series of opposing pairs who hold
an opposing position.    I focus on the discourse between the agreeing pairs as they engage in the joint task of
formulating their contributions to electronic discourse with a series of opposing pairs. In a preliminary study
that provides a foundation for the present work and employed very similar methods, we compared a condition
involving  collaborating    pairs   with a  condition   in    which    individuals  worked    alone    in  formulating  and
implementing   the  same    kind  of electronic  arguments      with an   opposing  peer.   When      subsequently  assessed
individually at the end of a several-month period, those in the collaborating condition showed greater increase in
argumentation skill (as indexed by frequency of use of direct counterargument, the same measure employed in
the present work).  I therefore seek in the present study to investigate what occurs in the collaborative discourse
of same-side pairs that is beneficial to their individual skill development.
          The hypothesis that guided the present study is that this benefit is metacognitive in nature.          Meta-level
regulation lies at the end of a meta-level developmental trajectory beginning with a young child's awareness of
mental functions   (Kuhn,    2000;   Wellman,   1992).  In   the argumentive     context, the  focus    is on metastrategic
knowing   ­   specifical ly knowing   about    how   to   effectively   engage   in an   argument.      This  metastrategic
competence includes knowledge of the goals of argumentation, including attention to the opponent's position
and  claims,  and knowledge      of  different discourse   strategies.    Awareness   is  a  first step toward    meta-level
competence.    A  high   level of   such competence     is reflected   in metastrategic   evaluation,   which   enables the
speaker to monitor the effectiveness of strategy use.      Awareness and evaluation are both necessary along a path
of meta-level development toward true meta-level regulation.
          Meta-level regulation in the argumentive context involves the speaker's ability to control strategy use
during argumentive   discourse.      Speakers   at this level   are  able to choose   and   sequence    different  strategies
effectively, based on their knowledge of the utility of the strategies, while understanding how the strategies lead
to the dual goals of argumentation, identified by Walton (1989) as obtaining commitments from the opposing
partner to support one's own arguments and critiquing the opposing partner's arguments to weaken their force.
In addition, regulation allows for continuous adjustments in response to the other speaker's discourse strategies.
This   metastrategic  effort   reflects   knowledge     and     control   over   a  sequence    of    strategies   involving
counterargument and rebuttal (counterargument of a counterargument).
          Three techniques were employed in the present work to support students' awareness of and reflection
on their argumentive discourse.      These were thought to be key in enhancing both their understanding of the
goals of argumentation and their skill in implementing these goals.          First, students worked in pairs.       Previous

                                                      254   ·   © ISLS
                                                   ICLS 2010   ·   Volume 1

research demonstrates the benefit of collaborative planning and implementation in the development of young
adolescents' argument skills (Kuhn & Udell, 2003; Shaenfield & Moore, 2009; Sampson & Clark, 2009).
         A primary benefit of collaborative planning is making knowledge explicit.              Learning is shown to be
enhanced when learners articulate the reasoning behind problem-solving behaviors (Chi & Van                Lehn, 1991).  In
the context of planning argument discourse strategies, collaboration provides the opportunity for articulation of
meta-level  regulatory    strategies.   It  was hypothesized     that two   students with  the same   goal   and  having to
deliberate regarding      each argumentive     move  would     not only   generate   more  effective  contributions  to  the
discourse but would also make the collaborative pair more aware and reflective regarding this discourse.
         Second, following the work of Felton (2004), an explicit reflective activity was added. Some of the
students' own dialog transcripts were made available as the basis for this activity.           Third, students conducted
their dialogs via instant-messaging (IM) software.          In  addition  to capitalizing  on  teens' familiarity  with  the
medium,    this technique   has   the benefit  of providing    an  immediately   available and  permanent    record  of  the
discourse, as   a basis   for reflection.   In striking contrast,  in  real-time verbal  discourse,   the contents of each
contribution to the dialog immediately disappear as soon as they are spoken.
         A number of previous studies (Anderson, Nguyen-Jahiel, McNurlen, Archodidou, Kim, Reznitskaya, et
al., 2001; Chinn, 2006; DeFuccio, Kuhn, Udell, & Callender, 2009; Felton, 2004; Felton & Kuhn, 2001; Kuhn
et al., 2008; Kuhn, Shaw, & Felton, 1997; Kuhn & Udell, 2003; Nussbaum, 2003, Nussbaum & Kardash, 2005;
Nussbaum    &   Sinatra,   2003;   Reznitskaya,   Anderson,    McNurlen,    Nguyen-Jahiel,   Archodidou,     & Kim,  2001;
Schwarz, Newman, & Biezuner, 2000; Udell, 2007) have reported gains in argumentation skill as a result of
engagement and practice.
         Previous research (DeFuccio et al., 2009; Felton, 2004; Felton & Kuhn, 2001; Kuhn et al., 2008; Kuhn
& Udell, 2003) has shown that young adolescent arguers tend to limit themselves largely to discourse strategies
addressed  to   articulation   of their own  positions.     Over  time, a shift  is seen  toward greater   attention to  the
opponent's claims and, eventually, efforts to address and weaken them. As this occurs, a shift in the awareness
of the goals of argumentation may also be developing.            Growth of the meta-strategic aspect of argumentation,
alongside skill development, may be critical for progress.         Previous studies of argument skill development have
not explicitly addressed the relationship between this meta-level development and skill development itself. To
further understand    the     relati onship between     developing    meta-level    regulation and    developing   dialogic
argumentation     skills, the  intra-dyad   discussion  between    same-side  partners   was   recorded   on audiotape   for
subsequent analysis.

Method
The research employs a two-group repeated measures design using an untreated control group to compare the
effects of the intervention on argument discourse skill.          The entire study took place in repeating phases over
seven months.

Participants
Participants were the entire eighth-grade student body of 49 students not assigned to individualized education
programs (IEP), drawn from three classrooms, in an urban public middle school.               The school primarily serves
African American and Latino families from a lower-income community; 80% of students are eligible for free
lunch and 14% are eligible for reduced-price lunch.          The city school system classifies the student body of the
school as academically disadvantaged, with student achievement is several years below grade level. The city
education website lists the student body ethnicity ratios as 54% Black or African-American, 40% Hispanic or
Latino, 4%  White,  1%    Asian   or Pacific-Islander and 1% Native American.        One class of 26 students (17  females
and nine males), participated in the intervention, while the remaining 23 (10 females and 13 males), drawn from
two classrooms, served as a control group.

Procedure

Pretest Assessment
The purpose of this phase was to assess all 48 students' individual initial skill levels in dialogic argument, for
comparison    at  final   assessment.      Students' opinions     regarding  capital  punishment      (CP)   were  assessed
individually by questionnaire.     This assessment   allowed students to    be classified as holding a pro or  con position
on CP. Each student was then paired with a classmate holding an opposing (pro or con) view on CP.                 Each pair
conducted a dialog on the CP topic mediated by iChat (instant messenger chat software) installed on laptop
computers.   The specific instruction was to attempt to convince the other opponent that his or her opinion was
the better one.   Pairs of pro and con students were positioned to face opposite sides of the classroom to reduce

                                                        255  ·  © ISLS
                                                ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

the possibility of verbal or eye contact.    The software saved a transcript of the dialog for analysis.   Sessions
were approximately 25 minutes in length.

Initial Intervention
The initial phase of the intervention took place over the course of 11 successive 45-minute class periods, twice
per week.   On the days when the experimental group was participating in the intervention, the control group
attended their regular social studies class. The experimental group's first topic was whether children should be
required to attend a town school or whether it's permissible for parents to teach them at home if they wish.
         1. Individual position and assessment (session 1).      Students' positions regarding the first topic were
assessed individually by questionnaire, allowing students to be classified by position on the topic.
         2. Dyadic electronic arguments with opposing-view pairs (sessions 2-7).      Students were paired with a
classmate holding the same view (home okay or school mandatory).          An attempt to form the greatest number of
same-gender dyads was made but not possible to implement completely due to the uneven gender make-up of
the intervention group. However, the majority of pairs were same-gender.        The two members of a pair remained
paired throughout the topic. The paired students collaborated in engaging in a series of e-dialogs with other
dyads  holding the opposing  view.   In   one  case, to accommodate      an uneven number  of students,  a trio was
formed.  Dyads were instructed and reminded to collaborate with one another in constructing their input and,
once in agreement, to take turns typing it on the laptop.  An audio tape recorder continuously recorded the intra-
dyad discussion.  Sessions averaged 25 minutes in length.
         Dyads   engaged a different opposing    dyad   at each  session.   During the dialog period, several adults
circulated to address any technical difficulties and to remind partners to collaborate.   Dyads were also provided
with a series of "reflection sheets" to promote their representing and reflecting on their own and the opposing
pair's arguments.  The "Other Argument" sheet asked the students to determine what the other side's main
argument was, their dyad's "comeback" (counterargument) to that argument, and how the dyad could improve
this comeback.   The "Own Argument" sheet asked the students to identify one of their main arguments, the
other side's counterargument to that argument, the dyad's comeback (rebuttal) to the counterargument, and to
suggest how that comeback could be improved.
         3. Preparation for final, class-level e-argument (sessions 8 & 9).     Session 8 marked the beginning of a
culminating activity with respect to the topic. Students worked within their same-side teams, preparing for what
was to be a final "showdown" debate at session 11.      Within each of the same-side teams, each of the dyads that
had worked collaboratively to this point were divided, one assigned to an "Other Argument" (OTH) team and
the other to an "Own Argument" (OWN) team.           Each preparation team had an adult coach who facilitated the
group process.   The materials available to each team were as follows:      The "Own Argument" teams had copies
of the "own argument" reflection sheets that had been produced by each team.         The "Other Argument" teams
had copies  of the "other  argument"  reflection  sheets   that  had  been  produced by each  team.   Coaches   had
transcripts of all dialogs on hand for reference if requested by the students.
         The OWN team was told that their goal in preparing for the showdown was to be familiar with the
possible counterarguments the opposition could assert and prepare rebuttals to use in the showdown.      The team
created a set of "own argument ­ counter ­ rebuttal" sequences that were recorded onto the OWN argument
sheet.  To do this, first they selected the three most convincing arguments for their position.      The reflection
sheets were provided as references to complete the OWN argument sheet counter and rebuttal sections.            The
OTH team was told that their task was to be familiar with effective counterarguments to use when faced with
other  arguments  advanced by the    opponents   in  favor   of their position.  The team  created a set of  "other
argument  ­  counter" sequences that  were    recorded  onto    the OTH   argument sheet.  During this preparation
session, these team members identified the three most damaging arguments raised by the opposition and, using
the provided or newly generated materials, decided on their counterarguments.
         4. The Showdown (session 10).       Students on each side were divided into two teams of 6-7 members ­
Team A and B based on the recommendations of the coaches during the preparation phase, so as to create two
teams of overall comparable skill.   The division was done such that each team contained members who in the
preparation phase specialized in generating the best "own arguments" for their position, as well as members
who had specialized in countering the "other arguments" of the opponents.
         During the first half of the showdown, Pro Team A debated with Con Team A.           At half time, a team
change took place and B Teams from each side continued the showdown.            The showdown consisted of a single
electronic dialog between the two sides lasting approximately 30 minutes. All members of the team collaborated
and came to an agreement on the text to be sent to the opposition.
         5. Judging   and  feedback  (session   11).    The   electronic  dialog produced  in the  showdown     was
represented in an argument map prepared by the researchers.         All the arguments, as well as the corresponding
counterarguments and rebuttals, were represented and connected by lines to show their interrelation.       Different
colors were used to label contributions as effective, ineffective, or neutral argumentive moves.    A point system

                                                    256  ·  © ISLS
                                               ICLS 2010  ·   Volume 1

was also applied, which made it possible to declare a winning side. The argument map as well as the graph
representing the outcome was presented to the students for their examination the week following the showdown.

Subsequent Intervention Phases
The intervention was repeated during the second and again during the third trimester of the school year, with
new topics. The second topic addressed whether disruptive students should be expelled from school or allowed
to remain.  The third topic, linked to the social studies curriculum, addressed whether the United States should
offer military intervention to a small country requesting it. Due to time limitations created by school scheduling
conflicts, the second and third interventions included only five dialogic sessions instead of six.

Posttest Assessment
The pretest assessment involving individual dialogs on CP was repeated for all students.        In the intervention
group, one student participating in the initial assessment left the class after the first topic and was not included
in the posttest assessment. Another student who joined the intervention classroom during the second topic was
also not included in the posttest assessment.

Results

Overall effect of the intervention
Dialogs were coded based on the argument discourse coding scheme developed and used in previous research
(Felton, 2004). The main indication of improvement was the increase in counter-critique strategy moves ­ a
counterargument that directly weakens the force of the opponent's preceding argument.           The proportion of
Counter-C usage for the intervention group increased from 20.67% (SD = 29.67%) at initial assessment to
40.91% (SD = 19.28%) at final assessment, while the control group increased nominally from 18.84% (SD =
28.45%) at pretest to 19.93% (SD = 32.44%) at posttest.     A significant group X time interaction was found, F(1,
46) = 4.89, p=.032, partial !2 = 0.096.

Intra-dyad Discourse Analysis
Analysis of the intra-dyad discussions is based on the 163 intra-dyad discussion transcripts of the discussion
between members of a dyad as they participated in the sessions of the intervention.      A coding scheme was
developed to distinguish meta-level discursive moves about strategies (planning, evaluating, or predicting) from
simply discussing the content of the arguments (see Table 1).

Table 1: Intra-dyad discourse coding scheme

                            Code                                                  Examples
METACOGNITIVE STRATEGIES
PLANNING [PL]                                                     -We could mention how effective the
                                                                  expulsion will be towards the kids in the
                                                                  school. Maybe we explain that better?
                                                                  -I meant we can use the friends reason.
                                                                  -What should we say to that?
PREDICTING [PR]: Predicting effect or consequence of              -They are still writing. What do you think
strategy that hasn't happened                                     they are going to talk about?
                                                                  -They will say that he could learn English
                                                                  in school or they could get him a Spanish
                                                                  teacher.
                                                                  -Don't know how they will come back
                                                                  from that
EVALUATING [EV]: Analysis of performance and strategy             -We stuck a hole in their argument
effectiveness                                                     -We gave them a good comeback
                                                                  -They proving our point! Look what they
                                                                  keep writing!
                                                                  -What's our main argument?
METACOGNITIVE KNOWLEDGE [MC]                                      -I don't even know why I'm arguing with
                                                                  this side. I got so many ideas in my head

                                                   257  ·  © ISLS
                                               ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

                                                                     -Can we just talk to everybody instead of
                                                                     typing?
                                                                     - You know what, we can use this! We can
                                                                     use this! This is our comeback! Our
                                                                     Counter-Counter argument.
NON-METACOGNITIVE
         NULL [N]                                                    -Oh man
         OFF TASK [OT]                                               -I'm MAD hungry.      How much     time til
                                                                     lunch?
         TECH [TC]                                                   -They just responded
                                                                     -I don't think our network is connected
         READING FROM SCREEN [RS]                                    -They said, "Aris needs to make friends"
         TYPE-ALOUD [TA]                                             -We... think... the... boy... should... be...
                                                                     home... schooled
         DICTATION [DT]                                              -...receiving a fatal warning, F-A-T-A-L.
         DIVISION OF LABOR [DL]                                      -Let me type now
         ARGUMENT DISCUSSON [AD]                                     -He could hire a tutor
         Discussion of content (not discourse)

Relation between Meta-Level Intra-Dyad Discourse and Strategic Gain
To examine    the relationship  between  meta-level    discourse    and strategic    performance from    initial to final
individual assessment,  students   were categorized  into   two    additional groups   for each  topic.   The strategic
improvement categorization is based on whether they increased or didn't increase with respect to a key indicator
of strategic improvement, the proportion of Counter-C utterances from initial to final assessments.
         For Topic 1, six students (three dyads) were dropped from the analysis of the first topic due to not
participating in the intervention. Simply put, the partners didn't interact with one another during the entire first
topic of the intervention.  In consultation with the classroom teacher, these six participants were arranged in
better pairs for the second and third topics. Of the 19 participants, 14 were classified as showing improvement
from initial to final assessments. Of the 14 that improved, eight were also classified in    the high-meta  intra-dyad
category, i.e., they were equal to or above the median for total number of meta-level utterances, and six were
classified in the low-meta category.  Of the five that didn't improve, two were above or equal to the median and
three were below.   While suggestive, these proportions were not significantly different (a = .628, Fisher's Exact
Test).
         For Topic 2, of the 25 participants, 19 improved   from    initial to final assessments and six didn't.  Of the
19 that improved, 13 were above or equal to the median for proportion of meta-level utterances and six were
below.  Of the six that didn't improve, all were below.   These proportions were significantly different (a = .005,
Fisher's Exact Test).
         For topic 3, of the 25 participants, 19 improved from initial to final assessments and six didn't.       Of the
19 that improved, 13 were above or equal to the median for proportion of meta-level utterances and six were
below.  Of the six that didn't improve, all were below. These proportions were significantly different (a = .005,
Fisher's Exact Test).

Relation between Total Utterances and Strategic Improvement
A similar analysis was conducted to determine if total intra-dyad talk related to strategic improvement. Two
groups were formed per topic ­ the high-talk group, at or above the median, and the low-talk group below the
median.  The relationship between total talk frequency and strategic improvement, even while suggestive for
topics 2 and 3, was not significant for any of the topics.     Thus, it appears to be meta-level talk specifically,
rather than talk in general, that is predictive of strategic gain.

Discussion
The present results confirm that argumentation skill can be developed among young adolescents over the course
of a goal-based, collaborative activity offering dense opportunities for engagement in discourse. Consistent with
earlier findings (Kuhn et al., 1997, 2008; Kuhn & Udell, 2003), the intervention was effective in enhancing
students' dialogic argument skills in addressing a new topic that had not been included in the intervention.
Students in the intervention group exhibited an increased proportion of usage of skilled argument strategies
(Counter-C)   and a decreased   frequency of   usage of   less advanced   (Exposition)     strategies, compared   to the
control group.

                                                   258  ·  © ISLS
                                                   ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

         These findings are inconsistent with claims that argument skills are entirely domain specific (Stein &
Miller, 1993). Participants in the present study only engaged each other on the capital punishment (CP) topic
twice ­ once before the intervention as a pretest and once at the end as a posttest.            The pretest did provide
students with     some   experience   with    the topic, but  no  more   than  it did    students in  the control  group.
Improvements within a domain could be due to acquisition of specific content-bound arguments within the
domain, but transfer to a different domain requires a more complex account.
         It warrants     emphasis    that this  progress   was   observed  in  a  group   of significantly  academically
disadvantaged     students.   Prior  to  the  intervention, these young    adolescents   had little occasion  to  practice
sustained argumentive discourse in their daily lives.         Observation of their classroom experience showed that
they experienced only infrequent opportunities to express their views and then only in response to a teacher's
question, rather than in debate with one another. Yet these students readily engaged the activity and the majority
showed clear advance in skill.
         The contribution of the present study lies in the insight it offers regarding the mechanisms that make
the method effective.    The intervention created conditions in which focused peer discourse was required and
supported.   The results indicate that its value lay not in talk per se, the quantity of which did not predict
improvement. Instead, it has been proposed here, a major value of such discourse is its support of meta-level
representation and regulation of discourse processes.        The findings support this hypothesis. Students producing
a high  proportion    of meta-level   utterances   during   peer discourse  tended    to make   the  greatest progress in
individual argument skill. This relationship was statistically significant for the latter two of the three phases of
the intervention period.    During the first topic, we can speculate, students were settling into an activity that was
very new to them and gains were less consistent overall.
         The   present   results, it should   be  emphasized,    don't  simply   show  that  students displaying   a  high
proportion of meta-level utterances did better on the argument skill posttest.           Rather, frequent expression of
meta-level utterances with a collaborating partner is associated with advance in individual argument skill.           This
advance, note further, could be observed across the range of initial skill levels.           Initially less competent and
initially more competent individuals both improved when they engaged in frequent meta-level talk.
         Why      might  engaging     in  meta-level   regulatory   discourse    lead to  skill   advance?     Meta-level
understanding of the goals of argumentation and of strategies to achieve these goals develops over time with
engagement   and      practice.   Such   meta-level   discussions   aren't simply  reflecting   the  individual's  current
understanding of task and strategies.     The discussion is part of the process, along with engaging the opposition,
of constructing the understanding.
         The   most    useful   and  likely   accurate way    to conceptualize    the relationship   between   meta-level
understanding and strategic engagement with a cognitive task is most likely as one of mutual bootstrapping
(Kuhn & Pearsall, 1998).      Implementation and practice of strategies leads to greater understanding and valuing
of them, in bottom-up fashion, while top-down monitoring and management of strategies plays an increasing
role. This is not a new idea, but the present study contributes to our understanding of how this process may
work by examining and identifying differences between cases in which it works well and less well over an
extended period of time.      The Counter-C strategy was used in combination with less advanced strategies over
the course  of    the intervention.   Both    the effective  use of advanced   strategies   and ineffective   use of  less-
advanced strategies may "feed-up" to the meta-level and strengthen awareness of the utility of each strategy.
Meta-level understanding also "feeds down" to the strategic level.         Increasing awareness of the coordination of
task objectives and effective strategies to reach task objectives guides strategy implementation.
         As  microgenetic     research    has repeatedly   shown,  enhanced   meta-level   awareness  of  strategies, and
particularly more advanced strategies, doesn't mean that less-advanced strategies cease to be used (Siegler,
2006).   More likely, however, meta-level understanding was under construction throughout the intervention
through repeated engagement rather than emerging in a single observable moment of change.
         In summary, the present results support the conclusion that the opportunity for explicit meta-level
discourse contributes to meta-level understanding, which has been shown here to relate to the development of
strategic skills. We are far from a complete understanding of the mechanisms involved and more observation of
them  in action   is  needed.     In particular,  the  need  to  understand  how  top-down    and   bottom-up   processes
reciprocally support one another will arguably require more attention to individuals' understanding of their
practices, rather than simply performance of them.

References
Anderson, R., Nguyen-Jahiel, K., McNurlen, B., Archodidou, A., Kim, S., Reznitskaya, A., et al. (2001). The
         snowball phenomenon: Spread of ways of talking and ways of thinking across groups of children.
         Cognition and Instruction, 19(1), 1-46.
Brown, A. L. (1987). Metacognition, executive control, self-regulation, and other more mysterious mechanisms.
         In F. E. Weinert & R. H. Kluwe (Eds.), Metacognition, motivation, and understanding (pp. 65-116).

                                                       259  ·   © ISLS
                                              ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

         Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Chinn, C. A. (2006). Learning to argue. In A. O'Donnell, C. Hmelo-Silver, & G. Erkens (Eds.), Collaborative
         learning, reasoning, and technology. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
DeFuccio,   M., Kuhn,    D., Udell,  W.,  &  Callender,    K. (2009).  Developing     argument   skills  in severely
         disadvantaged adolescent males in a residential correctional setting. Applied Developmental Science,
         13(1), 30-41.
Felton,  M.  (2004).   The   development   of  discourse   strategies  in  adolescent    argumentation.     Cognitive
         Development, 19, 35-52.
Felton, M., & Kuhn, D. (2001). The development of argumentive discourse skills. Discourse Processes, 32,
         135-153.
Flavell, J. (1979). Metacognition and cognitive monitoring: A new area of cognitive­developmental inquiry.
         American Psychologist, 34, 906­911.
Graff,  G.  (2003). Clueless in academe:   How   schooling    obscures the life   of the mind.   New    Haven: Yale
         University Press.
Kuhn, D. (1995). Microgenetic study of change: What has it told us? Psychological Science, 6, 133-139.
Kuhn, D. (2000). Metacognitive development. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 9(5), 178-181.
Kuhn, D., Goh, W., Iordanou, K., & Shaenfield, D. (2008). Arguing on the Computer:        A Microgenetic Study of
         Developing Argument Skills in a Computer-Supported Environment. Child Development, 79(5), 1311-
         1329.
Kuhn,   D., &  Pearsall, S.  (1998). Relations between     metastrategic  knowledge    and    strategic performance.
         Cognitive Development, 13, 227-247.
Kuhn, D., Shaw, V., & Felton, M. (1997). Effects of dyadic interaction on argumentive reasoning. Cognition
         and Instruction, 15(3), 287-315.
Kuhn, D., & Udell, W. (2003). The development of argument skills. Child Development, 74(5), 1245-1260.
Kuhn, D., & Udell, W. (2007). Coordinating own and other perspectives in argument. Thinking and Reasoning,
         13, 90-104.
Nussbaum, E.M.      (2003). Appropriate appropriation:   Functionality of student arguments and support requests
         during small-group classroom discussions. Journal of Literacy Research, 34, 501-544.
Nussbaum,    E.M.,  &  Kardash,  C.  (2005). The effects   of  goal  instructions and    text on the    generation of
         counterarguments during writing. Journal of Educational Psychology, 97, 157-169.
Nussbaum,   E.M.,   & Sinatra, G. (2003). Argument     and conceptual  engagement.     Contemporary      Educational
         Psychology, 28, 384-395.
Reznitskaya, A., Anderson, R., McNurlen, B., Nguyen-Jahiel, K., Archodidou, A., & Kim, S. (2001). Influence
         of oral discussion on written argument. Discourse Processes, 32, 155-175.
Sampson, V. & Clark, D. (2009). The impact of collaboration on the outcomes of scientific argumentation.
         Science Education, 93(3), 448-484.
Siegler, R. (2006). Microgenetic studies of learning. In W. Damon & R. Lerner (Series Eds.) & D. Kuhn & R.
         Siegler (Vol. Eds.), Handbook of child psychology: Vol. 2. Cognition, perception, and language. (6th
         ed.). Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.
Stein, N., & Miller, C. (1993). The development of memory and reasoning skill in argumentative contexts:
         Evaluating, explaining, and generating evidence. In R. Glasser (Ed.), Advances in instructional
         psychology. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.

                                                  260  ·  © ISLS
