                                               ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 2

  Technologies and Tools to Support Informal Science Learning
                 Heather Toomey Zimmerman, Penn State University, heather@psu.edu, Chair
                           David E. Kanter, Temple University, dkanter@temple.edu
                   Kirsten Ellenbogen, Science Museum of Minnesota, kellenbogen@smm.org
                          Leilah Lyons, University of Illinois-Chicago, llyons@uic.edu
                    Steven J. Zuiker, National Institute of Education, steven.zuiker@nie.edu.sg
                     Tom Satwicz, University of Washington, tommysat@u.washington.edu
               Sandra Toro Martell, University of Wisconsin-Milwawukee, smartell@uwm.edu
                                Matthew Brown, Inquirium, matt@inquirium.net
                    Sherry Hsi, Lawrence Hall of Science, sherryh@berkeley.edu, Discussant
                 Brian K. Smith, Rhode Island School of Design, bsmith@risd.edu, Discussant
                       Molly Phipps, Science Museum of Minnesota, mphipps@smm.org
                            Robert Jordan, Penn State University, raj152@psu.edu
                           Jennifer Weible, Penn State University, jlw1086@psu.edu
                            Chris Gamrat, Penn State University, cwg118@psu.edu
                                    Ben Loh, Inquirium, ben@inquirium.net
                            Joyce Ma, Researcher/ Evaluator, joyce1.ma@gmail.com

         Abstract:   This paper   explores the role  of  technologies  in  supporting informal  science
         learning from seven perspectives. Together, the authors ask a common question: How can
         learning technologies--tools, spaces, and places--be designed to support learners within
         and across environments? Eight exemplars are offered to answer this question through an
         analysis of a specific instance of technology in a non-school environment. Collectively, the
         authors examine the role of tools that support: access to and distribution of information;
         scaffolds  to help learners tackle    complex    tasks and   deeper  understandings;  bridging
         learning across contexts; feedback and reflection; extension of learning experiences in a
         temporal way; aggregations of visible knowledge, social interaction, facilitation of social
         practices, personalized learning, and the breakdown of epistemic authority. The authors and
         two discussants reflect on the methodological innovation, technological advancement, and
         collaborations needed to move research in this area forward.

Introduction
This paper explores the role of technologies and tools in supporting informal science learning. Authors come
from a variety   of perspectives: university learning   sciences  programs,  training programs  for designers and
museum   professionals,   informal  learning institutions,  and   technology  development.   From   eight  different
perspectives, the authors ask and answer a set of common question:

         How can learning technologies--tools, spaces, and places--be designed to support learners
         within and across environments? How do these studies of learning technologies provide
         insight into   how   to  support   learners,   not  only  within   settings  but also  across
         environments? How can these learning technologies support field-level collaboration
         across institutional lines of practitioner, researcher, and evaluator?

         The authors   answer these  questions    by presenting   analyses of technology   use, development,  and
research in non-school    environments. In  their analyses,  the  authors  examine the  role of tools that support
various learning processes in informal spaces, including:
             ·   access to, and distribution of, information
             ·   scaffolds to help learners tackle complex tasks and deeper understandings
             ·   bridging learning across contexts
             ·   feedback and reflection
             ·   extension of learning experiences in a temporal way
             ·   aggregations of visible knowledge
             ·   social interaction
             ·   facilitation of social practices
             ·   personalized learning
             ·   the breakdown of epistemic authority
These exemplars of technologies are also designed specifically to reflect learning and teaching in informal
spaces, reflecting visitors' expectations and mirroring norms of behaviors in informal environments.

                                                   260  ·  © ISLS
                                                  ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 2

Background
This session  work    is part  of a  National  Science  Foundation      funded  community-building     project, Building
Capacity  and    Collaboration    at the  Intersection of  the  Learning   Sciences  and Informal   Science   Education
(Intersection). The Intersection project brings together international researchers to advance research and practice
related learning outside of school. The goal of the Intersection project is to develop a community that will
further the aims of both the informal science education and the learning sciences fields by building on key
publications over the last decade, including How People Learn (NRC, 1999), The Cambridge Handbook of the
Learning    Sciences  (Sawyer,    2006),   the latest  NRC      consensus   volumes   Learning     Science in   Informal
Environments: People, Places, Pursuits (NRC, 2009), and Surrounded by Science (NRC, 2010). These books
summarize what we currently know about the processes, content, and contexts of human learning in science
inside and outside of formal schooling.
     The  Intersection   project's   community    building  efforts include knowledge    sharing   and writing   projects
accomplished through online forums, a website for sharing ideas, and a face-to-face workshop held in August
2009. The intellectual work and conversations that happen through the workshop meeting and in the online
spaces highlight synergies, challenges, and opportunities that arise when the informal science learning and
learning sciences professionals work together. The Intersection project participants are conducting studies and
writing papers that make progress in four key areas:
     1.  Understanding the concepts of learning and engagement
     2.  Equity, access, and methodology in informal learning
     3.  Informal learning pedagogy
     4.  Tools and technologies that support informal science learning
This interactive symposium is a collaborative effort between a subgroup of researchers and practitioners who
are participating in the Intersection grant activities focused on the last key area, tools and technologies that
support informal science learning
         The authors in this symposium are members of the subgroup interested in applying learning sciences
and informal science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) education methodologies and theories
in order  to study   how   to  facilitate learning, most    broadly   considered, with  technologies   in  out-of-school
environments. In addition to participating in the workshop and online forums discussed above, the technologies
subgroup has formed a special interest networking group and a wiki to begin to synthesize what is known about
learning with technologies outside of school. This subgroup cuts across research groups, involves emerging and
established  leaders, and   includes   both  informal  learning   institutions  and  universities. (Note:  this work  is
occurring with additional colleagues.)
         The authors have organized this paper to share the findings from their work with the broader learning
sciences  field. They    offer eight  diverse  designs     and  studies of  technology-supporting    learning   to better
understand how pedagogy can be conceived in out-of-school environments. An author or small team of authors
presents each of the eight perspectives below; the authors present findings from an empirical study or set of
studies. Then, together, the authors engage the audience in conversations across the studies towards deeper
conceptual understandings about the nature of learning with technology that occurs on school fieldtrips, in
museums, in homes, in afterschool clubs, and similar places.

Symposium structure
The symposium session will start with a brief introduction by the chair, Heather Zimmerman. Next, the first
authors  of each  of  the eight   posters  (David Kanter,     Kirsten Ellenbogen,   Leilah Lyons,   Steve  Zuiker,  Tom
Satwicz,  Heather  Zimmerman,        Matthew   Brown,   and     Sandy  Martell) will provide  a    two-minute   fire-hose
presentation of their topic. The bulk of the remaining time will be spent in small group conversation between the
audience and presenters. The groups will come back for broader discussion, sparked by initial comments by the
two discussants, Sherry Hsi from the Lawrence Hall of Science (an interactive science center in California) and
Brian K. Smith from the Rhode Island School of Design. The discussants will make comments on posters in
regard to connections to educational practice in informal institutions, learning theory, and the National Research
Council   new    report, Learning    Science   in Informal      Environments:   People,  Places,   and Pursuits    (Bell,
Lewenstein, Shouse, & Feder, 2009). After the discussants' remarks, the time remaining will be spent on full
group discussions. Final questions to seed this group, if questions do not arise naturally, include:
         What types of methodological innovation are needed to move our understanding of the
         learning here forward? What types of technological innovation and collaboration are needed
         to realize the potential these authors put forth?

                                                       261  ·  © ISLS
                                                ICLS 2010  ·   Volume 2

Exemplars

Exemplar 1: Using the demand for data in a project-based science curriculum to bridge high
school biology classrooms and an informal science center by David E. Kanter, Temple
University

This analysis reflects  on   work   conducted   as part   of   a National Institutes of  Health Science   Education
Partnership Award    titled, "Supporting  Student  and   Teacher   Inquiry   in Bioscience," a partnership between
Northwestern University (Learning Sciences) and Chicago's Museum of Science and Industry (MSI). The work
resulted in a project-based high school biology curriculum, "Disease Detectives," and related software, "Village
Park Mystery," closely coupled to the museum's "Live from the Heart," a videoteleconference to a real-time
coronary artery bypass graft procedure, experienced by the high school students in the informal museum setting.
To address the mystery of what was wrong with the people in Village Park, the curriculum and software were
designed to help students reason through real data including patient case files, medical images like angiograms,
and a virtual cell laboratory, that they would ultimately "invent" Coronary Artery Disease (CAD), requiring and
learning cell biology standards along the way. (The term "invent" is used as per Karplus to describe students'
conceptual "invention," the middle of the original three-phase inquiry cycle.)
         Students complete the project by devising a public health plan for Village Park, defended by data about
the characteristics of individuals whose CAD (or lack thereof) would benefit from invasive procedures or non-
invasive treatments. It is   in completing this part of    the project  that high school students collect first-hand
information from medical professionals about the relative merits of the invasive fix for CAD they are seeing
via videoteleconference with other possible interventions for CAD, both invasive and non-invasive. In this way,
by coupling   the technology     in the informal   space   to  a project-based  science  curriculum for the formal
classroom, the learning possible with the existing informal technology in extended insofar as the specialized
data, only available in the informal setting, can learned as integral to students' ongoing investigation in the
classroom, and as such might be expected to be learned more deeply. We present such changes in students'
meaningful understanding of science concepts. On this basis, we emphasize the utility of altering the pedagogy
that frames the use of even existing informal technologies to better support science learning.

Exemplar     2:   Rain  Table:      Visualization    technology      using      complex  datasets    that   allows
learners to control and follow water flow across the Earth's surface by Kirsten Ellenbogen
and Molly Phipps, Science Museum of Minnesota

Water movement across the Earth's surface is among the most misunderstood concepts in earth science (e.g.,
Coyle, 2006). Concepts like "rivers always flow south" and "curving of water flow due to the Earth's spin" are
common issues that emerge in everyday science experiences. One of the best ways to understand water flow is
to watch the movement of water across the Earth's surface. However, this is not possible in most lab settings
and physical models cannot capture the intricacies of unrestricted stream flow across large areas.
         To overcome these obstacles, the Science Museum of Minnesota and the National Center for Earth-
Surface Dynamics initiated a partnership with the Electronic Visualization Laboratory of the University of
Illinois at Chicago to create a new visualization technology using complex datasets that allows learners to
control and follow water flow across the Earth's surface. Using touch screen technology, Rain Table allows
users to make rain with their fingertips, producing tens of thousands of raindrops that then flow down and across
digital elevation models of real landscapes in ways highly analogous to actual landscape processes. (See an
early prototype of Rain Table at http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rc5I774Mnh4.)
         Learning research on the Rain Table at the Science Museum of Minnesota has focused on public
conceptions of the directional flow of water on the Earth's surface. Pre- and post-interviews with museum
visitors were conducted using a large two-dimensional, non-interactive floor map of the world or Rain Table.
Additionally, visitors were video recorded as they used Rain Table. Findings were analyzed with an eye toward
understanding the directional flow in:
         ·   Interactive and non-interactive contexts
         ·   High and low elevation areas
         ·   A de-contextualized situation
         ·   A problem-based learning situation (e.g., avoiding run off from a factory when choosing a location
             for a house)
Findings were also considered in light of the museum visitor's age, the social grouping in which they explored
the exhibit, and motivations for coming to the museum.

                                                    262  ·  © ISLS
                                               ICLS 2010   ·   Volume 2

Exemplar 3: Mobile devices transforming the museum experience: Opportunistic user
interfaces to exhibits by Leilah Lyons, University of Illinois at Chicago

The nature of learning in informal environments is individual, idiosyncratic, and opportunistic--suggesting
technology employed in these settings should also take on these characteristics. For this reason, mobile devices
have been a popular platform in museums (Tallon & Walker, 2008). In the tradition of audio guides, most
implementations focus on delivering information to visitors, and many research projects have capitalized on
devices' computational abilities to try to customize that delivery, inferring the desired content from the visitor's
location (e.g., Abowd, et al., 1997), focus of attention (e.g., Bruns, Brombach, Zeidler, & Bimber, 2007), time
spent in different areas (e.g., Benta, 2005), or user-provided preferences (e.g., Chou, Hsieh, Gandon, & Sadeh,
2005).  The  emphasis  has been   on  individualizing   output  experiences,     but mobile devices   also  permit  the
individualization of input experiences.
         This analysis   explores mobile   devices   as opportunistic   user  interfaces to exhibits,  giving  visitors
opportunities to interact bidirectionally  with an   exhibit   through  their personal  devices  (Lyons,   2009).  This
approach is distinct from other innovative uses of mobiles in museums that view the museum as a whole as an
interactive space, usually framed as a scavenger hunt (e.g, Yatani et al., 2004; Klopfer et al. 2005; Yiannoutsou
et al., 2009). Rather, mobiles used as opportunistic user interfaces are intended to enhance visitor interactions
with a single exhibit at a time. In this fashion, computer-based exhibits can be scaled up to support multiple
simultaneous  users,  transforming   the traditional single-user   kiosk  experience   into a  collaborative  learning
opportunity. The semi-private setup allows visitors to transition from peripheral to central roles in the shared
experiences, and offers the promise of customized scaffolding to support user interactions with exhibits.

Exemplar 4: Cyber-stretching: The Taiga biome around kids' worlds by Steven J. Zuiker,
Learning Sciences Lab, National Institute of Education, Singapore

Science education takes place in functional learning environments in and out of school settings (Scribner &
Cole, 1973), and increasingly through designed spaces that cut across these settings. Quest Atlantis (QA) is a
virtual space that leverages cyber-infrastructure    and   the technologies   and    methodologies of  videogames    to
design  for transformative play   in these functional   ways    (Barab   et al., 2009).  Learners  from   a variety of
countries,  including Singapore,   develop  scientific  knowledge      through   participation in  QA   activities and
practices.
         One popular unit engages learners as field investigators exploring water quality issues in the Taiga
biome (Barab, Zuiker, et al., 2007). Highlighting the confluence of informal science education and learning
sciences, these QA experiences are shaped by the diversity of cultural-historical backgrounds as much as the
demands of QA's quests, missions, and units. Leveraging this diversity as a resource for learning is a central
focus of the QA design. However, it remains unclear whether, and how, interactions provoke learners to think
about themselves as systematic yet distinctive knowers and users of, and occasionally contributors to, science.
         This analysis considers how the QA Taiga unit facilitates and, at times, frustrates social practices of
meaning making in lived, albeit virtual, experiences. The analyses draws on case studies of Singaporean youth
engaging QA in after-school programs and at home and contrasts them with other less informal school-based
instances  where teachers  and students   agreed that   their  classroom    would  function under  a  set  of dramatic
conventions that work to shift epistemic authority.

Exemplar 5: Understanding the pieces of knowledge in informal learning environments by
Tom Satwicz, University of Washington

What role do informal learning environments play in life-long learning? Bruner (1996) speculated that many of
life's experiences provide us with an intuitive understanding of more complex scientific theories. For instance, a
young child playing with a seesaw develops an initial understanding of the rule of the lever, which may later be
developed into a formal abstract algebraic form. Other work has argued that initial experiences result in small
bits of functional knowledge that when overextended lead to misconceptions (Smith, diSessa, & Roschelle,
1993). Given the importance of prior knowledge in supporting new learning, informal learning environments
offer important initial encounters with elements of more complex theories.
         This analysis explores how artifacts, particularly new technologies, present in a variety of informal
learning   environments,  provide representations    of knowledge    elements    that  may  be  later used  in  STEM
learning. The analysis utilizes a framework that combines a knowledge in pieces perspective (diSessa, 1996)
with Distributed Cognition (Hutchins, 1995) to analyze video recordings of young people playing commercially
available video games. It is then argued that embedded into many games are elements of STEM knowledge that
may be productively utilized in formal educational settings.
         One case in particular explores a six year old boy's initial understanding of probability as evidenced by

                                                   263   ·  © ISLS
                                               ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 2

his talk-in-interaction while playing a mini-game on the popular website Webkinz. The analysis demonstrates
that initial knowledge fragments are present in a combination of cognitive, social, and material resources that
are coordinated in the service of solving a complex task.

Exemplar 6: Using digital photography on an Internet portal to extend and enrich outdoors
learning experiences by Heather Toomey Zimmerman, Robert Jordan, Jennifer Weible, and
Chris Gamrat, The Pennsylvania State University

This analysis reports on a research and design project that created an Internet-based photograph-sharing portal
for a nature center and its visitors. The nature center has diverse programs, including an overnight school for
fifth graders, outdoor trails for the general public, presentations for family audiences, and a visitors' center with
exhibitions and live animals. The goal of the photograph-sharing website was to enrich existing programming in
two ways. First, the portal allows visitors to extend and connect learning experiences across time and space (i.e.,
home, the center, and other Internet-enabled places). Second, photographic documentation of the center, with
the ability to share and view others' photographs, allows visitors to focus observations of their community on
ecology related phenomena and increase curiosity about ecological concepts.
     Theoretically, the design work and resulting research build from a distributed intelligence and cognition
frame (Pea, 1993; Hutchins, 1995), a "making thinking visible in a shared community" principle (Bell, 1997)
from a knowledge integration perspective (Linn, 2006), and a model of family learning where parents and
children work together to make sense of new content that they observe (Zimmerman, Reeve, & Bell, in press).
     This    project  started with formative  research    on how    Association of Science-Technology    Centers'
(ASTC) institutional members (i.e., science centers) use web 2.0 and related technologies with their members,
especially families. This included a textual analysis with quantitative coding of 342 ASTC science center's
websites.  These  findings on  current  educational practice  with  web  2.0 technologies,  especially the role of
photographs in science learning institutions, were used to design a new portal that encouraged visitors to share
their experiences at the nature center from late winter to early spring as the center's grounds and trails changed
with the seasons' change. The visitors could share their observations through photographs and writing a brief
statement. The pilot study of the portal's use includes family and adult visitors groups that attended the nature
center on weekend days. Methods include interviews, observations of groups using the portal, and analysis of
visitor created digital artifacts. We report on the formative research, the design elements, and the pilot study of
the portal being available to the membership of the nature center, both onsite and online.

Exemplar 7: Innovative Tools and Student Perceptions of Technology: Owl Tracking and
GIS Mapping with Fifth and Sixth Graders by Sandra Toro Martell, University of Wisconsin-
Milwaukee

Media representations and digital technologies can be used in conjunction with traditional hands-on approaches
to promote engagement in authentic science activities in informal settings (Bell, Lewenstein, Shouse, & Feder,
2009). Previous studies have demonstrated that advanced technologies can help people "learn to see" in specific
disciplines (Stevens & Hall, 1998), support visitor-to-visitor knowledge communication, and allow for new
forms of knowledge communication among unacquainted visitors and beyond the actual museum visit (Stevens
& Martell, 2003; Knipfer et. al, 2009).
       This descriptive study builds upon these understandings by showing how urban fifth and sixth grade
students'  use of innovative   technological tools  informed  their understanding  of technology  and   their own
learning across settings. Data from two sets of students over two years include student interviews, post-museum
visit questionnaires, and videotaped observations of group activities around GIS Mapping in a school lab setting
and use of owl tracking radar in a museum and outdoors.
       This analysis sheds light on how these different resources can help children build understandings of
scientific practices and discusses  implications   for both  learning sciences  researchers and informal   science
education practitioners in terms of the design and development of curricula that features both traditional and
innovative technological tools.

Exemplar 8: Take a Stand: Creating an immersive social experience with people tracking,
3D game technology, and interactive storytelling by Matthew Brown and Ben Loh, Inquirium
and Joyce Ma, Researcher/Evaluator.

This analysis presents the design and formative evaluation of Take A Stand, an interactive immersive exhibit
installed at the Illinois Holocaust Museum and Education Center. The exhibit aims to teach young visitors the

                                                   264  ·  © ISLS
                                               ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 2

universal lessons related to the Holocaust (i.e., the power of one's actions, the challenges of standing up for
others, and the importance of dealing with bullying) in the safety of an age-appropriate, simulated world. Using
a computer   vision-based   people tracking system   married   with  modern  3D   video game   technologies and a
massive display, Take a Stand physically immerses visitors in a game-like narrative that places them in the role
of bystanders in a socially fraught situation where they must decide whether and how they might want to act.
Through  their interactions, visitors  experience  personal  agency   and a sense  that their actions can  make a
meaningful difference.
         The formative evaluation considers two types of visitors: (a) 8-11 year old students who come as part
of their school field trip (the target audience), and (b) casual museum visitors who visit apart from a larger
organized group    (the  secondary  audience). The     study   involves observation  and   informal interviews  of
approximately 120 visitors and their facilitators during the exhibit experience, which included an exhibit play as
well as a docent-led introduction and debrief session.
         The analysis discusses: (1) design goals and challenges, (2) technical implementation, (3) affective and
cognitive goals, and (4) affordances of the technology for supporting new forms of informal experiences and
learning. Implications are given based on this example on how to design simulated worlds to support informal
science learning.

Symposium significance
The dual focus of this session, on the design of learning environments and the study learners engaged with
technologies in out-of-school time, advances theoretical constructs and design principles of interest to learning
scientists and informal science educators. This work adds empirical accounts to address outstanding questions
in the recent NRC document (2009) about the nature of learning with media. Additionally, it adds needed out-
of-school perspectives to learning sciences fields where the school-based accounts of learning with technologies
often dominate the learning technologies discussions.

Discussants
Sherry Hsi from the Lawrence Hall of Science and Brian K. Smith from the Rhode Island School of Design will
each present short remarks on the impact of this work on the learning sciences field and on educational practice
in non-school environments.

References
Abowd,   G., Atkeson,   C., Hong,  J., Long,  S., Kooper,   R., &   Pinkerton,  M. (1997). Cyberguide:   A  mobile
         context-aware tour guide. Wireless Networks, 3(5), 421-433.
Bell, P., Lewenstein, B., Shouse, A. W., & Feder, M. A. (2009). Learning science in informal environments:
         People, places, and pursuits. Washington, D.C.: National Academies Press.
Benta, K. I. (2005).  Affective  aware   museum    guide.   In Proceedings  of  IEEE  International Workshop   on
         Wireless and Mobile Technologies in Education (WMTE `05), Nov. 28-30, 2005, (pp. 53-55).
Bruner, J. (1996). The culture of education. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Bruns, E., Brombach, B., Zeidler, T., & Bimber, O. (2007). Enabling Mobile Phones To Support Large-Scale
         Museum Guidance. Multimedia, 14(2), 16-25.
Chou, S. C., Hsieh, W. T., Gandon, F., & Sadeh, N. (2005). Semantic Web technologies for context-aware
         museum tour guide applications. In Proceedings of the 19th International Conference on Advanced
         Information Networking and Applications (AINA `05), March 28-30, 2005, (pp. 709-714).
Coyle, K. (2006). Environmental Literacy in America: What Ten Years of NEETF/Roper Research and Related
         Studies Say about Environmental Literacy in the U.S. Washington, DC: The National Environmental
         Education & Training Foundation.
diSessa, A. (1996). What do `just plain folks' know about physics? In D. R. Olson & N. Torrance (Eds.), The
         handbook of education and human development (pp. 709-730). Malden, MA: Blackwell Publishing.
Hutchins, E. (1995). Cognition in the wild. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Kanter, D. E. and M.A. Schreck (2006). Learning Content Using Complex Data in Project-based Science: An
         Example from High School Biology in Urban Classrooms. New Directions in Teaching and Learning,
         108, 77-91.
Klopfer, E., Perry, J., Squire, K., & Jan, M. (2005). Mystery at the Museum ­ A Collaborative Game for
         Museum    Education.  In  Proceedings    of Proceedings    of  the conference  on    Computer   Supported
         Collaborative Learning (CSCL `05), Taiwan, (pp. 316-320).
Knipfer, K., Mayr,   E., Zahn,  C.,   Schwan,  S., &   Hesse,   F. W.   (2009). Computer   support  for knowledge
         communication in science exhibitions: Novel perspectives from research on collaborative learning.
         Educational Research Review. 4(3), 196-209.

                                                   265  ·  © ISLS
                                              ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 2

Linn, M. C. (2006) The knowledge integration perspective on learning and instruction. In R. K. Sawyer (Ed.)
        The Cambridge handbook of the learning sciences (pp. 243-264). New York: Cambridge University
        Press.
Lyons, L. (2009). Designing Opportunistic User Interfaces to Support a Collaborative Museum Exhibit. In
        Proceedings    of the 8th International Conference     on   Computer  Supported   Collaborative  Learning,
        Rhodes, Greece, June 8- 13, 2009, (pp. 375-384). ISLS.
National Research Council, 1999. (Bransford, J. D., Brown, A. L. & Cocking, R. R. (Eds.). How people learn:
        Brain, mind, experience, and school. Washington, D.C.: National Academies Press.
National Research Council, (2010). Surrounded by Science. Washington, D.C.: National Academies Press
National Research Council, (2009). Bell, P., Lewenstein, B., Shouse, A. W., & Feder, M. A., (Eds.) Learning
        Science  in  Informal   Environments:   People,     Places,   and Pursuits. Washington,    D.C.: National
        Academies Press
Pea, R. (1993). Practices of distributed intelligence and designs for education. In G. Salomon (Ed.), Distributed
        cognitions:  Psychological     and  educational   considerations   (pp.  47-87).  Cambridge:  Cambridge
        University Press.
Sawyer, R. K.   (Ed.), (2006)  The  Cambridge    Handbook     of  the  learning sciences, New   York: Cambridge
        University Press.
Smith, J. P., diSessa, A. A., & Roschelle, J. (1993). Misconceptions reconceived: A constructivist analysis of
        knowledge in transition. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 3(2), 115-163.
Stevens, R. & Hall, R. (1998). Disciplined perception: Learning to see in technoscience. In M. Lampert & M. L.
        Blunk (Eds.), Talking mathematics in school: Studies of teaching and learning. New York: Cambridge
        University Press.
Stevens, R. & Martell, S. T. (2003). Leaving a trace: Digital meta-exhibits for supporting visitors to represent
        and exchange their ideas about museum exhibits. Journal of Museum Education 28(2), 25-31.
Tallon, L., & Walker, K. (2008). Digital Technologies and the Museum Experience: Handheld Guides and
        Other Media. Lanham, MD: Altamira Press.
Yatani, K., Sugimoto, M., & Kusunoki, F. (2004). Musex: A System for Supporting Children's Collaborative
        Learning  in a  Museum    with  PDAs.   In  Proceedings    of the 2004  IEEE  International Workshop  on
        Wireless and Mobile Technologies in Education, Taoyuan, Taiwan, (pp. 109-113). IEEE Computer
        Society.
Yiannoutsou, N.,  Papadimitriou,   I., Komis,   V., &     Avouris,  N.  (2009)."Playing   with" museum   exhibits:
        designing educational games mediated by mobile technology. In Proceedings of the 8th International
        Conference on Interaction Design and Children, Como, Italy, (pp. 230-233). ACM.
Zimmerman,   H.  T.,   Reeve,  S. &    Bell P. (in  press).  Family    sense-making  practices  in science center
        conversations. Science Education. DOI 10.1002/sce.20374

Acknowledgments
The work to synthesize and disseminate knowledge is funded by the National Science Foundation awards:
0814031and 081387 (PI: S. T. Martell, PI: L. R. Herrenkohl). This work was conducted in partnership with the
Center for the Advancement of Informal Science Education (CAISE), Penn State University (PSU), University
of Washington (UW), and University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee (UWM). All opinions expressed are those of the
authors, and they do not reflect the views of the funders or partners.

                                                   266  ·  © ISLS
