                                                 ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

  Eliciting and Developing Students' Ideas and Questions in a
                Learner-Centered Environmental Biology Unit
      Christopher J. Harris, SRI International, 333 Ravenswood Avenue, Menlo Park, CA, 94025
                                           christopher.harris@sri.com
      Rachel S. Phillips, University of Washington, 312 Miller, Box 353600, Seattle, WA, 98195
                                           rachelsp@u.washington.edu
          William R. Penuel, SRI International, 333 Ravenswood Avenue, Menlo Park, CA, 94025
                                            william.penuel@sri.com

          Abstract: An important instructional practice for teachers in learner-centered science
          classrooms is to be able to work productively with students' ideas and questions. Eliciting
          and thoughtfully attending to students' thinking in order to help them advance in their
          learning is  no  easy    matter, however.   This     study  examined    how  teachers     enacted
          instruction to  elicit, connect,  and  build   upon   their elementary    students'   ideas  and
          questions during an innovative twelve-week learner-centered environmental biology unit.
          The purpose of the study was to identify and describe successes, issues, and challenges
          related to incorporating students' ideas and questions into science instruction. Primary
          data sources   included   field  notes taken   during   classroom  observations    and    teacher
          interviews. We   present  three  contrasting   cases  of teachers  to   highlight evidence  that
          shows teachers' differing strategies for eliciting students' ideas and questions, and for
          developing   students'   ideas,  questions  and   questioning   skills.   We discuss   practical
          implications   for  designers    of  inquiry-based     science  curricula    and   professional
          development.

Introduction
Learning sciences research has identified as a key design principle that learning environments must be
"learner-centered," that is, they must attend to and make use of what students bring to the classroom
learning situation (National Research Council [NRC], 2000a). By eliciting and attending to what students
bring, teachers can actively engage students' ideas about and orientations to what and how they are learning
(Schwartz  &   Bransford,  1998).   Moreover,    making   use  of  students' contributions   in teaching    can help
transform  students'   discipline-oriented   thinking    and   ways  of  participating  in  disciplinary    practices
(Baranes, Perry, & Stigler, 1989).
          To support student sense-making effectively in learner-centered science environments, teachers
need to shift from the typical pattern of talk in classrooms (e.g., Cazden, 1988; Mehan, 1979) to new forms
of discourse that promote productive thinking and participation. In addition, teachers need to be able to
make creative   use   of the diversity of  student ideas    during   instruction. This entails  making  productive
adaptations to  students  and  their contributions    as instruction  unfolds.    A challenge   for designers   is to
develop flexibly adaptive curriculum materials (Schwartz, Lin, Brophy, & Bransford, 1999) that provide
the structure for teachers to enact ambitious science instruction while at the same time provide support and
room for teachers to make use of what students bring to the learning context. Even with such materials,
teachers are likely to diverge in their approaches to and success in creating richer forms of discourse in
classrooms.
          In this study, we examined teachers' instructional moves to elicit and develop students' ideas and
questions as they enacted a twelve-week learner-centered environmental biology unit with their fifth grade
students. The   unit  was designed   specifically  to help   teachers reconfigure    their  classrooms for  science
learning in ways that were more learner-centered, with a particular focus on creating opportunities for
teachers to elicit and work with students' ideas and questions as a source for student-led investigations of
habitats. A central aim of our study was to gain insight into the ways in which teachers' enactments enabled
them to work with students' ideas and questions to help advance learning. To this end, we present three
contrasting cases of teachers to highlight evidence that shows teachers' differing strategies for eliciting
students' ideas and questions, and for developing ideas, questions and questioning skills.

Theoretical Framework
Formulating and refining questions that can be answered through scientific investigations is a fundamental
ability required for science inquiry (NRC, 1996, 2000b, 2007). Developing scientific questions is a creative
act at the heart of scientific activity (Shodell, 1995). In practice, however, student questions are rare in
classrooms, compared with teacher questions (Carlsen, 1993; Dillon, 1988). Moreover, students find it
challenging to take an ill-formulated question posed at the outset of an inquiry and clarify or refine it in

                                                     261  ·  © ISLS
                                                  ICLS 2010     ·  Volume 1

ways that can productively guide inquiry (Krajcik, Blumenfled, Marx, & Soloway, 2000; Lehrer, Giles, &
Schauble, 2002; van Zee, Iwasyk, Kurose, Simpson, & Wild, 2001). Thus, a critical challenge is to help
teachers use curriculum to enable students to both to generate and develop questions that can guide inquiry.
           Research on student question generation suggests that teachers' actions are critical. When teachers
establish   discourse   patterns (e.g., brainstorming,    "K-W-L"    sequences)    that elicit   student  questions   and
engage students in discussion about their observations of familiar contexts, more questions are likely to
emerge in the science classroom (Penuel, Yarnall, Koch, & Roschelle, 2004; van Zee, et al., 2001). In these
discussions, teachers' use of "wait time" and reticence from immediately judging student contributions give
space for more student questions to emerge (Gallas, 1995; Rowe, 1986). Besides observation, other sources
of student questions that teachers can tap are prior knowledge, cultural beliefs, information from media,
and family experiences (Chin & Chia, 2006; King, 1994; Reeve & Bell, 2009).
           Not all student-generated     questions  can   be  investigated   in classrooms     and   those  that can  be
pursued often require the assistance of the teacher and peers to develop. Some questions students pose can
be researched using books or digital resources and are answered readily with reference to facts; others are
"wonderment" questions that invite hypothesis generation and prediction (Scardamalia & Bereiter, 1992).
Teachers can encourage the latter type of questions by engaging students in extended problem solving
activities (Chin, Brown, & Bruce, 2002) and in student-led investigations (Hofstein, Navon, Kipnis, &
Mamlok-Naaman, 2005). In addition, putting students into collaborative learning situations where they
must clarify questions and design investigations together can help develop students' questions (Marbach-
Ad & Sokolove, 2000). Finally, teacher discourse moves such as "revoicing" that explicitly align different
student contributions and ideas to content and to set up contrasts among students helps develop questions
provides a motivating context for the development of questions (O'Connor & Michaels, 1993).

Curricular Context
The research described here is part of a larger design-based research project that included the creation of an
elementary school science inquiry unit as a means to support science instruction that is challenge-based
(Schwartz, Lin, Brophy, & Bransford, 1999), leaner-centered (NRC, 2000a), and authentic in the sense that
students engage in tasks that are relevant to the science topic under study and to their own lives and
interests.  This curricular  unit  was   created via  a   school-university    partnership,   subsequently    piloted by
teachers in the district, and then revised collaboratively with teachers and researchers. Cornerstones of the
unit were student-choice and student-driven inquiry related to an over-arching challenge, all couched in
socially interactive group work. The newly revised unit was then systematically studied as it was being
implemented by a cadre of teachers in their elementary classrooms, which exemplifies the tenets of a
research into practice, practice into research approach (Design-Based Research Collective, 2003). In this
curriculum unit, titled The Isopod Habitat Challenge (IHC), students move through phases of inquiry as a
means to solve their ultimate challenge--to create an optimum habitat for isopods. Students first share their
ideas and   questions   about isopods,    take part  in a  teacher-guided      investigation, and    then participate in
student-generated investigations to answer their questions. As students move through each phase, they
revisit and revise their initial ideas and questions, conduct new research, revise their ideas and reformulate
their questions again, and then present their final habitat plan in a public forum.
           The unit materials included features that are educative (Davis & Krajcik, 2005), meaning features
meant to help teachers learn, to better support student learning. Educative features in the materials included
overviews of the instructional stance, organization, and phases of the unit, flexible pacing guides that
supported   teacher   planning,  and    embedded    notes  that   signified decision points   (i.e., critical junctures)
during instruction where it was especially important to attend to student thinking. The lesson materials also
included prompts such as idea generating (e.g., brainstorming) and questioning prompts that were meant to
help  teachers   elicit student  ideas  and  questions.    Materials   for  students included    an   idea  journal   for
developing   and   recording  ideas  and    questions   and  for   iteratively investigating   key   questions   as they
progressed through phases of inquiry, as well as a team planner for collaboratively designing the habitat for
their isopods. Teachers had access to the unit materials online through the school district website.
           University researchers and two teachers who initially piloted the unit led three formal professional
development sessions to support teachers' learning of how to use the curriculum materials with students.
All of these sessions took place after school hours in participating teachers classrooms. The focus of the
professional   development    sessions   included   instruction   on science   content, descriptions     of lessons   and
activities, modeling     of lessons     and activities  through     video   clips, pacing     of the  unit,   classroom
management, and discussion on effective instructional strategies for teaching science as inquiry. Time was
also  spent  troubleshooting     challenges    that teachers    encountered    during   unit   enactment    as   well as
celebrating and sharing successes. In addition to the formal professional development sessions, the teachers
were in close contact via email and in-person meetings at school sites with university researchers who were
involved in the unit development. This frequent electronic and in-person communication, or "just in time"

                                                       262  ·   © ISLS
                                                 ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

professional development provided individualized support to the teachers while they were enacting the unit
in their classrooms.

Methods
The overarching research question guiding this study was, For a curriculum unit that aims to develop
students' skill in posing scientific questions, how do teachers vary in the ways they elicit, re-voice, connect,
and/or build upon students' science ideas and questions? We approached the question by focusing, as past
research has, on teachers' instructional moves to elicit and help students to go further with their ideas and
questions. By analyzing differences among teachers using the same curriculum materials, our comparative
case  approach   enabled    us to    examine   how   teachers'  enactments     shaped   their students'  learning
opportunities.

Setting and Participants
A total of eight teachers across five elementary schools in one mid-size suburban school district in the
Pacific Northwest enacted IHC over 12 weeks in their fifth grade classrooms. We present case studies of
three of the  teachers  from   three different schools  in  the district.  The  three teachers, Ms.  Atwell,   Mr.
Jimenez, and Ms. Lesh (pseudonyms), were purposefully selected as contrasting cases for the present study.
Mr. Jimenez was a M.A.-level teacher in his 15th year and taught at an elementary school whose student
population was diverse (24% Asian American, 40% Caucasian, 22% Hispanic, 6% African American, and
8% multi-ethnic), with a high percentage of students receiving free or reduced price lunch (47%). Ms.
Atwell was a M.A.-level fourth-year teacher who taught at an elementary school that was predominately
Caucasion (60%) and Asian American (19%), with a small percentage of students receiving free or reduced
price lunch   (13%).   Ms. Lesh   was   a B.A.-level  fourth-year   teacher  at  an elementary   school  that  was
comprised primarily of Asian American (52%), Hispanic (19%) and Caucasian (17%) students, with 29%
of students receiving free or reduced price lunch.
         Within    the  sample,    the  three  teachers'   students    represented    three  different  levels  of
accomplishment with respect to the unit's goals. Students in Ms. Lesh's class had the highest average score
on  the post-assessment    and Mr.   Jimenez'  students scored    lowest.  Ms.   Atwell's students  scored in  the
middle. Preliminary analyses of observation data suggested these three teachers also differed with respect
to their approaches to implementing the unit, such that the differences in student results might be analyzed
in terms of these differences.

Procedures
Data sources included narrative documents of lessons produced by integrating field notes and observation
protocols completed by classroom observers, as well as semi-structured teacher interviews conducted by
researchers during and after teachers' enactment of the unit. The classroom observations were spread across
the 12-week unit, enabling observers to visit classrooms and record lessons at the beginning, middle, and
end  of the  unit. We   used   as the  basis for  analysis a  set  of  narrative documents    from  18  classroom
observations   across  the three  teachers.  The  narratives  were    comprehensive   descriptions  of  classroom
events, targeting teacher and student actions, interactions, and conversations.
         In  analyzing   narratives,  we  developed   and   employed     a coding   scheme    based on   discourse
interactions, focused particularly on patterns of teacher "uptake" (Nystrand & Gamoran, 1991) of student
ideas and questions during instruction. The coding scheme was developed through an iterative process of
creating codes based on hypotheses, coding evidence of elicitation and uptake, modifying and refining
codes, and recoding consistent with recommendations for qualitative data analysis by Miles and Huberman
(1994). Independent coding of narratives was conducted with two coders who met regularly to compare
evidence  for  codes  and  calibrate  their approaches  for   identifying  evidence.  Differences   were resolved
through discussion and consensus. In instances where both coders were uncertain about a piece of evidence,
a third researcher provided judgment to help clarify and reach agreement. A short statement of justification
was written for each piece of evidence that linked the evidence to a code.
         Interviews were conducted with each teacher at two time points: once midway through the unit
and a second time at the conclusion of the unit. Specific to the present study, the semi-structured interviews
addressed  teachers'   perspectives  on students'  experiences,   ideas,  and  questions  during instruction,  and
included questions on what teachers did in response to student contributions. For example, teachers were
asked whether and how students' ideas influenced their teaching, the kind of guidance they provided to
students during student-led research activities, and how they tried to respond to students' problematic ideas.
Interviews  were   audio recorded,   transcribed, and  then   used  to further  explore developing   patterns  and
themes that emerged from the analyses of narrative data.

                                                    263  ·   © ISLS
                                                ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

Constructing the Cases
We sought to select cases that, through analysis, could provide guidance to teachers about how to work
productively with students' ideas in ways that went beyond simple elicitation. To this end, we took an
explanatory, multiple-case study approach (Yin, 2003) that focused on explaining variation in individual
teacher  enactment  from   curriculum use.   In this  approach,  researchers take  as their   aim   not simply to
describe the phenomena under study, but to seek out explanations for why cases unfold the way they do.
Yin's (2003) recommendation is that researchers develop a set of initial possible "rival explanations" for
patterns in the data that they expect to find, both as a guide to instrument design and as a method for
guarding against confirmation bias.

Results
In this  section we  highlight  evidence from    our   analyses focused   on teachers'   strategies  for eliciting
students' ideas and questions, as well as strategies for developing ideas, questions and questioning skills.
We frame these strategies as instructional moves ­ actions meant to facilitate learning typically through a
combination of speech and gesture. Strategies for eliciting refer to instructional moves made by teachers in
an effort to draw out and make student ideas and questions visible. Strategies for developing pertain to the
"next step" instructional moves made by teachers to respond to student thinking. Though we identify and
describe   instructional moves   separately, we    recognize    that they are  oftentimes     intertwined  during
instruction and that teachers typically enact sequences of moves to support learning.
         Overall, our findings show that all three of the teachers were effective in employing instructional
moves to elicit student ideas and questions. Moreover, their strategies for eliciting were similar. However,
teachers differed widely in their next step instructional moves and how they worked with student ideas and
questions to help students go deeper in their thinking; the teacher whose students scored the lowest on the
student  assessments  made   the  fewest of    these  kinds  of  moves.   To  illustrate these  similarities and
differences,  we  present  below  summaries     of teachers'  moves    with  examples    that characterize   their
instruction.

Strategies for Eliciting Ideas and Questions
All three teachers used the elicitation prompts in the unit materials as well as their own strategies. Among
the three teachers, we identified two common strategies for elicitation ­ posing questions to elicit students'
ideas and questions, and inviting students' ideas and questions. The teachers used these strategies to elicit
both procedural and wonderment thinking. That is, teachers asked and invited procedural questions that
addressed basic information about how to accomplish teacher-structured tasks as well as how to carry out
student-generated ones. They also asked and invited wonderment questions that dealt with hypothesizing
and predicting, explaining and clarifying, and making sense of investigative experiences and results.

Mr. Jimenez
Mr. Jimenez tended to pose questions to elicit student thinking about procedural knowledge for engaging in
tasks, such as what materials to use for investigations, the steps to follow, and how to record work. During
activities and  investigations, Mr.  Jimenez   asked   basic information  questions   to check  in  on   students'
progress (e.g., what are you doing?) and help students in carrying out their tasks (e.g., what will you do
next?) When students experienced difficulties in carrying out their procedures, he tended to pose elicitation
questions to help students move forward in their investigative process (e.g, how does that help answer your
question?).
         Mr. Jimenez also engaged in a regular elicitation pattern of inviting students to share their group
work  experiences   and   outcomes.  He  tended    to structure these  opportunities  as  whole-class    reporting
sessions   in which students    from different  investigative   groups  take turns  stating   their group  ideas,
questions, and findings. Elicitation invitations included such prompts as "what did you research?", what did
you find out?" and "let's have each group tell us what they did". In the following excerpt, Mr. Jimenez
invited students to report their findings as he recorded them on a smart board:
         S1: They live under rocks and in soil.
         S2: When you touch them they roll up...
         T: Okay... what was the other comment you said?
         S: They roll up.
         T: Oh, okay, they roll up.
         S3: They are in different segments.
         S4: They have eyes.
         S5: They don't have eyes!!
         T: There is some disagreement, let's write them both down for now. If you have any
         other ideas, please share.

                                                   264   ·   © ISLS
                                                ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

Ms. Lesh
Ms. Lesh posed procedural and planning questions to her students to ensure that they clearly understood
how to do tasks and to help them in the planning process of their investigations. During whole class
discussions about    planning procedures  for   investigations, Ms.  Lesh   tended to  invite students to help
determine steps and reason through the benefits or drawbacks of following particular steps. For example,
while collectively planning an experiment in which they were going to examine isopods' food preferences,
Ms. Lesh elicited students' ideas regarding the number of isopods needed for the experiment by asking,
how many isopods do we need to be able to answer our question? Students then offered their ideas and
reasons for various numbers. One student's response to the elicitation was to select either 3 or 5 isopods,
"because if isopods moved in even numbers to both sides, it wouldn't be possible to decide."
          When students encountered difficulties during small-group activities and investigations, Ms. Lesh
typically elicited  their ideas  about how the   problem/issue   might  be  resolved,  rather than offering an
immediate   solution.  She  also monitored groups   closely,  encouraging   anticipatory thinking  by  eliciting
students' predictions about what might happen next as they were proceeding through investigations. She
tended to ask students while they were working in groups to explain what they were doing.
          After group investigations, Ms. Lesh tended to have students report out their results as well as
their successes    and challenges in   carrying out their  investigations. Of note  is that Ms.  Lesh  elicited
wonderment questions primarily when prompted to do so in the materials (e.g., prompts in the materials to
generate student-driven questions about isopods).

Ms. Atwell
Ms. Atwell posed questions to elicit students' procedural knowledge for carrying out tasks as well as their
ideas for planning and conducting investigations. Similar to Ms. Lesh, she tended to ask students to report
out on their designs for student-led investigations and then elicit from students their reasoning for their
design decisions (e.g., why did you decide to do it like that?). She also tended to pose questions to elicit
students' ideas about conceptual topics. These elicitation questions were typically framed as wonderment
questions (e.g., what do you think?) that probed students' grasp of science ideas (e.g., what is a habitat ­
what are your ideas?), their ideas about what makes for a good researchable question (e.g., what does a
scientific question involve?), and the kinds of questions that students were working with (e.g., what is your
question?).
          She also elicited conceptual questions from students and structured discussions in a manner that
encouraged students to clarify (e.g., what do you think she means?), build upon (who can add to what was
said?), or counter one another's ideas (e.g., who has a different idea about how we can set this up?). After
investigations, her whole class elicitations tended to focus on what students learned (e.g., what did you find
out?) as well as what new questions they had (e.g., what questions do you have now?).

Strategies for Developing Ideas, Questions and Questioning Skills
All three teachers worked with their students to generate, refine and pursue questions that served to frame
students' investigations and guide their inquiries. In addition, students in all three classes appeared to
benefit when teachers made suggestions and pressed students to clarify and refine their questions and
investigations. However, the three teachers differed in their level of attention to students' ideas, questions,
and questioning skills. Here we highlight the diverse ways in which teachers attended to student thinking.

Mr. Jimenez
Mr. Jimenez tended to incorporate student thinking into whole-class activities and discussions, but often
did not go beyond simple acknowledgement of students' contributions. There were very few instances
where he tried to really work with students on developing their ideas. When he did try to do so, it tended to
be in the context of supporting students in designing investigations. In the following excerpt, Mr. Jimenez
tried through his elaborations and questions to support students in thinking about controlling variables in
their procedures:
          T: So, what materials do you think are necessary to do this investigation or experiment?
          S: Soil.
          T: Soil, okay (writes on "soil" on board). About how much soil do you think is necessary for this?
          S: A handful.
          T: Okay, a handful, uh, so, if we just say a handful and we just put it in the runway, how are we
          going to know if the other side is going to have the same amount, okay? So, what can we do with
          the soil?
          S2: Use cups.
          T: Use cups, okay? Okay, so that's important, so we need to keep the amount of soil the same,
          that's another variable that we need to keep the same.

                                                    265  ·  © ISLS
                                               ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

        Another way that Mr. Jimenez incorporated student thinking into whole-class activities was by
having groups report out on their group activities and learning, and asking individual students to share ideas
and questions. But when students shared results, posed a question, or raised an issue, he tended to simply
acknowledge the contribution and would then move on to another topic. For example, when Mr. Jimenez
encouraged groups to bring out their ideas, he often responded to contributions by saying "next group",
"okay", and "so, now we are going to...".  In this way, Mr. Jimenez structured discourse so that ideas and
questions were elicited but fell short on leveraging those contributions to help deepen students' thinking.

Ms. Lesh
Ms. Lesh actively worked with students to ensure that their questions and procedures were feasible. She
regularly pressed students to refine their questions, often engaging individual students in elaborating on
their questions so she could then help tighten them. When pressing students to be detailed in their
procedures, she explained that as scientists "you have to be exact" and regularly reminded them to "put in
more detail" and "be more specific". When supporting students in refining their research questions, she
tended to revoice their questions and press them to elaborate. Through her questions of their research
questions, students were prompted to clarify and make their questions more feasible for classroom
investigation.
        During end-of-investigation discussions, Ms. Lesh connected student findings and insights to the
work of other groups when the opportunity arose. For example, when a student reported observations that
were similar to the work of another group, Ms. Lesh made explicit the similarities in findings. When Ms.
Lesh took   up students' conceptual  ideas, she tended    to value  and validate  their ideas  with supportive
comments like "you've got it" and "excellent" and expressing excitement through gestures such as high
fives. When students were off the mark in their ideas, she tended to try and redirect student thinking
through clarification questions (e.g., are you really asking about day or are you interested in light vs. dark?)
and explaining her interpretation of students' ideas.

Ms. Atwell
Ms. Atwell worked continuously with students to help them learn how to ask researchable questions. In the
following excerpt, she asked questions to help a student refine a question, and also used the conversation to
model for the class how she was thinking when listening to what students were saying:
        S: what does the climate need to be for them?
        T: what do you mean by climate?
        ...
        T:  (to whole class) What I'm trying to do is paraphrase in my mind what I think she's saying.
        It's a good thing for you to do when you're listening, too.
        T: (to student who asked question) We have temperature questions, but it seems like you're
        going a little further.
        S: Does the isopod's habitat need to be hot and dry or cold and moist?

        Ms. Atwell held inquiry discussions and structured them to involve students in clarifying their
own ideas and questions and exploring others' perspectives. She also invited students to help each other
think through their ideas and questions. For example, when a student shared her prediction about isopods
preferences for location, Ms. Atwell asked the class, "does anyone want to respond?" She then allowed
students to ask clarification questions regarding the initial prediction and encouraged students to provide
reasons why    they did or did  not think the prediction    would  hold true.  In this way, she established  a
discourse environment in which students saw their task as sense making and knowledge building.
        Similar to Mr. Jimenez and Ms. Lesh, Ms. Atwell asked groups to report out their designs for their
student-led investigations and,   once investigations  were  conducted,  encouraged     groups to  report their
findings. Differently, however, Ms. Atwell tended to pose questions, encourage students to pose questions,
and gave  clear  feedback  when   recognizing student    thinking. For  example,  when   a student  group  was
describing the reasoning for their second research design, both Ms. Atwell and a student engaged the
group:
        S1 (G1): Since in the first investigation they liked the moist side...
        T: Good thinking ­ I like how you built on knowledge you already had.
        S2: I have a question, why did you decide to do it like that?
        S1 (G1): We wanted to have it super light and super dark on each side.
        T: So, were you thinking if you had more contrast you might get better data?
        G1: Yes (multiple students respond).
        T: Thanks team.

                                                   266  ·  © ISLS
                                             ICLS 2010     ·  Volume 1

Discussion and Conclusions
       Our comparative case studies revealed that the three teachers differed in the ways they developed
or took up student questions posed in investigations in ways that potentially help explain observed
differences in student learning across classrooms. In Mr. Jimenez' class, where students scored lowest on a
test of their skill in posing investigable questions, the teacher made few moves to help develop student
thinking. By contrast, in the two other classrooms where students did better on the assessment, the teachers
used multiple strategies for developing student questions. Even when implementing the same curriculum
unit, which provided explicit guidance about how to elicit questions and called for multiple iterations in
students' design of investigations, there was significant variation in how teachers took up the materials.
       Implementation variation of this kind is hardly surprising (see, for example, Schneider, Krajcik &
Blumenfeld, 2005), but the particular ways teachers varied and were similar in this study points to specific
aspects of developing students' questioning skills that future curriculum materials may need to consider.
Strikingly, all three teachers (as well as others we observed in this study) were able to use the curricular
guidance in the materials to elicit student questions. The teachers in interview data, not reported here, all
found this aspect easy and interesting to enact. By contrast, teachers had a harder time consistently helping
students develop their ideas. Sometimes, as we report elsewhere (Phillips, Harris, Penuel, & Cheng, 2010),
it was because teachers had to balance considerations of time with the need to give students multiple
opportunities to develop their thinking. But in the successful teachers' classrooms, we also found evidence
of classroom norms developed through sequences of moves described above. The individual moves
employed were in some cases simple and straightforward, but orchestrating them in class was a skill that
varied from teacher to teacher in the study. A single move can be described and pointed out easily, but
learning how to orchestrate them into coherent, effective sequences of "next step" moves takes time and is
likely to develop primarily through reflective practice.
       One conclusion from our findings is that the IHC curriculum materials must provide greater
educative support for teacher learning to develop students' questions. The team that designed the unit
shared our conclusion and developed additional resources to support future teachers' enactment that
illustrate ways to develop teacher questions. Some of these resources included video exemplars from the
two teachers in the study who were more successful in developing student questions. For its part, the
district in the study plans to take the results of our implementation analysis and share our list of discursive
moves with science instructional coaches. Their plan is to use the moves as a lens for observing and
mentoring teachers to make the most of the curriculum materials.
       Future research is needed on strategies to develop students' questioning skills that compare the
efficacy of different sequences of moves for developing questions. Our analysis did not permit a fine-
grained analysis to distinguish how successful the two teachers who had a broader repertoire of moves for
developing questions were. It may be that some strategies are more effective with some students,
depending, for example, on their prior experience with planning investigations. Given that questioning is
such a fundamental aspect of science and most students remain novices at posing and investigating their
own questions, research in this area is an important focus for learning scientists to pursue.

References
Baranes, R., Perry, M., & Stigler, J. W. (1989). Activation of real-world knowledge in the solution of word
       problems. Cognition and Instruction, 6(4), 287-318.
Carlsen, W. S. (1993). Teacher knowledge and discourse control: Quantitative evidence from novice
       biology teachers' classroom. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 30(5), 417-481.
Chin, C., Brown, D. E., & Bruce, B. C. (2002). Student-generated questions: A meaningful aspect of
       learning in science. International Journal of Science Education, 24(5), 521-549.
Chin, C., & Chia, L.-G. (2006). Problem-based learning: Using ill-structured problems in biology project
       work. Science Education, 90(1), 44-67.
Davis, E., & Krajcik, J. (2005). Designing educative curriculum materials to promote teacher learning. Educational
       Researcher, 34(3), 3-14.
Design-Based Research Collective (2003). Design-based research: An emerging paradigm for educational
       inquiry. Educational Researcher, 32(1), 5-8.
Dillon, J. (1988). The remedial status of student questioning. Journal of Curriculum Studies, 20, 197-210.
Gallas, K. (1995). Talking their way into science: Hearing children's questions and theories, responding
       with curricula. New York: Teachers College Press.
Hofstein, A., Navon, O., Kipnis, M., & Mamlok-Naaman, R. (2005). Developing students' ability to ask
       more and better questions resulting from inquiry-type chemistry laboratories. Journal of Research
       in Science Teaching, 42(7), 791-806.
King, A. (1994). Guiding knowledge construction in the classroom: Effects of teaching children how to
       question and how to explain. American Educational Research Journal, 31(2), 338-368.

                                                 267     ·  © ISLS
                                               ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

Krajcik, J. S., Blumenfled, P. C., Marx,  R. W., & Soloway, E. (2000). Instructional, curricular, and
       technological supports for inquiry in science classrooms. In J. Minstrell & E. H. v. Zee (Eds.),
       Inquiring into Inquiry Learning and Teaching in Science (pp. 283-315). Washington, DC:
       American Association for the Advancement of Science.
Lehrer, R., Giles, N. D., & Schauble, L. (2002). Children's work with data. In R. Lehrer & L. Schauble
       (Eds.), Investigating real data in the classroom: Expanding children's understanding of math and
       science (pp. 1-26). New York: Teachers College Press.
Marbach-Ad, G., & Sokolove, P. G. (2000). Can undergraduate biology students learn to ask higher level
       questions? Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 37, 854-870.
Mehan, H. (1979). Learning lessons: Social organization in the classroom. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
       University Press.
Miles, M. B., & Huberman, A. M. (1994). Qualitative data analysis: An expanded sourcebook (2nd ed.).
       Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.
National Research Council (1996). National Science Education Standards. Washington, DC: National
       Academy Press.
National Research Council (2000a). Inquiry and the National Science Education Standards. Washington,
       DC: National Academy Press.
National Research Council (2000b). How people learn: Brain, mind, experience. (Expanded ed.).
       Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
National Research Council (2007). Taking science to school: Learning and teaching science in Grades K-8.
       Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
Nystrand, M., Wu, L. L., & Gamoran, A. (2003). Questions in time: Investigating the structure and
       dynamics of unfolding classroom discourse. Discourse Processes, 32(5), 135-198.
O'Connor, M. C., & Michaels, S. (1993). Aligning academic talk and participation status through revoicing:
       Analysis of a classroom discourse strategy. Anthropology and Education Quarterly, 24, 318-355.
Penuel, W. R., Yarnall, L., Koch, M., & Roschelle, J. (2004). Meeting teachers in the middle: Designing
       handheld computer-supported activities to improve student questioning. In Y. B. Kafai, W. A.
       Sandoval, N. Enyedy, A. S. Nixon & F. Herrera (Eds.), Proceedings of the International
       Conference of the Learning Sciences (pp. 404-411). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Phillips, R. S., Harris, C. J., Penuel, W. R., & Cheng, B. (2010). Teachers managing students' ideas,
       questions, and contributions in the context of an innovative inquiry-based elementary science unit.
       Paper to be presented at the annual meeting of the National Association for Research in Science
       Teaching, Philadelphia, PA.
Reeve, S., & Bell, P. (2009). Children's self-documentation and understanding of the concepts 'healthy' and
       'unhealthy'. International Journal of Science Education, 31(14), 1953-1974.
Rowe, M. B. (1986). Wait time: Slowing down may be a way of speeding up! Journal of Teacher
       Education, 37(1), 43-50.
Scardamalia, M., & Bereiter, C. (1992). Text-based and knowledge-based questioning by children.
       Cognition and Instruction, 9, 177-199.
Schneider, R. M., Krajcik, J., & Blumenfeld, P. (2005). Enacting reform-based science materials: The range of
       teacher enactments in reform classrooms. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 42(3), 283-312.
Schwartz, D. L., & Bransford, J. D. (1998). A time for telling. Cognition and Instruction, 16(4), 475-522.
Schwartz, D. L., Lin, X., Brophy, S., & Bransford, J. D. (1999). Toward the development of flexibly
       adaptive instructional designs. In C. M. Reigeluth (Ed.), Instructional design theories and models:
       A new paradigm of instruction theory (Vol. 2, pp. 183-213). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Shodell, M. (1995). The question-driven classroom: Student questions as course curriculum on biology.
       The American Biology Teacher, 57, 278-281.
van Zee, E. H., Iwasyk, M., Kurose, A., Simpson, D., & Wild, J. (2001). Student and teacher questioning
       during conversations about science. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 38(2), 159-190.
Yin, R. K. (2003). Case study research: Design and methods (3rd ed.). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by grants from the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation and the National Science
Foundation (NSF  #0354453).     The opinions,    findings and  conclusions expressed here are those    of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the funders or the authors' institutions. We gratefully
acknowledge Kari Shutt,  Allison    Moore,   Kathryn   Torres, Kersti  Tyson, and Katie Van   Horn     of the
University of Washington for their assistance with data collection and to Aisha Heredia and Sheila Shea of
SRI International for their assistance with data analysis. We extend special thanks to the teachers and
students who participated in the project.

                                                   268  ·  © ISLS
