                                               ICLS 2010     Volume 2

 FormulaT Racing: Combining Gaming Culture and Intuitive Sense
                         of Mechanism for Video Game Design
                    Nathan R. Holbert, Uri Wilensky, Northwestern University, Evanston, IL
                         Email: nholbert@u.northwestern.edu, uri@northwestern.edu

        Abstract: While video games are typically labeled either commercial or educational, little has
        been done to amplify the educational value of popular commercial games. Using data from a
        pilot study of children playing commercial games we have developed a prototype video game
        called   FormulaT   Racing.   This   game    is   designed   to  fit  into  gaming  culture  while
        simultaneously providing an environment that draws on players' intuitive beliefs to move
        them to a qualitative understanding of basic kinematic principles.

Introduction
Video   games constitute an important   part of  the   lives of youth   in today's  world.  The   PEW  Internet and
American Life Project claims that as many as 97% of American youth play video games and 50% play games
daily for an hour or more (Lenhart et al., 2008). Although much has been written about the potential for video
games   to serve as  powerful  learning environments      in science   (Gee, 2003;  Kafai, 1996),  these  games are
typically dubbed "educational" or "serious" and are not embraced by the mainstream audience.
        We believe that commercial video games are an untapped domain ripe with educational potential. In an
effort to increase the educational value of commercial video games we have designed a prototype game we call
FormulaT Racing. While others have attempted to build "games" to teach kids about kinematic principles, our
game is different in that it was designed to foreground kinematic principles while still being consistent with
current video game culture. Specific design components of FormulaT Racing are based on an analysis of a
previous ethnographic study of children playing commercial racing video games. In this study we uncovered
features of games that instantiated the player's intuitive schema of velocity, acceleration, and momentum. These
design components were then altered and adapted in our design of FormulaT Racing.

Theoretical Framework and Method
Our attempt to create a design framework for increasing the educational potential of popular commercial video
games proceeds in three phases. The first phase of this work was a study involving ethnographic observations
and semi-clinical interviews of participants playing Burnout Paradise on the XBox 360, and Mario Kart Wii on
the Nintendo Wii. These interactions were videotaped, transcribed, and coded inductively in an iterative process
over multiple passes. To uncover the game designs that activate players' intuitive theories of motion we created
an analytical framework that utilizes Roschelle's (1991) concept of registrations and diSessa's (1993) sense-of-
mechanism. Roschelle (1991) describes registrations as, "the way students carve up their sensory experience,
give labels to parts, and assign those labeled parts significance" (p. 9). In our study, a player may develop a
registration of "turning" as a combination of a specific manipulation of the controller as it relates to on-screen
action. To analyze how players label registrations, we borrow diSessa's (1993) notion of sense-of-mechanism.
In diSessa's well-known framework, knowledge elements are composed of phenomenological primitives (p-
prims). While  playing  racing games    players commonly      instantiated   Ohm's  p-prim  (that more force yields
greater result) by "mashing" the gas button even when their vehicle was at its top speed.
        In the second phase of our overall research plan we are constructing a prototype racing game that
incorporates a specific design framework developed from the analysis of the ethnographic study. In the study,
players attended to three key design components: the spatial relationship between the player car and other
vehicles or features on the screen as a representation of velocity, the tendency to assume acceleration was a
static property of the player's vehicle, and the importance of the analog nature of the controller. FormulaT
Racing is designed to look and feel like a typical commercial racing game while incorporating specific and
subtle design tweaks meant to move these intuitive theories of kinematics to a more expert-like understanding.

FormulaT Racing Design
FormulaT Racing was created in the agent-based software NetLogo (Wilensky, 1999). The ability to easily look
"under the hood" and quickly manipulate code makes NetLogo an ideal programming environment for a video
game prototype. FormulaT Racing is a microworld (Edwards, 1995) designed to cue the same registrations and
p-prims found in popular commercial racing games. Specific design features of FormulaT Racing include the
use of a motion-sensitive analog controller, external cues as a context for velocity and acceleration, the use of
formal terminology, "just-in-time + 1" feedback, action-oriented representations for qualitative vector addition,
and a   scaffolding system consisting   of multiple  representations.   These  designs  are intended   to tweak the

                                                   268     ISLS
                                                 ICLS 2010    Volume 2

previously  identified  registrations to   more  accurately    represent velocity   and acceleration  and to  subtly
encourage the player to notice relationships between the two quantities.
         FormulaT Racing puts the player in the shoes of a new driver as they train to join the FormulaT Racing
Circuit. Early  "levels" are structured    as driving skill   tests and take  place on  a straight continuous track.
Examples of skill tests include driving at a constant velocity, driving at constant acceleration, and learning to
manipulate a motion sensitive controller to achieve these desired states. In our observations we noticed that
players typically "mashed" the buttons often leading them to miss the acceleration phase--for them the car was
either going slow, or fast. In FormulaT Racing players utilize a Nintendo Wiimote controller that is motion
sensitive to manipulate their car. Actions were carefully mapped to highlight the vector nature of quantities and
to be body-syntonic and cognitively coherent. For example, acceleration is achieved by rolling the controller
forward (positive) or backwards (negative). Many challenges force the players to dynamically adjust the roll
applied causing them to reflect on acceleration as a changing quantity that directly impacts velocity.
         Before racing, players are given their objective from a pit boss. While racing the pit boss occasionally
gives tips and corrections using audio cues to help the player achieve level objectives. Key to the pit boss design
is the use of formal physics terminology and "just-in-time +1" feedback. Because the informal nature of the
typical language utilized in video game helps to draw the player into the game, it is important for our prototype
to carefully consider the use of formal physics terminology. Our solution was to keep the "attitude" of the
language,  such  as having  the pit   boss speak  in  a  southern   accent, but to use  formal terminology, such  as
"velocity" rather than "speed." When giving corrective advice we decided feedback would be more valuable if it
were given just after it was needed. This "just-in-time + 1" feedback allows the player to reflect on the outcome
of his errant technique so that he can better understand why a certain technique works in a given situation.
         Data  from  ethnographic     observations   suggested   players typically  determined  their own   vehicles
velocity and acceleration by looking at the spatial relationships between the player car and the competition cars.
To utilize this registration, in each of the early levels the player sees his own car, a street complete with lane
markers  spaced  a  regular  intervals, and   a competition   car.  Because  FormulaT   Racing  does  not provide a
speedometer, players must utilize the other car on the track to determine if they are succeeding in the task. For
example, in the constant velocity challenge the player must catch up to another car on the track and match the
other vehicle's speed (the other car moves at a constant velocity). We have also incorporated a velocity vector
addition feature in the disguise of a "reverse time" special ability. Once players obtain this ability they can press
a button that moves their car back a few time steps and reveals an animated vector arrow showing their current
velocity vector. Players can then dynamically draw a new vector that will be added behind the scenes. Through
repeated use players can gain a qualitative sense of vector addition.
         Taking a constructionist design approach (Papert & Harel, 1991) FormulaT Racing also incorporates a
set of tools that encourage reflection by changing the nature of representation. In later levels, rather than drive
the car using a gas and brake button, the player "paints" the racetrack different colors, each color corresponding
to a different speed (acceleration can be painted as well). Another level forces the player to construct a velocity
vs. position graph that the car then matches as it drives around the racetrack. In these levels the player must
demonstrate a deep understanding of the relationship between velocity and acceleration to be successful.

Conclusion
We've presented FormulaT Racing, a prototype video game designed from pilot data of kids playing racing
video games. The intention of FormulaT Racing is to create a game that accomplishes the twin goals of being
consistent with kids' video game culture and making salient core kinematic concepts. FormulaT Racing will
next be implemented in an after-school program. The new game designs will be evaluated by observational data
and with an adapted post-test method. Data from this experiment will be presented with the poster.

References
diSessa, A. A. (1993). Toward an epistemology of physics. Cognition and instruction, 10(2 & 3), 105-225.
Edwards, L. D. (1995). Microworlds as representations. Proceedings of the 2nd International NATO Symposium
         on Advanced Technology and Education
Gee, J. (2003). What video games have to teach us about learning and literacy. New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
Kafai, Y. B. (1996). Learning design by making games: Children's development of design strategies in the
         creation of a complex computational artifact. In Y. B. Kafai & M. Resnick (Eds.), Constructionism in
         practice: Designing, thinking, and learning in a digital world. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Lenhart, A., Kahne, J., Middaugh, E., Macgill, A. R., Evans, C., & Vitak, J. (2008). Teens, Video Games, and
         Civics.
Papert, S., & Harel, I. (1991). Constructionism. New York: Ablex Publishing.
Roschelle, J. (1991). Microanalysis of qualitative physics: Opening the black box. Chicago, IL.
Wilensky,  U.   (1999).  NetLogo.     http://ccl.northwestern.edu/netlogo/.   Center for  Connected   Learning  and
         Computer-Based Modeling, Northwestern University. Evanston, IL.

                                                     269     ISLS
