                                                 ICLS 2010   ·   Volume 1

    Mentor Modeling: The internalization of modeled professional
                                thinking in an epistemic game

         Abstract: Players of epistemic games--computer games that simulate professional practica--
         have been shown to develop epistemic frames: a profession's particular way of seeing and
         solving problems. This study examines the interactions between players and mentors in one
         epistemic game, Urban Science. Using a new method called epistemic network analysis, we
         explore how players develop epistemic frames through playing the game. Our results show
         that players imitate and internalize the professional way of thinking that the mentors model,
         suggesting that mentors can effectively model epistemic frames, and that epistemic network
         analysis is a useful way to chart the development of learning through mentoring relationships.

Introduction
There is   a broad  consensus   that  mentoring  is  an  important   part  of  young  people's  intellectual, social, and
emotional development (Freedman, 1999). In this paper, we look at one powerful form of mentoring--the
mentoring that takes place in professional training--and examine how one feature of professional mentoring--
modeling-- can be used to help players in a computer game learn real-world skills, knowledge, values, and
ways  of  thinking. The   context for  this study   is the   epistemic  game   Urban   Science, a game   modeled      on a
practicum course for graduate urban planning students (Shaffer, 2006b). Epistemic games are computer-based
role-playing games that simulate professional training.
         A critical element of professional practica is the interaction between young professionals and their
mentors   (Schön,   1983,  1987).  In  the  urban    planning    practicum,   students   meet  regularly with   planning
consultants:  experienced  professionals    with  whom       the students    talk about  their  work. These    reflective
conversations  play a critical role in developing a  professional way of thinking.     In Urban Science, mentors--who
are also  called planning  consultants--do   the  same   for   the players.   As  in the planning  practicum,   planning
consultants in Urban Science help novices with the intricacies of the work, provide feedback, and inspire them
when they are stuck.
         A central role of professional mentors, however, is to model the way of thinking that is unique to their
profession: what Shaffer (2006a) calls the epistemic frame. This paper looks at whether this same form of
mentoring takes place in one epistemic game, and if so, whether it has the same effect as mentoring in the
professional context.   We ask to what extent players in an epistemic game imitate the epistemic frame that in-
game mentors model, and whether this imitation leads to the internalization of a professional way of thinking.
While the results are specific to this study, the type of mentoring and learning that happens in epistemic games
could be useful models for designing new types of educational settings, in schools or elsewhere.

Theory
There is a wide body of research on mentoring and its effects on youth development that focuses on the role that
mentors can play in promoting positive behavior and habits in youth (DuBois & Silverthorn, 2005). In terms of
cognitive development, Vygotsky (1978) is important for his work on how the development of the child's higher
cognitive processes depends on the presence of mediating agents in the child's social learning environment.
While Vygotsky     himself "emphasized      symbolic   tools-mediators     appropriated  by children  in the  context    of
particular sociocultural  activities, the most   important    of which     he considered   formal schooling"   (Kozulin,
2003), scholars have extended the discussion of those mediating agents to emphasize mediation through another
human being. Much of the literature on social mediation is concerned with how adults can facilitate the child's
problem solving process by arranging and structuring the problem for them, and by participating in the problem-
solving itself. Joint problem solving (Wertsch, 1978) and other situations where a child's current capabilities are
extended   through  the support   of  an  adult, are   often framed     as "scaffolded"  learning (Wood,   1999)   or    as
cognitive  apprenticeship  (Rogoff,   1990).  Mediating      strategies like  scaffolding, while  perhaps  too  context-
dependent and numerous to be simply classified (Kozulin, 2003), have been well described (Schaffer, 1996), but
how particular aspects of social mediation contribute to a child's cognitive development is unclear. How social
learning processes are converted into internal developmental processes Vygotsky leaves murky, suggesting that
showing "how external knowledge and abilities in children become internalized" is an important agenda.
         In particular, he describes how children imitate problem-solving techniques. As Vygotsky (1978) puts
it, "using imitation, children are capable of doing much more in collective activity or under the guidance of
adults." Children can imitate adults or more advanced peers to handle problems that would otherwise be beyond
them. As Valsiner and Van der Veer (1999) point out, Vygotsky's use of the concept of imitation is more
sophisticated than simple copying; it is part of a learning and developmental process. When Vygotsky argues
that children "can imitate only that which is within... [their] developmental level" (1978), he is describing what

                                                     269   ·  © ISLS
                                                  ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

he calls the zone of proximal development. Problems that are in the learners' zone of proximal development are
not just those problems that they cannot yet do alone; they are problems that they have the potential to one day
solve by themselves. Thus, imitation leads to internalization.
         While Vygotsky used this social learning process to describe young children who were learning to do
simple math problems, the scope of the process is larger. The movement from imitation to internalization is the
process by which, as Vygotsky puts it, learners "grow into the intellectual life of those around them" (1978).
Researchers have described how knowledge is situated in the activity, context, and culture in which it is used
(Collins, Brown, & Holum, 1991; Lave & Wenger, 1991). Hutchins (1995), for example, examined the role that
more experienced naval navigators play in novice crewmembers' development of essential navigational skills
and knowledge. The quartermaster monitors the actions of the novice watch standers as they attempt their
duties, and is ready to help or take over if they are unable to complete the task to the ship's requirements. More
generally, participating in the practices of a professional community, under the supervision and guidance of
mentors, gives individuals access to that profession's repertoire of ways of seeing and solving problems (Lave
& Wenger, 1991). Mentoring practices in professional communities are situated in the activities that the learner
is attempting to master.
         Many professions have institutionalized this mentor-mentee relationship in the form of a professional
practicum. Schön (1983, 1987) describes how novices participate in practices they wish to learn in "simulated,
partial, or protected form" under the guidance of a senior practitioner. This way of learning is suitable for
learning the mores of a professional community because professionals, more than knowing basic facts and using
basic skills, have  a  particular way    of  thinking (Goodwin,      1994). They  make   decisions  based   on a  set of
professional values, and defend those choices with profession-specific modes of argumentation and standards of
evidence--that  is, with  a   particular professional epistemology    (Schön,   1983).  To  learn to participate  in  the
community of practice that Lave and Wenger describe, professionals-in-training need to learn to assume an
identity and values consonant with the fundamental purposes of their profession (Sullivan, 1995).
         Shaffer (2006b), building on professional repertoire, communities of practice, the role of practica in
professional preparation, and Vygotsky's explanation of development, introduces epistemic frame theory. "The
work  of  creative  professionals  is organized   around    epistemic  frames,"  Shaffer (2006b)    argues: the  "skills,
knowledge,    identities, values  and    epistemology  that  professionals   use  to  think in innovative   ways."   Yet
epistemic frames    are   not  merely collections of   these   unrelated elements.   As Shaffer   (2006b) argues,    "the
epistemic frame    of a   profession  is the combination--linked     and  interrelated--of  values,  knowledge,   skills,
epistemology, and identity" that professionals use to see and solve problems. Professionals use their epistemic
frame in the context of professional action. By simulating the world of professional practice, practica provide
learners with the occasion to practice professional action, and thus develop a particular epistemic frame.
         In professional practica, where learners are faced with problems that are often beyond their capabilities,
mentors are there to guide them. Throughout the practicum, mentors monitor learners' performance, intervening
at critical moments of confusion and struggle (Schön, 1983, 1987). While in these cases the mentors may
sometimes instruct in the conventional sense (Schön, 1983, 1987), they mainly function as coaches whose
conversations with the learners' highlight how to navigate the obstacles of the profession. As the novices engage
in the activities of the profession, the mentors reflect, and invite the learners to reflect, on the work. In this
facilitation, mentors reveal to apprentices ways to go about solving problems: they model (Collins, et al., 1991).
Through these reflective conversations, mentors model a way of working that requires the complex of skills,
knowledge, values, identity and ways of thinking associated with the community of practice. In short, they
model the epistemic frame. In modeling the epistemic frame, mentors offer learners a professional vision that
they can imitate and eventually internalize.
         Shaffer (2006a) describes epistemic games as simulations of professional training, and he and others
have shown that those who play them develop epistemic frames (2006a, 2006b; Svarovsky & Shaffer, 2006)
which can persist months after the game is over (Bagley & Shaffer, 2009). As in practica, epistemic games
feature mentors  who      lead learners  to the right way    of working.    In Urban  Science,  for example,   planning
consultants   guide the   players through    a series of  activities drawn   directly from  ethnographic    study of  an
undergraduate planning practicum. Urban Science provides us a case study of mentor-learner interactions that
can show the formation of an epistemic frame. Conversations between players and mentors in Urban Science
can show the extent to which a player not only uses elements of the epistemic frame of a practice, but the extent
to which the player uses elements of the frame the way a more experienced practitioner does.
         In order to accurately capture players' demonstration of epistemic frames while playing epistemic
games, we have developed a method to measure how game participants link the elements of the epistemic frame
during game play. Epistemic Network Analysis (ENA) is a method designed to assess learner performance
based on the theory of epistemic frames. This method measures whether players develop a particular epistemic
frame over the course of epistemic game play (Shaffer, et al., 2009). Epistemic games are based on a theory of
learning that looks not at isolated skills and knowledge, but at the way skills and knowledge are systematically
linked to each other, and linked to a set of values, epistemology and identity markers. To assess a way of

                                                      270  ·  © ISLS
                                               ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

thinking about a professional domain means to measure a learner's formation of connections between frame
elements, because this construction of a network of skills, knowledge, values, identity, and epistemology allows
the learner to   see and  solve problems  as  a professional  does  (Shaffer, et al., 2009). ENA      measures how
epistemic frame elements become linked through the co-occurrence of those elements in discourse. Mapping the
connections between frame elements the way that social network analysis maps connections between people,
ENA assumes that the more times frame elements occur together in discourse, the more closely they are related.
         This study examines how players of Urban Science develop the epistemic frame of urban planning
through one particular feature of the game, namely the mentors' modeling of the epistemic frame. Specifically,
we look at players' pre and post interviews and the reflective conversations between mentors and players to see
whether the players imitate and internalize the epistemic frame that the mentors model. We ask three questions.
First, did the players of Urban Science develop planning epistemic frames? Second, during the game, did the
players  imitate the  epistemic frame that the  in-game   mentors  modeled?   Finally, did the   players' epistemic
frames during the game persist when the mentors were not present after the game?

Methods

Study Design
In  the epistemic game    Urban  Science,  students play  the role of  urban  planners  charged   with  redesigning
neighborhoods in their own city. Game activities were modeled on an ethnographic study of a graduate-level
planning practicum, Urban and Regional Planning 912, at the University of Wisconsin-Madison. Offered as part
of a summer program called College for Kids at the University of Wisconsin-Madison, fourteen middle-school
age students played Urban Science four hours a day during weekdays for four weeks during the summer of
2007. Players had no prior experience with urban planning.
         The four planning consultants in the game were graduate students who underwent a one-day training in
the urban planning profession, the game's activities, and mentoring strategies. The mentors met before each
session to plan for the day's activities, and after each session to reflect on how the session went.

Data Collection
Data were collected through individual interviews with each player before and after the game. The interviews
were composed     of  questions about science,  technology,   and  urban  planning    practices. Pre  and postgame
interviews from the game were recorded and transcribed. The questions asked were:

·        What do think urban planning is?
·        Do you think urban planning is important?
·        What do you think it means to be a planner?
·        How would you say urban planners get information for the plans they propose?
·        Do planners ever work with other people?
·        Do you think environmental issues are important to cities?

Data were also collected through recorded and transcribed interactions between the players and mentors during
the game. Interactions consisted of one-on-one conversations where the mentor approached a player at work and
asked a prepared set of questions, including:

·        What are you working on?
·        How is it going?
·        If not going well: What have you tried? Why?
·        If going well: Why is it going well?

Other interactions consisted of team meetings where the players stopped working, and met as a group to reflect
on the work that they had been doing that day or during the previous activity. The mentor facilitated the
meeting, asking questions that included:

·        What were you working on today/before?
·        How did it go?
·        What did you try/How did you do it? Why?
·        How would you do it differently next time?    Why?

Some    interactions were spontaneous  conversations   during  game   play. These  interactions   were  initiated by
players in need of some help, or by a mentor who observed that guidance was needed. The mentor usually asked
the questions detailed above, but depending on the nature of the situation, the conversations varied.

                                                   271  ·  © ISLS
                                               ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

Data analysis

Coding
Transcriptions from individual interviews were segmented into units representing one complete answer to a
question, and included  any  follow-up    questions or   clarifications between   the player and  the interviewer.
Transcriptions from in-game interactions between mentors and players were segmented into units representing
one complete interaction between a player, or group of players, and mentor. A single rater coded all excerpts for
elements of an urban planning epistemic frame: the interrelated set of skills, knowledge, values, identity and
epistemology of the profession. The in-game interactions were coded both for the players' epistemic frames and
the mentors' frames. Table 1 describes the analytic codes used in our qualitative data analysis of the in-game
discourse. The analysis of the pre and post interviews used the same analytic codes.

Table 1: Analytic codes used in qualitative data analysis of in-game discourse
Code              Description                  Player Example                          Mentor Example
Skills            Abilities needed tobecome an urban plannerCrime I managed to keep low byjust not adding too much highdensity housing.Are there other things youcan change into housing?
Knowledge         Aspects of urbanplanning domainknowledgeOne of the stakeholders wants aAnything else in terms oflot of housing.... and I'm makingzoning that you think yousure that the business, trash, andmight have to balance?crime don't go up too high.
                                               Mentor: What did they say?              But is there a way we can
                  Feelings of belonging to     Player 1: that our plan was             look at it as planners?
Identity          a urban planning             sophisticated....community or of being aMentor: did you feel
                  professional                 sophisticated, presenting?
                                               Player 1: more...  than   school
Values            Things that are importantto urban planningpracticeIt was pretty easy to please mystakeholders, but this planprobably wouldn't work very wellfor anyone else.They [stakeholders] are allconcerned about the samething or different things?
                                               That's a justification we can have      Alright, so then what would
Epistemology      Ways of thinking aboutor justifying activitywithin the urbanplanning communityfor crime, that when we added thebe a justification for theneeded housing for people whostakeholder who wants itwork in the Schenk-Atwoodway lower, what would youneighborhood and need to livesay to that stakeholder?there, in order to do that, crime
                                               went up by one incident per year.

For example,  if during a  conversation   with a planning    consultant  a player mentions   the value of serving
stakeholders and the skill of zoning particular parcels to create a site plan that will satisfy those stakeholders,
that player's excerpt is coded for values and skills, and those elements are considered linked at that moment.
Similarly, if during a conversation a mentor asks a player to justify a particular zoning choice in light of a
particular stakeholder's needs, that mentor's excerpt is coded for values and epistemology, and those elements
are considered linked in that moment.

Dynamic epistemic network graphs

Epistemic adjacency matrices
For this study, the epistemic frame of urban planning is assumed to have 5 elements: skills, knowledge, identity,
values, and epistemology. For any participant in Urban Science, we look at each data segment for evidence that
the participant is using one or more of the elements of the urban planning epistemic frame. To construct an
epistemic network from data such as this, we create an adjacency matrix for that player at that data point,
recording the links between the elements of the frame for which there is evidence. For example, if in a particular
segment, a player uses skills and knowledge, a link would be considered to exist between them.
By representing the epistemic frame in use during a segment as an adjacency matrix, we use the tools of
network analysis to examine the cumulative impact of strips of activity on a developing epistemic frame. To
construct a player's cumulative adjacency matrix, we sum the adjacency matrices of the segments of interest.
We computed a series of epistemic adjacency matrices:

                                                  272  ·   © ISLS
                                              ICLS 2010  ·    Volume 1

    ·   one for each player's pre interview
    ·   one for each player's post interview
    ·   one for each player's in-game interactions, weeks 1-3
    ·   one for each player's in-game interactions in week 3 only
    ·   one for the players' collective in-game interactions, weeks 1-3
    ·   one for the mentors' collective in-game interactions, weeks 1-3

Derived Network Characteristics
Weighted density provides a measure of a frame's complexity: the overall strength of association of the frame
(Shaffer, et al., 2009). We compute the weighted density of an epistemic network by calculating the square root
of the sum of the squares of the associations between individual elements in the network. In order to compare
weighted densities when  there were   a  variable  number      of   strips of activity, we normalized  the data by
calculating an adjusted weighted density. We calculated the adjusted weighted density by dividing the weighted
density by the number of its constituent strips of activity.
        Relative centrality is a measure of the relative weight of an epistemic network's constituent frame
elements. By extension from the weighted density of the network as a whole, we compute the weight of a frame
element from the square root of the sum of squares of its associations with its neighbors. Measuring the strength
of association for a given frame  element    emphasizes       those  elements  with tighter  linkages to individual
neighbors. We compute the relative centrality of an individual frame element by dividing its weight by the
frame element with the greatest weight in the network (Shaffer, et al., 2009).

Statistical tests
To compare the complexity of the players' epistemic frames between pre and post interviews, we calculated the
weighted density of their frames based on their answers to pre and post interview questions. We then used a
paired t-test to determine whether or not the weighted density of the players' frames significantly increased
between the pre and postgame interviews.
        To determine whether the players' in-game frames persisted after the game, we tested whether the
adjusted weighted density of the players' 3rd week frames was correlated with the weighted density of their post
interview frames. One player's third week consisted of only one interaction, so that player's data was removed.

Results
Data in this section support three claims about the experience of players in the epistemic game Urban Science.
First, players developed epistemic frames by playing Urban Science. Second, the players imitated the epistemic
frame modeled by the in-game mentors. Third, the players' frames, as developed in the game, persisted even
when the mentors are not present, after the game.

Developing an epistemic frame
The matched pair questions players answered in post interviews contained more co-occurring frame elements
than those answered in pre interviews. As a result, the weighted density of the players' post interview frames
was significantly greater than that of their pre interviews (mean pre=0.1, mean post=4.4; p<0.01).
        These changes in weighted density corresponded to a qualitative difference between players' pre and
post frames. For example, one player, when asked, "What do you think it means to be a planner" in the pre
interview, replied, "You sort of sketch out and you sort of visualize what will go where and how that will work
out." In the post interview, the player answers the same question with considerably more detail:

        "I think it means collecting as much information as you can and it means listening to peoples'
        opinion and taking them into consideration. It also takes humor because you're not going to
        plan a place by yourself, you're going to have to collaborate with a lot of people and it takes a
        lot of compromising and coming up with justifications. The main goal is trying to plan and
        design a city and trying to improve it and making it the best you possibly can to fit the
        people's needs and what they want and trying to come up with a solution for all the different
        opinions and point of views."

Before the game, the player's answer was very vague and said generally that planners think ahead by sketching
and visualizing, without any mention of the process of learning about stakeholders' needs, or working with
colleagues to meet the needs of the stakeholders and the community as a whole. After the game, the player's
more elaborate response refers to important elements of the epistemic frame of urban planning, like research,
collaboration, compromise, and justification in the service of improving a community for its constituents.

Imitating the modeled epistemic frame

                                                  273  ·     © ISLS
                                               ICLS 2010    ·  Volume 1

In their conversations with players, mentors modeled the planning epistemic frame. For example, in week 1, a
mentor reinforced a planning value by prompting a team of players arguing about zoning decisions to remember
that their job is to represent the needs of stakeholders:

        Mentor: Are you arguing your opinion or your stakeholder's opinion?
        Player 1: My stakeholders.
        Player 2: My stakeholders' opinion.   I don't agree with it, but I'm arguing for them.

The mentor's question makes clear what the correct answer is. The players' responses adopt the mentor's use of
the professional term "stakeholder" and the planning value of advocating for the stakeholders' opinions as
opposed to one's own whims.
        The   mentor then  follows  up   with another     question  designed  to remind the planners that they are
collaborators, not adversaries:

        Mentor: My other question is: whose team are you on?
        Players 1 & 2: My stakeholders...
        Player 1: Oh, our team.   Our team!

By bringing to the players' attention that they are on a team together, the mentor gets Player 1 to shift her
perspective from that of a simple advocate for one stakeholder group to that of a colleague whose job it is to
work with a team to serve the greater public good by satisfying all of the stakeholder groups.
        In week 2, player 1, now on a different team with a different mentor, and working with a different
stakeholder group, now thinks of her teammates' stakeholder groups when considering zoning changes:

        Mentor 2: ....do you feel like there are some decisions you would adjust based on what you
        heard here and going forward to a final plan?
        Player 1: yeah cause we gotta compromise, I can't only want these people's views to push
        through all the problems.
        Mentor  2: So what are some of the ones   you feel you might have to adjust?    Taxes was one...
        Player 1: I don't know we have a lot of things in common... Robert's group doesn't really
        care about greenspace, but... Cheryl's group does want more greenspace and so does mine so
        that's one thing we have in common and also everyone here increased housing in their plan...
        and I think everyone wants low crime... I don't think anyone wants high crime...

The player is now prepared to compromise because she knows that planners do not only serve one group of
stakeholders. She is ready to figure out how to serve the stakeholders by finding what they want "in common."
        In other words, players emphasized the same frame elements that the mentors emphasized. In terms of
relative centrality, the players' frame elements followed the same sequence as those of the mentors (Figure 1):

                    Figure 1: Collective relative centrality of players' and mentors' epistemic frames

Together, knowledge and skills were the most central for both players and mentors; as the most central frame
elements, their relative centrality was always at or near 100. For both the mentors and players, the values frame
element was   the third most    central element, the epistemology       frame element was the fourth most  central
element, and the identity frame element was the least central element. In the conversations between mentors and
players, mentors modeled a particular planning epistemic frame, and the players emulated that frame.

                                                   274    ·  © ISLS
                                               ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

Internalizing the modeled epistemic frame
Comparing players' frames as adopted in the game with their frames as demonstrated in post-interviews shows a
significant relationship between them. The adjusted weighted density of the players' frames in the third week of
the game correlates to the weighted density of the players' post interview frames (R = 0.6535737, p = .021).
         In summary, these results suggest that a) players began to develop an urban planning epistemic frame
by playing Urban Science; b) during the game, players adopted the version of the urban planning frame that was
modeled  by   in-game  mentors;   and, c) the  planning   frame that  the  mentors  modeled   and   players  imitated
persisted after the game when the mentors were not present.

Discussion
This study examined whether a feature of one particular form of mentoring--the modeling of professional
thinking that takes place in a professional practicum--was reproduced in the epistemic game Urban Science.
Specifically, we   looked   at whether  mentors'   modeling   of   professional  thinking  contributed    to players'
development of the epistemic frame of urban planning. We addressed this issue in three parts.
         First, we used ENA to examine the weighted density of players' epistemic frames in pre and post
interviews.   The players'  post-interview  frames  were    significantly  denser. This   change    suggests  that in
answering the post-interview questions, players saw more connections between the urban planning epistemic
frame elements    than in the  pre-interview. That is, the  players  of Urban   Science   began  to develop   a more
complex urban planning epistemic frame. If, as Shaffer (2006b) suggests, professional thinking is characterized
by  "the combination--linked     and interrelated--of  values,  knowledge,     skills, epistemology,   and   identity,"
players of Urban Science appear to have developed a professional way of thinking by playing Urban Science.
         Next, we used ENA to examine the relative centrality of individual frame elements of both the players'
and mentors' frames, as enacted in their conversations together. In game conversations, the players emphasized
the same frame elements as the mentors. As might be expected of more experienced practitioners, the mentors
connected more frame elements more often, suggesting a more mature epistemic frame. But the ordinal position
of the players' epistemic frame elements, and thus the shape of their epistemic frame, was the same as that of
their mentors'. In other words, the players of Urban Science were able to imitate the mentors' professional way
of talking about urban planning work. If, as Vygotsky (1978) argues, children "can imitate only that which is
within...[their] developmental level," the players' successful emulation of the mentors' modeling suggests that
the game's activities were within the players' zone of proximal development.
         The  zone  of   proximal  development   only    describes the  potential  for  internalization. In  order to
determine whether the mentors' modeled frame was adopted, not parroted, by the players, we compared the
weighted density of the players' frames in the third week of the game with their post-interview frames. The
weighted densities of these frames were correlated, suggesting that the imitated frame persisted after the game.
This persistence is evidence that the players internalized professional thinking such that they no longer needed
the mentors'   scaffold.  The  urban   planning professional   thinking    was in  the  players' zone    of  proximal
development during the game, but in their actual development level when the game was finished. While it is
unclear  exactly  when  the transformation  took place,   the players   of Urban   Science  began   to achieve  some
autonomy in their ability to think as professionals, and that this autonomy was derived from their interactions
with mentors. Vygotsky's hypothesis presupposes that learning processes, such as the imitation of modeled
behavior, are converted into internal developmental processes. While this study does not claim to completely
demonstrate the process by which children internalize external knowledge and abilities, the results presented
here suggest that the imitation of modeled behavior is one step in the process of internalization. A second
significant finding is that epistemic network analysis was shown to be a useful way to measure the development
of epistemic frames, as well as the relationship between the players' and mentors' frames.
         This study has limitations, which include a small sample with insufficient grounds for making causal
claims, coarse-grained treatment of the epistemic frame, no treatment of mentoring strategies, and the use of a
new and in-development method for understanding epistemic frame development. Still, the results here suggest
several implications for people interested in mentoring, and in particular the ways players of games receive
guidance from mentors. This study shows that mentors can model the sophisticated way that urban planners
think, and that players of the game not only imitate the mentors, but develop the ability to think as urban
planners themselves. In subsequent studies we are further examining the role of professional mentoring in
epistemic games, and in particular, using epistemic network analysis to investigate the process by which players
of epistemic games internalize epistemic frames.

References
Bagley, E. A. S., & Shaffer, D. W. (2009). When people get in the way: Promoting civic thinking through
         epistemic gameplay. International Journal of Gaming and Computer-Mediated Simulations, 1(1), 36-
         52.

                                                   275  ·  © ISLS
                                               ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

Collins, A., Brown, J. S., & Holum, A. (1991). Cognitive apprenticeship: Making thinking visible. American
         Educator, 15(3), 6-11.
DuBois, D. L., & Silverthorn, N. (2005). Natural mentoring relationships and adolescent health: Evidence from
         a national study. American Journal of Public Health, 95(3), 518-524.
Freedman,    M. (1999). The   kindness of strangers:  Adult   mentors,   urban youth, and  the  new voluntarism:
         Cambridge Univ Press.
Hutchins, E. (1995). Cognition in the Wild. Cambridge, Mass: MIT press.
Kozulin,  A.  (2003).  Psychological tools and   mediated    learning:Vygotsky's  educational   theory in cultural
         context. In A. Kozulin, B. Gindis, V. S. Ageyev & S. M. Miller (Eds.), Vygotsky's educational theory
         in cultural context (pp. 15-38): Cambridge University Press.
Lave, J., & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning: Legitimate peripheral participation: Cambridge University
         Press.
Rogoff, B. (1990). Apprenticeship in thinking: Cognitive development in social context. New York: Oxford
         University Press
Schaffer, R.  (1996).   Joint involvement  episodes   as    context  for development.  In H.   Daniels  (Ed.), An
         Introduction to Vygotsky (pp. 251-280). London: Routledge.
Schön, D. A. (1983). The reflective practitioner: How professionals think in action: Basic Books.
Schön, D. A. (1987). Educating the reflective practitioner: Toward a new design for teaching and learning in
         the professions: Jossey-Bass San Francisco.
Shaffer, D. W. (2006a). Epistemic frames for epistemic games. Computers & Education, 46(3), 223-234.
Shaffer, D. W. (2006b). How computer games help children learn: Palgrave Macmillan.
Shaffer, D. W., Hatfield, D. L., Svarovsky, G. N., Nash, P., Nulty, A., Bagley, E. A. S., et al. (2009). Epistemic
         Network Analysis: A prototype for 21st Century assessment of learning. The International Journal of
         Learning and Media, 1(2), 33-53.
Sullivan, W. M. (1995). Work and integrity: The crisis and promise of professionalism in America. New York:
         Harpercollins.
Svarovsky, G. N., & Shaffer, D. W. (2006). Engineering girls gone wild: developing an engineering identity in
         digital zoo.
Valsiner, J., & Van der Veer, R. (1999). The encoding of distance: The concept of the "zone of proximal
         development" and its interpretations. In P. Lloyd & C. Fernyhough (Eds.), Lev Vygotsky: Critical
         assessments (Vol. 3, pp. 3-31). London: Routledge.
Vygotsky,  L.   S. (1978). Mind  in  society: The development     of  higher mental  processes. Cambridge,  MA:
         Harvard University Press
Wertsch,  J. V. (1978).  Adult-child interaction  and the   roots of  metacognition. Quarterly  Newsletter of  the
         Institute for Comparative Human Development, 2(1), 15-18.

                                                  276  ·   © ISLS
