                                                  ICLS 2010     Volume 2

           I Don't Do Science: Urban Minority Girls' Science Identity
            Development in an Informal Authentic Science Context

          Abstract: Urban middle school girls participated in a 10-week voluntary, after-school science
          club, Science    STARS,   designed    to foster     positive science  identity development     through
          collaborative, authentic science experiences, culminating in recognition of this work among peers
          and community members. This study explores the specific roles and paths five participating girls
          took through STARS as they developed a more positive scientific identity and the role of the
          facilitators in that development.

Introduction
Urban middle school girls (N=60) at three sites participated in a 10-week after school science club, Science STARS
(Students Tackling Authentic & Relevant Science), designed to foster positive science identity development as well
as developing expertise in understandings of both science content and process. However, there is very little research
about what   experiences,  tools, and other   conditions  within    informal  science environments    enable this kind  of
identity  development   (NAS,  2009), especially   within   the  under-represented  population    of urban female  youth.
During Science STARS, participants met weekly to develop and conduct a student-chosen investigation relating to
the overarching theme "Shrinking our Ecological Footprints". As urban middle school girls successfully engaged in
scientific discourse that had a perceptible positive impact on their world, they developed a meta-awareness of their
possible roles in science, and they were able to see themselves as more interested in the kinds of work being done,
the usefulness of the results of science, and their competence as contributors to this work. This study explores the
specific roles and paths five participating girls took through STARS as they developed a more positive scientific
identity. Each   small  group is  facilitated by pre-service    science  teachers enrolled  in  a graduate   program   that
emphasizes reform-based teaching practices in the context of social justice. This study also explores the impact of
these facilitators on participants' identity development.

Literature Review & Theoretical Framework
Recent research suggests that identity development plays a pivotal role in how girls come to see themselves as
science learners and contributors (Brickhouse & Potter, 2001). This is particularly problematic for urban middle
school girls who often belong to low socio-economic classes and race/ethnicities that have been traditionally under-
represented in science (Brown, 2004). There is evidence that girls' attitudes towards and achievements in science
begin to  drop   during middle    school (Atwater,  Wiggins,     &   Gardner,  1995), a  particularly important   time for
developing high school trajectories and beyond (AAUW, 1996). Multiple reasons for this phenomenon have been
identified including: girls do not find school science interesting because they do not see its relevance to their lives or
communities and perceive scientific work as isolated and non-collaborative (Miller, Blessing, & Schwartz, 2006);
girls are marginalized in school science in subtle yet pervasive ways, including differential treatment from teachers,
who   have  narrow  expectations   about  what   boys  and    girls achieve, and  from  counselors,   who  make   different
recommendations    about   science course   selections  for   girls (Sadker  & Sadker,   1994); and   social and  parental
expectations often convey discriminatory messages that preference males and white peoples' participation in science
(Dentith, 2008). The paradoxical reality is that the very discourse that prescribes and thus restricts one's identity can
serve as the context where a person renegotiates a new identity (Holland, Lachicotte, Skinner, & Cain, 1998).

Research Design
An exploratory case-study approach was used to address two questions: In what ways did STARS impact individual
participant's development of a science identity? What features of the learning environment emerged as central for
framing girls' development? Data sources, spanning both emic and etic, included: pre-STARS surveys focused on
characterizing participants' science identity, mid- and post-interviews, weekly participant journals, researcher field
notes, and audio transcriptions of STARS sessions. At the conclusion of Science STARS, each participant was
showcased in a mini-documentary about the science they studied and their role as scientists. Data analysis was
conducted by four science educators considering lenses of identity development (Wenger, 1998; Barton, Tan, &
Rivet, 2008), ecological features of given environments that contribute to learning (Newstetter, 2009) as well as
through   open-coding   of emergent  themes    (Strauss &     Corbin,  1990). Major   codes focused   on  girls' forms  of
participation, roles of facilitators and environmental features. Codes and categories were triangulated among the
four researchers.

                                                      270      ISLS
                                                    ICLS 2010      Volume 2

Results
Five participants were selected as case studies because they expressed on their surveys views of self as not a science
person, not good in science, and/or having no expectations to use science in their future at the start of STARS. They
represented the target audience for Science STARS. In the poster presentation we will present detailed data on all
five case. Here we briefly detail two cases, Brittany and India. Both Brittany and India experienced significant shifts
during STARS as evidenced by the increased depth of their science interactions. Often these interactions involved
shifting from private participation (with a peer or a facilitator) to voluntary public participation. They both also
evidenced shifts in identity towards seeing self as scientist, moving from an outsider perspective to an inbound
perspective  (Wenger,   1998). Specific     ecological features    (Newstetter, 2009)    of  STARS'     work   that contributed
positively and in identifiable ways to their development involved the impact of wrestling with uncertainty (key for
India), the role of embodied learning (key for Brittany), experiencing agency (key for both), and making room for
diverse  participation (key for  both).     In Brittany's and     India's  groups,  the facilitators made  room     for  diverse
participation by creating space, advocating for each girl individually, and at times scaffolding participation until the
girl in question began to volunteer her involvement. The facilitators also routinely physically engaged the girls with
science artifacts, and respected student voices by letting the individual girls' ideas guide the direction of the next
session. Lastly, the   facilitators' attention  (or lack  of)   to uncertainty in   science  was   significant in   the learning
environment.

Discussion & Implications
Implications  of this  work  are     two pronged.    First, the    results of  this study   suggest  that  future   design  and
implementation of science programs should seek to foster participation among marginalized youth, whose voices are
often missing from the scientific enterprise, through 1) authentic science experiences, 2) continued utilization of
informal contexts which can replace the high pressure of seemingly irrelevant high stakes testing with a perceptibly
more authentic and meaningful high stakes assessment, such as the public documentary, and by 3) capitalizing on
the brief window offered by the middle school years as a critical time to nurture a positive view of self as scientist.
Second,  this research   contributes     to our   understanding     of  the  role   of  the facilitator to create    space  for
engagement/participation and to instigate/initiate identity transformation. Questions are raised as to how best to
support the facilitators to capitalize on the opportunities they have to impact science identity development.

References
American Association of University Women Educational Foundation. (1996). Girls in the Middle. Washington, DC:
         American Association of University Women.
Atwater, M., Wiggins, J., & Gardner, C. (1995). A study of urban middle school students with high and low
         attitudes toward science. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 32, 665-677.
Barton, A., Tan, E., & Rivet, A. (2008). Creating hybrid spaces for engaging school science among urban middle
         school girls. American Educational Research Journal, 45(1), 68-103.
Brickhouse, N. & Potter, J. (2001). Young women's scientific identity formation in an urban context. Journal of
         Research in Science Teaching, 38(8), 965-980.
Brown, B. (2004). Discursive identity: Assimilation into the culture of science and its implications for minority
         students. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 41(8), 810-834.
Dentith, A. (2008). Smart girls, hard-working girls but not yet self-assured girls: The limits of gender equity politics.
         Canadian Journal of Education, 31(1), 145-166.
Holland, D., Lachicotte Jr., W., Skinner, D., & Cain, C. (1998). Identity and Agency in Cultural Worlds. Cambridge,
         MA: Harvard University Press.
Miller, P., Blessing, J., and Schwartz, S. (2006). Gender differences in high-school students' views about science.
         International Journal of Science Education, 28(4), 363-381.
National Academies Press. (2009) Learning Science in Informal Environments. Washington, D.C.: National
         Academies Press.
Newstetter, Wendy. (2009) Learners in complex settings: Agentive Learning in University Research Laboratories.
         Paper presented at the National Association for Research in Science Teaching. Garden Grove, CA.
Sadker, M., & Sadker, D. (1994). Failing at fairness: How our schools cheat girls. New York: Simon & Schuster.
Strauss, A. L. and J. Corbin (1990). Basics of qualitative research: Grounded theory procedures and techniques.
         Newbury Park, Calif., Sage Publications.
Wenger,   E.  (1998).  Communities       of practice:  Learning,     meaning,   and     identity. Cambridge,    Great   Britain:
         Cambridge University Press.

                                                        271      ISLS
