                                             ICLS 2010     ·  Volume 2

       Expertise in Engineering Learning: Examining Engineering
         Students' Collaborative Inquiry of Computer Systems
 Yuen-Yan Chan, The University of Hong Kong, Pokfulma Road, H.K., Hong Kong SAR, yychan8@hku.hk

        Abstract:    This  work  studies   how    expertlike  engineering   undergraduates   learned  about
        computer    systems   modeling  and  simulation      through  collaborative inquiry. From   a  close
        examination   of  the  student artifacts, noticeable   dfiferences between   expertlike engineering
        learners and their non-expertlike counterparts werefound. Such differences were consistent to
        literature. Although    inquiry-based     learning   and collaborative learning  have   long   been
        recommended as pedagogy to enhance student learningand knowledge construction, experts
        and novices still demonstrate various differences ni their collaboration and inquiry process.

Introduction
Engineering is one of the difficult knowledge domani s. Engineers not only need to understand how computer
systems work,   they  also  need to know    how   to  develop such   systems   and  to optimize  their  performance.
Traditional computer systems often involve only oneclient (the entity that requests) and one server t(he entity
that responses with requested service). However, astechnologies advances, nowadays computer systems usch as
those for handling stock exchange and supply chainmanagement often adopt a multi-tier architecture. Anumber
of recent studies take in the perspective of learnnig sciences to look into engineering student learnni g (such as
Chan, 2007; Chan, Hui & Dickinsonet al., 2009).
        There are a few works that distinguish between expert and novice learners in the engineering subject
domain. For example, Basili, Selby and Hutchens (1986) studied how experts and novices developed software
with specific requirements, and found that expertscould analyze the documents using their "own" way nad
work effectively, but novices needed training and erquired a procedural approach. Schenk, Vitalari andDavis
(1998) investigated how expert and novice system analysts approached the information systems differenlty and
accomplished the tasks differently. They identifiedthe differences in their problem-solving approachin which
experts analysis were more creative. Soloway and Ehrilich (1984) explicitly designed an experiment tostudy
between expert and novice programs and notice thatexpert programmers possessed and used programming
plans and rules of programming discourse when writni g programs, while novice programmers did not.

Contributions of the Current Work
I am interested to find out the characteristics demonstrated by expertlike engineering learners who aer engaged
in a collaborative inquiry learning environment. Idistinguish and illustrate the differences betweenexpert and
novice  engineering  learners  with the  subject   contents  of  computer   systems  modeling   and   simulations. In
particular, I attempt to characterize expertlike engineering students in terms of the followings:
    1.  How they approach to the problem? Do they approachit with a specific goal?
    2.  How are their problem-solving behaviors different rfom their peers? How they make use of given
        information and available resources to solve the porblem?
    3.  How they organize and represent the subject knowledge?
    4.  How they collaborate within the group to undergo inquiry-based learning?
        I answer the above questions by exploring the student artifacts produced from a collaborative inquiry-
based  learning conducted   in a class  of engineering undergraduates.      My  work   may   contribute disciplinary-
specific examples and provide reference cases for hte learning scientists.

Methods and Data Sources
The participants were 124 engineering undergraduates (104 males, 20 females) at the second to the thidr year
(70 second year students, 54 third year students).They took a course for computer simulations and sytsem
modeling. These participants formed into groups of3 to 5, and were engaged a collaborative-inquiry porject
about capacity sizing for an imaginary trading sysetm. The students formed into 32 groups according totheir
own preference.  Groups    with  more  than half   of  the   members having  achieved  G.P.A.   of 3.5  or above   are
identified as expert groups. Based on this criterion, 6 out of the 32 groups were identified as expertgroups;
these groups involved 24 students (19% of all partciipants, 21 boys and 3 girl). The author admits that such
selection criterion is not scientific enough. As aremedy, the two groups were further compared in temr s of final
examination scores   in the course. The    final  examintaion   was  an individual  assessment  of students'  ovearll
learning and its assessment was independent of theproject. Students in the expert groups (M = 83.00,SD = 1.93)
different from their counterparts (M = 64.47, SD =11.11) significantly (p < .05) in terms of final eaxmination
performance. Rather then naming the rest of the clsas as novice group, I refer them as the non-expertgroups in
the rest of this paper. The participants were requried to submit project deliverables that document all planning,

                                                   272  ·  © ISLS
                                              ICLS 2010   ·   Volume 2

findings, and reflections along the project learning process as detailed as possible. Such deliverablse reflected
how students collaboratively tackled and understoodthe design problems.

Results
I compared   the artifacts of  the  expert  groups with that    from  the    rest of  the class.     In  accordance to hte
perspectives reviewed in (Bereiter and Scardamalia,1993; Bruer, 1993; Chi et al., 1981; Chi, Glaser & Rees,
1982), the following characteristics about how exprets learn through collaboration and inquiry are identified.
    1.  Expert   groups   practiced progressive  problem     solvingwhile     most    of their non-expert     counterparts
        adopted the best-fit strategy.
    2.  Expert groups held knowledge-building goals and demonstrated extensive efforts in seeking external
        but related information.
    3.  Expert groups approached the problem with underlying principles and do not take in given information
        as is.
    4.  Expert   groups  demonstrated    more  sophisticated    reprseentation    and organization      of knowledge   and
        concepts.
    5.  Expert groups adopted contemporary project managemnet principles as strategies for collaboration and
        inquiry.
Based on the findings from this study, the followings are suggested for possible follow up in the future:
     ·  Although inquiry-based learning and collaborative elarning have been recommended as a pedagogy to
        enhance    student learning  and  knowledge    construction,  expertlike     learners  still demonstrate   various
        differences in their collaboration and inquiry proecss. Aligning to the previous literatures, they behave
        differently in  a  number   of aspects  such as   the problem  solving     behaviors   and    the  organization of
        knowledge.   The   findings  discussed  in the  previous   esction   may   provide    additional    information to
        learning scientists for improving learning with similar settings.
     ·  The current study provides important information about engineering learning and instruction, However,
        it is remarked that engineering educators should beaware about the prior knowledge that the students
        possess, and avoid exposing novices to expert modesl (Bransford, Brown & Cocking, 2000: p.50).
     ·  Findings   from    the current  studies do   provide     some  useful     hints  on   better    implementation  of
        constructivist  pedagogies  in  the engineering   discipline, as    well  as  other  disciplines   in general. For
        example, contemporary project management skills suhc as better planning, testing, and documentation
        of the  inquiry process,   can be  introduced  to   the  sut dents. One   can   also help    the students defining
        project goal and objectives at the beginning of theprojects. In particular, my findings also provide
        information on how expertlike learners work with system design and computer programming, which
        are the core competencies for engineering students.

References
Basili, V. R., Selby, R. W, and Hutchens, D. H., (1986) Experimentation in software engineering,IEEE
        Transaction on Software Engineering, 12(7), 733 - 743.
Berieter, C., Scardamalia, M. (1993),Surpassing Ourselves: An Inquiry into the Nature and Implications of
        Expertise, Chicago, IL: Open Court.
Bransford, J. D., Brown, A. L., and Cocking, R.R. 2(000), How People Learn: Brain, Mind, Experience, and
        School, Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press, 2000.
Bruer, J. (1993) Schools for thought: A Science of Learning in the Classroom. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Chan,  Y.-Y.   (2007). Teaching    Queueing   Theory   with   na Inquiry-Based       Learning  Approach:      A   Case  for
        Applying WebQuest in a Course in Simulation and Statistical Analysis. In Proceedings of the 37th
        IEEE/ASEE Frontiers in Education conference, (F3C-1-6), Wisconsin, US.
Chan, Y.-Y., Hui, D., & Dickinson, A., R. et al. (2010). !"#$"%%&$"#' ()*&%+,-.'/'0),,%001)2'$"$*$+*$3%' 4$*-'
        #$1*%5'0*)5%"*0'$"'0,$%",%'+"5'*%,-"(2(#6'$"'7("#'8("#9'!"""#$%&'()#*'#"+,)-#./012:';<='>';?;9''
Chi, M. T. H., Feltovich, P. J. and Glaser, R. (1981). Categorization and representation of physics porblems by
        experts and novices. Cognitive Science, 5(2), 121 ­ 152.
Chi, M. T. H., Glaser, R., and Rees, E. (1982). Expertise in problem solving. In R. Sternberg (ed),Advances in
        the Psychology of Human Intelligence, volume 1, Erlbaum.
Schenk, K. D., Vitalari, N. P. and Davis, K. S. (198) Differences between novice and expert systems naalysts:
        what do we know and what do we do?Journal of Management Information System, 15(1), 9 ­ 50.
Soloway,  E.   and Ehrlich, K.   (1984). Empirical   studeis  of programming       knowledge. IEEE         Transaction  on
        Software Engineering, 10(5), 595 ­ 609.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by Strategic Research Theme­ Sciences of Learning at The University of Hong Kong.

                                                   273  ·  © ISLS
