                                                 ICLS 2010    Volume 2

                 Finding the "Learning" in Biology Students' Use
                              of Learning Management Systems

Steven Lonn, Usability, Support, and Evaluation (USE) Lab, Digital Media Commons, University of Michigan
     3350 Duderstadt Center, 2281 Bonisteel Blvd., Ann Arbor, MI 48109-2094, Email: slonn@umich.edu

         Abstract: This study investigated how students used Learning Management Systems (LMS)
         to interact with each other, collaborate, and co-construct knowledge without mediation by the
         instructor. Results   indicate that   students successfully used   the   LMS   to interact and,  to   a
         significant extent, collaborate with each other, but there was very little evidence of knowledge
         co-construction within the LMS. The results suggested that the ease and availability of face-
         to-face meetings as well as limitations with the technology were influencing factors.

Introduction
Contemporary    conceptions    of  learning  emphasize    social,  distributed, and  collective  forms   of    interaction
between students (e.g., Brown, Collins, & Duguid, 1989). Computer-supported collaborative learning (CSCL)
researchers have demonstrated the value of peer interactions via online environments and elaborated many of
the conditions under which students can use technology to profit from working together (e.g., Dillenbourg,
1999). Thus it becomes increasingly important for educators to build opportunities for student peer interaction
into their curriculum and to provide students with the tools for social interaction that have the potential to lead
to collaborative and  constructive   learning  outcomes.    Web-based   Learning   Management      Systems   (LMS)   are
nearly ubiquitous in higher education today. Although most LMS are used for the distribution, management, and
retrieval of course materials, these systems can also incorporate functionality that supports interaction between
students and  instructors  and   among  students  (West,    Waddoups,   &  Graham,    2007).  While  there  has   been a
significant amount   of   research on   the kinds  of   communication    tools  found within   LMS     (see De    Wever,
Schellens, Valcke, & Van Keer, 2006), there has been little research on how students use the collection of LMS
tools to socially interact with each other and arrive at common goals with their peers.
         The research study described in this paper was primarily focused on how LMS support peer learning.
The context for this study was an undergraduate biology course that had a required group project. In focusing on
the group assignment, three research questions were investigated: (a) what types of peer interactions between
students take place within LMS, (b) what factors influence the types of peer interactions between students
within LMS, and (c) how LMS can be improved in order to better support student learning.

Defining Student's Online Social Processes
In this  study, students'   online communication      within  LMS    was   characterized   as  one  of   three forms   of
interaction: basic interaction, collaboration, or knowledge co-construction. Basic interaction can be defined as
"sustained, two-way communication among two or more persons" (Garrison, 1993, p. 16). For this study, basic
interaction was   defined   as   any  kind   of  communication      that   took   place online   within     LMS    tools.
Collaboration is often defined as "a coordinated ... activity that is the result of a continued attempt to construct
and maintain a shared conception of a problem" (Roschelle & Teasley, 1995, p. 70) in which the group members
collectively negotiate the final outcome or deliverable product (Dillenbourg, 1999). Thus, in this study, basic
interaction was further distinguished as collaboration when students used LMS tools to engage in interaction
that served to develop and/or sustain shared ideas about a collective problem. Knowledge co-construction
refers to the types of Vygotskian social interactions with other people that allow individuals to build their
understanding   about   the  world.   Just  as not all   peer  interaction  is  collaborative, not   all collaborations
automatically   lead to knowledge    creation;  collaborators  must  engage    in conversation  in  which   participants'
viewpoints  are  articulated,  accommodated,     and    challenged  by  group   members    in order  to  construct  new
meanings that are retained and elicited at a later point in time (Murphy, 2004). In this study, knowledge co-
construction  was    thus defined  as collaboration     between    students within    LMS     tools when    either  new
information was conveyed from one student to another and retained by the receiving student or a new
understanding    was    elicited  by  students   through    their   collaborative  interactions.    Within   this study,
collaboration and knowledge co-construction were defined as specific forms of social discourse of the more
general construct of peer interaction and were limited to the content of students' online messages.

Setting, Participants, and Methodology
This study was conducted during one semester at a public American Midwestern four-year university. Students
from one upper-division undergraduate laboratory course in Biology were asked to participate. As part of this
course, students completed a group project of writing a mock grant proposal to the National Institutes of Health
(NIH) on any unpublished biological topic of their choosing. Students worked independently or in self-selected

                                                     278     ISLS
                                                  ICLS 2010      Volume 2

groups  of 2-6    students. Overall,  there  were 32  groups   formed      for the group  project,  twenty-one  of which
voluntarily decided to use the LMS to create their own site (82 students, average group size: 4 students).
         The  content   of  all communication     between    site participants  within   LMS  was   collected.  An online
survey (n=56, 44% response rate) was also administered after students turned in their group project. In order to
analyze  students' peer-to-peer     communication,  online   messages      were combined   or separated  into   individual
"units of meaning" based on the natural breaks in students' conversations and messages to each other (Henri,
1992), resulting in a total of 397 peer-to-peer message units. Next, each message unit was coded in order to
classify the type of peer interaction that took place. Finally, a second type of coding examined the content of the
message units. There were a total of 627 "topic" codes assigned with each of the 397 message units assigned a
maximum of three codes (27 different coding categories).

Results
The majority   (60%)    of  the  397  peer-to-peer  message    units  within    LMS   were  identified as collaboration,
followed   by basic  interaction    (37%),   and knowledge     co-construction     (3%). While the   median    number  of
message units was 11.5 per student group, there was a wide disparity in the number of message units for each
student group ranging from 4 units to 120 units. The majority of topic codes assigned to message units coded as
basic interaction discussed face-to-face meetings (35%). Message units coded as collaboration were assigned a
wide variety of topic codes, the most popular of which was biology concepts and procedures (17%). Half (50%)
of the message units coded as knowledge co-construction also concerned biology concepts and procedures and,
in addition, also contained evidence of new learning.
         Nearly three quarters (74%) of LMS users reported using their site at least a few times per week. Over
three quarters (82%) of students also reported that they met face-to-face at least once every week suggesting that
LMS use was not a substitute for meeting. When asked what students discussed at face-to-face meetings (52
total comments), most of the students (n=47) replied that they divided work or went over certain portions of the
grant proposal and that they did so because it was easier than meeting online.

Discussion and Conclusion
The results show that every group that used the interactive LMS tools had at least one collaborative exchange on
their site, and about half of those groups had more collaborative messages than interactive messages. There was
an abundance of basic interaction and collaborative messages found within students' online messages, providing
support  for  potential student     learning within this  technology.  However,      there was very    little evidence of
knowledge co-construction in students' online communications. That is not to say that students did not learn
from each other or from this course assignment, only that evidence of such learning was not found in the
majority of   messages  within   LMS.    There   were several     possible factors  that may  have   influenced   whether
students engaged in collaboration or knowledge co-construction within LMS including the high rate of face-to-
face meetings and problems and limits of the LMS technology.
         While LMS do have many of the basic tools to support students' knowledge co-construction, those
tools lack the necessary features to guide, facilitate, and scaffold students successfully. LMS should therefore
incorporate some basic scaffolds to facilitate student collaboration and knowledge co-construction for projects
like the one investigated in this study. LMS are complex, multifaceted systems that require continued design
improvements as well as attention from instructors, instructional designers, and researchers in order to achieve
their potential as a technological facilitator for student learning.

References
Brown, J. S., Collins, A., & Duguid, P. (1989). Situated cognition and the culture of learning. Educational
         Researcher, 18(1), 32-42.
De  Wever,    B., Schellens,    T., Valcke,  M.,  &  Van    Keer,  H. (2006).    Content   analysis schemes    to analyze
         transcripts of online asynchronous discussion groups: A review. Computers & Education, 46(1), 6-28.
Dillenbourg, P. (1999). Introduction: What do you mean by 'collaborative learning'? In P. Dillenbourg (Ed.),
         Collaborative learning: Cognitive and computational approaches (pp. 1-19). Oxford, UK: Elsevier.
Garrison, D. R. (1993). Quality and theory in distance education: Theoretical considerations. In D. Keegan
         (Ed.), Theoretical principles of distance education. New York: Routledge.
Henri, F. (1992). Computer conferencing and content analysis. In A. R. Kaye (Ed.), Collaborative learning
         through computer conferencing: The Najadan papers (pp. 117-136). London: Springer-Verlag.
Murphy, E. (2004). Recognising and promoting collaboration in an online asynchronous discussion. British
         Journal of Educational Technology, 35(4), 421-431.
Roschelle, J., & Teasley, S. D. (1995). The construction of shared knowledge in collaborative problem solving.
         In C. O'Malley (Ed.), Computer supported collaborative learning (pp. 69-97). Berlin: Springer-Verlag.
West, R. E., Waddoups, G., & Graham, C. R. (2007). Understanding the experiences of instructors as they adopt
         a course management system. Educational Technology Research & Development, 55(1), 1-26.

                                                      279     ISLS
