                                                  ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 2

Analyzing People's Views of Science Though Their Categorization
                               of Television Science Programs
 Pryce Davis, Northwestern University, 2120 Campus Drive, Evanston, IL 60208, pryce@u.northwestern.edu

          Abstract: In this study, participants view representations of science from television programs
          and categorize the show's characters as "scientists" or not. Follow-up interviews reveal that
          when thinking about the science and knowledge claims in the television shows, participants
          adopt one of two views about scientists: either "process-dominant" (scientists as people who
          investigate claims using some process) or "persona-dominant" (scientists as people who have
          a specific look, demeanor and credentials).

Introduction
The argument is often made that, in a democracy, an understanding of the nature of science is necessary for
people  to  participate fully  as  informed   citizens (Driver,  Leach,   Millar &   Scott, 1996; Sandoval,  2005).  In
concert with this argument, I suggest that if we want to uncover the views people hold about the nature of
science we should do so in contexts where they actually interact with public claims of scientific knowledge. The
NSF finds that about 40% of US adults primarily get their information about science and technology from
television (National Science Board, 2008); therefore it seems reasonable to use science-based television shows
as a context in which to explore people's views on the nature of science. In this study, I have chosen two
popular  shows,   Mythbusters   and    Ghost  Hunters,  which    make   arguments    and claims  that are presented  as
scientific. How   might    a viewer  interpret the differing    methods,  attitudes, and  unusual  versions  of  science
presented by Mythbusters and Ghost Hunters? And what might these interpretations reveal about the viewer's
views on the nature of science?

Theoretical Background
For several decades, researchers have attempted to understand exactly what views people have about the nature
of  science, both  as   a  practice and  as  a source   of    knowledge.  A great   deal of  research is  done  through
questionnaires that overtly ask participants what they think science is, and how it works (e.g., Lederman, Abd-
El-Khalick, Bell, & Schwartz, 2002) This research often argues that people hold relatively concrete ideas about
the nature of science, often seen to run from naïve (e.g., scientific knowledge as absolute) to informed (e.g.,
scientific knowledge as tentative). While this prior research has identified some broad trends in how people
view science in school, the various methodologies used to probe those views rely on tacit assumptions that may
not  be accurate  or  useful   for  understanding  how     people  make   sense  of  science outside  of  school. Some
researchers (Leach, Millar, Ryder, & Séré, 2000; Elby & Hammer, 2001; Hammer & Elby, 2002) have argued
that much    of this research  incorrectly   assumes   that   views of  science  are articulable and  consistent  across
contexts.   According   to Leach,   et al., (2000) there   is no  evidence  that a  person's  responses  to generalized
questions about the nature of science can be used to predict the knowledge drawn upon by the person in a
specific context. I go further in arguing that studies that do attempt to localize questions in a context (e.g.,
Leach, et al., 2000) do not go far enough. These marginally contextualize studies often do not: 1) Have a real
world familiarity or significance. 2) Supply participants with the underlying arguments of real world scientific
claims. 3) Portray a diversity of scientific methodologies (Sandoval, 2005). Therefore, I have chosen to use two
television shows as the contextual basis of my study. These shows (Mythbusters and Ghost Hunters) reflect
authentic popular representations of "science," are consequential to the viewer in that the topics are familiar,
and construct an argument (each using a different method) and a resultant claim of knowledge.

Method
There were eight participants for this study: four adults (3 females, 1 male; aged 41-47) and four children (2
females, 2 males; aged 11-14.) Each participant viewed a 20-minute clip from both Mythbusters ­ experiments
about whether a penny dropped from a skyscraper can kill a person ­ and Ghost Hunters ­ collection of video
and audio recordings in an allegedly haunted tavern. Clips were counterbalanced to control order effects. After
each clip, the participant was interviewed about the specific show they had just seen. The interview protocol
used was divided into three sections: 1. An introductory set of questions. 2. A set of questions intended to draw
out some of the participants' opinions about how the shows' methods and evidence. 3. A set of questions
designed to elicit the participants' views of scientists.

Analysis & Results

                                                       280  ·  © ISLS
                                                  ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 2

Interviews were transcribed and labeled on a spectrum from naïve to informed understanding of science. While I
was able to find many cases where the participants' responses seemed to fit these categories, there seemed little
consistency within interviews, demonstrating that individual pieces of evidence activate different ideas about
science.  Furthermore,  this  top-down     approach   left   an unacceptable   number    of responses   unable   to be
categorized. Therefore, I took a more bottom-up approach and analyzed the nature of single responses and what
larger patterns emerged from them.
         Based on this analysis, it seems the participants held one of two very different views of science. One
group claimed neither the Mythbusters nor the Ghost Hunters were scientists while the other concluded both
were scientists. Participants were evenly split (4 each) into the two groups. These two groups have been labeled
Persona-dominant or Process-dominant based on the very different benchmarks each group used to categorize
the shows. The members of the Process-dominant group, which felt both shows were science, seem to place a
premium on the process and actions a scientist goes through. This group viewed scientists as anyone who used
the scientific method (or a caricature thereof). For example, one participant stated plainly when asked whether
or not the Mythbusters were scientists: "They start out with a question if a myth is right or wrong and then they
go test it which is kinda like what the scientific method is. You have a question and you try to answer it."
Likewise, the plausibility of the existence of ghosts did not matter to this group; they all concluded the Ghost
Hunters were scientists because of the process they claimed to employ, not due to the plausibility of the target
studied.
         The Persona-dominant group, however, were more interested in what a scientist looks like and where
the scientist works. Members of this group were particularly dubious of the fact that neither the Mythbusters nor
the Ghost Hunters display any credentials: One claiming, "I would have felt better if they'd said, `So-and-so is
from MIT    and so-and-so  is     from  Harvard.'" The    Persona-dominant   group   view scientists as professionals,
working in a sterile lab and doing their job in a very serious way, as evidenced by one member of this group
asserting, about the Mythbusters, "I think they're guys who are, um, probably pretty crafty about figuring out
ways to do different things... I was going along with them up till the part they started goofing around."
         What is striking about the fact that each participant fell into one of two categories is that not one of
them made any real distinction between the two shows. For these participants, at least, determining if something
is science or not is a relatively surface level task. The Persona-dominant group saw people that violated their
prototypical image of a scientist and thus decided they could not be scientists. While the Process-dominant
group made similar surface level determination by deciding anyone seeming (or claiming) to employ a method
must be a scientist, and no one is this group dug deeper to determine the specifics of the given method and
critically evaluate its validity.

Conclusion
This small study raises interesting questions about how people view science, and how researchers attempt to
uncover   those views.  Through      the  categorization  of   television scientists it became  clear   that for some
participants the process a scientist goes through was more important than what the he or she looked like or was
testing. On the  other hand,      other participants were    much more    interested in the persona  of the   character
presented as a scientist. These views seem much different, and much more pliable, than views uncovered in
previous (decontextualized or marginally contextualized) research. However, this study says little about how
these views actually impact how people evaluate claims to scientific knowledge. In future research, I hope to
explore this question more fully.

References
Driver, R., Leach, J., Millar, R., & Scott, P. (1996). Young people's image of science. Buckingham: Open
         University Press.
Elby, A. & Hammer, D. (2001) On the substance of a sophisticated epistemology. Science Education, 85(5),
         554-567.
Hammer, D., & Elby, A. (2002). On the form of a personal epistemology. In B.K. Hofer & P.R. Pintrich
         (Eds.), Personal epistemology: The psychology of beliefs about knowledge and knowing (pp. 169-190).
         Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Leach, J., Millar, R., Ryder, J., & Séré, M-G. (2000). Epistemological understanding in science learning: the
         consistency of representations across contexts. Learning and Instruction, 10, 497-527
Lederman, N.G., Abd-El-Khalick, F., Bell, R.L., & Schwartz, R. (2002). Views of nature of science
         questionnaire (VNOS): Toward valid and meaningful assessment of learners' conceptions of nature of
         science. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 39(6), 497-521.
National Science Board. (2008). Science and Engineering Indicators 2008. Arlington,VA: National Science
         Foundation.
Sandoval, W.A. (2005). Understanding students' practical epistemologies and their influence on learning
         through inquiry. Science Education. 89(4), 634-656

                                                      281  ·  © ISLS
