                                                 ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

       Representational Technology For Learning Mathematics: An
       Investigation of Teaching Practices in Latino/a Classrooms
            Phil Vahey, Teresa Lara-Meloy, SRI International, 333 Ravenswood Dr. Menlo Park CA
                                  philip.vahey@sri.com, teresa.lara-meloy@sri.com
Judit Moschkovich, Griselda Velazquez, University of California Santa Cruz, Education Department, 1156 High
                         Street, Santa Cruz CA, jmoschko@ucsc.edu, gvelazqu@ucsc.edu

         Abstract: This paper explores representation- and language-rich mathematics instruction in
         two classrooms with low-income Latino/a students. The two classroom teachers were part of a
         larger   study investigating   the  use of SimCalc   in middle   school,  and  their   classrooms  had
         learning gains greater than the mean gains for the study overall. Prior analyses documented
         that these two teachers implemented exemplary classroom discourse practices: they engaged
         students in discussions with high intellectual work and showed high levels of responsiveness
         to student statements (Pierson, 2008). Such practices are consistent with both the research on
         representationally-rich   mathematics    environments,   and    instructional practices   for students
         from   non-dominant    communities.     We   use  transcript excerpts  to illustrate   these  teachers'
         practices in detail. We found that these two teachers enacted some similar practices, but they
         also had    different teaching  styles, different  approaches   to connecting   representations,   and
         different ways of supporting mathematical discussions.

Introduction and Significance
As the population of Latino/a students increases in U.S. schools, so do concerns with their needs in mathematics
classrooms. One concern is performance on assessments. Only 13% of Latino/a students scored at or above
proficient on the 2005 8th grade NAEP exam, compared to 39% of white students and 47% of Asian students
(Gándara & Contreras, 2009). Many schools attempt to address these concerns by placing large numbers of
Latino/a students in remedial courses designed to address the needs of students who are "at risk," a decision
which may exacerbate the situation. Research shows that the problem lies not in the students but in their access
to quality teaching. In general, low-income Latino/a students attend racially segregated poor schools and have
little access to the kind of teaching that supports the development of conceptual understanding or academic
discourse (Gándara & Contreras, 2009). However, there are examples of classrooms where this is not the case.
Quantitative data from the SimCalc study (Vahey, Lara-Meloy, Knudsen, 2009) and qualitative research with
this student  population   has shown    that Latino/a students   can  learn complex    mathematics     and participate in
mathematical discussions (i.e. Moschkovich, 2002) when they have access to quality teaching.
         In this paper we examine the teaching practices of two teachers, providing a sharp contrast to the
perspective  that    Latino/a  students need   `remedial"   teaching.  We    analyze   two  instances of    mathematics
instruction  that support    conceptual  understanding    and  mathematical    discussion  as   students   participate in
representation-rich mathematics environments. There is reason to believe that there is consonance between the
literature on improving instruction for low-income students from non-dominant linguistic backgrounds and the
literature on the use of representationally rich technologies in mathematics (Vahey, Lara-Meloy, & Knudsen,
2009). Both highlight the use of multiple ways to represent ideas, point to supporting students as they make
connections   among    these  multiple  representations,  and  point  to the importance    of   language   rich practices.
However, there has not yet been a systematic attempt to integrate the representational affordances of technology
with research on improving mathematics instruction for students from non-dominant linguistic backgrounds.
This leaves educators with little guidance on how to use technology for this underserved student population.
         This paper begins to address this gap by using two lenses to describe the instructionalpractices of two
teachers who were successful in using technology to support students in their primarily high-poverty Latino/a
classrooms   in learning  important   conceptual    mathematics.  We   explore  the  ways   in  which   these   successful
teachers engaged in practices that were consistent with (or at odds with) research-based recommendations for
mathematics instruction that is (a) representation-rich, and (b) supports mathematical discussions.

Background
We ground our exploration in the Scaling Up SimCalc study (Roschelle et al., in press) for three key reasons.
First, SimCalc    is based on   a rich  theoretical and   empirical   base, and so   provides   an excellent    proxy  for
representationally rich technology use more generally. Second, the Scaling Up SimCalc study was a large scale
randomized    controlled  experiment    that not  only   found significant   results across   a wide   range    of student
demographics, but also collected a rich array of data including many videotaped lessons. Finally, the study
included large numbers of Latino/a(1) students (about half of the 1621 total students) from poor schools, many
in the Rio Grande Valley, which borders Mexico and is one of the poorest regions in the United States (the

                                                     285  ·  © ISLS
                                               ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

study denotes this area as Region 1, as it is served by the Region One Education Service Center). The SimCalc
study is an ideal place to begin our exploration into the connections between research on representationally rich
technologies and instructional recommendations for teaching students from non-dominant language groups.

The Scaling Up SimCalc Study
For over fifteen years the SimCalc project has had the goal of ensuring that all learners have access to complex
and important mathematics (Kaput, 1994). To achieve this goal SimCalc places motion phenomena at the center
of learning (see Figure 1), enabling students to build on existing cognitive and social competencies. Students in
our studies, including traditionally low-achieving students, construct rich stories about motion over time, and
use narratives as a   resource  for interpreting graphical  and tabular representations  of motion.   SimCalc  also
allows students to play and replay a motion simulation as many times as they wish, providing more students
access to these fundamental resources than is possible using traditional static media.

        Figure 1. SimCalc linked representations (left); SimCalc MathWorlds® activity screenshot (right)

         This engagement with motion leads to the study of functions through linked simulations, graphs, tables,
and symbols. Students engaged with SimCalc can directly manipulate a mathematical representation such as a
graph,  and immediately    see  the  effects on  other linked   representations (Roschelle  et al., 2000).   Formal
mathematical   vocabulary  and  symbolic  forms    can then  be introduced after  students  have experiences  with
motion, narratives, tables, and graphs. In this way the vocabulary and symbols are about something, and can be
understood  as a  compact   and  precise  way   of describing phenomena.    The  features  of  direct manipulation,
multiple representations, and experience-before-formality may be particularly beneficial to students from non-
dominant   linguistic backgrounds,    as  these  features  alleviate  some of   the language   demands    found in
mathematics classes, allowing students to work directly with mathematical objects (Vahey, et al., 2009).
         These same features can allow students to more fully participate in classroom discussions. The linked
representations provide a shared set of referents for students and teachers to explore: they can replay a motion or
make changes in one representation to see the changes in the others. Students have opportunities to use a wider
range of verbal and nonverbal communication acts, such as pointing: "See, right here the boy starts running
faster." Students also have opportunities to use academic mathematical language for a communicative goal (e.g.,
Does going longer refer to time or distance?). This multi-faceted approach is consistent with recommendations
for supporting mathematical discourse and developing vocabulary (Moschkovich, 2007a, 2007b) and it contrasts
with traditional approaches to teaching academic language that relyon drill and practice or memorization.

                          Figure 2. Mean student-learning gains by subpopulation group.

         The Scaling Up SimCalc study found the SimCalc approach to be successful in meeting the needs of a
variety of  teachers  and their students. Ninety-five  seventh  grade  teachers  across varying  regions  in Texas
participated in a randomized controlled experiment in which they implemented a SimCalc-based three-week
replacement unit. An analysis of the results showed a large and significant main effect, with an effect size of0.8

                                                   286  ·  © ISLS
                                                  ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

(Roschelle et al., in press). This effect was robust across a diverse set of student demographics including gender,
ethnicity, teacher-rated prior achievement, and poverty level (measured by the percentage of the campus eligible
for free or reduced price lunch) (Figure 2). Consistent with our other data, we see that the students in Region 1
(the Rio Grande Valley) who used SimCalc had greater learning gains than students in the control condition,
and these learning gains included improvement on items that target conceptual understanding.

Theoretical Framing
We  take  a socio-constructivist   theoretical  approach.   We   assume   that students  learn through  interacting  with
materials and technological artifacts while participating in discourse, that mathematical discourse is multi-modal
and multi-semiotic (O'Hallaran, 2000), and that it includes not only talk, but also other tools such as inscriptions
or animations and several modes such as oral, written, and gestural.

Recommended instructional practices for all students
Research in mathematics education describes teaching that promotes conceptual development as having two
central features: one is that teachers and students attend explicitly to concepts, and the other is that students
wrestle with   important   mathematics    (Hiebert &   Grouws,   2007).    Teachers  face  a considerable   challenge   in
balancing both of these features in their teaching. In particular, teachers working with Latinos/as often focus on
procedural rather than conceptual aspects of mathematics (Gándara & Contreras, 2009). In contrast, effective
environments for students from non-dominant linguistic backgrounds should provide "abundant and diverse
opportunities for speaking, listening, reading, and writing" and "encourage students to take risks, construct
meaning, and seek reinterpretations of knowledge" (Garcia and Gonzalez, 1995, p. 424). These practices require
that teachers view language as a resource, not a deficiency (Gándara & Contreras, 2009), and reject models of
their students as intellectually disadvantaged (Garcia and Gonzalez, 1995).
         Framing    research   on students  from   non-dominant   linguistic   backgrounds    is complex.   This  student
population  is  heterogeneous   (e.g.  in some    geographical   areas this population     includes students   from  many
countries who speak many languages). Within our relatively constrained population (students from two classes
in the Rio Grand Valley) almost all students are labeled as Hispanic. Although we do not have an exact account
of how many students in these classrooms were learning English, it is likely that students in these two SimCalc
classrooms, like students in this geographic area in general, vary along a spectrum of monolingual to bilingual.
We  assume     that some   students in these   classrooms    may  be   learning   English; some   students may    be   first
generation   immigrants,   and    some families    may   have  lived   in  Texas   for  several  generations.  With    that
complexity   in   mind,  we  examine   teaching    practices for  these   two  teachers  because    we believe    they are
illustrative of teaching strategies that support gains in conceptual mathematics for Latino/a learners, some of
whom are likely to be learning English.

Use of representations
A key feature of mathematics is the use of representations, not only to overcome the limitations of human
memory   (as   in the use  of  simple  lists), but also  to  embed   computational     rules into symbol   systems     (e.g.
algebraic notation), and to re-represent complex relationships in ways that can be more easily perceived by
those who have facility with the representational system (e.g. the graph of a function) (Ainsworth, 2006). The
use of representations is both a requirement for full participation in everyday quantitative reasoning (e.g. it is
necessary   to interpret graphs   commonly     shown  in daily   newspapers),   and   an important   tool that can  allow
students to engage with mathematical objects as they also grow in their mathematical skills and understanding
(Kaput, 1994). Representations, and dynamic representations in particular, can be particularly powerful learning
tools when they are part of mathematical discourse: they can support shared focus of attention, allow gestural
and physical communication to supplement verbal communication, and provide meaningful feedback that is
consistent with the mathematical phenomena under investigation (Moschkovich, 2008; Roschelle et al., 2000).
         Recommendations for instruction for students from non-dominant linguistic backgrounds (e.g. August
and Shanahan, 2006; Echevarria et al., 2004) also include the use of representations. These recommendations
focus on the use of visual artifacts to (a) offload demands on language, and (b) represent abstract ideas using
illustrations or objects (e.g. holding up an illustration of a triangle when referring to a triangle in a geometry
lesson), rather than as a way to provide insight into complex mathematical concepts.

Use of mathematical discussions
One way     to engage    students  in both  attending   to   and wrestling  with   important    mathematics    is through
mathematical discussions. It is generally accepted that "mathematical discourse" and "academic language" are
important for all students to develop, and are especially important for students from non-dominant communities.
As  students   participate  in these   activities they  are  learning   to  communicate      mathematically    by making
conjectures,   presenting  explanations,   constructing   arguments,    and    so on.  When    describing  mathematical
discourse we should not confuse "mathematical" with "formal" or "textbook." Textbook definitions and formal

                                                     287   ·  © ISLS
                                                ICLS 2010    ·  Volume 1

ways of talking are only one aspect of school mathematical discourse. It is also important to avoid construing
everyday   and   academic   mathematical    discourse    as  opposites   (Moschkovich,     2007a),   as  some  everyday
experiences may provide resources for communicating mathematically.
          Some recommendations for teaching reduce mathematical discourse to addressing vocabulary through
direct instruction, drill and practice, or memorization. In contrast, other recommendations are based on research
that shows that academic discourse is more than vocabulary, and that vocabulary is most successfully learned
through instructional environments that are language rich, actively involve students in using language, require
both receptive and expressive understanding, and require students to use words in multiple ways over extended
periods   of  time  (Blachowicz    &   Fisher,  2000).   Additionally,    for  mathematics     instruction,  learning to
communicate mathematically is not primarily a matter of learning vocabulary, as students also need to develop
conceptual   understanding   and  learn to  describe    patterns,  make  generalizations,    and use  representations   to
support their claims (Moschkovich, 2002 and 2007b).

Analysis
In our exploration we examine and summarize the teaching strategies in one lesson selected from the classes of
each of two teachers from Region 1, Teacher E and Teacher M. We chose these classes because these students
are commonly labeled "at-risk" for poor mathematical performance: one class is 96% Latino/a (Teacher E) and
the other is 100% Latino/a (Teacher M); and both classes are in schools where over 84% of the students are
eligible for free or reduced price lunch. However, a previous quantitative study (Pierson, 2008) found that
students in these two classrooms had gains greater than the mean gains for all classes using SimCalc. Pierson's
analysis indicates that one possible reason for these gains may have been that these two teachers engaged their
classes in   discussions with  high   intellectual work,     and  showed  high   levels   of  responsiveness  to  student
statements (Pierson, 2008). Intellectual work reflects the cognitive work requested from students with a given
turn of talk. Responsiveness is an attempt to understand what another is thinking, displayed in how the teacher
builds, questions, clarifies, takes up or probes that which another says.
          Pierson (2008) shows that, for the 13 classes that had video data available, these two types of teacher
moves were correlated with student gains. The two selected teachers stand in contrast with another teacher from
a nearby school with a similar student population (95% Latino/a students and 93% students on campus on free
and  reduced   lunch) who   had  lower  than  average    intellectual work,   responsiveness,    and student  gains.  Our
question  moving    forward  is: in  what  ways    did  these  two   teachers, selected   for  exemplary    mathematical
discourse  practices, engage  in  practices   that were   consistent  (or at  odds)  with    recommended    instructional
practices  for  the use  of  representationally    rich  mathematics    environments    and    supporting   mathematical
discourse? Given the correlational findings in Pierson, our goal here is to provide a more detailed qualitative
description  of interactions  in these  two   classrooms.    These two   descriptive cases    ground  both  research  and
practice: while the correlational study showed that the quality of these two teachers' discourse was related to
student gains, our goal here is to describe how these two teachers enacted these practices during a lesson.
          The data for this study are records of teacher activity at the front of the classroom over a single lesson.
Thus, our analyses will focus on teacher's uses of talk and inscriptions. Our data will not let us investigate non-
observable features such as teacher beliefs, or those features that take an extended time to develop, such as the
initial setting of classroom discourse norms. The classroom videos and transcripts we analyzed for teachers E
and M show the same lesson from the SimCalc 7th grade curriculum, entitled "On the Road." During this
lesson, students are expected to write stories explaining the motion of a bus and a van over several trips from
Abilene to Dallas. Students must make sense of piecewise linear functions (see Figures 3 and 4) of increasing
complexity. Students are asked to interpret functions that consist of multiple slope lines, including some with
zero  and    negative slopes. In  the   first situation,  students    observe  a   position   graph  and    corresponding
computerized simulation of the motion of a bus and a van, and then write an explanatory story. In the second
situation, students are asked to predict the motion of the bus and the van based on the graph before viewing the
simulation to verify their predictions.
          In our analysis we   first partitioned   the  classroom  videos  into  a set  of   curricular segments. These
segments are based on curricular topics, as dictated by the teacher (and, of course, heavily influenced by the
SimCalc   materials).  Within each   segment   we   investigated   episodes   in which    the  participants focused  on a
particular mathematical topic. While the materials influence these topics, episodes were typically driven by the
particular classroom interactions, and we expect episodes to vary significantly by classroom. In this paper we
focus on   representative classroom    episodes    that illustrate how   these   teachers  (a) made   significant use of
representations or (b) engaged students in significant mathematical classroom discourse.
          Our analysis shows that Ms. M and Ms. E used various strategies during these lessons. Since some of
the teaching strategies were similar across the teachers and others differed, we emphasize that no single aspect
of the teaching accounts for student gains, that there is no single way to enact best practices, and that there is no
simple formula for teaching this student population. In fact, a strength of this analysis is to show that teachers
with different teaching styles can instantiate best practices in such a way that students commonly labeled "at

                                                     288   ·  © ISLS
                                              ICLS 2010    ·  Volume 1

risk" can and do learn complex and conceptual mathematics. Additionally, although we present examples of
how the teacher used representations and supported discussion separately, these two are dialectically related,
and this separation is only for the purpose of our illustration.

Teaching Practices that Connect Representations
As the teachers led class discussions based on position graphs, we note that both teachers consistently pushed
the students to make connections between the two functions represented on each graph, and across multiple
representations  (simulation, narrative, and  graph).  In    addition, after  several attempts to  have  the  students
describe these connections, the teacher would then explicitly state the connection she considered most salient to
the activity. Both   teachers did  this  on occasions   where    the   students had   already  described the  desired
connection, as well as cases in which the students had not, presumably so that all students had some exposure to
the desired connection.

Figure 3. Last year's graph of the Abilene-Dallas trip.            Figure 4. The trip from three years ago.

Example 1: Ms. E (see Figure 3)
Ms. E conducted this class is in a computer lab, with a 1:1 student to computer ratio. Students were seated
facing the computers, lined up along the wall. The teacher had a document camera projecting her workbook in
the center of the room. During whole group discussions, she often pointed or traced her pencil over the graphs
or text in her workbook projected via the document camera. This type of gesturing is a common strategy for
helping students connect what is being said with the activity tasks. The following episode took place early in the
lesson. The students worked in pairs at computers as they viewed the simulation that is represented by the graph
in Figure 3. As this episode begins, the teacher was orienting the students to a whole-class discussion.

        T:        Ok. Did everybody get a chance to go through the simulation?
        Ss:       Yes.
        T:        It says: (Reading   from  the workbook)     "What    information  can you    get about last
                  year's trip from looking at and analyzing the graph? Write down everything you can
                  think of and be sure to include the speeds of the vehicles." Ok. So the first thing that
                  we noticed is that we have two graphs. One represents who and who?
        Ss:       The bus and the van.
        T:        Ok. Very good. The bus and the van. Ok. What can you tell me by looking at the
                  graph?
        Yuri:     The bus was going faster --
        Amy:               -- The bus was going faster but then it slowed down and the van caught up.
        T:        Ok. Yuri and Amy said that the bus was going faster but then what happened Amy?
        Amy:      The bus slowed down and the van caught up.
        T:        Ok. [Writing in her workbook] "The bus was going faster." So let's write that down.

        In this excerpt we see the teacher explicitly asking the students to connect the graph to the simulation
they had just viewed ("One represents who and who?", "What can you tell me by looking at the graph?").
However, it   is not obvious  (to the teacher   or to  the observer)   whether  the   students were  relying  on their
recollection  of the simulation,  the markings     on  the graph,  or   both. For  example,    the teacher asked  for
information that could be derived from the graph, but the source of Yuri and Amy's response is unclear, as they
could have been referring to the simulation. Although the teacher accepted these responses in this interaction,
she followed this conversation with a detailed analysis of the speeds of the bus and the van, using statements
that connected the information they had gathered from the simulation with the details in the graph. This is
shown in Example 3, in which we analyze how the teacher leveraged student language as a resource for not only
connecting representations, but also for supporting conceptual understanding and language development.

Example 2: Ms. M (See Figure 3)

                                                   289  ·   © ISLS
                                              ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

Ms. M's class was also held in a computer lab, with one student at each computer facing the front of the class.
The relevant SimCalc software file was displayed for the class with a projector. Ms. M seemed to have a good
rapport with her class, often teasing them and being willing to entertain their outlandish stories. In this example
we see Ms. M asking students to read their stories to the class (as in Example 1, the class had already viewed the
corresponding  motion   simulation).  Ms.   M   challenged    Dan's   story not  by  questioning     the  (possibly
inappropriate) content, but by questioning the relationship between the story and the graph.

        T:       Everybody listen to Dan's story. Go ahead Dan.
        Dan:     Alright. The bus driver is going 70 miles per hour. But then a monster got in the way
                 and the bus driver had to slow down to 40 miles per hour. And, then he shot him with
                 an emergency shotgun, (student laughter) but not before the monster ate him. But at
                 the end they played in memory of him. But I had to take over and drive the bus--
        T:               -- But the bus -- was already there, if I'm interpreting correctly, you already
                 said that they got there and that's when the monster attacked him?
        Dan:     No! [unintelligible]
        T:       Read it again. Go ahead.
        Dan:     "The bus was going 70 miles per hour. But then all of a sudden, a monster gets in the
                 way (he makes a monster growl)."
        T:       And it slowed down?
        Dan:     Yeah. And the bus, it slowed down, he got scared, and took the emergency shotgun
                 and shot him but not- not-
        T:       While he was driving?
        Dan:     Yeah, while he was- like this (pretends to shoot a gun, students laugh).
        T:       Okay. That's kind of scary.
        Dan:     But not before the monster ate him. So I had to take over and drive the bus. And the
                 game is played in memory of him (reads imagined name and date of birth and death).
        T:       But okay, in the real world, okay, if they eat something, how is it staying constant?
                 (gestures to the graph projected on the board) How does it stay constant (gestures to
                 the graph of the bus)? 40 miles per hour. Unless you were there while he was being
                 eaten, and you put your foot, and you stayed steady. Understand?
        Dan:     Yeah
        T:       So maybe if you would have arrived in Dallas (points to Dan) and then the monster
                 could have eaten the bus driver.

        In this excerpt we see the teacher challenging Dan to describe exactly how his story related to the
graph. She points out that in Dan's story the driver is eaten en route, without the bus stopping. She pushes Dan
to make the connection between his story and the fact that the graph shows the bus slowing from a constant
speed of 70 mph to another constant speed of 40 mph. While she was apparently willing to accept that the
monster scaring the driver would result in the bus slowing down in a manner consistent with the graph ("And it
slowed down?...Okay"), she was not willing to accept that the monster could then eat the driver with the bus
staying at the constant speed of 40 mph. Instead she provided an alternative narrative ("So maybe if you would
have arrived in Dallas and then the monster could have eaten the bus driver").
        In sum, we see that both teachers leverage the simulation capabilities of SimCalc to provide a shared
context of motion that can be referred to by all students. They also used SimCalc's position graphs to provide a
shared mathematical representation that grounded the discussion, and a set of stories that were used to explain
the graphs and simulations. The teachers then spent considerable effort pushing students to make connections
between these representations. In terms of their teaching practices for connecting representations, Ms E does
this during the whole group discussion before writing stories, and Ms. M does this principally in response to
students' stories. Noticeably absent is the use of representations as a purely visual aid designed to make abstract
ideas concrete to language learners. In the next section we analyze how these teachers scaffolded the use of
language in ways suitable for students from non-dominant linguistic backgrounds, and how this language use
helped students interpret the representations as well as the target mathematical concepts.

Teaching Practices that Support Mathematical Discussion
In the lessons observed, neither teacher used explicit vocabulary instruction, vocabulary drill and practice, or
memorization   for vocabulary. Instead,  both teachers   addressed   vocabulary in the  context  of  language-rich
instruction focused  on making   sense   of the mathematics.     Thus, they  used  many    of the research   based
recommendations for vocabulary development: environments that are language rich, actively involve students in
using language, require both   receptive and  expressive   understanding, and   require students  to use  words in
multiple ways over extended periods of time (Blachowicz & Fisher, 2000). We also found that both teachers

                                                  290  ·  © ISLS
                                               ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

wove together everyday and academic meanings, vocabulary, and ways of talking. Both teachers accepted, built
on, and used student contributions to introduce academic language. They often used and built on students'
informal contributions and their own informal descriptions to include technical language in their discussions,
and used colloquial language to further illustrate their own formal descriptions.
         Despite these similarities, the two teachers addressed vocabulary using different approaches. Ms. M
began her lesson by clarifying colloquial language used in the problem, for example "traffic tie-ups," and by
asking students to describe what they saw on the map (roads, cities, towns, etc). In contrast, Ms. E asked her
students to go straight into the simulation without previous discussion of the map or of the meaning of terms
used in the  problem.  Ms.  E  also made   heavy use   of   gesturing and  pointing to the  workbook    (which     was
projected on a screen). She used her finger to point to the problem text as she read out loud, and frequently
pointed to segments of the graph as the class discussed the problem. Below we provide two examples of the
ways that each teacher's practices reflected recommendations for supporting mathematical discussions and the
development of academic discourse.

Example 3: Ms. E (see Figure 3)
This excerpt follows immediately where Example 1 ends. After asking the students to determine "how fast" the
bus was going, the teacher used student responses to introduce the word "speed," using the phrase "constant
speed" as represented in the graph:

         T:      How fast was the bus going? Ok we're going hours and miles. Miles and hours.
         S:      60 miles per hour.
         T:      Ok. How did you determine that?
         S:      Divided the 180 miles by 3 hours.
         T:      Ok. If I divide the final distance divided by the final time. Ok. That's gonna give me
                 a speed. You're right. But you told me first he was going fast and then he slowed
                 down. So was this a constant speed?
         Ss:     No.
         T:      No. Ok. So I need to determine the speed to see how fast he was going before he
                 started slowing down. Ok?

         In this example, the teacher moved from a general description of "the bus was going faster then slowed
down" (shown in Excerpt 1) to asking students to find the specific speeds at which the bus was traveling. She
used the students' responses to her questions to introduce into the discussion mathematical concepts and phrases
such as  speed, constant  speed, and   changing speed,   all grounded   in a discussion  of how   these     three were
represented in the graph.

Example 4: Ms. M (see Figure 4)
The following segment takes place towards the end of the lesson, after students have written stories about two
motion situations. This example illustrates how Ms. M moved back and forth between formal and informal
descriptions of a horizontal segment and clarified the mathematical significance of that segment on the graph:

         T:      Now look at the bus. The bus looks pretty normal this time, right? Because we know
                 that right here is a straight, horizontal line right. And what does the flat line tell us?
         S:      It's going nowhere.
         T:      It's going nowhere. And what kind of slope is it?
         S:      Zero.
         In this example, Ms. M combined formal academic language to describe the line as "horizontal" with a
more informal description of the line as a "flat line." She repeated the student's contribution and followed it
with a question  about  the slope, introducing  the formal   mathematical  concept  of a  zero slope. Ms.    M    used
colloquial  language to   lead the  class to academic    language,  interweaving    both types of language        while
grounding the discussion in the graph. In sum, neither teacher used explicit instruction of technical terms, but
rather wove   together both  everyday   and  academic    language  to  support a  discussion   about  mathematical
concepts. Our continuing analysis shows that both teachers' discourse was oriented to mathematical concepts
rather than to vocabulary definitions.

Conclusions
This exploration into the practices of two teachers shows some connections between instruction that is both
representation and language rich, and thus supports both conceptual mathematics learning and discussions that
are oriented to mathematical concepts. The analysis shows that these two teachers shared some practices but
also had different styles, approaches to connecting representations, and ways of addressing vocabulary. We find

                                                  291  ·   © ISLS
                                               ICLS 2010  ·   Volume 1

it promising that this data shows that teachers can have an impact on the mathematics learning of students
mistakenly labeled "at-risk." This beginning analysis is also promising in that these teachers are enacting many
of the research-based teaching practices for providing representation- and language-rich learning environments.

Endnotes
(1)  We use the term "Latino/a" to be consistent with current usage, although "Hispanic" is the term commonly used in
     Texas to designate people of Latin American--specifically Mexican--descent.

References
Ainsworth, S. (2006). DeFT: A conceptual framework for considering learning with multiple representations.
         Learning and Instruction, 16(3), 183-198,
August, D. and Shanahan, T., eds. 2006. Developing Literacy in Second-Language Learners: Report of the
         National Literacy Panel on Language-Minority Children and Youth. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Blachowicz, C., & Fisher, P. (2000). Vocabulary instruction. In M. Kamil, P. Mosenthal, P. D. Pearson, & R.
         Barr (Eds.), Handbook of Reading Research (vol. III, pp. 503-523). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
         Associates.
Echevarria, J. Vogt, M. and Short, D. 2004. Making Content Comprehensible for English Learners: The SIOP
         Model. Needham Heights, MA: Allyn & Bacon.
Education   Trust.  (2003a).  Latino achievement   in  America.   Retrieved      July 14,  2004,   from   http://www2.
         edtrust.org/NR/rdonlyres/7DC36C7E-EBBE-43BB-8392-CDC618E1F762/0/LatAchievEnglish.pdf
Gándara, P., & Contreras, F. (2009). The Latino education crisis: The consequences of failed social policies.
         Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Garcia, E., & Gonzalez, R. (1995). Issues in systemic reform for culturally and linguistically diverse students.
         Teachers College Record, 96 (3), 418-431.
Hiebert, J., & Grouws, D. (2007). The effects of classroom mathematics teaching on students' learning. In F.
         Lester  (Ed.), Second  handbook    of research   on  mathematics  teaching      and learning  (pp. 371­404).
         Reston, VA: NCTM.
Kaput, J.  (1994).  Democratizing  access   to calculus:  New   routes  using    old  roots. In A. Schoenfeld,  (Ed.),
         Mathematical thinking and problem solving. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Moschkovich,    J.  N.  (2002). A  situated  and  sociocultural   perspective    on   bilingual mathematics   learners.
         Mathematical Thinking and Learning, 4(2 & 3), 189-212.
Moschkovich, J. N. (2007a). Examining mathematical discourse practices. For the Learning of Mathematics,
         27(1), 24­30
Moschkovich, J. (2007b). Using two languages while learning mathematics, Educational Studies in
         Mathematics, 64(2), 121-144.
Moschkovich, J. N. (2008). "I went by twos, he went by one:" Multiple interpretations of inscriptions as
         resources for mathematical discussions. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 17(4), 551-587.
O'Halloran,  K.  L. (2000).  Classroom   discourse in   mathematics:   A  multisemiotic      analysis. Linguistics and
         Education, 10(3), 359-388.
Pierson, J. (2008).  The   relationship  between  teacher    follow-up moves     and  mathematics   learning. Austin:
         University of Texas. Unpublished doctoral dissertation.
Roschelle,  J., Kaput,   J., &   Stroup,  W.   (2000).  SimCalc:   Accelerating      students'  engagement   with   the
         mathematics    of change.   In M.  J. Jacobson   &   R.  B.   Kozma     (Eds.), Innovations   in science  and
         mathematics    education: Advanced    designs   for technologies of  learning    (pp.  47-75). Mahwah,    NJ:
         Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc.
Roschelle, J., Shechtman, N., Tatar, D., Hegedus, S., Hopkins, B., Empson, S., Knudsen, J., & Gallagher, L. (in
         press). Scaling up SimCalc: Results from random-assignment field trials in seventh and eighth grade
         mathematics. American Educational Research Journal.
Vahey, P. Lara-Meloy, T., & Knudsen, J. (2009). Meeting the Needs of Diverse Student Populations: Findings
         from the Scaling Up SimCalc Project. In Swars, S. L., Stinson, D. W., & Lemons-Smith, S. (Eds.).
         Proceedings of the 31st annual meeting of the North American Chapter of the International Group for
         the Psychology of Mathematics Education (pp. 416-424). Atlanta, GA: Georgia State University.

Acknowledgments
This material is based on work supported by the National Science Foundation under Grant No. 0437861 anda
grant to the Center for the Mathematics Education of Latinos/as (No. ESI-0424983). Any opinions, findings,
and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Science Foundation.

                                                   292  ·  © ISLS
