                                                ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 2

Do social skills play a role in collaborative project-based learning?
Impact of the distribution of perceived social skills within learning groups in a
Computer Supported Collaborative Learning- setting: An empirical pilot study
                                     Michele P. Notari, Adrian Baumgartner
                                    PHBern, University of Teacher Education
                                               Getrud-Woker-Strasse 5
                                                    CH-3012 Bern
                                          Contact: michele.notari@phbern.ch

        Abstract: The pilot study looks for empirical answers to the following question: What distribution of
        perceived social skills within learning groups is predictive for group member's degree of satisfaction
        with   group   performance and      quality of     collaboration? Data    collection took   place   with two
        questionnaires at the beginning and the end of semester. The analysis of 20 learning groups (N = 59
        teacher training students) revealed the following trends: High exchange orientation (i.e. being able to
        cooperate, compromise, resolve conflicts etc.) and high assertiveness within groups are associated with
        more satisfaction concerning collaboration quality and group performance. Heterogeneous groups with
        low group-means of the social skill exchange orientation were less satisfied with their work and stated
        to be less efficient in collaboration than other groups.

Research design
The present  study   was conducted with     59  students   of the  University of  Teacher Education    Pädagogische
Hochschule Bern. The students participated in a media education course and had to work on a media project in
groups of two or three during three months. Our research questions were:
    1.  Which individual social skills are predictive concerning satisfaction and quality of cooperation, in a
        collaborative project-based learning setting?
    And on a group level:
    2.  Which configuration of social skills within the learning group is perceived by the group members to be
        effective for successful project-based collaborative learning?
At the beginning of the course all students completed a self-assessment questionnaire (pre-questionnaire) about
their social skills. At the end of the project, students filled in a questionnaire covering their satisfaction with the
project and their perceived quality of collaboration. 59 students (20 project-groups) completed pre- and post-
questionnaire.

Self-assessment of individual social skills (pre-questionnaire)
The questionnaire   contained 16 self-referential   statements    for which students  had    to choose between   four
responses (totally agree ­ totally disagree).

Indicators  of  satisfaction   and  quality     of  cooperation       towards     the end    of   the project    work
(post-questionnaire)
To measure satisfaction with the achieved project work and the quality of collaboration we used the following
six questions with four possible responses (totally agree: 4 ­ totally disagree: 1):
    1.  I am satisfied with the achieved level of team work (satisfaction)
    2.  The group worked together in an efficient way (efficiency)
    3.  The responsibilities were clearly distributed within the group (division)
    4.  There was a group leader (centralized management)
    5.  We got along well within the group (harmony)
    6.  We supported each other and / or complemented one another well within the group (support).

Results
Self-assessment of perceived individual social skills
In order to reduce complexity we tried to find similar answering behavior within the 16 asked questions.
The items of the questionnaire were reduced to higher-level factors using principal component analysis (pca).
The extracted  five factors explained 67%   of the variance.  All factor  scales had satisfactory internal consistency
between (Cronbach's alpha: 0.698 !" #" !" $%&'(). We labeled the five factors: exchange orientation, empathy,
initiative, leadership and assertiveness.

                                                    288  ·  © ISLS
                                                ICLS 2010    ·  Volume 2

Correlation    between      social    skills  factors  (of     pca,  first questionnaire)     (pre    questionnaire),
indicators of work satisfaction and perceived quality of cooperation (post questionnaire) and
within items of the post questionnaire
The social skills correlated to various items concerning satisfaction and perceived quality of collaboration.
Highly significances (p<0.01) were found between `satisfaction in work' and `collaboration efficiency' r(59) =
.43 ; satisfaction in work and `distribution of work' r(59) = .36; `collaboration efficiency' and `distribution of
responsibilities' r(59) = .49; collaboration efficiency' and `group leader r(59) = .53 ; collaboration efficiency',
and    `mutual support r(59) =    .63 ;  `group  harmony'      and   `mutual support'   r(59) = .56   ; distribution  of
responsibilities  and mutual support    r(59) =  .43.  Significant   correlations  (p<0.05)   could be  found   between
`distribution of responsibilities' and `group leader' r(59) = .43; `empathy' and `satisfaction with work' r(59 = -
.30; `empathy' and `collaboration efficiency' r(59) = -.28 and `empathy' and `mutual support' r(59) = -.27.

Proposal of a possible way to combine the results of the analysis of individual social skills
and the interindividual (group related) specificity of different social skills
The quality of collaboration within groups is not singularly based on the individual group member - level of a
particular social skill (e.g. exchange orientation). Rather a systemic view might be appropriate, were a group
consisting of persons with both high and low individual levels of a particular social skill will likely perform
differently than groups were the members perceive the same or a more comparable level of the concerned social
skill. We call this pattern of individual social skills within a group the skill - configuration.
In order to analyze how satisfaction and quality of collaboration within groups was dependent on the skills
configuration, we split the sample for each of the five skills (see pca) into homogeneous and heterogeneous
groups (based on the average range between group members with the highest and with the lowest skills level)
and in groups that showed a high or a low average group level of the skill. Thus, for each social skill, four group
types could be differentiated: HOLO: homogeneous group with low means in a specific social skill; HELO:
heterogeneous group with low means of the focus social skill; HOHI: homogeneous group with high means of
the focus social skill, and HEHI: heterogeneous groups with high means of the focus social skill. Using group
typologies based on homogeneity/heterogeneity and average skills level showed various promising effects in our
pilot study even considering that the range of heterogeneity within the heterogeneous groups was quite small:

Performing several analyses of variances (ANOVA) we could find the following results:
    !    Exchange orientation: (HELO groups were less satisfied with their work, F(1,18) = 5.589; p < .001,
         and less efficient in collaboration, F (1,18) = 12.447; p < .001) than the three other group types.      Thus,
         a low exchange orientation is a threat to work satisfaction and collaboration quality only, when group
         members    show   different  levels in  this skill.   Presumably,   it is the  high exchange   oriented  group
         members that suffer the most in this kind of skills configuration. Initiative:       HOLO groups were less
         supportive and complementary than the other three group types, F(1, 19) = 3.455, p < .10. For HELO
         groups such an effect was not found. To have no group members that act socially initiative is therefore
         especially disfavorable to mutual support giving.
    !    Leadership:   HOHI   groups    had   a more   efficient    collaboration  than  groups  of   types HEHI     and
         HELO,F(1,     19) =  2.906;   p <   0.10).   Many     high  leadership  oriented  people   make    for efficient
         collaboration within a group. However, groups that show a homogeneous skills configuration with
         respect to leadership (HOHI and HOHE) have less often a centralized leadership than heterogeneous
         groups (especially HEHO), F(1, 19) = 4.376, p < .05.
    !    Assertiveness: Members of HOLO and HELO groups reported to have lower mutual support than
         members of HOHI groups. F(1, 19) = 2.705, p < .10.

Multilevel analysis   might  also be  valuable   for  our    data but for  our   pilot study  with  a small  amount   of
participants and groups we did not consider the multi-level approach. In our ongoing study with a lager amount
of groups and participants multi-level analysis approach will be compared to the described method in the pilot.
The major problems we encountered in our pilot concerned the reduction of complexity and the interactions
between the parameters on individual level and on group level.

References
Heuermann,     A. &   Krützkamp,   M.    (2003). Selbst-,    Methoden-,    und   Sozialkompetenz.     Bausteine  für die
         Sekundarstufe II. Berlin: Cornelsen.

                                                      289  ·  © ISLS
