                                            ICLS 2010    ·  Volume 2

                Social construction of mathematical meaning
                    through collaboration and argumentation
Shirley     Atzmon,        the    Hebrew        University       <shirlyazmon@walla.com>,               Rina
Hershkowitz (organizer), the Weizmann Institute <rina.hershkovitz@weizmann.ac.il>
Chris Rasmussen, San Diego State University <chrisraz@sciences.sdsu.edu>, Baruch
Schwarz (organizer and chair), the Hebrew University <msschwar@mscc.huji.ac.il>,
Gerry Stahl, Drexel University            <gs47@drexel.edu>, Megan Wawro, San Diego State
University      <meganski110@hotmail.com>,                    Michelle      Zandieh,      Arizona       State
University zandieh@asu.edu, Mitchell Nathan (discussant), University of Wisconsin-
Madison <mnathan@wisc.edu>

Symposium overview
         The mathematics education research community has considerably evolved during the two last
decades towards and within a socio-cultural approach (e.g., Cobb & Bauersfeld, 1995). This approach has
first led to fine-grained descriptions in which they could identify specific entities that are central to learning
processes in classroom contexts. For example, they identified socio-mathematical norms (Yackel & Cobb,
1996)  and   important  practices    such   as collective   argumentation   (Krummheuer,     1995)  or  collective
reflection (Cobb & Yackel, 1996) that are central for understanding learning in classroom contexts. These
theoretical tools have helped in describing learning processes in specific social settings (Hershkowitz &
Schwarz, 1999). Also, anthropologists have elaborated methodological tools for describing mathematical
activities in a succession of activities (see for example, Saxe et al., 2009 for a methodology for describing
the 'travel of ideas' through observation of the transformation of form and function of artifacts).
           Finally, researchers   in mathematics     education  have  adopted   a design   research approach    to
elaborate  successions  of activities  in which   they   used the methodological    tools developed  to  envisage
desirable outcomes and values (Cobb, Sophian, et al., 2001; Hershkowitz et al., 2002). Among the central
desirable practices, talk practices (e.g., Sfard, 2008) and collaborative practices (e.g., Hoyles & Healey,
1995).  In another   tradition,  scientists from   the  Computer   Supported    Collaborative   Learning (CSCL)
community also shares talk and collaboration practices as settings that promote learning. CSCL scientists
have recognized that these practices are not easy to trigger and have subsequently elaborated computerized
tools that afford desirable practices (Stahl, Koschman & Suthers, 2006). For example, Suthers (2003) has
shown   that   computerized   tools   provide   representational  guidance   that   deeply affects  collaborative
practices. The  CSCL    community     has   developed   an  impressive number    of environments    for triggering
collaborative and argumentative practices.
         This   symposium     is intended   to present   perspectives  from  the  two communities    in  order  to
understand in depth some key issues in mathematics education. The three contributions of the symposium
focus on successive activities that include collaborative and argumentative practices. This kind of focus
invites in-depth analyses of learning processes that involve meaningful changes. The following themes
emerge from the three contributions:
   1.    The transformational character of argumentation/collaboration in successive activities
   2.    Novel ways to mediate the social production of meaning: In Stahl's contribution, these are the
         multiples channels and mathematical representations that enable the synchronous coordination of
         actions among dyads; For Rasmussen, Zandieh and Wawro, these are the brokering moves of the
         teacher; For Hershkowitz, Schwarz & Azmon, these are distinctive talk patterns that propagate in
         individual and unguided activities.
   3.    The central role of the design of the learning unit towards productive interactions.
Each  of   the  contributions provides    a methodology     for a fine-grained   follow-up   of the unfolding    of
production   of mathematical     meaning.   Stahl extends   discourse  analysis methods   to synchronous     multi-
channel   communication;   Rasmussen,       Zandieh   and   Wawro    adopt a cultural-historical  activity   theory
approach to study the transformations of boundary objects between activity systems; Hershkowitz, Schwarz
and Atzmon integrate between interactional analyses with inferential statistics to study the effects of kinds
of structuring adopted by teachers during their interactions with students on the ways students engage in
these interactions and on their argumentative ability      in the collective discourse and individual tasks.

References
Cobb, P., & Bauersfeld, H.    (1995). The emergence     of mathematical meaning.    Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.

                                                  29  ·  © ISLS
                                          ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 2

Cobb, P., Stephan, M., McClain, K., & Gravemeijer, K. (2001). Participating in classroom
           mathematical practices. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 10(1&2), 113­163.
Cobb, P., & Yackel, E. (1996). Constructivist, emergent, and sociocultural perspectives in the context
           of developmental research. Educational Psychologist, 31, 175­190.
Hershkowitz, R. & Schwarz, B. B. (1999). The emergent perspective in rich environments: Some roles
           of tools and activities in the construction of sociomathematical norms. Educational Studies in
           Mathematics, 39, 149-166.
Krummheuer, G. (1995). The ethnography of argumentation. In P. Cobb & H. Bauersfeld (Eds.) The
           Emergence of mathematical meaning: Interaction in classroom cultures. Hillsdale, NJ:
           Erlbaum.
Saxe, G. B., Gearhart, M., Shaughnessy, M., Earnest, D., Cremer, S., Sitabkhan, Y., Platas, L. &
           Young, A. (2009). A Methodological Framework and Empirical Techniques for Studying the
           Travel of Ideas in Classroom Communities,    In B. B. Schwarz, T. Dreyfus &   R. Hershkowitz
           (Eds.), Transformation of Knowledge through Classroom Interaction, ( pp. 203-222). London,
           UK: Routledge.
Schwarz, B. B., Hershkowitz, R. & Prusak, N. (2009). Argumentation and Mathematics. In C. Howe &
           K. Littleton (Eds.), Educational Dialogues: Understanding and Promoting Productive
           Interaction (pp. 115-141). Routledge.
Sfard, A. (2008). Thinking as communicating: Human development, the growth of discourses and
           mathematizing. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Stahl, G., Koschmann, T., & Suthers, D. (2006). Computer-supported collaborative learning: An
           historical perspective. In R. K. Sawyer (Ed.), Cambridge handbook of the learning sciences
           (pp. 409-426). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Suthers, D. D. (2003). Representational guidance for collaborative inquiry. In: J. Andriessen, M. Baker,
           and D. Suthers (Eds.), Arguing to Learn: Confronting Cognitions in Computer-Supported
           Collaborative Learning environments (pp. 27-46). Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Yackel, E., & Cobb, P. (1996). Sociomathematical norms, argumentation, and autonomy in
           mathematics. Journal for Research in Mathematics Education, 27, 458­477.

           Computer Mediation of Collaborative Mathematical
                                          Exploration
              Gerry Stahl, Drexel University, Philadelphia, USA, Gerry.Stahl@drexel.edu
Two central principles of contemporary learning science theory (Stahl, Koschmann & Suthers, 2006)
are:
!    Student learning involves construction of meaning by the learners (constructivism).
!    Learning often takes place originally inter-subjectively (socio-cultural theory).
           For learning in the discipline of mathematics, these principles imply:
!    Student exploration of mathematical issues should play a significant role in math education.
!    Collaborative  approaches  should   be incorporated,    in  which small groups     of  students build
     mathematical understanding together.
           The field of computer-supported collaborative learning (CSCL) proposes that these aims could
be furthered through the use of networked computers. Online collaboration environments can mediate
activities designed  to promote math    learning  in    multiple ways. They  can    provide a workspace,
representations of math objects and tools for manipulating the representations, to provide stimulating
experiences   of  math    exploration,  discovery    and  meaning    making.  They     can  also  provide
communication media to support productive collaboration and the sharing of knowledge by individuals,
small groups and larger communities, such as classrooms and communities of people interested in
math.
           The Virtual Math Teams (VMT) Project (Stahl, 2009d) is developing an online environment
for small groups of students to explore mathematics together. As a result of a design-based research
effort at Drexel University since 2003, our software system has evolved to integrate synchronous text
chat, shared whiteboard, asynchronous portal and community wiki. Analysis of student interactions in
this environment have documented processes of group cognition (Stahl, 2006), which move between
graphical, narrative and symbolic modes of collaborative mathematical meaning making !"#$%&'()*+*,(
& Stahl, 2009).

                                              30   ·  © ISLS
                                            ICLS 2010   ·   Volume 2

         We have found that mathematics can be accomplished collaboratively, even by small groups
of novice math students helping each other, building sequentially on each other's moves and exploring
together, even across sessions (Sarmiento & Stahl, 2008). Virtual math teams can engage in graphical
constructions, verbal   accounts    and  symbolic   derivation, using   conventional   methods   of interaction
adapted  to  online   media,  such   as  methods  of   social acknowledgment,     proposal   offerings, deictic
references, questioning and agreement. Issues of presence, orientation and embodiment--so important
in face-to-face mathematical discourse--remain critical in virtual media, although in transformed ways.
         Our   approach    to computer-supported     collaborative   mathematics    learning  is based  on   the
theory that math cognition is at base a matter of math exploration (Livingston, 1999; Lockhart, 2009)
and math    discourse  (Sfard,   2008;  Stahl, 2008).  Of   course,  math   discourse  involves  drawings  and
symbolic expressions as well as terms, propositions and arguments in natural language. According to
(Netz,  1999),    the origin   of   mathematical  deduction    in   ancient  Greece   was  a  function  of   the
development of labeled diagrams and a specialized math dialect used for asynchronous collaboration.
Consider the flowering of Western mathematics through the exchange of text and diagrams on clay
tablets and papyrus documents among Euclid's colleagues around the Mediterranean; now imagine
analogous    digital  versions   of this within  online   global    communities   equipped    with  specialized
computer media and tools.
         Based    on  theories of   embodied   cognition,   distributed  cognition,  discursive  cognition and
mediated   cognition,  we  are   currently extending   the  VMT     virtual learning  environment   to  support
dynamic mathematics. We are integrating the first multi-user dynamic geometry system into VMT.
This is a port of the single-user GeoGebra system, which provides coordinated symbolic, graphical and
spreadsheet representations of geometric constructions. This will allow online teams of math students
to propose, explore and solve problems from algebra, geometry, matrices, trigonometry, conics and
elementary calculus. The VMT system is instrumented to capture the entire interaction of these groups
for replay and analysis by students, teachers and researchers--allowing the students themselves, their
teachers and educational researchers to observe and reflect on actual collaborative math processes.
         The   design   of the   VMT    software  supports    scripting  of educational  activities integrating
individual, small-group and community meaning making (Stahl, 2009a). The synchronous textual chat
and graphical workspaces are associated with asynchronous wiki pages and web browsers. Curriculum
units (Powell, Lai & O'Hara, 2009)--which can be tuned by teachers to classroom circumstances--
guide students to explore sequences of open-ended mathematical topics, to pose their own questions, to
reflect on  multiple  problem-solving    paths,  to bring  in  mathematical    terminology   and principles, to
summarize their argumentation and to post accounts of their work for other student groups.
         As learning-science researchers, we are interested in the details of how math learners make
meaning within various learning environments. The VMT system, with its logging and replay facilities,
makes visible and persistent the details of the interactions by means of which small online groups co-
construct   their  understandings    of   mathematical    problems      and  situations.  In  this  symposium
presentation, we will take a more detailed and comprehensive look at the interaction data that we began
to analyze in CSCL 2007, CSCL 2009 and ICCE 2009 (Koschmann, Stahl & Zemel, 2009; Stahl, 2007;
2009b; Stahl, Zemel & Koschmann, 2009). This is data from Team B during VMT Spring Fest 2006.
Three students spent four hours online together discussing, exploring and reflecting upon a number of
related  pattern  problems.    We   approach   this data  with    a form    of interaction analysis  based   on
conversation   analysis  (Stahl,  2009e).  Our  new    look at  the data  will  extend   sequential analysis to
consider  longer  sequences    than  adjacency  pairs--including    group-cognitive   moves   and   larger-scale
thematic work. It will also look at a more detailed scale to identify different kinds of references--
indexical, temporal, semantic and deictic, for instance--that link a given utterance to multiple past
postings, drawings, events, resources and future potentialities.
         Although chat postings often appear to be chaotic and inscrutable (Stahl, 2009c), it is possible
to reconstruct their implicit response structure and to recreate the indexical relations that underlie their
ubiquitous deictic references. We can then build up an explicit analysis of the semantic and linguistic
structure that was implicit in the student collaboration. (This corresponds to the tacit understanding that
participants maintain   of   the  on-going  interaction.)   From    the detailed relationships   among  lexical
elements of the chat postings, we can identify pairs of initiating proposals and responses to them. These
can be seen as communicative methods by which the students achieve group-cognitive moves that
advance their larger discussion themes. In this way, among others, we analyze the mediation (within
computer-based media) of collaborative mathematical exploration. By observing at this unprecedented
level of detail the methods by which students actually coordinate their mathematical work and their
shared understandings, we can see how collaborative mathematics can take place in a setting like VMT.

                                                 31  ·  © ISLS
                                      ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 2

We observe and analyze how: students co-construct, communicate, negotiate and make shared sense of
math representations (graphical, narrative and symbolic); decide as a group what to do next; inquire
about things they do not understand; agree on their joint findings. An understanding of student methods
for doing such things deepens our sense of how to design technology to support collaborative math
exploration and how to guide, script or scaffold it pedagogically. It also advances our understanding of
collaboration as sequential interaction, math exploration as discourse and learning as a social process.

References
"#$%&'(-.(/.'()*+*,'(0.'(1(23#4,'(5.(!67789.(:4*(;<=>3(<&?#>=@#3=<>(<A(=>3*&#B3=<>(C=34=>(#(+D,3=+<E#,(
    CSCL medium. International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 4(2), 115-
    149. Web: http://GerryStahl.net/pub/ijCSCL_4_2_1.pdf Doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s11412-
    009-9061-0
Koschmann, T., Stahl, G., & Zemel, A. (2009). "you can divide the thing into two parts": Analyzing
    referential, mathematical and technological practice in the VMT environment. Paper presented at
    the international conference on Computer Support for Collaborative Learning (CSCL 2009),
    Rhodes, Greece. Web: http://GerryStahl.net/pub/cscl2009tim.pdf
Livingston, E. (1999). Cultures of proving. Social Studies of Science, 29(6), 867-888
Lockhart, P. (2009). A mathematician's lament: How school cheats us out of our most fascinating and
    imaginative art forms. New York, NY: Belevue Literary Press.
Netz, R. (1999). The shaping of deduction in Greek mathematics: A study in cognitive history.
    Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Powell, A. B., Lai, F. F., & O'Hara, K. (2009). Supplemental curriculum unit for online, collaborative
    problem solving in VMT. Web: http://GerryStahl.net/vmt/combinatorics.pdf
Sarmiento, J., & Stahl, G. (2008). Extending the joint problem space: Time and sequence as essential
    features of knowledge building. Paper presented at the International Conference of the Learning
    Sciences (ICLS 2008), Utrecht, Netherlands. Web: http://GerryStahl.net/pub/icls2008johann.pdf
Sfard, A. (2008). Thinking as communicating: Human development, the growth of discourses and
    mathematizing. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Stahl, G. (2006). Group cognition: Computer support for building collaborative knowledge.
    Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 510 + viii pages. Web: http://GerryStahl.net/mit/
Stahl, G. (2007). Meaning making in CSCL: Conditions and preconditions for cognitive processes by
    groups. international conference on Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning (CSCL '07).
    Web: http://GerryStahl.net/pub/cscl07.pdf
Stahl, G. (2008). Book review: Exploring thinking as communicating in CSCL. International Journal
    of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 3(3), 361-368. Web:
    http://GerryStahl.net/pub/Sfardreview.pdf Doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s11412-008-9046-4
Stahl, G. (2009a). Designing a mix of synchronous and asynchronous media for VMT. In G. Stahl
    (Ed.), Studying virtual math teams (ch. 16, pp. 295-310). New York, NY: Springer. Web:
    http://GerryStahl.net/vmt/book/16.pdf Doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4419-0228-3_16
Stahl, G. (2009b). Keynote: How I view learning and thinking in CSCL groups. Paper presented at the
    International Conference on Computers and Education (ICCE 2009), Hong Kong, China. Web:
    http://GerryStahl.net/pub/iccekeynote2009.pdf
Stahl, G. (2009c). Meaning making in VMT. In G. Stahl (Ed.), Studying virtual math teams (ch. 26, pp.
    505-527). New York, NY: Springer. Web: http://GerryStahl.net/vmt/book/26.pdf Doi:
    http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4419-0228-3_26
Stahl, G. (2009d). Studying virtual math teams. New York, NY: Springer. 626 +xxi pages. Web:
    http://GerryStahl.net/vmt/book Doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4419-0228-3
Stahl, G. (2009e). Toward a science of group cognition. In G. Stahl (Ed.), Studying virtual math teams
    (ch. 28, pp. 555-579). New York, NY: Springer. Web: http://GerryStahl.net/vmt/book/28.pdf Doi:
    http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4419-0228-3_28

                                          32   ·  © ISLS
                                        ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 2

Stahl, G., Koschmann, T., & Suthers, D. (2006). Computer-supported collaborative learning: An
      historical perspective. In R. K. Sawyer (Ed.), Cambridge handbook of the learning sciences (pp.
      409-426). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. Web:
      http://GerryStahl.net/cscl/CSCL_English.pdf in English,
      http://GerryStahl.net/cscl/CSCL_Chinese_simplified.pdf in simplified Chinese,
      http://GerryStahl.net/cscl/CSCL_Chinese_traditional.pdf in traditional Chinese,
      http://GerryStahl.net/cscl/CSCL_Spanish.pdf in Spanish,
      http://GerryStahl.net/cscl/CSCL_Portuguese.pdf in Portuguese,
      http://GerryStahl.net/cscl/CSCL_German.pdf in German,
      http://GerryStahl.net/cscl/CSCL_Romanian.pdf in Romanian,
      http://GerryStahl.net/cscl/CSCL_Japanese.pdf in Japanese
Stahl, G., Zemel, A., & Koschmann, T. (2009). Repairing indexicality in virtual math teams. Paper
      presented at the International Conference on Computers and Education (ICCE 2009), Hong Kong,
      China. Web: http://GerryStahl.net/pub/icce2009.pdf

      Brokering as a Mechanism for the Social Production of
                                             Meaning
                    Chris Rasmussen, Michelle Zandieh, Megan Wawro

        A pressing concern in mathematics education is to reveal processes by which inquiry-oriented
classrooms enable learners to explore and develop their own reasoning powers while simultaneously
connecting them with the collected wisdom and conventions of the discipline (Cobb & Bauersfeld,
1995; Lampert,  2001).   A teacher's role in this  process is one that often comes    with considerable
tension. For example, in her work with elementary school students, Ball (1993) posed the tension in the
following way: "How do I create experiences for my students that connect with what they now know
and care about but that also transcend their present? How do I value their interests and also connect
them to ideas and traditions growing out of centuries of mathematical exploration and invention?" (p.
375). Research  in  inquiry-oriented undergraduate    mathematics  classroom  reveals  similar  tensions
regarding the role of the teacher and other students in the social production and uptake of ideas (e.g.,
Wagner, Speer, & Rossa, 2007).
        In this report we address the aforementioned pressing concern by identifying the brokering
moves of the teacher and some students in an undergraduate mathematics class that functioned as a
mechanism for the social production of meaning. From an individual cognitive point of view, there are
well-established mechanisms that describe how individuals build ideas. From a social point of view,
however, mechanisms that describe how ideas are interactively constituted are less developed. Such
mechanisms  are significant because  they  address  the  complex  job of teaching and  specific teacher
moves that promote the social construction of meaning (Rasmussen & Marrongelle, 2008).
        In his seminal work on communities of practice, Wenger (1998) highlights how brokering
requires the ability to "cause learning" by introducing into one community elements of practice from a
different community (Wenger, 1998, p. 109). We adapt Wenger's work to the classroom and consider
three different communities: the broader mathematical community, the local classroom community,
and the various small   groups that  make  up the  local classroom  community.  The    brokers  in these
communities are the teacher and specific students in the class. A broker, by definition, is someone who
has membership status in more than one community. For example, in our case the teacher is a member
of the broader mathematics community, the classroom community, and a peripheral member of each of
the small groups that make up the classroom community.
        Data for the analysis is drawn from classroom videorecordings collected during a 15-week
classroom  teaching experiment  (Cobb,  2000)   conducted  in  an undergraduate differential  equations
course. Focusing on a one week sequence that led to the reinvention of a sophisticated inscription
known   by experts  as a bifurcation diagram  (Rasmussen,   Zandieh,  &  Wawro,   2009),   we  identified
different types of brokering moves that contributed to the social production of meaning. Each of these
brokering moves highlight the view that teaching and learning mathematics is a cultural practice, one
that is mediated by and coordinated with the broader mathematics community, the local classroom
community, and the small groups that comprise the classroom community.

                                             33  ·  © ISLS
                                          ICLS 2010    ·  Volume 2

          Close analysis of the function of students' and the teacher's discursive contributions resulted
in the identification the   following   three broad   categories  of broker moves:   creating   a boundary
encounter, bringing participants to the periphery, and interpreting between communities. In the first
brokering move category, creating a boundary encounter, a boundary encounter refers to direct as well
as indirect encounters between communities. Moreover, boundary encounters involve boundary objects
that serve as an interface between different communities. A broker, by virtue of his or her membership
in more   than one  community,    is in a position    to bring forth boundary   objects that can   facilitate
encounters between communities. For example, we identified instances when the teacher functioned as
a  broker between   the   classroom  community    and   the mathematical  community    by introducing    and
constituting tasks that engaged learners in indirectly encountering the mathematical community via
their participation in mathematizing (Rasmussen, Zandieh, King, & Teppo, 2005; Schwarz, Dreyfus, &
Hershkowitz,   2009). The   task, as it was   constituted,  functioned as a  boundary   object. Creating  a
boundary encounter was not limited to the teacher, however. The presentation will detail how one small
group's presentation of their work on a task resulted in their creation of an inscription that was new to
other students in the class and mathematically quite sophisticated. As such, this inscription functioned
as a boundary      object between   the small     group  community   who    created it and the    classroom
community.
          We refer to the second brokering category as bringing participants to the periphery. We follow
Wenger (1998) in distinguishing between the terms boundary and periphery. The term boundary is
more closely aligned with possible discontinuities between communities, whereas the term periphery is
more closely aligned with possible continuities between communities. As such, the brokering move of
bringing participants to the periphery is one in which the broker helps members of one community
move along a continuum toward another community. For example, brokers are able to draw specific
ideas out from a small group community so that these ideas become more accessible to the classroom
community. Conversely, brokers are in a position to encourage and promote engagement and reflection
by the whole class community in ideas that were put forth by a particular small group community. Our
analysis revealed that the teacher was more likely than students to function as broker in this capacity.
          The third brokering category we identified, interpreting communities, is one in which the
broker makes explicit connections between two communities with respect to how ideas are construed,
notated,  related, or labeled.  In   comparison    to   the first brokering category,   creating   boundary
encounters, this third type of brokering move occurs when a broker takes specific steps to fulfill or
realize the opportunities that the creating boundary encounter moves offered. Our examples of this type
of brokering move involve both the teacher and specific students as brokers as they interpret between
the mathematical community and the whole class community and between the whole class community
and various small group communities.
          The presentation will illustrate and further clarify each of these types of brokering moves.
Implications   of  these  brokering  moves    for teaching   and  professional development    will  also be
discussed.

References
Ball, D. L. (1993). With an eye on the mathematical horizon: Dilemmas of teaching elementary school
          mathematics. Elementary School Journal, 93(4), 373-397.
Cobb, P., & Bauersfeld, H.   (1995). The emergence    of mathematical meaning.    Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Cobb, P. (2000). Conducting teaching experiments in collaboration with teachers. In A. E. Kelly & R.
          A. Lesh (Eds.), Handbook of research design in mathematics and science education (pp. 307­
          334). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Lampert, M. (2001). Teaching problems and the problems of teaching. New Haven, CT: Yale
          University Press.
Rasmussen, C.  L., & Marrongelle, K.    A. (2006). Pedagogical content tools:   Integrating student
          reasoning and mathematics in instruction. Journal for Research in Mathematics Education 37,
          388-420.
Rasmussen, C., Zandieh, M., King, K. & Teppo, A. (2005). Advancing mathematical activity: A view
          of advanced mathematical thinking. Mathematical Thinking and Learning, 7, 51­73.
Rasmussen, C., Zandieh, M., & Wawro, M. (2009). How do you know which way the arrows go? The
          emergence and brokering of a classroom mathematics practice. In W.-M. Roth (Ed.),
          Mathematical representations at the interface of the body and culture (pp. 171-218).
          Charlotte, NC: Information Age Publishing.

                                                34  ·  © ISLS
                                            ICLS 2010    ·  Volume 2

Schwarz, B. B., Dreyfus, T., & Hershkowitz, R. (2009). The nested epistemic actions model for
           abstraction in context. In B. B. Schwarz, T. Dreyfus & R. Hershkowitz (Eds.), Transformation
           of Knowledge through Classroom Interaction (pp. 11-41). London, UK: Routledge.
Wagner, J., Speer, N., & Rossa, B. (2007). Beyond mathematical content knowledge: A
           mathematician's knowledge needed for teaching an inquiry-oriented differential equations
           course. Journal of Mathematical Behavior, 26, 247-266.
Wenger, E. (1998). Communities of practice: Learning, meaning, and identity. Cambridge, UK:
           Cambridge University Press.

      Distinctiveness of teachers' discourse patterns and their
impact on students' emergent and subsequent argumentative
                                                 activities
                            Rina Hershkowitz,    Baruch Schwarz, and Shirly Azmon

           Although many researchers have recommended guidance practices involved with intensive
interactions, argumentation and collaboration as effective ways to foster learning gains in classroom
(e.g., Webb, 2009), systematic research on influencing student interaction and learning gains through
teacher discourse is under-represented. The goal of this research is twofold. We first aim at uncovering
patterns of teacher-led talk in the course of a learning unit. We then aim at investigating whether those
patterns impinge on the students' commitment to argumentation that emerged in the talk itself, as well
as on characteristics of their individual arguments in a consolidation phase, at the end of the learning
unit.
           Four teachers, in four different schools, and their Grade 8 students participated in the study.
The   teachers were   invited  to  teach a  learning  unit  in probability  carefully designed   to  encourage
productive argumentation. The teachers were left free to choose the way to manage their lessons: we
did not stipulate social settings (individual work, [un]guided small group problem-solving, teacher-led
discussions, etc.) and did not provide scripts for teachers' structuring of interactions with learners. All
lessons were observed, video documented and transcribed. Three episodes in three different lessons
where chosen for each teacher for micro-analysis. Each episode was similar for all four teachers. This
similarity  between   the    four  teachers  concerned     not  only  the problem    situations involved   but
comparable length of time of the analyzed episode. Another criterion for the choice of the episodes was
episodes that focused on content whose mastery was checked in an individual activity at the end of the
learning unit.
           A major finding of this study ­ supported by qualitative and quantitative analysis, is that
teacher-students interactions were governed by patterns: These patterns were distinctive and relatively
stable, for each teacher, beyond the different tasks and lessons that constituted the learning unit. The
distinctiveness of each pattern was characterized as follows:
           The kinds  of challenges    initiated by  the teacher.  For example,   the first  teacher generally
initiated challenges through open questions that invite the expression of elaborated explanations and
dialectical moves. In contrast, the second teacher did not challenge students but rather asked closed
questions whose answers were clear and expectable.
           The patterns identified at a micro-level conveyed socio-mathematical norms at a meso-level:
For   example,  the   first teacher  adopted a   dialogic-dialectical  talk (similar  to the  exploratory talk
identified  by  Mercer,     1987) in which   the  diverse   claims  which   were raised,  were  supported    by
examples or/and explanations and at the same time, were also challenged by examples or explanations
in a rich social context. The construction of knowledge emerged from this tension. In the second class,
the talk is closer to a cumulative "traditional" talk governed by IRE patterns (Cazden, 2001) in which
initiative is  almost exclusively   in the  teacher's hands.   This  difference between   the two   teachers is
exemplified in following data; while Teacher 1 dedicates 63% of her utterances, in all three episodes,
to encourage argumentation (explanation of claims, arguing, raising dialectical dialog, etc...) and 11%
to ask for claims only (short answers, declaring facts), Teacher 2 dedicates only 14% of her utterances
to encourage argumentation and 49% to ask for claims. Beyond these data, we identified distinctive
patterns involving teachers and students across all teacher-led discussions. These patterns and their
validation will be presented in the symposium.

                                                  35  ·  © ISLS
                                           ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 2

        Delegation of responsibilities. The socio-mathematical norms that developed in each class
impinged at a macro-level concerning the responsibility of students to their knowledge constructing.
For example  in  the  class of  the  first teacher,   the challenges  of the teacher led students  to feel
responsibility to provide elaborated explanations. 90%) of the claims expressed by the students in the
three episodes were reasoned and eventually turned to full-fledged arguments. In the second class, the
elaboration of explanations was not under the responsibility of the students but of the teacher. Only
18% of the students' claims, in the three episodes in class 2, were reasoned. Interactions appeared as
chains of short questions and short claims as answers (70% of the students utterances in class 2, were
claims and 46% in class 1) punctuated by social validation of correctness. Quite naturally, correctness
was valorized rather than processes that led to the (correct) result.
        The transformatory character of argumentation. The enactment of dialogic-dialectical talk
(like for the first teacher) in a succession of tasks designed to encourage knowledge construction, led
students to discuss mathematical principles under the orchestration of the teacher and to co-construct
them with the teacher and when left alone in small groups. It turns then that there are strong bonds
between   teacher-led dialectic argumentative   talk     and subsequent  co-construction of mathematical
principles/concepts.
        Adaptive planning as an expression of dialogic-dialectic norms. When the teacher aims at the
construction of mathematical principles, it impinges on the structure of the lesson. The order of tasks,
within the learning sequence, is only a suggestion that the teacher adopts or does not adopt according to
her pedagogical considerations. The more confident the teacher is in her contents' knowledge and
pedagogical knowledge, the more flexible she is in planning the activities of her students. In contrast,
sticking in an orthodox way to a sequence of tasks and to proposed social settings (like for the second
and third teachers)   suggests that some   teachers   view   educational goals in a bureaucratic way  that
preserves the authoritative status of the teacher in the class.
        A  second    major finding  suggests  that  the   impact of teacher-led argumentative talk in  the
classroom, on subsequent individual argument elaboration is deep and subtle. We checked the quality,
frequency and correctness of the explanations which were given by her students to support their claims
at the end of the learning unit. In this posttest a high percent of students in all classrooms answered to
the questions on a claim level, and gave explanations as required in the test. While more than half of
students in the first class (in which the patterns of interaction between the teacher and the students were
dialogical/dialectical) constructed right arguments (including right reasons), less than third does it in
the other classes. In addition, in another test item it appeared that answers that interacted with the first
teacher, arguments were richer as they contained more idea units per argument.
        In the presentation we will present quantitative data and conclusions will be drawn.
        The present research suggests the importance of the mediation of the teacher. This mediation
seems to be more productive when the teacher acts as an agent that negotiates meanings with students
(Hershkowitz & Schwarz, 1999). The argumentative patterns that characterize talk can either give birth
to meaningful constructions or to senseless artifacts. Our findings suggest the importance of in-service
teachers' programs focusing on the animation of classroom discussions for the sake of the promotion of
mathematical reasoning and for delegating responsibility to students on their learning.

References
Cazden, C. B. (2001). Classroom discourse: The language of teaching and learning. Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann.
Hershkowitz, R., & Schwarz,    B. B. (1999). Reflective processes in a technology-based mathematics classroom.
    Cognition and Instruction, 17 (1), 65 ­ 91.
Mercer, N. (1997). The guided construction of knowledge- talk amongst teachers and learners. Clevedon.
    Philadelphia. Adelaide.
Schwarz, B. B., Hershkowitz, R. & Prusak, N. (2009). Argumentation and Mathematics. In C. Howe &
      K.  Littleton   (Eds.),  Educational    Dialogues:     Understanding   and   Promoting  Productive
      Interaction (pp. 115-141). Routledge.

                                               36   ·  © ISLS
