                                                  ICLS 2010    Volume 2

     The Use of Animations and Online Communication Tools to
        Support Mathematics Teachers in the Practice of Teaching
               Vu Minh Chieu and Patricio Herbst, School of Education, University of Michigan,
          610 East University Ave., Ann Arbor, MI 48109, vmchieu@umich.edu, pgherbst@umich.edu
     Michael Weiss, Department of Teacher Development and Educational Studies, Oakland University,
                             470E Pawley Hall, Rochester, MI 48309, weiss@oakland.edu

  Abstract: This paper reports on a pilot study on the effect of animated classroom stories, as a reference
  point,   directly embedded     in  the  space  of online   communication      tools to help  mathematics    teachers
  collectively learn to notice critical events of teaching practice. The main results include: more than 70%
  of the teachers' comments focused on instructional practice, chat and forum could be complementary to
  help experienced teachers, and only forum could be suitable for novice teachers.

Introduction
The practice of teaching is important but very complex and difficult (Leinhardt & Ohlsson, 1990): the teacher
must be   able to   continuously   structure  or restructure   his  or her  knowledge    in different ways    in order to
adaptively   respond   to  changing   practical  demands    from    moment   to moment,     adapting  different  semiotic
resources   from  student    to  student,  and   from class    to   class. We   aim   at using   interactive  rich-media
representations  of  teaching    and online   communication     tools  for  the design   of virtual  settings to  support
mathematics    teachers   in learning to   do the practice   of teaching.   We   used  animated   classroom   stories1 as
reference artifacts to prompt discussion among teachers, engaging them in talking about the rationality they
invest in action (Herbst & Chazan, 2003). Although animations may reduce some degrees of complexity of
classroom interaction, they were designed in such way that eliminated noisy elements (often present in video
records of practice) helped teachers attend to important events of classroom interaction. We also embedded the
animations as reference points directly into the online discussion space. That original feature can make the
discussion among the participants more meaningful and in-depth.
         Our first research question is to look at how much of the teachers' discussion is focused on classroom
interaction and whether their exchanges are more in-depth when they refer to the embedded animations. The
second question is concerned with how the nature of the discussion tool (chat vs. forum) is correlated with
teachers' noticing. The third question is to examine the differences in noticing between experienced and novice
teachers  in  those specific    settings. Noticing, evaluating,    and  interpreting  noteworthy   features   of teaching
practice are important for teachers to improve their own professional practice (van Es & Sherin, 2008). The
study is the first critical step of a design-based research agenda (Collins, 1992) toward building complex virtual
settings for teachers to learn to do the practice of teaching.

Method
Nine experienced mathematics teachers were randomly organized into two virtual groups: four in the forum
condition  and  five   in  the  chat condition.   A similar    pair of  sessions  was    carried out  with  eight  novice
mathematics teachers: four in each condition. Those participants had previously seen the animated stories and
discussed them either in a study group or in a teacher education class. In both conditions, the participants did the
same warm-up activity: viewing a clip from the beginning of a lesson and a clip from the end of the lesson, then
responding questions about what might happen in between, and finally viewing the full story. After that the
forum participants went to a forum in which three threads with questions about three noteworthy moments were
created in advance. The chat participants individually responded to those same questions before joining a chat.
A moderator was available in both conditions.
         Data included screen records of interaction between the teachers and the online experiences, session
logs, and video records of focus groups after the online experiences. Sentences of forum and chat logs were
coded to understand what and how teachers noticed during discussion. Our coding system (Chieu, Weiss, &
Herbst, 2009) is partly based on the codes used by van Es and Sherin (2008). It consists of five categories: The
Topic (what was talked about) codes consisted of five "content topics" (mathematics, students' mathematics,
teachers' tactics, teachers' planning, and emotion and climate), three "context topics" (media, user-interface,
and interpersonal), and other.       The  Subject (who    was   being  talked about)   codes were   subjectless,  student,
teacher, self, and other. The Stance (how teaching practice was analyzed) codes were descriptive, evaluative,
interpretive, and   other.   The Specificity  codes  (level  of specificity  used to   discuss   teaching practice) were
general  or  specific. The   Temporality    codes (how    the  embedded     animation  was   referred to)  were  none  or
reference to the animation in general / scene of the animation / action in the animation / specific time code.

1 Interested readers may request an account at http://grip.umich.edu/themat/ to watch examples of animations.

                                                      290     ISLS
                                              ICLS 2010     Volume 2

Results And Discussion
Overall, the participants in all groups concentrated on discussing their professional practice (more than 70% of
their comments  were  about content). More     specifically, they  narrowed    the focus on    making  references to
students' mathematics, teachers' tactics and    planning,   and   students' emotion  and     classroom climate.  The
participants predominantly attended to the animated teacher and/or students. They frequently took evaluative
and/or interpretive stances. Except for the pre-service teachers in the chat condition, the teachers' comments
were specific, and the specificity was often about pedagogy. The experienced teachers often referred to the
animation when they made comments. Those figures were comparable with the results of the video club study
(van Es & Sherin, 2008).
         We found that relationships existed between referring to the animation and making specific comments.
For example, in any group the probability that a sentence that did not refer to the animation in general would be
specific was just 60% of the probability that a sentence referring to the animation would be specific (95% CI =
[.24, .97], p = 0.001). The findings mean that teachers' comments were more specific when they referred to the
embedded   animation than when   they did not.   The   existence   of those  relationships   shows evidence  for  the
effectiveness of the embedded clips. Indeed, if one assumes that making specific comments engages teachers in
more meaningful and in-depth discussions, and helps them notice critical events of instructional practice better
(which might influence how well they learn how to do the work of teaching better), then it is useful to stimulate
them to refer to the specificities of the shared artifacts when they make comments. Embedding animation clips
directly in the virtual space of discussion is an effective way to support this specificity.
         The study also found that both chat and forum conditions can be complementarily used to engage in-
service teachers in meaningful exchanges about their professional practice. The chat condition, however, may
not be useful for pre-service teachers to be able to create in-depth and significant exchanges about teaching
practice. The forum condition could be much better for pre-service teachers. Indeed, in that condition they can
attend to and discuss instructional practice in a manner that is closer to the way experienced teachers do.

Concluding Remarks
In this paper, we report on a study to understand the nature of the discussion of both teachers in online chat and
forum conditions in which animated clips of classroom interaction are embedded and used as a reference point
to facilitate and stimulate meaningful and in-depth discussion. We especially look at how the participants notice
critical events of the embedded classroom story. The study found evidence to support the original feature of our
online experiences: embedding animations directly to the online discussion space. Although the study did not
analyze teachers' actual practice of teaching, it did analyze their ability to notice and interpret critical events of
the practice, an important part of their professional work (van Es & Sherin, 2008).
         The study, as the first step of a design-based research approach, also identified technological problems
and provided suggestions for those problems. For example, because of little experience in the use of forum,
several teachers in forum mistakenly responded to a "seed" entry though they wanted to respond to a sub-entry
of that "seed" entry. This finding may indicate the need to implement a new forum format in which members'
entries will be organized in a semantic and tree-structured system rather than in a chronological system that has
been very common in many web-based forums. That feature has been implemented in a new forum tool in the
second iteration of our development process. Our preliminary observations with the use of the new forum tool
by pre-service teachers suggest that the new forum format seems to sort the above confusing issue out and also
help the users follow discussion stories more easily.

References
Chieu, V.M., Weiss, M., & Herbst, P.G. (2009, April). A pilot study toward building web-based interactive rich-
         media virtual settings for teacher preparation and development. Paper presented at the Annual Meeting
         of AERA, San Diego, CA.
Collins, A. (1992). Toward a design science of education. In E. Scanlon & T. O'Shea (Eds.), New directions in
         educational technology. Berlin, Germany: Springer-Verlag.
Herbst, P., &  Chazan,   D. (2003).   Exploring   the   practical  rationality of  mathematics     teaching through
         conversations about videotaped episodes. For the Learning of Mathematics, 23(1), 2-14.
Leinhardt, G., & Ohlsson, S. (1990). Tutorials on the structure of tutoring from teachers. Journal of Artificial
         Intelligence in Education, 2, 21-46.
van Es, E.A., & Sherin, M.G. (2008). Mathematics teachers' "learning to notice" in the context of a video club.
         Teaching and Teacher Education, 24(2), 244-276.

Acknowledgments
The work reported in this paper is supported by NSF, grant ESI-0353285 to Patricio Herbst. Opinions expressed
here are the sole responsibility of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the Foundation.

                                                  291      ISLS
