                                                 ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 2

     DevInfo GameWorks: Supporting inquiry-based game design
                                  Jeff Kupperman, University of Michigan - Flint
              Beth Robertson and Shawn Baglin, Community Systems Foundation, Ann Arbor, MI
                             Email: jeff@digw.org, beth@digw.org, shawn@digw.org

          Abstract: We report on a pilot of DevInfo GameWorks, a web-based system that allows users
          to create and play data-driven educational games.     In particular, we focus on the challenges of
          scaffolding game creation, encouraging meaningful inquiry as the basis for game design, and
          supporting a community of learners.    Preliminary findings point to several areas for continued
          investigation and development.

The promise and challenge of learning through designing games
Research over the past two decades has pointed to the power of engaging learners in designing their own games.
At the same time that the idea of learning through playing digital games has gained currency (Gee, 2007; Salen,
2008), educators taking a "constructionist" approach (Bruckman, 1998; Papert, 1991) have pointed to the even
greater   potential of learning through    creating games,    especially when  the goal  is to create games   with  an
educational purpose (Carbonaro, et al., 2006; El-Nasr, 2006; Kafai, 1996).        Game-creation has the potential to
support higher-level thinking and expression using multiple literacies, and to boost motivation and self-esteem
for children who don't consider themselves good at traditional literacy practices (Robertson & Good, 2005).
          In this work, however, three persistent challenges remain. First, despite the increasing availability of
tools designed to support game-programming by novices (e.g., Overmars, 2004), making digital games still
generally demands substantial time and technical skills. Second, it is not easy for learners to create games that
are satisfying  to  play,  interesting, and   genuinely  educative.  While    we believe that  games    can provide a
framework for meaningful inquiry, novice game-designers understandably tend to concentrate on the mechanics
of  their game  rather    than educational    implications  (e.g., Kafai,  1996;  Overmars,    2004). Third,  while a
supportive, interested, and widely-distributed audience for learner-created games can provide crucial motivation
and feedback (Resnick, et al., 2009), environments that support this kind of authentic community remain rare.

Background and Methods
We have attempted to address these three challenges through DevInfo GameWorks ("DIGW"), a system that
includes game templates that allow easy creation of new game content; tools and resources to help learners
focus on inquiry with real data; and tools for feedback, collaboration, and social networking so that there is a
community of learners.
          The center of DIGW is a website (http://digw.org) that has templates designed to allow easy creation of
data-driven games that can be played in three formats: online in real time by multiple players, in solitaire mode,
or in printed form offline.  (The first game template is based loosely on tic-tac-toe, but with enhanced elements
of strategy, knowledge, and chance.) Using databases of indicators related to the United Nations Millennium
Development goals and other data sets, as well as user-created media, learners can design and play games that
are based on inquiry into rich sets of information, and which focus on meaningful relationships among data.
(For example, learners might investigate questions such as, "what is the relationship between GDP and HIV
infection rates in Africa?" or, "What are the biggest health problems in my community, and how big are these
problems regionally and globally?")
          At the same time, social-networking features help generate situations in which intentional learning
becomes   natural:  learners are able   to engage   with serious   content in playful ways;  older users  can mentor
younger   ones; and    the community    as  a whole   has   an overarching  goal   of increasing the  knowledge  and
engagement of the group.
          Many DIGW users are students using the system as part of a class assignment or project, but the
system is also available for use by the general public.     Teachers who wish to use the system as part of a class
have access to curriculum materials and guides, but no attempt has been made to standardize use of the system
across all learning contexts.
          Because of this variety of uses, and the range of educational aims that inform these contexts, our
analysis has not focused on finding some sort of cause-effect relationship between DIGW and a predefined
"achievement"   measure;    rather, we   have looked  at   the extent to   which the  system   supports new  ways   of
engaging in higher-level thinking activities, especially those that involve so-called "21st Century skills" such as
collaboration, "network awareness," and critical consumption of information (e.g., Davidson, 2009; Wagner,
2008).  To do so, we have examined the quality of engagement and learning, as measured by field observations,
evaluation surveys, interviews with facilitators and participants, and a content-analysis of the games themselves.

                                                     296  ·  © ISLS
                                               ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 2

Finding and implications
When DIGW was first proposed, the immediate goal was to increase awareness of global issues in general and
the Millennium Development Goals in particular.    An early pilot with urban sixth grade students established that
DIGW can be an effective tool for this aim (Robertson, Baglin, & Kupperman, 2009). Since then, however, the
system has been used to achieve a wide variety of different content goals: for example, a primary school teacher
in South Africa was attracted by the opportunity for learners to practice English language expression in an
authentic environment; a college professor used it to help her students learn literacy education concepts; and a
high school journalism teacher saw it as a way for her students to do grass-roots journalism.
         Across these varied contexts, it has become apparent that two aspects of the system are particularly
relevant in terms of supporting high-level intellectual engagement and the 21st Century skills mentioned above.
First is a strong sense of the audience ­ in other words, the potential players ­ during game design. In the most
successful designs, this sense of audience helps shape everything from the game's topic to media choice and
text phrasing. Ultimately, a good DIGW design must be interesting and appropriately challenging for players,
and it also should convey some important information.     Of course, a sense of audience is important in any kind
of authoring, from traditional texts to blogs or video, but because a DIGW game is played rather than read or
viewed, the player's perspective is especially compelling.
         The second aspect we have found to be particularly relevant is the importance of a tangible artifact as a
product of inquiry, along   with opportunities for  social  sharing  and  feedback around this artifact. Having a
concrete and public outcome seems crucial to fostering a sense of ownership and pride in the inquiry and design
work. This second aspect closely echoes the findings of Resnick and colleagues (2009) about users of the
programming environment Scratch: young people were able to do remarkably self-motivated and sophisticated
work in an environment that supported personally meaningful projects and social sharing. DIGW pushes this
idea further to include an additional emphasis on inquiry into real-world data (both from electronic databases
and from local communities) and globally relevant issues.
         All of that said, more work is needed to address the persistent challenges listed at the beginning of this
paper.  First, even though DIGW greatly reduces the technical knowledge necessary to create a game, it is still
not trivial to make a game that is genuinely and uniquely interesting, educative, and challenging to others. (At
the same time, the intellectual work of designing a game is important, and we don't want to shortcut that by
making game creation "too easy.") We are continuing to work on ways to scaffold this process.        Secondly, we
need to better help participants frame interesting questions for inquiry and find rich data representations. Project
participants are directed to a range of sophisticated tools that can be used to access, organize, and analyze data,
but we know that access to tools by itself is not enough. We are developing a number of strategies to support
deeper inquiry, including the creation of a library of "interesting questions" and related resources. Finally, when
done in  a school  setting, even  a  task like game    design  can  be  reduced to schoolwork   ­ an  involuntary
demonstration  of  knowledge     for the  teacher. Ultimately,    then, success will  depend  not just   on better
technological tools and materials, but on better ways to think about teaching, school, and learning.

References
Bruckman, A. (1998). Community support for constructionist learning. CSCW, 7, 47-86.
Carbonaro, M., et al. (2008). Interactive story authoring: A viable form of creative expression for the classroom.
         Computers & Education, 51(2), 687-707.
Davidson, C. N., & Goldberg, D. T. (2009). The future of learning institutions in a digital age. Cambridge, MA:
         MIT Press.
El-Nasr, M. S. & Smith, B. K. (2006). Learning through game modding. Computers in Entertainment, 4(1).
Gee, J. P. (2007). What video games have to teach us about learning and literacy (Rev. and updated ed.). New
         York: Palgrave Macmillan.
Kafai, Y. B. (1996). Learning design by making games. In Y. Kafai & M. Resnick (Eds.), Constructionism in
         practice (pp. 71-96). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Overmars, M. (2004). Teaching computer science through game design. Computer, 37(4), 81-83.
Papert, S. (1991).  Situating constructionism.  In  I. Harel   &  S.  Papert (Eds.), Constructionism   (pp. 1-11).
         Norwood, NJ: Ablex Publishing.
Resnick, M., Maloney, J., Monroy-Hernández, A., Rusk, N., Eastmond, E., Brennan, K., et al. (2009). Scratch:
         Programming for all. Commuications of the ACM, 52(11), 60-67.
Robertson, B., Baglin, S, & Kupperman, J. (2009, November). DevFacToe: Changing the world, one game at a
         time. Presentation at the Michigan Council for the Social Studies, Mount Pleasant, MI.
Robertson, J. and Good, J. (2005). Story creation in virtual game worlds. Communications of the ACM, 48, 61-
         65.
Salen, K. (2008). The ecology of games: Connecting youth, games, and learning.
Wagner, T. (2008). The global achievement gap: Why even our best schools don't teach the new survival skills
         our children need--and what we can do about it. New York: Basic Books.

                                                   297  ·  © ISLS
