                                                  ICLS 2010    Volume 2

                       "Oh god, please don't let me hurt them!":
   Assessing Self-Regulated Learning in Medical School Education

                  Ted Hanss, Stephanie Teasley, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109
                                     Email: ted@umich.edu, steasley@umich.edu

          Abstract:  With     recent  trends  in   residency   training  moving     towards     outcomes-based
          education, changes are needed in the design of undergraduate medical education. This study
          explores medical    students' learning   facilitated  by an  online   system,   the  ENCORE      LMS,
          designed to enhance the standard curriculum by promoting self-regulation and self-reflection.
          Student survey responses and analysis of their online journals provide evidence of content
          mastery  and  development     of self-regulated   learning. We    discuss the   effectiveness   of this
          student-centered learning management system.

Introduction
While  medical  school    education   has  evolved  in response    to basic  and  clinical research    discoveries and  an
enhanced understanding of learning methods, undergraduate medical education (UME) retains at its core the
time-based curriculum of two pre-clinical years focused on basic science lectures and two clinical clerkship
years. This model was established nation-wide a century ago, with its roots dating back to the 1870s (Flexner,
1910). Outcomes-based education has recently taken hold in residency programs and, anticipating that this trend
will move   upstream,   the medical    school  at a large   Midwestern   U.S.   research   university  is investigating  a
competency-based    approach     for  UME.    Combined    with  rigorous    assessments,   this curriculum   reform    will
ultimately permit a student to move through medical school at his or her own pace while still achieving mastery
over the content required by licensing boards.
          To support this new curriculum, named ENCORE, the medical school is partnering with faculty at the
university's Schools of Information and Dentistry to prototype a new learning management system (LMS),
following Dalsgaard's (2006) recommendation to replace the monolithic learning management system in order
to "engage  students   in an  active  use  of the  web   as a  resource  for their  self-governed,     problem-based   and
collaborative activities." Key features of ENCORE include explicit competency standards that must be met for
graduation, assessments     that track  student  mastery    of outcomes,    and  flexible  learning paths    based on  the
individual needs and interests of students. ENCORE relies on a self-regulated learning model; a metacognitive
process built on the concept of, and positively correlated with, perceived self-efficacy or personal judgment of
performance  capability   (Schunk,     1985;  White    & Gruppen,     2007).  Self-efficacy    contributes   to motivated
learning, which    emphasizes    acquiring skills  and knowledge      over  task completion.    Self-regulation   includes
strategies for planning, monitoring, and modifying student cognition (Pintrich & De Groot, 1990). The benefits
of self-regulated learning have been established through controlled studies that show students with good self-
regulation skills  performing    at a higher  academic   level  than  those  without such  skills (e.g.,  Zimmerman     &
Bandura,   1994).  Challenges    include   maintaining   motivation    and  developing     the  skills to effectively   use
feedback.
          ENCORE's portfolio-oriented LMS features tools for managing learning outcomes, listing and tagging
learning resources, recording patient encounters, reflective journals, formative and summative assessments, and
faculty feedback. Faculty mentors provide a default set of learning activities while students self-select (and
sometimes   self-define   and acquire)  learning   activities  and learning  resources,    such  as journal   articles and
anatomy videos. Self-regulated learning in ENCORE occurs both independently and in peer groups. Students
decide when  they   are   ready  for  summative   assessments    based   on their use of   formative    assessments.   The
research question for this project is: How do medical students develop and express self-efficacy and identity as
self-regulated learners in an environment facilitated by a new learningmanagement system?

Methods and Preliminary Analysis
During the summer of 2009, six first year medical students were recruited to participate in a six weekevaluation
of the ENCORE curriculum. The pilot curriculum had three major threads: clinical experiences with patients,
collaborative learning projects, and independent learning. An online survey instrument was administered six
times during the study, prompted at different times of the day, to ask students about the reason for their most
recent use of the LMS, their assessment of the value of the LMS, and the relevance of that use to the learning
objectives. Students also utilized the system to record journal entries regarding their various learning activities.
          Survey data revealed that, at the moment of prompting, 37% of the students were using the ENCORE
LMS because they wanted to, while 73% of the time they were completing a compulsory task. Using a 5 point
Likert scale (1 = not at all relevant to 5 = very relevant) to measure the fit between the LMS tools and learning
activities, 89% of the student responses were that the system tools were somewhat or very relevant to the

                                                     298      ISLS
                                               ICLS 2010      Volume 2

current learning task. Using a similar scale, 81% of the student responses were that the LMS somewhat or very
much improved the quality of the learning activity.
          Students provided 160 daily and capstone journal entries in which they were asked to address the
following prompts: What are your (reflective) thoughts about today's learning experiences? How did today's
experience(s) build upon previous learning experiences (e.g., the connections you are seeing/making)? Describe
progress you are making toward your learning goals. Describe progress you are making toward program goals.
          Discourse analysis of the journal entries provides evidence of growing awareness of self-efficacy and
learning. For example, one student, through the use of metaphor, indicates a positive experience while still
acknowledging challenges:

          This whole week was a great opportunity to stretch my wings and try to fly a little for the first
          time. I feel like the Wright brothers. My first flights are very short and bumpy, but one day,
          I'm really going to make it work and I'll walk into the room thinking "I can help this person"
          rather than "oh god, please don't let me hurt them!" (S3)

The same    student, while  hedging  on    qualifications     and exhibiting    stake inoculation   (i.e., not   claiming
competencies not yet held), shares a success story of reaching the same conclusion as an attending physician:

          While diagnosing  is not  really a   skill we're    expected    to have mastered  yet,  I think   it's
          tremendously useful to push us to try and think it through. I may not be brilliant and quick
          yet, but I did come to the same conclusion as Dr. X. (S3)

Another student indicated a shift in perception regarding the institutionally conferred power structure:

          I learned to be more critical about data and practices that were more based on tradition than
          research. Since starting medical school, we have been bombarded with so much information
          that I have not been able to question the validity of the material. Honestly I have assumed that
          everything we have been taught must be correct because the material is being presented by
          clinicians and PhDs who have more experience. It seems in medicine there is a hierarchy and
          sometimes information is just taken to be true just based on the fact that it comes from your
          superior and you don't want to fail because you didn't do what they thought was right. (S6)

Discussion
This study explored the use of a new learning management system in conjunction with an innovative curriculum
based on self-regulated learning. The survey data indicates that although use is not primarily student-initiated,
student learning can be facilitated by a learning management system "tuned" to self-regulated learning. The
preliminary analysis of student journals demonstrates evidence of growing self-efficacy and learning. Future
work will include more detailed discourse analysis of student journals and provide further evidence from the
surveys, student interviews, and review of the broad range of artifacts generated during the pilot. Standardized
test scores will also be incorporated into the analysis, facilitating a longitudinal assessment of the intervention.
          Although generalizability is not   a top   goal   for   this project, we anticipate that  understanding the
experience of a specific group of medical students will inform larger-scale follow-up initiatives. For example, a
subset of the LMS tools are currently being deployed to all 170 first year medical students to support outcomes-
based collaborative learning around patient cases. This pilot will inform surveys of that larger population. As
other disciplines move to outcomes-based education, these studies will inform a broader movement to support
self-regulated learning and provide input to the design of student-centered learning management systems.

References
Dalsgaard, C. (2006). Social software: E-learning beyond learning management systems. European Journal of
          Open,    Distance    and     E-Learning,        2006      (II).    Retrieved    May       2,     2009    from
          http://www.eurodl.org/materials/contrib/2006/Christian_Dalsgaard.htm
Flexner, A. (1910). Medical Education in the United States and Canada: A Report to the Carnegie Foundation
          for the Advancement of Teaching. New York, NY.
Pintrich, P., & De   Groot, E. (1990). Motivational      and   Self-Regulated   Learning  Components       of Classroom
          Academic Performance. Journal of Educational Psychology, 82(1): 33-40.
Schunk, D. (1985). Self-efficacy and classroom learning. Psychology in the Schools, 22: 208-223.
White, B.C., & Gruppen, L.D. (2007). Self-regulated Learning in Medical Education. Edinburgh: Association
          for the Study of Medical Education.
Zimmerman, B., & Bandura, A. (1994). Impact of Self-Regulatory Influences on Writing Course Attainment.
          American Educational Research Journal, 30(4): 845-862.

                                                     299     ISLS
