                                                 ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

    Representational Practices in the Activity of Student-Generated
 Representations (SGR) for Promoting Conceptual Understanding

              Orit Parnafes, School of Education, Tel-Aviv University, Israel, oritpa@post.tau.ac.il

        Abstract:     This  research    aims  to investigate   student-generation and  elaboration   of visual
        representations as a tool for promoting understanding of difficult conceptual domains. The
        paper focuses on students' naturally occurring representational practices as identified in an
        activity of student-generated representations (SGR). The research is based on observations of
        pairs  of    students, ages  10-14,   generating  representations   while  trying  to understand  the
        phenomenon       of the  moon   phases.   The activity  involves  a few   stages.  First, each  student
        generates a representation to promote his or her own understanding of the phenomenon. Then,
        the students negotiate and co-construct representations with their peers. Finally, they design
        representations for explaining the phenomenon to an external audience. The analysis identifies
        various representational practices utilized by students for making sense of the phenomenon,
        developing explanations, and communicating their ideas to their peers. The analysis examines
        how these practices support students in achieving some cognitive and communicative goals.

Introduction
This research aims to investigate student-generation and elaboration of visual representations, as a tool for
promoting understanding of difficult conceptual domains. In particular, it examines students' practices of using
drawings and visual representations to advance their own understanding.
        Generally speaking, the idea of SGR can be motivated by combining two important components that
have been shown valuable for learning: First, a wide range of research has shown that learning with visual
representations enhance     learning and   understanding    (e.g., Larkin &   Simon,  1987;   Scaife &  Rogers,    1996;
Ainsworth, 1999; Parnafes, 2007). Second, research has shown that self-generated explanations (Chi, Bassok,
Lewis, Reimann, & Glaser, 1989; Chi, de Leeuw, Chiu, and La Vancher, 1994) promote deeper understanding.
This research proposes to combine the two components and investigate the potential of student-generated visual
representations as a means for explaining difficult phenomena to promote learning and genuine understanding.
        Student-generated explanations can take different forms (or representations). In most studies the self-
generated explanations are either verbal or textual. Chi et al. (1994) mention that other forms of nonverbal
constructive activity, such as diagram drawing, may also be effective at enhancing learning. This is particularly
important given that our world is rich in visual images, and this era is characterized in an ever increasing
amount of innovative and sophisticated diagrams and visualizations that enhance various types of information in
many  fields  (e.g., Tufte, 2001).   It is only  sensible to   enrich students' repertoire of  self-explaining  tools to
include visual means to enhance their own understanding and learning of researched phenomena. Furthermore,
humans think occasionally with images and visual models and those could be expressed in order to be operated
on and communicated with. Yet, if we look at school practices, students' opportunities for expression involve,
for the most part, verbal and textual forms. Visual forms are mainly offered to students as resources, and rarely
as forms for expression and self-generation.
        This rational is stimulated also by examining representational practices in scientific areas. Scientists
use representations   in their  practice   to promote  their   own  understanding,  to think  with   in order   to make
scientific progress, and to communicate with other scientists (Latour, 1986; Lynch and Woolgar, 1990; Ochs,
Jacoby, & Gonzales, 1994; Nersessian, 2002). DiSessa et al. (1991) studied students' competencies in various
representational practices. They show that students, as young as elementary school students, have sophisticated
competencies for creating, critiquing and inventing new representations (meta-representational competencies).
Developing    these   competencies,     they  conjecture,   is important   in   enhancing  students'    representational
innovation, as well as deepening their understanding of any kind of representation (diSessa, 2004).! From a
meta-representational point of view, the competency of grappling with a tough conceptual field through the
generation and elaboration of representations was not explored. This may well be an important competency to
develop, given that it is a common practice in scientific work, involving a fair amount of inventiveness and
creativity.
        Research programs that have already been conducted on SGR (e.g., Ainsworth & Loizou, 2003; Roy &
Chi, 2005; Cox & Brna, 1995; Cox, 1999; Gobert & Clement, 1999; Hall, Bailey, & Tillman, 1997) demonstrate
the increasing interest of the research community in self-generated representations. While much of this research
comes from cognitive science, comparing various cognitive differences between experimental settings, there is a
growing research that uses qualitative methods for examining activities of students' SGR in an open ended

                                                     301  ·    © ISLS
                                              ICLS 2010    ·   Volume 1

setting (Bamberger, 2007; diSessa, 2004; Danish & Enyedy, 2007; Enyedy, 2005; and Nemirovsky & Tierney,
2001).
          The  current research explores  the proposal    that SGR   can  be  a powerful tool   for thinking  and for
developing understanding of difficult topics. One path of exploration of the current research, and the focus of
this paper, is examining students' naturally occurring practices of SGR, and analyzing the means by which these
practices shape and facilitate their developing explanations and conceptual understanding. The analysis attempts
to address the question: In what ways could naturally occurring SGR practices support the achievement of
conceptual and   communicative   goals  in  the process   of developing   and   elaborating explanations of   difficult
phenomena?

Methods

Data collection
The research is based on observations of 7 pairs of students (see table 1), generating representations while
trying to understand   the phenomenon    of the phases    of the moon.   The  students were   10-14  years old  (4-8th
grade). Each pair attended a session of one to two hours.

Table 1: the research subjects.

                            Gender                        Grade level
Rose and Natalie            Two girls                     5th grade
Merav and Maya              Two girls                     5th grade
Tal and Rotem               Two boys                      5th grade
Ran and Gil                 Two boys                      4th grade
Liron and Itai              Two boys                      5th grade
Roni and Tom                Two boys                      6th grade
Or and Meital               Two girls                     8th grade

The scientific domain selected for this study is the Phases of the moon. The instructional design of the sessions
involves four parts, following a beginning, in which the students receive a brief explanation about the research
and the session.
   1.     An introductory activity: a brief interview about what the phases of the moon are, the cycle of the
          moon phases over a month, and the system of moon, Earth and the sun including relations between
          rotations and revolutions. The interview usually ends with soliciting students' initial explanations about
          the causes of the phases of the moon.
   2.     Personal representations: the students are asked to draw some representations (diagrams or sketches)
          to explain the cause of the phases of the moon.
   3.     Collaborative representations: the students are asked to share their representations with one another
          and to explain the cause of the phases of the moon to their peer based on the representations. Then,
          they should negotiate and co-construct a shared representation that they both agree on. This part is
          usually the longest of all parts and the students go through several drafts as they refine their shared
          understanding.
   4.     Presentable  representations: the students   are   asked  to  produce a diagram   for people   that are not
          present in the activity. Student design a PowerPoint presentation in this phase. In some cases, this stage
          is conducted in a separate session, a few weeks or even months after the first session.
During the session, the researcher's role is mostly a participatory observer. In principle, interventions are kept to
the minimum, and if made, it is for the purpose of clarifying meanings, or asking challenging questions when
the students seem to be satisfied with their state of explanation. The sessions are videotaped and then digitized
for further analysis. The representations produced are collected and scanned.

Data analysis
The methodological orientation of this research encompasses a fine-grain detail qualitative analysis of case
studies. The theoretical framework is developed in an approach similar to the grounded theory methodology
(Glaser & Strauss, 1967; Strauss & Corbin, 1990). The construction of a theory is done by generating categories
from evidence taken from a few focus cases. These categories are then explored in other cases, which may
support the categorical concept or suggest modifications to make it more generalized.
          To conduct the analysis, the various sources of data are examined: 1. The representational forms that
the students produced during the session; 2. The video recordings of the interaction between the students as they
work together, including their actions such as pointing to aspects of the representations, gesturing, highlighting,
arguing,  refining, agreeing, disagreeing  and  so forth.  From    this close examination   some categories   emerge

                                                   302  ·    © ISLS
                                               ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

concerning actions and practices of SGR. These categories were applied on two of the sessions and refined
through several  iterations of applications.  When    the  framework    stabilized  and the  categories  demonstrated
usefulness and insight with regards to the issue at hand, the categories were applied on other case studies. The
analysis is carried out using the Transanai video analysis software.

Preliminary findings
The preliminary findings are presented in this paper in the form of a set of categories of actions and practices of
SGR produced by the analysis. In addition, a sample analysis of one episode is provided to demonstrate how
some of  the actions and    practices support  the   achievement    of conceptual   and communicative    goals   in the
process of developing and elaborating explanations using the generation and elaboration of representations.

The System of Categories
The system of categories includes two sets of categories. The first set includes categories of observed actions
operated on the representations, and the second set includes categories of practices for achieving cognitive and
communicative goals. Below is a description of each category with some accompanying examples.

Observed Actions Operated on the Representations:
   A.   Generating   representations   - Students    draw  representations,  either from  scratch, or,  they continue
        elaborating a representation that already appears on the paper. Students generate representations with
        various degrees of innovation and inventiveness. Some of their drawings are customary representations
        of objects and relations between them (see Figure 1 on the left). Generating representations can also be
        done  by  borrowing    a representation   invention   or convention   from  other   resources.  Resources   can
        include representational aspects drawn by the peer, or a conventional representation seen in a textbook
        or elsewhere (See Figure 1 in the middle). Ultimately, a representation could be generated by making a
        representational innovation,     in which    students use   various  common     signs (circles,  lines, words,
        numbers, and colors) inventively. In Figure 1 on the right, students use big circles to indicate the field
        of view from different positions on Earth.

                     Figure 1 - various degrees of inventiveness in generating representations

   B.   Gesturing over a representation - Students make gestures to express various ideas. There are various
        types of gestures that are found to be used by students through their discussion, including pointing,
        animating and covering a representation. For example:
             a.  Animating:    Figure  2    shows  a selection   of animating   gestures  on  the static drawing    for
                 representing    motion. The  two    pictures on  the  left demonstrate  gestures  that  represent  the
                 motion of the sun rays from the sun to the moon. The two pictures on the right show gestures
                 that represent the rotation of the Earth around its axis, and the revolution of the moon around
                 the Earth, accordingly.

                                 Figure 2 - animating gestures for representing motion

             b.  Covering: Students cover parts of the representations with their hands. In Figure 3 on the left,
                 the student covers parts of the representations to highlight only one moon on which she wants
                 to  focus.  This is  an example     of covering    and  hiding details  to reduce  destruction   from

                                                   303   ·  © ISLS
                                            ICLS 2010     ·  Volume 1

                 unnecessary details (in this case, drawn by her peer). In the picture on the right, the student
                 covers with her hand half of the moon ­ the part that is not seen by people looking from the
                 Earth. In this, she tries to reason about the part that is seen from Earth.

                                                    Figure 3 - covering gestures

   C.    Highlighting selected details - The students select certain details in the representation and highlight
         them either by circling, shadowing, or making any other form of highlighting. For example, when
         Natalie talks about the day and night on Earth, she highlights the line splitting the Earth into two halves
         ­ the one that's facing the sun, and the one that is not. Another example is highlighting and shadowing
         a part of the moon that is not facing the sun to show that half of it is shadowed. The students keep
         highlighting and shadowing the part even though it is already shadowed.

   D.    Transforming a representation - Students transform a piece of an existing drawing by adding details,
         changing, and deleting. They add details that were not on the original drawing, change some aspects, or
         delete aspects of the representation. For example, Natalie explains that the moon in the picture cannot
         be seen from Israel but can be seen from the US. Rose argues with her, saying that even US cannot see
         it because this moon is dark ­ the Earth casts shadow on it. She darkens the moon (it was only a blank
         circle before) and in that transforms the representation to represent a dark moon.

                                     Figure 4 - Transforming a representation

         As with  the "generating representations"     category, students  transform representations  with various
         degrees of innovation and inventiveness.

3.2 Practices Used for Achieving Cognitive and Communicative Goals

Students generate representations, gesture  over,      highlight and   transform representations  as a means     for
achieving some task-related goals. Following are five functions identified in the data for achieving cognitive
and communicative goals in this sense making activity.

   E.    Organize information  ­  Students organize     on  the  paper all the relevant information  ­ usually   the
         objects and their spatial relations. This is usually happens at the beginning of producing a drawing.

   F.    Construct and communicate an explanation ­ Students use representations to generate an explanation
         either for enhancing their own understanding, or to communicate their explanation to their peer or to
         the researcher.

   G.    Manage   complexity  ­  Students  use     the  representations  to reduce   or organize   epistemological
         complexity. This can be done by freezing a state in a dynamic process, or by selecting a focus on only
         one state, by ignoring some details, etc.

   H.    "See" better ­ perceptual aid - Students use various common signs (circles, lines, words, numbers, and
         colors) inventively to achieve some communicative goals and to "see" new ideas better.

                                                   304  ·  © ISLS
                                                ICLS 2010    ·  Volume 1

    I.   Claim accountability - A student uses the representation as evidence for her previous arguments or her
         peer's previous argument. The representations enable students to make their arguments with reference
         to the external representations they have produced. They can point to objects in the representations that
         they  wanted   to  argue about,   or to   elaborate   their ideas   on,  agree or  disagree to   statements   with
         reference   to them.  The   instructor  can use  this  practice    as well to  set the students'  attention   to a
         particular issue and to talk about it.

Following is a sample analysis of one short episode. The episode was identified as one in which representations
are used   for the function of  "seeing    better" (category   H).   It is analyzed to  reveal  how  the  various  actions
operated on the representations support the specific cognitive and communicative goal.

Practices of Using Representations to "see better" ­ Sample Analysis
Rose and Natalie are 5th grade students. They are towards the end of the third part of the activity, where they
made    an impressive   development     in their   explanations  and     understanding.   This  is their  last attempt    of
explaining  the  phases  of the moon     before  they  move    on    to the fourth  part, where    they'd try  to generate
representations for an external audience. They already explained nicely what happens in the mid month phase
(according to the lunar calendar) ­ when the moon is full. Now, they try to see how other phases are formed.
They are now focusing at the location of the moon described in Figure 5:

                                      Figure 5 - The moon in a new location

Natalie colors the moon in the new location ­ the part facing the sun is now lit (the colored part is the lighted
part). Rose adds a line splitting the moon to two other halves, an important move for highlighting the observer's
point of view and how the moon is seen from Earth:

               Rose:     So we... what we actually, see, is this part (drawing a
                         line almost vertical to the colored part), more or less...

Her explanation combines both the illumination of the moon (represented by the colored and non-colored parts
of  the moon),  and  the  part that  is seen  from   a particular    position  on Earth.  She  makes  a   representational
innovation, using a line to see the illuminated part seen from Earth. This representational innovation enables the
students to "see better" what is actually seen from Earth.
         Indeed, following Rose's elaboration of which particular part of the illuminated moon is seen, Natalie
gains a meaningful insight:

               Natalie:  Ah!   One   moment,    (takes Rose's   hand    away   from the   representation)  the
                         moon doesn't really get larger and smaller, it's simply what we see. We see
                         only the illuminated part [Rose: right!] (Natalie colors the illuminated part
                         again), and now it's like, only half of it, and it's possible that if we'll look
                         before... so maybe it'll be only this part. This line here [Rose: right]. It
                         depends (looks at me) on when we look and... when the moon...

This is a moment of "aha" for Natalie. She realizes that the moon does not really get larger and smaller (an idea
she kept voicing throughout the session, meaning that only parts of the moon are seen due to occultation), but it
is the  observed   illuminated  part seen   from   Earth that  changes.     She   summarizes    by saying  that   this is a

                                                     305  ·  © ISLS
                                               ICLS 2010   ·   Volume 1

combination of "when we look" (the point of view) and "when the moon" (how it is illuminated). This is a clear
case where seeing better leads to a clear development of conceptual understanding.
         Rose reiterates the same ideas and combines, more explicitly, the moon illumination and the way an
observer sees the moon from Earth:

               Rose:     So in  fact, when  the moon    is here, so  this part is lit
                         (colors  again the   half moon   that faces the  sun), and
                         Earth, say, this part (draws a line on the Earth to show
                         the field of view) sees relatively this part (draws a line
                         on the moon to split it ­ the line is parallel to the line
                         she drew on the Earth) here, something like that, from
                         the moon, that's lit

               Natalie:  That's  why   we see  it... These   are the phases  of   the
                         moon!

Rose makes a creative use of signs to emphasize this integration. She colors the half of moon facing the sun, and
the other half remains blank to indicate illumination. Next, to represent the observer's point of view, she draws a
line splitting the moon into halves, which is parallel to a line representing the field of view of the observer. The
half moon facing the Earth is what the observer can see of the moon.
         This  is an  example   of how  transforming    a  representation  (category   D)  in an innovative way can
facilitate seeing better (category H) of a specific aspect of the phenomenon that is crucial in making sense and
understanding it. Rose and Natalie transform the drawing of the moon in a way that highlights and makes visible
two important aspects:
   1.    The illumination of the moon by the sun, represented by the colored part.
   2.    The part of the moon visible from Earth, represented by the line that splits the moon to the part that
         faces the Earth, and the part that is hidden from the Earth.
The combination of these two aspects constitutes the core of the explanation of the phases of the moon. The
inventive way by which they transformed the representation signifies precisely this important combination.

Conclusions and further analysis
The analysis classified students' various SGR practices that were used authentically by students when they were
asked to generate representations to understand the phases of the moon, and then to communicate their ideas to
their  peers. These   practices support their  efforts  in thinking,   reasoning  and   making   sense of a  difficult
phenomenon, and maintained their attempt to explain the cause of the phenomenon to their friend, and exchange
ideas.
         The sample analysis demonstrates the practice of performing certain actions to help one seeing better a
particular aspect  of the phenomenon.     In  this case,  this was   a central  aspect  at the core of the  scientific
explanation ­ the phases of the moon are caused by the combination of the illumination of the moon by the sun
and the visibility of the part of the moon from Earth. The students transformed the illustration of the moon in a
creative way that expressed this combination, and in fact, helped seeing the shape of the moon seen in the
specific phase. The action of "transforming a representation" supports the students' efforts in "seeing better", to
facilitate their thinking, reasoning and making sense of a difficult phenomenon, and sustained their attempts to
explain the cause of the phenomenon to their friend, and exchange ideas.
         In a later analysis, students' trajectories of developing understanding will be described in detail. The
SGR practices will then be examined in conjunction to the paths of development, to suggest ways in which such
practices could support the process of learning and understanding. Such interrelations will serve to answer
questions such as what practices should be fostered, which ones should be discouraged, how specific practices
contribute to the development of conceptual understanding? Could some of these practices be taught? How such
practices could be supported and enhanced by adequate technological innovations? These can serve as the basis
for instructional recommendation of using SGR for science learning.

Acknowledgments
I wish to thank Andy diSessa, Mariana Levin, David Hammer, Billie Eilam, and Yael Kali for helpful comments
related to this work. I thank the participants of the Student-Generated Representation research group at Tel-Aviv
University, Orly Shapira, Hadas Shachar, and Meytal Saat, for help in conducting this research. This work was
partly supported by a grant to O. Parnafes by the Tel-Aviv university foundation for research promotion.

                                                    306  ·  © ISLS
                                            ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

i The data was analyzed with the support of video analysis software ­ Transana (Wisconsin center for education
research,! http://www.transana.org). The software was developed specifically for educational research, and it
enables uploading video movies, transcribing them, writing notes and interpretations, and creating small clips
for easier access and examination.

References
Ainsworth,  S.E  & Loizou,  A.  (2003) The   effects of self-explaining when    learning with text  or diagrams.
    Cognitive Science, 27, 669-681

Ainsworth, S. (1999). The Functions of Multiple Representations. Computers and Education, 33 (2-3), 131­52.

Bamberger, J. (2007). Restructuring Conceptual Intuitions Through Invented Notations: From Path-Making to
    Map-Making.     In  Teubal  (Ed).  The  development   of notational   representations. New    York:  Oxford
    University Press.

Chi, M.T.H., Bassok, M., Lewis, M.W., Reimann, P. and Glaser, R. (1989). Self explanations: How students
    study and use examples in learning to solve problems. Cognitive Science, 13(2):145-183.

Chi, M. T. H., de Leeuw, N., Chiu, M. H. and La Vancher, C. (1994). Eliciting self-explanations improves
    understanding. Cognitive Science, 18, 439-477.

Cox, R. (1999). Representation construction, externalised cognition and individual differences, Learning and
    Instruction 9, pp. 343­364.

Cox, R. & Brna, P. (1995). Supporting the Use of External Representations in Problem Solving: the Need for
    Flexible Learning Environments. The Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education. 6(2/3).

Danish, J. A., & Enyedy, N. (2007). Negotiated Representational Mediators: How Young Children Decide What
    to Include in Their Science Representations. Science Education, 91(1), 1-35.

diSessa, A. A., Hammer, D., Sherin, B., & Kolpakowski, T. (1991). Inventing graphing: Meta-representational
    expertise in children. Journal of Mathematical Behavior, 10, 117-160.

diSessa, A.  A. (2004). Meta-representation:   Native competence    and targets for  instruction. Cognition and
    Instruction, 22(3), 293-331.

Enyedy   (2005)  Inventing mapping:   creating cultural   forms to  solve collective problems.    Cognition and
    instruction. 23 (4)

Gobert,  J. D., &  Clement,  J.  J. (1999). Effects  of   student-generated diagrams  versus  student-generated
    summaries on conceptual understanding of causal and dynamic knowledge in plate tectonics. Journal of
    Research in Science Teaching, 36(1), 39-53.

Glaser, B. G., & Strauss, A. L. (1967). The discovery of grounded theory: strategies for qualitative research.
    Chicago: Aldine.

Hall, V. C., Bailey, J., & Tillman, C. (1997). Can student-generated illustrations be worth ten thousand words?
    Journal of Educational Psychology, 89(4), 677-681.

Larkin, J., & H. Simon (1987). Why a diagram is (sometimes) worth ten thousand words. Cognitive Science, 11,
    65­99.

Latour, B. (1986). Visualization and cognition: Thinking with eyes and hands. Knowledge and Society, 6, 1-40.

                                                307   ·  © ISLS
                                          ICLS 2010    ·  Volume 1

Lynch, M., Woolgar, S., (1990). Representation in Scientific Practice. MIT Press: Cambridge, MA.

McNeill, D. (1992). Hand and Mind: what gestures reveal about thought. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Nemirovsky, R., and Tierney, C.  (2001). Children creating ways to represent changing situations: On the
    development of homogeneous spaces. Educational Studies in Mathematics 45 (1-3), 67-102

Nersessian, N. J. (2002). Maxwell and "the Method of Physical Analogy": Model-based reasoning, generic
    abstraction, and conceptual change. In: Essays in the History and Philosophy of Science and Mathematics,
    D. Malament, ed. 129--166. Lasalle, Il: Open Court.

Ochs, E., Jacoby, S., & Gonzales, P. (1994). Interpretative journeys: How physicists talk and travel through
    graphic space. Configurations, 2 (1), pp 151-172.

Parnafes, O. (2007). What does fast mean? Understanding the Physical World through Representations. The
    Journal of the Learning Sciences. 16(3). 415-450.

Roth, W.-M. &   McGinn, M.K.  (1998). Inscriptions:   Toward  a Theory  of Representing as      Social Practice.
    Review of educational research 68(1): 35-59.

Roy, M. & Chi, M.T.H. (2005). The self-explanation principle in multi-media learning. In: R.E. Mayer, Editor,
    Cambridge handbook of multimedia learning, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK, pp. 271­287.

Scaife, M., & Rogers, Y. (1996). External cognition: How do graphical representations work? International
    Journal of Human-Computer Studies, 45, 185­213.

Strauss, A.L., & Corbin, J. (1990). Basics of qualitative research: Grounded theory procedures and techniques.
    Newbury Park, CA: Sage.

Triona, L. & Klahr, D. (2007) A New Framework for Understanding How Young Children Create External
    Representations for Puzzles and Problems. In E. Teubal, J. Dockrell., & L. Tolchinsky (Eds.), Notational
    Knowledge: Developmental and Historical Perspectives. Rotterdam: Sense Publishers

Tufte, E. R. (2001) The Visual Display of Quantitative Information, Graphics Press, (2nd Ed.).

                                              308  ·   © ISLS
