                                                ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 2

                         Overherd: Designing Information Visualizations to
                             Make Sense of Student's Online Discussions

 Libby Hemphill and Stephanie Teasley, University of Michigan School of Information, 1075 Beal Ave., Ann
                                                Arbor, MI, 48109
                                        Email: {libbyh,steasley}@umich.edu

        Abstract: Overherd is an information visualization tool that makes patterns of interaction and
        activity in online discussion boards visible so that instructors can more easily analyze their
        students' contributions. Our system uses the forums tool from the Sakai learning management
        system (LMS) to create visual representations of online behavior. We describe the design and
        development of Overherd, and provide design recommendations for "mashups" that extend the
        functionality of LMS yet rely on existing data within these learning environments.

Introduction and Motivation
With the nearly ubiquitous use of Learning Management Systems (LMS) in higher education, instructors are
increasingly turning to online discussion boards to augment classroom discussion ­ some even require that
students participate to earn part of their grade. In this form of "blended learning" (Garrison & Kanuka, 2004),
online discussion boards provide a number of advantages for both students and teachers (see, e.g., Xie, 2006),
including improved student performance (Krentler & Willis-Flurry, 2005). However, discussion boards present
a number of problems as well. For instance, making sense of the posts in an online discussion board can be
difficult, even when the conversation is threaded (Kay, 2006). The general use statistics most boards make
easily available, such as counts of posts or words, are poor measures of the quality of learning taking place in
those discussions (Mazzolini & Madison, 2005) and incorporating online discussions into existing teaching
practices can increase the course's workload for both students and instructors (Brush, et al., 2002). In an effort
to help instructors make sense of the discussions happening on a board and to ease their workload, we designed
an information visualization tool called Overherd. We designed Overherd using the metaphor of herd behavior
to visualize what   students are talking  about by providing       different views that show   aggregation patters of
students, topic, and keywords.   The goal of Overherd is to make it easier for instructors to get an overview of
what their students are talking about in online discussions by displaying visualizations that include post content,
author information, and connections among posts (e.g., replies). These visualizations allow instructors to answer
questions such as, "Are students using new terms introduced in class?" and "What course concepts are students
most  interested in discussing?"  Overherd     enables    instructors to  check for  students' understanding  and  to
diagnose topics that may need additional discussion during face-to-face instruction.

Designing and Studying Overherd
Overherd is an extension of a Sakai-based LMS that includes a Forums tool for online discussions. In designing
Overherd, we had very specific users and goals in mind ­ instructors of large lecture courses who used online
discussions to extend classroom instruction. By limiting our design space, we were able to build a flexible
platform that can still be extended to meet the goals of additional users in the future. In order to ground our
design, we interviewed four instructors about their use of online discussion boards and later discussed paper
prototypes of our designs with them. Overherd's goals are to
    ·   facilitate faculty exploration of their classes' overall understandings of a concept or concepts, and
    ·   assess student contributions and understanding for grading purposes.
In order to address these goals, Overherd displays visualizations that include both content (e.g., the text of
individual posts) and context    (e.g., author information,    timestamps).    Table 1  provides an overview   of  the
specific needs each visualization is designed to address. Figure 1 shows the design of Overherd.
        Overherd    will be  evaluated   in two stages:   first, a  pilot user study where we    display data from  a
completed course and ask instructors to evaluate the tool and second, a field study where Overherd will be
deployed in several courses. These studies will explore whether Overherd helps instructors make sense of their
students' online discussions and reduces the instructors' workloads.

Table 1: Addressing user needs with visualizations
User Need                                                     Visualization
Overview of topics being discussed                            Treemap organized by term or person
Determine which students use which terms                      Term/person node diagram
See lists of posts that meet instructor's search criteria     Clustered list window
Read posts that meet criteria                                 Prose view window

                                                    302   ·  © ISLS
                                               ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 2

         Figure 1. Overherd Interface v0.1

Mashups and Learning Management Systems
Many LMS such as Sakai, Moodle, or Blackboard provide tools that support discussion management. Because
LMS    are enterprise  systems ­ whole   campuses  rely   on their  stability and   infrastructure ­ it  is difficult to
experiment with new features and add-ons within the LMS itself (Severance, Hardin, & White, 2008). LMS
capture and   generate large   amounts  of data  about use   and   content  but   do  not provide   easy access   to  or
manipulation  of  that data  outside the LMS.   As  technical  barriers  to  building  and  experimenting    with web
applications decrease, the importance and usefulness of an application programming interface (API) for making
LMS data available increases and creates opportunities for extending the tool sets available to support learning.

Future Research
Our future work will explore how instructors use Overherd to see whether it meets the goals of 1) allowing
instructors to more easily get an overview of online discussions, and 2) reducing the overhead required for using
online  discussions.  How instructors  should participate   in online  discussions    with their students   is an open
question (see Mazzolini and Maddison, 2005) Overherd will help answer. We will also explore the use of
visualizations with students. A future version of Overherd will be student-focused and will allow students to
search for terms and concepts within the discussion. We will explore whether those visualizations help students
with self assessment and in finding answers to their questions about course concepts.
         Overherd is a technical research project as well, and we will continue to study the development of
information visualizations for use in learning environments and to develop mashup tools that extend learning
management    systems.  For  example,  future work  will  explore   best practices    for APIs that  make    LMS  data
available to external applications while protecting the personal and copyrighted information they contain. The
lessons learned from Overherd's development and field study will also inform future research on the usefulness
of information visualization for other online discussions, such as support forums and email archives.

References
Brush, A. J. B., Bargeron, D., Grudin, J., Borning, A., and Gupta, A. (2002).      Supporting Interaction Outside of
         Class: Anchored Discussion vs. Discussion Boards. Proceedings of CSCL 2002, 425-434.
Garrison,  D. R.; H.   Kanuka   (2004).  "Blended  learning:   Uncovering     its transformative   potential in higher
         education". The Internet and Higher Education, 7 (2), 95-105.
Kay, R.H. (2006).     Developing a comprehensive metric for assessing discussion board effectiveness. British
         Journal of Educational Technology, 37(5), 761-783.
Krentler, K.A. Willis-Flurry, L.A. (2005). Does Technology Enhance Actual Student Learning? The Case of
         Online Discussion Boards. Journal of Education for Business, 80(6), 316-321
Mazzolini, M. and Maddison, S. (2005).        When  to jump    in: The  role  of  the instructor in online   discussion
         forums. Computers & Education, 49(2), 193-213.
Severance,  C.,  Hardin, J.  &  Whyte,   A. (2008). The     coming   functionality    mash-up  in  Personal    Learning
         Environments. Interactive Learning Environments, 16 (1), 47-62.
Xie, K.,   Debacker,   T.K., and  Ferguson,   C. (2006).    Extending   the   traditional  classroom  through    online
         discussion: The role of student motivation. Journal of Educational Computing Research, 34(1), 67-89.

                                                   303  ·  © ISLS
