                                               ICLS 2010  ·   Volume 2

                Out-of-School Virtual Worlds Based Programs:
                                     A Cross-Case Analysis
                                     Constance Steinkuehler & Esra Alagoz
                University of Wisconsin-Madison, 225 North Mills Street, Madison WI 53706
                               constances@gmail.com, esraalagoz@gmail.com

         Abstract: This poster presents a cross-case analysis conducted on two out-of-school programs
         based on virtual environments: Global Kid's "I Dig Science" curriculum in Teen Second Life
         and the GLS "casual learning lab" based on the online game World of Warcraft. Using a
         coding framework   representing   the shared  instructional   goals  of  the programs   to  analyze
         ethnographic data from both sites, we compare the nature of learning in the two contexts.

There is a rising interest in out-of-school programs      for informal  learning  as  a way   to complement    (if not
supplement) formal   learning in classrooms.   Recent    trends toward   extension   of the  school  day in  America
coupled with an increased desire to not simply do more of the same have led to increased attention to informal
learning programs in sites such as boys and girls clubs, local libraries, and both on- and off-campus initiatives.
Coupled with this rising interest in informal education programs has been in increased interest in the use of
online interactive technologies and virtual worlds. Commercial worlds such as Second Life, World of Warcraft,
and Whyville ­ along with intentional learning environments like Quest Atlantis (Barab, Arcici, & Jackson,
2005) and   River City (Dede,    Ketelhut, &   Ruess,    2003)­have    become    "evocative   objects"  for educators
interested in technology as a means for fostering social interaction, increasing motivation and engagement, and
enabling quasi-authentic inquiry work in the context of virtual environments instead of real ones. Yet, we have
few empirically   documented   examples  of  programs     leveraging   existing  commercial    virtual spaces  toward
educational ends save the work of Kafai and colleagues (Neulight et al, 2007). This poster reports on a cross-
case analysis conducted on two out-of-school programs based on virtual environments. The sites studied in this
work ­ Global Kid's (GK) "I Dig Zambia" curriculum in the context of the virtual platform Teen Second Life
and the Games, Learning & Society (GLS) Program's "casual learning lab" based on the massively multiplayer
online game World of Warcraft ­ were selected for their comparable use of technology platform yet contrasting
approaches to instructional design. Using a shared theoretical framework based on the instructional goals of
both programs to analyze ethnographic data from both sites, we aim to tease out the similarities and differences
in the forms of learning that took place in each context. We present preliminary findings from this research,
highlighting the shift in research focus or "quintain" (Stake, 2006) from "affordances and constraints of virtual
worlds platforms" to "situated comparison of intentional (GK) versus interest-driven (GLS) learning models."

Case One: Global Kids "I Dig Zambia" in Teen Second Life
Global Kids is an independent non-profit organization with a mission to educate and inspire urban youth to
become   successful global  citizens and community     leaders.   Toward    this end, they   organize  out  of school
programs and experiences, including intensive summer camps, to educate youth about critical international and
public policy issues and to inspire them to take action. The data we analyzed for this cross-case analysis was
drawn from their 2009 summer camp entitled "I Dig Zambia." "I Dig Zambia" brought together 19 minority
adolescents from Chicago and New York for two weeks to learn about paleontology, biology, and Zambian
culture and politics in Teen Second Life. This intentional learning environment included structured activities
designed to give  participants an    opportunity to develop     their  21st century  skills, social interactions with
practicing paleontologists, and virtual world exhibits where youth presented their culminating work as well as
blogposts which added a reflective writing component to their daily activities.

Case Two: GLS Casual Learning Lab Based on World of Warcraft
The GLS casual learning lab based on World of Warcraft was an eight-month after school program targeting 22
adolescent boys that were disengaged (and frequently failing) in school. The goal of the GLS Casual Learning
Lab was to explore ways that instructional designers might leverage adolescents' existing interests in games in
order to engage them in practices that are both aligned with schools and meaningful in their everyday offline
lives. Participants and research staff met regularly in-game during the week for regular gaming using "guild"
functions to structure play and once a month for face-to-face Saturday pizza parties on campus that enabled
more structured data collection activities such as focus group discussions and interviews. Based on a general
model of "interest-driven learning," research staff acted as informal mentors rather than instructors with all
content instruction arising only on demand, in the context of authentic gaming practice.

Methods: Data Collection & Analysis

                                                   304  ·  © ISLS
                                              ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 2

Ethnographic data collection methods (Hammersley & Atkinson, 1986) were used across both in-game and
face-to-face contexts at both sites. Data collection included multimodal fieldnotes, in-game chatlogs, videotaped
and transcribed face-to-face discussions, and  participants'   blog  (GK)  and   forum    (GLS)   posts. The  coding
scheme used for this analysis (see Table 1) was constructed out of the instructional goals of each program and
functioned as a shared framework for tracing the emergence of key practices and dispositions within each site.
Codes were negotiated between the two program directors, then piloted, and then refined into a final set of 11
themes total with 44 subcodes nested within theme. A team of eight researchers then coded the entire data
corpus from both sites using NVivo. Interrater reliability, calculated on 10% of the data corpus, was 98%.

Thematic Comparisons and Conclusions
Table 1 presents the 9 main analytic themes highlighting the main contrasts between the two programs in light
of their disparate approaches to learning (i.e. "intentional" versus "interest-driven").

Table 1: Main contrasts between the two cases based on the analytic framework used
  Analytic Theme                GK "I Dig Science"                            GLS Casual Learning Lab
     Argument           Re-voicing techniques used by staff to       Collective, little structural coherence beyondcoordinate claims within a frameworksequential ordering of claims
 Problem-Solving     Getting the answer right (e.g. matching fossilfindings to the teacher's model)Finding a "good enough" (not necessarily"best fit") solution
       Reading               Program selected, coherent               User-driven and organic, yet idiosyncratic
    InformationLiteracy  Staff are main resource; evaluation,interpretation, and synthesis evidenced inreflective blogpostsPeers are main resource; access tied to social/cultural capital
    Digital Media      Media navigation is highly scaffolded with       Frequent transmedia navigation made
       Literacy           higher rate of "on task" behaviors           coherent by individual interest not task
       Design        Design critiques focused on the technical not Design critiques focused on the technical not
      Thinking                  social; re/design rare                           social; re/design rare
    Model BasedReasoningModels designed into activity; function tocoordinate discursive argumentationMost frequently in relation to "talent builds"system; function to coordinatediscursive argumentation
    Cross CulturalFluency     Moderated, "safe space"                          Spontaneous & volatile
     Workplace                    Domain Specific                                  Domain General
       Literacy              (i.e., paleontology related)                 (e.g. goal setting, time management)

One  conclusion that can be  drawn  from  this analysis    is that designers  of out-of-school    environments   that
leverage virtual worlds for learning must take seriously the need to balance standardization with customization.
A program designed for intentional learning offers structured goals with equal outcomes but runs the risk of
alienating students from their own learning preferences. On the other hand, an interest-driven program gives the
students opportunity to pursue their own interests but at the risk of narrowing their exposure to new concepts
outside their immediate interests. Positioning staff as nodes of equal status rather than conversational hub allows
the participants to develop systems of individual expertise where their social network as a whole can function as
the thinking apparatus  through discussions. However,      regardless of  the program     design, the facilitation of
participant discussions by staff using revoicing techniques appears important for fostering and sustaining more
sophisticated forms of discursive argument. Finally, having participants write reflections on their virtual world
experiences was a powerful activity implemented in both programs. In GK, it functioned as a way to engage in
informal formative   assessment and fostered   more   sophisticated   information  literacy  practices;   in GLS,   it
provided opportunity for more complex forms of metacognitive processing.

References
Barab, S., Arcici, A., & Jackson,  C. (2005).  Eat your    vegetables  and  do   your    homework:  A    design-based
         investigation of enjoyment and meaning in learning. Educational Technology, 45(1), 15-21.
Dede,  C., Ketelhut, D. &  Ruess,  K. (2003).  Motivation,     usability, and  learning   outcomes    in a prototype
         museum-based multiuser virtual environment. In P. Bell, R. Stevens, & T. Satwicz, (Eds.), Proceedings
         of the Fifth ICLS. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Hammersley, M. & Atkinson, P. (1986). Ethnography: Principles in practice (2nd ed.). London: Routledge.
Neulight, N. Kafai, Y.B., Kao, L., Foley, B., & Galas, C. (2007). Children's participation in a virtual epidemic in
         the science classroom. Journal of Science Education and Technology, 16(1), 47-58.
Stake, R.E . (2006). Multiple case study analysis. New York: Guilford Press.

                                                  305  ·  © ISLS
