                                                     ICLS 2010    Volume 2

                         Cutting the Distance in Distance Learning:
             Perspectives on Effective Online Learning Environments
          Erica C. Boling, Mary Hough, Hindi Krinsky, Hafiz Saleem, Maggie Stevens, Rutgers University,
                                  10 Seminary Place, New Brunswick, New Jersey 08901
erica.boling@gse.rutgers.edu,        bmhough15@aol.com,           Hindi.Krinsky@gmail.com,            hafizsaleem@gmail.com,
mags@maggiestevens.com

          Abstract:   This    qualitative  research  study   informs   the  development    and   implementation     of
          effective  online   learning environments    by  examining    course content,   sequencing,   methods,   and
          sociological approaches, as identified by students and instructors, which contributed to positive
          online  learning    experiences. Researchers     interviewed   6 online   course instructors   and   9 adult
          students   about  their experiences   in  undergraduate    and graduate   level  online  degree  programs.
          Using a Cognitive Apprenticeship Model to inform data analysis, findings revealed how various
          components of one online program provided students with an effective online learning experience.
          The study has implications for individuals who develop and/or teach online courses.

Introduction
Recently there has been an explosive growth in online distance learning that is "rapidly transforming post-secondary
education"   (Moller,  Foshay,    & Huett,  2008,   p. 66).  One  of the   greatest challenges   for  learning institutions and
instructors when designing and implementing online courses is to "provide a sense of community with constructive
feedback   and   provide   open   forthcoming   communications     as   well as   recognizing   membership     and  feelings  of
friendship, cohesion, and satisfaction among learners" (Desai, Hart & Richards, 2009, p. 333). How to create the
most  effective,  highly  interactive, online   social learning   communities,    however,   is still a relatively new   area of
study. The   purpose   of  this study  was  to  explore,   from   both teacher  and  student    perspectives,  what constitutes
effective online learning experiences.

Theoretical Framework
To explore the various components that make up an effective online learning community, the researchers turned to
the Cognitive Apprenticeship Model (CAM). The CAM is grounded in the belief that when students are learning in
an academic environment, they do not usually have access "to the cognitive problem solving processes of instructors
as a   basis for  learning    through  observation     and  mimicry"    (Collins,   2006,  p. 48).    Because  of  this, before
apprenticeship methods can be applied by students to learn cognitive skills, the learning environment "has to be
changed to make these internal thought processes externally visible" (p. 48). The CAM is designed so that these
cognitive processes can be brought into the open where individuals can "observe, enact, and practice them" (p. 48).
According    to  the model,   there are   four dimensions    that constitute any    learning  environment:    content, method,
sequencing, and sociology.

Methodology
Researchers interviewed 9 adult students who had completed online degree or certificate programs in different fields
of study (e.g., education, nursing, business) and 6 course instructors who had experience teaching online courses.
Prior  to participating    in a   one, 60-minute    interview,  participants   shared  relevant   course   materials   with   the
researchers, including such artifacts as course syllabi and assignment descriptions. Both deductive and inductive
analyses  were   conducted     using   constant comparative     methods    (Glaser  &   Strauss,  1965).   Researchers    coded
interview  transcripts  using   the Cognitive   Apprenticeship's     "content," "method,"     "sequencing"     and "sociology"
categories   for deductive    coding.  They    also noted   other recurring  themes,   reached    consensus    on  new   coding
categories, and revisited the data multiple times to code for new categories.

Findings
Findings revealed that in most of the online courses and programs, there was an emphasis on text-based content,
individual learning, and limited interaction among students. Most students reported feeling disconnected with their
instructors, course content, and fellow classmates in these programs which favored individual, text-based activities
over more collaborative, multimodal ones. One program in higher education, however, was an exception to this
model and is the focus of this paper.

                                                         310     ISLS
                                                 ICLS 2010    Volume 2

        The Content for the program in higher education emphasized the knowledge and skills that are needed to
guide and lead complex, dynamic institutions. This Masters program allowed students to specialize in areas such as
student affairs and community    college  leadership. Using    a backward    design model   based on  desired learning
outcomes, program creators turned to professionals in the field to assist in determining the subject matter and skill
sets that students needed to be prepared for real-life work situations. Course content was based not only on domain
knowledge but also on "heuristic" tasks which "mimic" real-life work responsibilities, enabling students to gain
feedback from professionals in the field. Dr. Karrie Bates, designer of the program and course instructor, explained
how one activity in a statistics course included obtaining instruction from a professor, creating a spreadsheet, and
then performing   a "real-world"  task   using   ANOVA.     Students  performed  this  task in Wimba,   a   live virtual
classroom, and an outside expert was present, along with the instructor, to provide students with additional advice
and instruction. In this way, students were "apprenticed" via the course content and design, ensuring they could
apply such knowledge in real-world situations. Courses followed a structure where instructors provided training,
engaged students in learning simulations, and then emphasized career placement, advancement, or transition.
        The sequencing of the program consisted of a total of 45 credits culminating with a final co-op experience.
Courses ran for 10 weeks in the fall, winter, spring and summer, meeting on a Wednesday to Wednesday schedule
so that students could maximize the weekend after receiving instruction. Because courses for the program were
created through backward design, they were sequenced so that the content and skills developed in each course built
upon one  other. In order  to support   students who  had   been out of  school for an extensive  amount  of  time, the
program offered online class sessions that taught students where to go and whom to contact for ongoing support and
assistance. This included introducing them, by their second week in the program, to university librarians, technology
support staff, and individuals who worked in the university's career development center.
        Findings related to method and sociology were interconnected and difficult to separate. Dr. Bates explained
that one of her goals for the program was to find ways to "bring the campus to the students" and to give the online
experience "a more human feel," something that she felt was lacking in many online programs. To accomplish this,
students entered the program as a cohort, participated in online social events, and engaged in online simulations and
a co-op experience, allowing them to interact with others and engage in authentic learning experiences. One student,
Edna, explained how these activities allowed her to interact with many people in higher education, allowing her to
learn more about the field. She and another student confirmed how technological tools such as Wimba fostered and
mediated social, online experiences. They described how instructors added a more "human touch" to the program by
recording voice comments on their papers, creating assignments that fostered interaction with other professionals in
higher education, and using audio-recorded weekly wrap-ups to highlight "key learning points." By using tools like
Wimba, instructors were able to create social learning environments that allowed them to model and scaffold student
learning while also allowing students to demonstrate and articulate what they learned.

Conclusion
This study  illustrates how the Cognitive  Apprentice    Model   provides a  useful lens to understand, evaluate,   and
develop interactive, online learning communities. It challenges instructors and curriculum designers to consider the
authentic needs of their students and communities while designing programs. The study highlights how technology
can be used to support social learning, moving beyond text-based to more multimodal ways of knowing. It also
shows   how class assignments   can   mirror real-world  application  while  scaffolding student  learning. Additional
research, however, needs to explore how technology can most effectively be used to enhance online teaching and
learning. Researchers might also want to investigate how universities can better support faculty in acquiring the
knowledge, skills, and dispositions that are needed for building effective online learning communities. Finally, it is
essential that researchers come to understand why some educators are choosing to use technologies that promote
student interaction, social engagement, and multimodal ways of knowing while others are not.

References
Casey, D. (2008). A journey to legitimacy: The historical development of distance education through technology.
        TechTrends, March/April, 52(2), 45-51.
Collins, A. (2006). Cognitive Apprenticeship. In R. K. Sawyer (Ed.), The Cambridge Handbook of the Learning
        Sciences (pp. 47-60). New York: Cambridge University Press.
Desai, M., Hart, J., & Richards, T. (2009). E-Learning: Paradigm shift in education. Education, 129/2, 327-334.
Glaser, B., & Strauss, A. (1965). Awareness of Dying. Chicago: Aldine Publishers.
Moller, L., Foshay,  W.,  &   Huett, J. (2008).  The evolution   of distance education:  Implications for instructional
        design on the potential of the Web. TechTrends, July/August, 52(4), 66-70.

                                                     311     ISLS
