                                                 ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 2

                     What makes a "good" scientific question?
                  Supporting independent student-driven inquiry
                        Julia Svoboda, Cynthia Passmore, University of California, Davis
                              jmsvoboda@ucdavis.edu, cpassmore@ucdavis.edu
!
!       Abstract: Students  rarely have   the opportunity     to pose   scientific questions  or  participate in research
        design. In this study, we identify the criteria that scientists used to guide a group of seven undergraduate
        students during an extended   phase   of project      articulation. We     categorize the criteria according     to
        epistemic and social dimensions and describe the ways in which the students were able to reason with these
        criteria as they developed their question and research plan.

Rationale
It is rare for undergraduate students to be given the responsibility of articulating a novel scientific question. When
students are asked to do so, they are rarely given the appropriate guidance, leading them to pose arbitrary or trivial
questions (Windschitl, Thompson, & Braaten, 2008). Part of the difficulty is that the criteria for developing a "good"
scientific question are embedded within a community of practice of which undergraduates are not yet members
(Lave & Wenger, 1991). Undertaking the difficult task of initiating a new research project requires repeated
exposure to the norms and strategies used by the scientific community, rather than simply following an algorithmic
"Scientific Method" (Chinn & Malhotra, 2002). We believe that when students are invited to participate in this
community they gain opportunities to both engage in sophisticated scientific reasoning and develop their
understanding of the nature of science - two key aspects of scientific literacy (AAAS, 1993). With these learning
goals in mind, we investigate how faculty can productively support student-driven inquiry.

Study Context
In this research we had the unique opportunity to observe how a group of four scientists helped a group of seven
undergraduates define and design a research project in mathematical biology. The context of this work was the
Collaborative Learning at the Interface of Mathematics and Biology (CLIMB) program, a yearlong, NSF- sponsored
traineeship for undergraduates. The CLIMB students worked collaboratively to solve modeling problems throughout
the year and were responsible for executing a novel, model-based research project over the summer. In this study,
we categorize the ways in which faculty mentors communicated scientific norms to guide students' progress over
the course of the three months preceding the summer research project. We also track how the CLIMB cohort was
able to attend to those criteria, identifying the successes and challenges facing the students in this difficult task.

Methods and Analysis
Our data set included detailed field notes of all student-faculty interactions, semi-structured interviews with both
students and faculty, and students' written research proposal with faculty comments. We used field notes to both
categorize faculty mentors' discourse related to project design as well as student reactions to their suggestions. In
our analysis we used a  grounded   theory approach  to      develop  categories,   which were   further corroborated     by
interviews with faculty. We then revisited field notes, the research proposal, and interview data from the CLIMB
students to assess the degree to which they, as a group, were able to attend to each of these criteria.

Findings
We identified six criteria articulated by the science faculty, which we grouped into two broad categories: 1)
Epistemic Criteria ­ in which faculty focused students' attention on the type of knowledge they sought to generate,
and 2) Social Criteria ­ in which faculty emphasized the subjective nature of achieving consensus. We provide a
brief description of each criterion grounded in examples from our field notes. It is important to note that we
highlight these criteria because they emerged repeatedly throughout the project articulation phase, often in
interaction with one another, highlighting the dynamic process of defining and refining a research project. Finally,
we briefly comment on the extent to which CLIMB students were able to attend to these criteria.

Epistemic Criteria
1a. Consider the data patterns that need explaining. Faculty mentors urged students to ground their research project
in a biological pattern in need of an explanation. When students expressed an interest in modeling either influenza

                                                     312  ·  © ISLS
                                                ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 2

(flu) or measles, faculty asked, "Are there patterns?" Students found that the yearly patterns exhibited by flu were
too complex to reveal obvious patterns. This led them to focus on measles vaccination patterns in the UK, for which
data on disease prevalence and vaccination were available. In general, finding data was not a major challenge for
students, but understanding what about that data needed explaining required that they attend to other criteria. 1b.
Consider the appropriate methods. The students were urged to think about the modeling approach they would
undertake simultaneously with refining their question. Faculty discouraged questions that were descriptive or
statistical in nature, such as, "will measles prevalence continue to rise?" Instead, they pushed students to think about
the mechanism they would build into their model. This prompted the students to consider mechanisms of disease
transmission. Considering the mechanisms that drive patterns was more difficult for students; they often asked
empirical or statistical questions instead of focusing on the underlying theoretical model. 1c. Evaluate existing
models. To guide students towards theory, faculty pointed them to the existing literature and asked them to evaluate
the theoretical soundness and the empirical accuracy of prior models as a basis for their own research. This led
students to understand that measles models should theoretically include age-structure to account for population
heterogeneity in infection susceptibility. Students also considered a model of human behavior that relied solely on
dyadic information transmission, which led them to think about adding direct learning from the environment into
their model. Students were quite successful at finding gaps in existing research, but were less discriminating about
which of these were most important. They had to overcome a tendency to add things into their model simply
because "they had not been done before." 1d. Imagine the possible results. Faculty urged students to "imagine what
the results might look like." Students created a long list of possible components to add to their model, but the faculty
mentors asked them to focus on the components that would make a difference in the results. This was especially
difficult for students who instead tended to focus on adding in model criteria because others had added them or
because they made the model "more realistic." It was primarily in retrospect that students were able to see that some
aspects of their model (such as age-structure) did not significantly alter the model results, while others (such as the
structure of information transfer) had a significant impact. In response, some of the students modified their
understanding of the research question even as they were preparing to present their results.

Social Criteria
2a. Do what is "worthwhile." Faculty mentors urged students to choose a problem that would engage them
throughout the summer. The mentors were willing to admit that this was a somewhat subjective decision,
suggesting, "do what motivates you." While students were initially hesitant about pursuing a disease model (because
the previous year's cohort had already done so) they ultimately agreed that they wanted to pursue a project with
social relevance. This helped them narrow down their options substantially. 2b. Do what is practical. Faculty
encouraged students to bound the problem space in accordance with time and resources. Students decided to leave
out many components of their original model in the interest of tractability. However, they were later encouraged to
assess the epistemic implications of these decisions. For example, students were asked to explain why they ignored
immigration but included age-structure ­ a task they found much more difficult. This is just one example of how
each of these categories, both epistemic and social, overlapped and interacted with one another throughout the
process, again emphasizing the need for students to consider many of these criteria simultaneously.

Implications
Throughout the process of project articulation, faculty mentors provided many opportunities for students to consider
the social and epistemic criteria used by the scientific community. In general, the group was able to identify
interesting questions, but students had more difficulty articulating the significance of questions that arose as they
moved into model construction. This result suggests that students need to be continually reminded to think deeply
about their research question even as they move into later stages of research. Future research will address the extent
to which exposure to these epistemic and social criteria has lasting impacts on students' images of science.

References
AAAS. 1993. Benchmarks for scientific literacy. New York: Oxford University Press.
Chinn, C. & Malhotra, B. 2002. Epistemologically authentic inquiry in schools: A theoretical framework for
       evaluating inquiry tasks. Science Education, 86(2), 175-218.
Lave, J. & Wenger, E. 1991. Situated learning: Legitimate peripheral participation. New York: Cambridge
       University Press.
Windschitl, M., Thompson, J. & Braaten, M. 2008. How novice science teachers appropriate epistemic discourses
       around model-based inquiry for use in classrooms. Cognition and Instruction, 26(3), 310-378.!

                                                    313  ·  © ISLS
