                                                    ICLS 2010    ·  Volume 1

      Perceptions of the relationship between evolutionary theory and
      biblical explanations of the origins of life and their effects on the
                  learning of evolution among high school students
                 Pratchayapong Yasri, Rebecca Mancy, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, UK
                             p.yasri.1@research.gla.ac.uk, r.mancy@educ.gla.ac.uk

         Abstract: This study explores the perceived relationship between evolution and the biblical account
         of  creation  amongst  Thai     high  school   students    in  Christian  schools  and   the  impact   of  these
         perceptions   on learning.   Evidence   was   found    for the    following  perspectives:  creation only   and
         compartmental (incompatible models); NOMA, fusion, and complementary (compatible models).
         Each perspective is related to an approach to learning: rejection of one explanation, switching
         between   explanations    instrumentally   according    to    the context,  differentiating between    areas   of
         reality explained by each, integration of the explanations and refinement of one explanation through
         the other.  Furthermore,    students  who   held compatible       perspectives   had the  potential  to engage
         positively with learning about evolution, those adopting a rejection approach tended to engage with
         evolution in order to falsify it and the student who took a switching approach demonstrated detached
         learning. The study therefore provides an example situation in which learning within one discipline
         affects learning in another.

Introduction
Evolution is considered to be a unifying theme in biology; however, its development has relied on the combined effort
of professionals in disciplines ranging from biology and medicine to physics and geology, engaged in observing,
collection  and   experimentation    to   enrich   and   validate   the    theory.  The  area  is  also   becoming      ever more
interdisciplinary as evolutionary models and frameworks are adopted by those working in domains as diverse as the
social sciences and informatics. Research in the area therefore not only produces a body of knowledge that is central
to the discipline of  biology,  it also   stimulates   scientific  collaboration    between   professionals  in  different   fields;
teaching of evolution usually takes place in the context of biology, yet it is central to work in a broad range of
discipline areas. Nonetheless, despite its inherent interdisciplinary importance as both a subject of study in its own
right and  a methodological    tool,  it  has  always  been  the    subject  of  considerable  debate,   partially  fuelled  by its
relationship with another disciplinary area, that of religion.
         Specifically, evolutionary theory is perceived by some to directly contradict religious explanations of the
origins of life. There has been a recent renewal of debates pertaining to the teaching of the origins of life and
evolutionary theory in formal education (Berkman et al, 2008) with a majority of clashes occurring in relation to
Christian groups (Padian 2009). We take the perspective that it is important to understand the ways learners perceive
the relationship between religious and evolutionary accounts of the origins of life, as well as their impact on learning,
in order to develop teaching approaches which simultaneously respect learners' beliefs and allow them to engage
positively  with evolution.  A  range    of studies  have    gathered   data   on  learner beliefs   but have  largely   relied on
quantitative approaches using pre-defined categories; we explore the relationships from the perspective of learners,
allowing categories to arise from the data.
         This   paper  uses  a phenomenographic        approach     to  analyze    data collected  via   individual and    in-depth
interviews,  providing evidence    of different  understandings     of  the  relationship  between    evolution  and  creation  as
perceived   by high   school  students    attending  Christian   schools    in  Thailand.  The   findings  reveal   five   different
perspectives of the relationship among the students: creation only, compartmental, NOMA, fusion and complementary
perspectives. Each perspective is related to an approach to learning: rejection of one explanation, switching between
explanations   instrumentally  according    to the  context, differentiating     between   areas  of reality explained   by  each,
integration of the explanations and refinement of one explanation through the other. Furthermore, each approach
reported here gives rise to different ways of engaging with evolution. Those who adopted differentiating, integration
and refining approaches had the potential to engage positively with the lesson whereas those who adopted rejection
approach   tended to  engage   the lesson   in order  to falsify   it.  Finally,  the student who    took a  switching   approach
demonstrated   detached   learning   that appeared   to  take   the form    of  cognitive  understanding   with  little emotional
engagement. A model is proposed that links these findings to perspectives from the literature. More generally, the
study suggests that, at least in some contexts, learning of disciplinary material is strongly influenced by learning that
takes place within other disciplines, with disciplinary epistemology playing a role in this.
         This paper begins by presenting models of the relationship between science and religion, as applied to
evolution and creation, drawn from the literature. It then explains the methodological approach implemented in this
study, followed by findings, discussion and educational implications.

                                                         317  ·   © ISLS
                                                ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

Background
The word evolution is generally associated with Charles Darwin who described the theory of evolution in On the
Origin of Species (Scott 2005), and more recent developments of this theory. Evolutionary theory explains changes in
species of living organisms over time as due to variation amongst individuals and the processes of natural selection
(Darwin 1859). In more recent versions of evolutionary theory, variation is claimed to arise randomly with respect to
function, with natural selection acting as a directional force that increases the relative frequency of adaptive traits
among the population (e.g. Dawkins 1986).
          Another explanation of the origin of life is provided in the Bible and other religious texts. Specifically in the
context of Christianity, the Bible explains that God created the Universe, the Earth and all living things (Alexander
2008). The explanation has been interpreted in a variety of ways, ranging from the literal to interpretations of the
biblical creation story as   a metaphor   (Scott 2005).   These  interpretations   have   different   implications  for the
relationship with the scientific theory of evolution. Although many Christians see no incompatibility between the
biblical account and evolutionary theory (for example, those who see the biblical creation story as metaphorical),
some interpretations lead to apparent incompatibilities between the scientific and religious claims regarding origins,
with those subscribing solely to the religious viewpoint in its strong form often referred to as "creationists".
          Various understandings of the relationship between evolution and biblical accounts of the origins of life have
been identified with Alexander (2007) describing four models relating science and religion (conflict, complementary,
fusion and  NOMA    models).   We now    provide an overview    of  these   models  as  a backdrop     to our   own   study.
Alexander's work appears to be based on broader philosophical perspectives on the relationship between science and
religion (e.g. Barbour 2002), but we concentrate on his work as the most recent source identified.

1. The conflict model
The first model identified by Alexander (2007) is the conflict model, according to which science and religion are
considered to be in fundamental opposition. In this view, the two explanations provide incompatible answers to the
same fundamental question. We note that this view can be divided into two: evolution only and creation only models.
          The first subcategory maintains that evolution provides a sufficient and convincing explanation of the origins
of life and that there is no place for God or supernatural powers in the scientific arena. This view has been shown to
be widespread amongst science teachers and students in a number of settings. For instance, Ingram and Nelson (2006)
found that over 60 percent of science students at the Midwestern University accepted the explanation of evolutionary
biology, but did not accept biblical interpretations. In contrast, proponents of the creation only model reject the theory
of evolution and accept that in the Bible (Scott 2005). This model is also found to be accepted by professionals in
various domains. For example, Berkman et al. (2008) reported that 38 percent of American people stated that they
would prefer that creation was taught in schools, not just in addition to, but in place of evolution.

2. The "NOMA" model
The second model is called NOMA after the Non-Overlapping Magisteria model proposed by Stephen Jay Gould in
2002 (Alexander 2007). In this view, science and religion deal with different domains of reality. Specifically, Gould
(2002) suggests that science and religion focus on different fundamental questions: the magisterium of science relates
to the facts of empirical data while the magisterium of religion covers questions concerning ultimate meaning and
moral value. The two domains do not overlap by definition thus there is no conflict between the two.
          This model corresponds to the viewpoint taken by a range of scientists and has been used by science teachers
to support the teaching of evolution. For example, Ladine (2009) notes that separating biblical explanations from the
theory of evolution enables him to teach evolution in Christian institutions comfortably and allows Christian students
to be open to learning about evolution.

3. The complementary model
The complementary model provides another way in which evolution and creation can be considered as compatible.
Alexander (2007, p.4) explains that "this model maintains that science and religion are addressing the same reality
from different perspective, providing explanations that are not in any kind of rivalry to each other, but rather are
complementary". For example, one instantiation of this model would be that the belief that God directs the processes
of evolution. Proponents of this perspective often argue that putting faith and scientific reason together enables us to
better understand the whole range of reality (Berry 2007).

4. The fusion model
The final  model  identified by Alexander  (2007)   is  called the fusion   model. In  this approach,     there is no clear
distinction between the kind of knowledge provided by evolutionary theory and religious explanations: both focus on
the same reality and provide the same knowledge. Alexander (2007, p.3) explains that those who take this perspective
"tend to blur the distinction between scientific and religious types of knowledge altogether, or attempt to utilize
science in order to construct religious systems of thought, or vice versa".

                                                    318  ·  © ISLS
                                                 ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

Aims of this study
The models identified by Alexander (2007) appear to have been identified from theoretical perspectives from the
philosophy of science. Although a number of studies provide evidence for the existence of some of these perspectives,
these  mainly take the  form   of evaluations  of  particular curricula   or courses.   These  studies  generally rely   on
quantitative approaches  that  offer participants pre-defined   categories   based   on the    tutors' own   experience  or
theoretical perspectives drawn from the literature. As a result, it may be that additional perspectives, or variants of
these, exist amongst the student population. Furthermore, most empirical studies have been carried out in Western
countries (USA, UK, EU countries), thus alternative perspectives may arise in other cultural contexts. Of particular
importance to education, the ways in which these perceptions influence learning have not been investigated in detail.
         The specific research questions addressed in the study were thus as follows: (1) How do Thai students at
Christian schools perceive the relationship between evolution and creation? (2) How does their perception of the
relationship relate to their account of the learning process in which they engaged while studying evolution?
         The study reported here contributes to the broader literature on the educational implications of perceptions of
the relationship between evolution and creation by investigating these viewpoints through discussions with students,
without providing pre-defined categories. It focuses on developing a deeper understanding of students' perceptions of
the relationship between the accounts of the origins of life, as well as on identifying the impacts of these perceptions
on their learning of evolution. Because we expected to encounter less polarized responses in a context where the
relationship between creation and evolution has been less politicized than in the Western world, we focus our study on
students  in  Christian schools   in  Thailand    where  the  Christian    population   generally   adheres   to  Baptism,
Presbyterianism and Pentecostalism. This new cultural context also extends our knowledge to beyond the Western
world, potentially allowing additional perspectives to be identified.

Methodology and method
Since this study aims to identify the different ways that students perceive a specific phenomenon ­ that of the learning
of evolution in their Christian school ­ phenomenography is chosen as a methodological framework for the study and
associated data analysis (Marton 1981). A phenomenographic approach is appropriate for an empirical study such as
this that aims to understand the ways in which people experience a particular phenomenon (Marton 1981), with
particular emphasis on describing, analyzing and understanding the different ways in which people experience a
situation from their personal viewpoint (Micari et al 2007). Researchers using phenomenography normally collect data
from  individual  interviews which   are transcribed and   analyzed   to identify common    and  contrasting   perspectives
relating to the phenomena of interest (Marton 1981).
         Nine high school students, aged 17-18, currently enrolled in Christian schools in Bangkok took part in this
study, alongside 2 teachers. In principle, all students should have encountered evolutionary and biblical explanations
of the origins of life in the school context as evolution is a compulsory part of the science curriculum and Christian
schools provide Bible Study classes that cover origins. To allow participants the freedom to describe freely the
relationship between  biblical and evolutionary   perspectives on    the origins  of life, the 30-minute     semi-structured
interviews employed open-ended questions carried out in their schools. The interview consisted of two parts: firstly,
the participants were asked to express their belief concerning the relationship between evolution and creation in a
general sense; secondly, they were encouraged to talk about their experiences of learning about these in the classroom.
         For data analysis, all interview records were transcribed in Thai. Based on the two sections of the interview,
participant narratives were analyzed along three dimensions: their general perceptions of the relationship between the
two explanations; the ways in which they approached the task of learning about the two explanations; and the types of
their engagement with evolution. Similar and contrasting perspectives relating to each dimension were drawn from the
narratives by grouping similar statements into categories to allow common themes to arise, whilst differences were
also actively sought between descriptions in order to differentiate between participant perspectives.
         Findings were also validated by using data triangulation and investigator triangulation (Marthison 1988).
For data triangulation, we considered both the relationship between our findings and those from the philosophical
literature and also interviewed teachers. Teachers and students were interviewed using a similar interview schedule;
however, students reported on their own perceptions whilst teachers referred to their own position and to the learning
of their students via questions   relating to the issues they  had    encountered  when    teaching    about evolution. For
investigator triangulation, two researchers were involved in the data analysis that took place in two phases. The first
author identified categories  of relationship according  to   processes  of  phenomenography.    Relevant    sections were
translated into English and the categories identified were compared to those considered in the literature. In the second
phase, the categories were further refined in conjunction with the second author using a process of consensus, until
both were comfortable. During the second stage, the categories were compared with Alexander's (2007) distinctions.

Findings
1. The relationship between evolution and creation
Analysis of the student narratives provided five perspectives on the relationship between evolutionary and biblical

                                                     319  ·   © ISLS
                                                  ICLS 2010      ·  Volume 1

accounts of the origins of life among participants in this group, summarized in Table 1. Four of the perspectives
correspond roughly to categories identified by Alexander (2007), while the other has not been described in this
context. The first two categories, creation only and compartmental, are both incompatible perspectives, while the
remaining three, NOMA, fusion and complementary are compatible perspectives.
         Expressing views in relation to the first of the incompatible perspectives, four students (Pavee, Prakhun,
Nicha, and Thida) explained that they accepted the biblical explanation of God's creation and rejected evolutionary
accounts, considering that it is impossible to reconcile the explanations. Three of these students (Pavee, Prakhun, and
Nicha) gave   their religious beliefs   as the reason   for their   position,  whereas   Thida  instead  emphasized    purpose,
explaining that belief in God's creation gave her life purpose, whereas evolution did not and she was therefore more
comfortable with the former. Their view is named creation only and corresponds to the subcategory of Alexander's
(2007) conflict model where evolution is rejected.
         Providing evidence for the second of the incompatible perspectives, Praporn explained that she viewed
evolutionary  and   creation perspectives  as  different, but    made  no  attempt   to  resolve  this  apparent  contradiction,
preferring to use the knowledge relating to each instrumentally in the relevant classes, using the different explanations
as appropriate according to the context. This perspective, which we call compartmental, is not discussed by Alexander
(2007) and we can find no evidence for it in the philosophy of science literature. This is perhaps unsurprising since the
philosophy literature focuses explicitly on the relationship between science and religion, whereas the student holding
this position actively avoids considering the connection.
         In the first of the three compatible perspectives, Daungjai and Mothana expressed the view that evolution
and creation address different kinds of fundamental question and realities: while evolution deals with the facts of
scientific evidence, creation deals with religious concerns, such as belief, values and purpose of life. This perspective
is named NOMA after Gould's (2002) model. Other compatible perspectives were held by Sadudee and Apai who
believed that scientific and   religious   explanations   pertain   to the    same reality, but  are   nonetheless   compatible.
Specifically, Sadudee appeared to hold a view most closely aligned with a fusion model whereby no clear distinction
is made between scientific and religious knowledge, suggesting that evolution can be viewed as scientific creation and
creation as  scientific  belief. Finally,  Apai  explained     that  he  believed   that    in time,   scientific and  religious
understandings of the world would become aligned, and that science would confirm his religious beliefs, in a way that
is reminiscent of Alexander's (2007) complementary perspective.

Table 1: Perceptions of the relationship between evolution and creation

Category name                                               Representative statements
   Conflict         Since evolution is different from the biblical explanation, I do not believe it. [...] Science is too
(Creation only)     small when compared to God. It cannot prove or disprove the existence of God. (Nicha)
                    Creation is a purposeful plan of God. I am not purposeless any more in this sense. I know where I
                    am from and where I will go after this. So, I am really happy that I am a beloved daughter of God.
                    Although this idea is like children's thought, it can create my happiness. It is impossible that
                    science can explain everything. (Thida)
Compartmental       These two theories seem different in various aspects, like time and process. However, I tried to
                    ignore these differences when I studied. (Praporn)
   NOMA             To me, evolution is a kind of scientific knowledge, but creation is a kind of religious belief. They
                    are fundamentally different. [Science] deals with the matters and evidence. [Religion] deals with
                    people's ethos and values. It explains what the purpose of life is. It teaches us how to be a good
                    person. (Mothana)
   Fusion           It is possible that God created small living things and let them evolve until they became billions of
                    species as we can see at this moment. However, God is the origin of life, in my opinion. I do not
                    reject evolution. [...] We should open our mind to receive a full range of knowledge. [A Christian
                    biology teacher] can make evolution to be scientific creation and make creation to be scientific
                    belief. (Sadudee)
Complementary       I believe    in creation because  I am     a   Christian. And  also, I  believe  in evolution    because it is
                    reasonable.     To me, science is   about    God   and God   is about   science.   [...] I treat science as  a
                    powerful tool to confirm that there is a God. (Apai)

2. Learning approaches
Five approaches were found to be used to negotiate the relationship when learning about the scientific and religious
accounts (see Table 2). Firstly, when Pavee, Prakhun and Nicha (creation only), learned about evolution in school,
they took the Bible as their starting point, comparing new material to their knowledge of the biblical creation story
and rejecting other explanations, in approach we name rejection. In addition to declining evolutionary theory, they
actively engaged with learning about evolutionary theory with the explicit aim to critique the theory in order to
reinforce their own religious perspective. Like these students, although Thida (creation only) did not learn about

                                                      320    ·   © ISLS
                                                 ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

evolution in her formal schooling, she consulted books, websites, and people in the church in order to reinforce her
belief and argue against evolutionary theory.
          Secondly, Praporn (compartmental) referred to having two modes of functioning, turning on "the switch of
scientific mode" when learning about evolution, and turning it off again when in religious education classes. In
relation  to her approach when undergoing      assessment,  she   answered questions   about evolution as   accurately as
possible to gain good marks, despite not believing the explanations provided, or wishing to engage with them in a
deep way. We name this approach switching.
          Thirdly, Daungjai and Mothana (NOMA) used what we call a differentiating approach, attempting first to
differentiate between the realms of applicability of the two accounts, and using the distinction to avoid internal
conflict and confusion. Daungjai referred to metaphorical interpretations of the Bible in generating the distinction,
whereas Mothana referred to the role of religion being to inform moral decisions and values.
          Fourthly, Sadudee (fusion) was interested in finding the integration of evolution and creation and ways in
which to coherently combine evolution and creation, suggesting that perhaps God had created life and that evolution
explains the development of life forms into the broad range of species existing today.
          Finally, Apai (complementary) was interested in learning about evolution and the complexities of life almost
as refinement of the existence of God, claiming that when aspects of the two perspectives appeared not to correspond,
that this was because of the current limitations of our scientific knowledge. For him, science is a powerful tool to
allow human beings to see God more clearly.

Table 2: Approaches for negotiating the relationship in learning contexts

 Approach                                                Representative statements
  Rejection       I think it is better to know both explanations. It is because I can know how others think about
                  evolution. I want to know more as I can find reasons to reject it. (Prakhun)
                  God is the truth. What he says is an ultimate truth. Other explanations that oppose to the biblical
                  account must be wrong. I have to deny them. (Thida)
 Switching        In a science class, I  tried  to be a  science   person  by answering   all   questions about evolution
                  scientifically. When I studied about creation in a religion class, I turned the switch of scientific mode
                  off and turned the religion one on. I tried to be a religious person. I answered everything according to
                  religious beliefs. (Praporn)
Differentiating   They have different purposes. So, what I really did was I tried to differentiate both of them first. And
                  then, I tried to understand which aspects that evolution wants to deal with and which aspects that
                  creation tries to imply. (Mothana)
 Integration      What I am looking for is the intersection between evolution and creation (Sadudee)
  Refining        My stance is I will not immediately reject what I do not understand. I will think that it might be
                  possible in some way. Although I cannot entirely understand how evolution and creation can be
                  perfectly matched, I think it might be possible in the future. I treat science as a powerful tool to
                  confirm that there is a God. I just think that there is a God and He is the truth. And then, other
                  findings will verify His existence. (Apai)

3. Types of engagement with evolution
Data analysis demonstrated that the perspectives and approaches above can be linked to at least three different types
of engagement with evolutionary theory and the understandings that arise from them: engagement, learning to falsify
and detached learning (see Table 3).
          Firstly, all students who held compatible perspectives (NOMA, fusion and complementary) appeared to be
positively engaged with learning about evolution, claiming that their perspective helped them to avoid confusion and
demonstrating enthusiasm and interest in the area. Whilst those with a NOMA perspective were interested in evolution
principally for the scientific knowledge itself, those taking a fusion or complementary perspective also saw learning
about evolution as a way of clarifying their understandings of religion. Secondly, those who hold a conflict view
explained that they were actively engaged in their studies or studied outside of the classroom with the explicit aim of
learning more about evolution in order to critique evolutionary explanations and thus strengthen arguments for their
religious viewpoint, engaging  with  the primary   purpose     of learning to falsify. Finally, the student who  took   a
compartmental view demonstrated detached learning, only acquiring knowledge about evolution because it was part
of the school curriculum.

Table 3: Types of engagement with evolutionary theory

   Type                                                  Representative statements
Engagement        I did not feel uncomfortable or want to reject it. In contrast, it was exciting to know how evolutionary
                  processes work. The more I can see how science is complicated, the more I am sure that there is a

                                                     321  ·  © ISLS
                                                  ICLS 2010     ·  Volume 1

                  God. As the Bible says, God is the source of wisdom. He gave the wisdom to us in order to let us see
                  His works. (Apai)
 Learning to      There was no negative impact on my study at all. I even could get a good grade in that term.
    falsify       Basically, I am confident with God's creation. But I also wanted to know about evolution so that I
                  can argue against it. (Pavee)
                  At that time, I did nothing, as I did not want to create any controversial issue in the class. However,
                  in my mind, I already rejected it. Then, I tried to ask my friend's father and other people in the
                  church about this. They gave me a lot of information. [...] In addition, I read many books that
                  support what I believe. I tried very hard to protect my belief. I stopped doing that when I felt that I
                  did not wonder about the existence of God anymore. (Nicha)
   Detached       In a  science class,  I tried  to be   a   science person    by answering    all questions  about  evolution
   learning       scientifically. When I studied about creation in a religion class, I turned the switch of scientific mode
                  off and turned the religion one on. I tried to be a religious person. (Praporn)

Discussion and implications
In relation to earlier work,  the  study  described   here   allows  for the   identification of  additional perspectives  not
demonstrated in other empirical research. Based on the findings and in relation to the four models proposed by
Alexander (2007), we claim that there are two primary ways of viewing the relationship between evolution and
creation: incompatible and compatible. Figure 1 provides an overview of the findings, linking together perspectives on
the relationship between evolution and creation, approaches to learning and engagement with evolution, as well as
situating these within other perspectives in the literature.
        In   the creation  only perspective,    creation   is   accepted and   evolution  is  not  considered  to  provide an
acceptable explanation; in the evolution only perspective, evolution is judged to be plausible and religious accounts
are rejected; in the compartmental perspective, both explanations are considered to be internally consistent but are in
conflict with one another, with no decision made as to the veracity of each. Although the first two models are
discussed by Alexander (2007) and others, the compartmental model appears not to have arisen in earlier work and we
suggest that it should be added as a subcategory of the incompatible perspectives. Furthermore, the data collected in
this study therefore demonstrate the existence of incompatible amongst Christian students in Thailand, despite the
background of Buddhist communities and the less politicized context.
        The    findings also  reveal at   least three categories     of  compatible perspectives,    corresponding   to  those
identified by Alexander (2007): NOMA, fusion and complementary. Students taking the NOMA perspective consider
that evolution and creation are addressing different kinds of question and through seeking the different aspects of
reality to which each explanation applies, avoid conflict. Students who hold a fusion view, do not seek distinctions,
but rather attempt to integrate the two explanations through blending, perceiving no clear distinction between them.
Finally, students taking a complementary viewpoint look for complementarities between the explanations and consider
them to be   mutually   supportive. The   data  provide  empirical   evidence   for the  existence   of  all three compatible
perspectives amongst Thai high school biology students.
        The categories indentified above were triangulated by interview data given by two biology teachers working
at the Protestant school who had both been teaching biology for at least 5 years, and at least one of whom had taught
evolution to the four students from the sample who were studying at this school. The teachers themselves appeared to
hold a  NOMA     perspective. Moreover,   they   provided     a   third-person perspective    on student learning   describing
examples of situations that correspond to conflict, fusion and complementary perspectives amongst their students. For
example, one teacher stated that `some of my students declined answering exam questions scientifically but they wrote
their point of view instead, for example, God created all things (conflict perspective) and that `some of them answered
the questions according to scientific explanations discussed in the class but they concluded that all of those are
controlled by God (fusion or complementary).
        The different perspectives and associated learning approaches identified appear to give rise to a range of
ways of engaging with evolutionary theory, which in turn support different educational outcomes for the students (see
Figure 1). According to our proposed model, those students taking one of the compatible perspectives (NOMA, fusion
and  complementary)    are able to  learn about   evolution     without  any   conflict with  their religious  beliefs. These
perspectives support either neutral or positive relationships between the learning that goes on in these two disciplines.
However,    students holding   the  incompatible    viewpoints     demonstrate    different   kinds of   influences  on  their
understanding and engagement. Not surprisingly, it was among students who interpreted the Bible literally that serious
misconceptions (Scott 2005) were identified:
        Evolution is about monkeys and humans. It claims that we are from monkeys. Natural selection is
        the reason why those monkeys could be humans. Those monkeys tried to adapt themselves to
        environments in which they lived. (Thida)
        More subtly, despite rejecting evolution, some students who learn to falsify (and potentially also those using
switching) may demonstrate convincing understanding of evolution:

                                                      322     ·  © ISLS
                                              ICLS 2010      ·  Volume 1

       There was no negative impact on my study at all. I even could get a good grade in that term.
       Basically, I am confident with God's creation. But I also wanted to know about evolution so that I
       can argue against it and answer questions related to the topic. [...] I actually should feel bored
       while I was studying. But it is not true. On the contrary, I was really keen to learn it. [...] It is
       weird, I know, that I wanted to know in order to reject it. (Pavee)
       Although Pavee appears to have understood evolutionary theory sufficiently to do well on the course, his
learning is qualitatively different from that of students who accept evolution as accurate.
       In his introduction to the Cambridge Handbook of the Learning Sciences, Sawyer (2005, p.2) emphasizes the
educational importance of "deeper conceptual understanding", contrasting this with factual and procedural knowledge.
However, the comments from students and teachers indicate that conceptual understanding does not necessarily lead
to acceptance of evolutionary theory. As educators, we need to ask the question of the kind of learning ­ conceptual
understanding or acceptance ­ we aspire to engender, as well as the moral implications of these intentions in a context
where disciplinary knowledge may potentially threaten belief systems that are important to learners. There is evidence
to suggest that some pedagogical approaches can support the acceptance of evolutionary theory without threatening
religious beliefs. However, it is interesting to recognize that although accepting evolution as plausible may be a
prerequisite to studying evolutionary biology, it may be possible to use evolutionary approaches as a methodology in
other areas (such as the social sciences) whilst rejecting biological evolution. Indeed, approaching evolution from this
perspective may even provide new pedagogical approaches.
       At present, one of the most promising pedagogical approaches, as described in Ladine (2009), is the explicit
exploration of the NOMA model with students. Ladine (2009) explains to students that he values religious studies as
moral development and science as the discipline for naturalistic explanation, and provides evidence that this approach
gives rise to positive engagement with evolution amongst his students. In an open-ended question that formed part of a
course evaluation questionnaire, students of a private Christian college in the US explained that they had learnt that
"evolution doesn't take God out of the picture," "learning that evolution and religion can coexist," and "that evolution
may not really be as much of an evil lie as I have always been taught" (Ladine 2009, p.391).
       Alternative pedagogies based on the other approaches associated with compatible perspectives ­ integration
and refining ­ may also be developed. However, it is necessary tread carefully in this area. It was slightly surprising to
us to realize that although three students (Pavee, Nicha and Sadudee) noted that evolutionary theory explains changes
in species over time and is therefore not strictly concerned with origins of life (biogenesis), two of these students
(Nicha and Sadudee) nonetheless rejected evolution. In other words, being explicit about this particular aspect of
integration is not sufficient to allow students to accept evolutionary theory as they can nonetheless see conflicts in
relation to other aspects, including timescale and purpose.
       Even if we do not see the need for students to appropriate evolutionary theory, using an approach such as
that described by Ladine (2009) may nonetheless be easier to justify on ethical grounds than leaving students to
generate their own understandings of the relationship, as this can lead to a state of uncomfortable confusion:
       To be honest, I am confused, as I don't know what is true. However, I try to ignore that. I try not to
       think about it too much. As I know, if I ask biology teachers, of course, they will use scientific
       evidence to explain it to me. If I ask religious teachers, they are going to let me read what the Bible
       says.   There is no way to find their compatibility.      So, it is better to keep   quiet and forget it.
       (Praporn)
       Finally, however, it is our hope that explicitly addressing the relationship between the two disciplines in
order to encourage more sophisticated understandings of this may be to engender greater respect amongst learners in
the classroom.
       It is important to note some limitations of this study. The dataset was limited primarily due to political unrest
in Thailand in 2009 at the time of data collection, making data collection from a larger sample, or indeed follow-up
interviews, impossible. A single interview with each participant, is, however, reasonable in the context of this study
since we intended to capture student positions at a single time point, rather than to establish how these changed over
time. Since we were interested in their perceptions (a first-person account), the primary data source was student
interviews, although two teachers were also interviewed. The nature of phenomenography, which aims primarily to
develop well-defined categories of experience of a particular phenomenon, means that at least at early stages, these
may constitute only a subset of categories that exist, and that furthermore, individuals included in the sample may be,
in fact, unique. This does not detract from the validity of the study itself, but makes it difficult to generalize the results
until further investigation has been carried out. Our claim is that the perspectives described have been uncovered;
however, we make no claim as to their relative prevalence in the population either amongst the larger population from
which they were drawn (high schools students at Christian schools in Thailand) or more generally.
       More generally, the findings reported here reveal that at least in some areas, learning within one discipline
can be strongly influenced by knowledge and learning within another: specifically, theology is shown to impact on
scientific understandings. In line with Gould's (2002) claims about the different types of knowledge associated with
religion and science, this impact may have its roots in the epistemology of science and religion more generally.

                                                  323  ·     © ISLS
                                                  ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

Indeed, Ladine (2009), while discussing perspectives of evolution and creation asserted that including God in the
explanation  of  science indicates misunderstanding     of the  nature of science. It is therefore  interesting to note  a
tendency amongst those students holding compatible perspectives to refer to science and religion more generally in
their comments, despite being asked about evolution and creation.
        For researchers, this study demonstrates the importance of an interdisciplinary approach to the study of
learning in real world contexts. Specifically, it highlights the significance of disciplinary understandings of the nature
of knowledge    and reality, and informs     theory in the  learning sciences by  exploring  their effects on   conceptual
understanding   of disciplinary material. In  order  to support  student  understanding  and  acceptance   of disciplinary
knowledge, we need to view our practice not as isolated within a discipline, but take account of its position in relation
to knowledge and epistemologies appropriate to other disciplines. As educators, we need to be aware of the possible
interactions between the epistemological paradigms underlying the disciplines in which we teach in order to address
any conflicts sensitively and intelligently.

                   Figure 1: Proposed model relating the relationship between evolution and creation

Acknowledgment
We would like to thank to the Royal Thai Government for the financial support provided to the first author throughout
this study.

References
Alexander, D. R. (2007). Models for relating science and religion. Faraday paper, 3, 1-4.
Alexander, D. R. (2008). Creation or evolution: Do we have to choose? Oxford: Monarch Books.
Barbour, I. G. (2002). Nature, Human Nature, and God. Norristown, Pennsylvania: Fortress Press.
Berkman, M., Pacheco, J. and Plutzer, E. (2008). Evolution and creation in America's classroom: A national portrait.
            PLOS Biology, 6(5), 920-924.
Berry, R. (2007). Creation and evolution: Not creation or evolution. Faraday paper, 12, 1-4.
Darwin, R. C. (1859). The origin of species by means of natural selection. London: John Murray.
Dawkins, R. (1986). The blind watchmaker. New York: Norton.
Gould, J. (2002). Rock of ages: Science and religion in the fullness of life. New York: Ballantine Books.
Ingram, E.   and Nelson,  C.  (2006). Relationship     between  achievement   and  students' acceptance  of   evolution or
            creation in an upper-level evolution course. Journal of Research on Science Teaching, 43(1), 7-24.
Ladine, T. (2009). Attitudes of students at a private Christian liberal arts university towards the teaching of evolution.
            Evolution: Education and Outreach, 2(3), 386-392.
Marthison, S. (1988). Why triangulation? Educational Researcher, 17(2), 13-17.
Marton, F. (1981). Phenomenography: Describing conceptions of the world around us. Instructional Science, 10, 177-
            200.
Padian, K. (2009). The evolution of creationists in the United States: Where are they now and where are they going?
            Comptes Rendus Biologies, 332, 100-109.
Sawyer, R. K. (2006). Introduction: The new science of learning. In R. K. Sawyer (Ed), The Cambridge handbook of
            learning sciences (pp. 1-16). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Scott, E. (2005). Evolution vs. creationism: An introduction. California: University of California Press.

                                                       324  ·  © ISLS
