                                              ICLS 2010  ·   Volume 2

    Using Design Personas to Inform Refinements to Software for
                                         Science Learning
                  Patrik Lundh, Britte Cheng, William R. Penuel, Aasha Joshi, Hannah Lesk
                     SRI International, 333 Ravenswood Avenue, Menlo Park, CA 94025
     Email: patrik.lundh@sri.com, britte.cheng@sri.com, william.penuel@sri.com, aasha.joshi@sri.com,
                                            hannah.lesk@sri.com

        Abstract: Design personas are a technique of participatory design intended to provide design
        teams with memorable, vivid representations of users' needs and practices. In this paper, we
        describe the process of creating personas to inform refinements to the design of software
        designed  to  help  elementary  students create    concept    maps  of science   topics  they   were
        studying. Drawing    from  interviews with  children,  parents,  and   teachers, the    aim of  these
        personas was to help the design team develop refinements to help children use the software
        effectively if it were to be assigned as homework.

Context
In this study we used design personas (Courage, 2005; Pruitt, 2006) to help a design team improve software
intended to promote upper elementary school students' conceptual learning in science. Design personas are
vivid representations of users' needs and practices, embodied in characters designers can relate to and utilize as
they discuss design requirements and refinements (Grudin & Pruitt, 2002). Personas give designers powerful
means  to reason  about  design issues (Cooper,  2004;   Dantin,   2005; Nieters,   Ivaturi, &   Ahmed    2007). The
personas involve students in the design process in a way that accounts for children as a special user group
(Bruckman & Bandlow, 2003), and emphasizes the roles they play in the design process (Druin, 2002).
        The study focused on Teachable Agents (TA), a software that enables students to create an agent and to
teach it science content through the creation of concept maps that constitute the agent's brain. The software has
different feedback features and the students can also have their agents participate in a game show to test their
agent's knowledge (Chase, Chin, Oppezzo, & Schwartz, in press). Tested initially in laboratories and recently in
classrooms, the team that developed the software is interested in extending its use into home settings; to see
whether it will help students learn more by engaging with the concepts in multiple contexts.

Approach to Developing Design Personas
A challenge of this particular design effort was to conceive how elementary-aged children engaged in multiple
contexts, including school and home. Our personas describe learning dispositions, likes, technology use, and
parental involvement associated with different activities. By characterizing the learning dispositions of children
in different contexts, we aimed to provide the design team with a better sense of children's motivational goals
(Ames & Archer, 1988; Pintrich & Schrauben, 1992; Urdan & Maehr, 1995) as well as other data that could
inform the design of particular features to appeal to a diversity of children. By considering parents' involvement
in different activities, we sought to anticipate issues that could arise from assigning TA as homework, given
parents' and children's preferences for mutual engagement in homework and technology-based activities.
        To develop the personas, we conducted case studies of 10 students in which we compared the data
about their informal activities with how they engaged in TA. We conducted two 1-hour long interviews with
each student and two with their parents. We also incorporated data from logs about their engagement with four
TA-specific features: chat, feedback via a grid showing correct and incorrect links between concepts, game
show, and concept map edits. Each of the four design personas aggregated data from 2 to 3 students.

Samples of Design Personas
The design personas focused on user type characteristics that were deemed most relevant to TA-specific features
mentioned above. The following are excerpts from the four design personas that were created.
        Brainy Bethany loves learning about new things. Being very inquiry-oriented, she is comfortable not
knowing   the end result of  an information-finding   effort and does   not limit  herself   to one  form  of finding
information.  Bethany feels   she knows  her  mind    very   well, and   she   is constantly    reasoning  about  her
surroundings.
        Social Susie is motivated by social participation in virtually all her activities. She can be sensitive to
critique but she also very reliant on others' input and opinions and relies quite a bit on guidance from adults.
She prefers practicing instead of advancing to more complex levels of learning. Even though she participates in
many sports, she is not motivated by competition at all.
        Hangback Hubert wants to do well, and he worries about failing in front of others. Hubert depends on
the guidance,  structuring, and feedback from  others    and  gets overwhelmed     and   anxious    in an open-ended

                                                  320  ·  © ISLS
                                                 ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 2

environment. He   needs   clearly  articulated  goals but   he can   also be  motivated by   intellectually stimulating
aspects such as puzzles and strategy-like activities. He is not very competitive,
         Gamer Gabe makes a game of whatever he is doing, which gives him a strong sense of agency in the
world.  Gabe  likes to   get things   right. He  doesn't    so much     like "learning" the  varied   games   he  plays
(videogames, computer games, puzzles, board games), but is rather driven by a need for novelty. He finds
homework    boring, because   it's  repetitive. Gabe   is   social, but   prefers smaller,  trusted groups  of  people,
especially when the social context is activity-centered (like playing games together, for example).

Implications for Refining the Design of the Software
For each of the personas developed, our team generated suggestions for design implementations. Overall, the
user profiles represented by the personas suggest more integration of TA's main features and more flexibility in
their particular functionalities.
         The chat feature is not likely to appeal to Bethany in the same way it might others, because she is an
independent learner and seeks help efficiently on her own. Likewise, Bethany would likely see through the
game show; instead of using it as a motivating vehicle for improvement, she is likely to discover and use
alternate methods of getting feedback to check to see if the links she has made between science concepts are
correct. If the design team incorporated additional ways for Bethany to search for information outside the site
that could help her learn about the concepts, the software might be more appealing to her.
          Personalizing the agent and integrating it more in the TA landscape might be more motivating for
Susie. It would probably help her to de-emphasize the competitive aspect of the game show and make it more
social. Susie's sensibility  toward   criticism  may     be   dealt with  by  making    the agent   more    "alive" and
strengthening its role as ego buffer
         Hubert would likely prefer to communicate with friends and others that he already trusts. Perhaps the
grid in its present form is too much like a grade for Hubert, leading him to focus more on the game show, where
the outcome reflects less on him directly and more on his agent. If it was possible for the game show to retain its
quality of high structure but integrate it more with other features, it could provide opportunities for Hubert to
involve himself with his map and his agent's learning in a more productive way.
         As a sophisticated gamer who takes interest in game-specific problem solving strategies, Gabe might
benefit from integrating the game show strategy with the agent's knowledge. To leverage learning goals against
achievement and game strategy goals for Gabe, TA might shift the balance from the explicit achievement
functions and capitalize more on strategy and game playing features with learning goals.
         The best   test of  personas'  usefulness    is  whether    the  software  refinements lead   to   the desired
engagement with the key aspects of what makes the software a powerful learning tool. Such a study is planned
for the 2009-10 school year, as a collaborative endeavor between our research team and the design team.

References
Ames, C., & Archer, J. (1988). Achievement goals in the classroom: Students' learning strategies and motivation
         processes. Journal of Educational Psychology, 80(3), 260-267.
Bruckman, A., Bandlow, A., 2003. HCI For Kids. In: Jacko, J., Sears, A. (Eds.), Human­Computer Interaction
         Handbook, Lawrence Erlbaum, Hillsdale, NJ, pp. 428­440.
Chase, C., Chin, D. B., Oppezzo, M., & Schwartz, D. L. (in press). Teachable agents and the protege effect:
         Increasing effort towards learning. Journal of Science Education and Technology.
Courage, C. a. K. B. (2005). Understanding your Users. A Practical Guide to User Requirements. San
         Francisco: Morgan Kaufmann Publishers.
Druin, A., 2002. The role of children in the design of new technology. Behaviour and Information Technology
         21(1), 1­25.
Pintrich, P. R., & Schrauben, B. (1992). Students' motivational beliefs and their cognitive engagement in
         classroom academic tasks. In D. Schunk & J. Meece (Eds.), Student perceptions in the classroom:
         Causes and consequences (pp. 149-183). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Pruitt, J., S. and Tamara Adlin (Ed.). (2006). The Persona Lifecycle. Keeping People in Mind throughout
         Product Design. San Francisco: Morgan Kaufman Publishers.
Urdan, T. C., & Maehr, M. L. (1995). Beyond a two-goal theory of motivation and achievement: A case for
         social goals. Review of Educational Research, 65(3), 213-214.

Acknowledgments
This material is based upon work supported by the National Science Foundation under Grant Number SBE-
BCS-0624307. Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those
of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Science Foundation.

                                                     321  ·  © ISLS
