                                                ICLS 2010     Volume 2

         Learning to Categorize Word Problems: Effects of Practice
                                               Schedules
                                      Brian D. Gane & Richard Catrambone
         Georgia Institute of Technology, School of Psychology, 654 Cherry St., Atlanta, GA 30332-0170
                                 Email: bgane@gatech.edu, rc7@prism.gatech.edu

           Abstract:  Participants learned to categorize and solve probability word problems by studying
           worked examples and solving practice problems.       The examples and problems were ordered
           according to either a blocked (sequential examples of the same problem category) or mixed
           (intermixed examples of different problem categories) schedule. Preliminary results suggest
           that  when   categorizing  problems   the    blocked     schedule  might   facilitate  immediate
           performance, whereas the mixed schedule might facilitate delayed performance.

Introduction
Solving word problems in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) domains often requires
determining the category of the word problem as a first step (e.g., selecting the relevant formulas or algorithm to
solve the problem).   Accurate categorization is difficult for novices because they have an incomplete base of
conceptual categories and tend to concentrate on surface features (Chi, Glaser, & Rees, 1982).
           Attempts to improve learners' ability to categorize word problems can be informed by psychological
research on concept learning.   Novices are  essentially learning how to classify the exemplars that they   view (i.e.,
the word problems) as instances of different categories (i.e., the problem types).     This issue can be framed as
"How do novices build a conceptual structure based on viewing example instances and what conditions during
study might affect those processes?"
           One important study  condition is the order of examples.   The practice schedule in which learners  study
or solve word problems can be varied such that multiple example instances from the same problem category are
either presented sequentially (i.e., a blocked schedule), or distributed among other problem category examples
(i.e., a mixed   schedule). Research  suggests that practice   schedule  can  affect learners'   conceptual structures
(Hiew, 1977) and categorization accuracy (Gane & Catrambone, 2009; Kornell & Bjork, 2008).
           These practice schedule conditions are relevant to instructional designers. Consider the task of creating
a textbook presentation or homework assignment to teach multiple types of probability word problems.          Should
the textbook present worked examples according to a blocked or a mixed schedule?         Likewise, should students
complete homework problems that are arranged in a blocked or mixed schedule?          These decisions become more
difficult because practice schedules can differentially affect immediate and delayed performance (Schmidt &
Bjork, 1992).    This study examines how blocked and mixed practice schedules affect novices' immediate and
delayed performance of categorizing and solving probability word problems.

Method

Participants
Undergraduates from the Georgia Institute of Technology who had not taken a college-level probability or
statistics course participated. Data collection is ongoing; to date, data from 36 participants have been analyzed.

Learning Materials
Participants studied four categories of probability word problems: permutation with replacement, permutation
without    replacement, combination   with   replacement,   and  combination  without  replacement.    The   learning
materials consisted of four packets of word problems; each packet contained four worked examples followed by
a conventional problem to solve.     Thus, participants studied a total of 16 worked examples (four examples per
category), and solved four conventional problems (one problem per category).
           Worked examples had the word problem stem, a category label, the two features (order: permutation or
combination, and replacement: with or without) that determine the category label, the category-appropriate
formula, values inserted into the formula, calculations, and the final answer.    Conventional problems had only
the world problem stem.

Design
The practice schedule manipulation had two levels: blocked and mixed.         The same set of 16 worked examples
was used in the blocked and mixed conditions, only the order differed.         The blocked order had four worked
examples from the same category presented consecutively; the mixed order never repeated a worked example
from the same category consecutively.    These two orders were operationalized by including four examples of

                                                    322      ISLS
                                                    ICLS 2010    Volume 2

one category in a packet (blocked) or by including one example of each category in a packet (mixed).                     To
reduce the influence of the specific category ordering used within the blocked and mixed schedules, we created
two versions of each schedule with different category orders.

Procedure
After studying the example packets, participants completed use, access, and transfer tests, in that order.             In the
access test participants chose the appropriate formula (but did not solve) the word problem.            In the use test the
formula  was   given;   participants  inserted   the values   and calculated   the final  answer.    The transfer test was
formatted  like   the conventional     problems;     we  manipulated     transfer  distance  by   varying the  number     of
probabilities used  to  calculate  the  final answer.    The   access, use,  and   transfer tests used a  mixed   schedule.
Participants returned for Session 2 after 48 hours and completed another set of access, use, and transfer tests.

Results
Preliminary   results (n  = 36)   are reported,  but  data  collection   is ongoing.   Random assignment appeared to
equalize domain knowledge and mathematical skills; there were no significant differences between conditions
on either the probability pretest or math pretest.
         All participants in the blocked conditions categorized all of the conventional problems correctly (M =
4.0, SD = 0.0), whereas participants in the mixed conditions did not (M = 3.6, SD = 0.6), F(1, 34) = 8.16, p <
.01. Practice schedule also affected categorization on the access tests.         In Session 1, the blocked condition had
higher categorization accuracy (M = 4.9, SD = 1.1) than the mixed condition (M = 4.5, SD = 1.3).             In Session 2,
however, the blocked condition (M = 3.9, SD = 2.1) had lower categorization accuracy than the mixed condition
(M = 4.4, SD = 1.5). This reversal in means resulted in a significant interaction at the ! = .10 level, F(1, 31) =
3.12, p = .09.  With a larger sample, we expect to find a significant interaction at a conventional ! level.            The
use  and transfer  test results   did not  show  stable  trends.   We    await a  larger  sample  to determine   if practice
schedule affects categorization accuracy on the transfer test; previous research (Gane & Catrambone, 2009)
suggests a small effect.

Discussion
These preliminary results suggest that practice schedules might affect concept learning with word problems in
STEM domains.       Further, they suggest that this effect might change as a function of the retention interval.
These results extend the general phenomenon of the contextual interference effect (Battig, 1979), to concept
learning processes in a cognitive skill domain.
         These    results  suggest    that ideas  from   concept   learning    literature can inform   instruction   design
decisions.    For  instance,   to facilitate  categorization   while   studying,   a blocked    schedule  might     be used.
However, to improve delayed performance, a mixed schedule might be more effective.                  An interesting question
is whether  this   type of  ordering   is  practical to  implement    in a  classroom    environment,  and  how   students'
expectations of how lessons typically order materials (e.g., simple to complex, blocked first, then random, etc.)
might affect their learning from different schedules.
         We    believe  future  work   should    focus   on the   processing   differences  between   individuals   in  each
condition.  It would be helpful to collect qualitative data regarding whether participants in each condition are
explicitly comparing      worked   examples      to  one another.   Another    interesting   question  is how    individual
differences in metacognitive processing might moderate practice schedule effects.            For  instance, individuals that
effectively monitor their understanding and control their allocation of study effort might engage in the same
type of processing regardless of the type of practice schedule.

References
Battig, W. F. (1979). The flexibility of human memory. In L. S. Cermak & F. I. M. Craik (Eds.), Levels of
         processing in human memory (p. 23-44). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Chi, M. T. H., Glaser, R., & Rees, E. (1982). Expertise in problem solving. In R. J. Sternberg (Ed.), Advances in
         the psychology of human intelligence (Vol. 1). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Gane,  B.  D., &   Catrambone,     R.  (2009,  April).   Practice  schedules   in  cognitive  skill acquisition: Effects  of
         example order on categorization and problem solving. Paper presented at the American Educational
         Research Association annual meeting, San Diego, CA (AERA '09).
Hiew,  C.  C.  (1977).  Sequence      effects in rule learning    and  conceptual  generalization.   American    Journal  of
         Psychology, 90, 207-218.
Kornell, N., & Bjork, R. A. (2008).        Learning concepts and categories: Is spacing the "enemy of induction"?
         Psychological Science, 19, 585-592.
Schmidt,   R.  A., &    Bjork, R.  A.  (1992).   New    conceptualizations    of  practice: Common     principles   in three
         paradigms suggest new concepts for training. Psychological Science, 3, 207-217.

                                                        323     ISLS
