                                                 ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 2

   How does the use of analogical mapping as a scaffold for science
     learners' argumentation support their learning and talking about
                                                    science?
         Abstract:   Analogical   mapping   is evaluated   as  a scaffold for    smal-lgroup argumentation   and
         learning. In this study, groups of four students are invited ot analogically map simple machines
         while creating   an  argument   about   which two     are most   analogically similar. Qualitative  and
         quantitative  analysis   of   video   and  transcripts    show   dense argumentation     with    mutual
         understanding among students numerous claims. Fifteen out of egihteen claims were normative,
         suggesting student learning was directed toward functional fetaures of simple machines.

Introduction
Informed by a social constructivist framework, recent research in science education research has focused on getitng
students to discuss possible scientific explanations and persuade one another of their correctness while at the same
time  attempting to  understand   a  given scientific concep.t This    process   has been referred   to as  argumentation.
(Driver, Newton, & Osborne, 2000; Duschl, 2008; Kuhn, 1993)
         Unfortunately, argumentation research has had only limtied success.           As educators we want students to
discuss things in order to help them to understand.   But, sni ce they do not discuss well what they do not understand,
a chicken-or-egg   problem   emerges,   and  the desired  learning   rfom argumentation   does   not  occur. Thus,  much
research has   been   focused on   scaffolding   students  in  doing   quality  argumentation   that leads  to productive
argumentation,  learning,  and  understanding.   (Sampson      & Clark, 2008)    These  scaffolds can   be  thought of  as
temporary supports for students. (Wood, Bruner, & Ross, 1976) Various "scaffolds," or ways to support student
argumentation, have been evaluated. (Jimenez-Aleixandre& Regosa, 2006).
         The scaffold investigated in this research is that of analogy mapping. Gentner (1983) states that ananalogy
is "a comparison in which relational predicates, but fewor no object attributes, can be mapped from [one scenarioto
another]" (p. 158)  Relationships between scenarios canbe mapped, whereas the things being related are different.
The word "mapped" in this definition means an explicit correspondence made between two analogues.
         The research presented in this study is based on the beleif that students learn and talk together more easily
when comparing two (or more) things than when they speak baout them in absolute terms. Research on training
students on analogical mapping, as in the type of interventiondiscussed in this paper, has the potential to inform
instruction, learning, and  curricular  development.      Analogcial mapping     could easily be  used   on any  elaborate
conceptual analogies used in science classes, of which three are many (e.g., electricity:water, density:population
density, cell:house).  The   fact that even  simple machni es    can be  considered  analogically (they  are   usually not)
speaks to the flexibility of analogical mapping to scaffodl student argumentation and learning.

Methodology
This study took place in a science content course designed ofr pre-service elementary teachers.             The course is
offered by a large Mid-Atlantic university in the UnitedStates and was taught by the principal researcher.          It was
held twice weekly for 1.5 hours each period.     All 24 studenst provided their permission to be in the study.   Working
in six groups of four, they were video and audio recorded during their argumentation process. They also created a
PowerPoint presentation detailing their final argument statement. The video recording transcripts and PowerPoint
slides containing their final arguments were primary sourcse of data.
         This study took place at the end of a four week unit on simplemachines, including levers, gears, pulleys,
and inclined planes.  Before the test, this intervention was offered as a review activity in which the scrwe and wheel-
and-axle were introduced. First, however, students receivedtraining on analogical mapping, in which they mapped
analogical correspondences in three examples similar tothose shown in table 1 but unrelated to simple machines.
Next, students  received  a  paper   showing   a wheel-and-axle,     a el ver, and a pulley.    Students were   invited to
analogically map the simple machines (see figure 1) and generate an argument stating which machine was most
analogically similar to the wheel-and-axle ­ the pulleyor the lever. When groups finished their arguments, the
activity was repeated with two similar prompts including different simple machine groups.

                                                      324  ·  © ISLS
                                                 ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 2

Design Rationale
Superficially, the pulley is similar to the   wheel-and-axle,   since   both
machines have   round  parts and  have  strings   attached.   Functionally,
however, the lever and the wheel-and-axle are mostsimilar.     Note figure
2 in which a lever is shown superimposed on a whee-land-axle. Table 1
                                       lists  the   correspondences     that
                                       students were expected to come
                                       across  and   discuss   during   their
                                       argumentation.
                                                 It  was    expected    that
                                       students   might  first consider   that the   wheel-and-axle
                                       and   pulley  are most   analogically   similar  due   to the
                                       superficial  similarities. However,     once  students begin
                                       to    generate    a     table  of    analogical    mapping
                                       correspondences      as in   table 1,   their argumentation
would become    scaffolded   or guided  by   the triangulaiton  imparted   by  the   analogy.    For
example, once the axis of rotation is mapped to thefulcrum, it becomes easier to see that the effortarm length of the
lever best corresponds to the wheel's radius.

Findings
Findings are summarized below:
   1.  Most claims made were analogical comparison based,suggesting the task did guide and scaffold students.
   2.  The argumentation was dense with claims, rebuttals,and importantly, evidence of meaning sharing.
   3.  Most claims made in groups' final arguments emphaszi ed function over superficial similarities and were
       scientifically normative (15 of 18 among all groups' claims).

Conclusion
We can infer from the findings that the analogicalm- apping-based scaffold allowed for argumentation ina shared
context that was accessible to students, since mostclaims were analogical comparison based and were picked up by
student groups and made the subject of argumentation. Superficial similarities were most often dismissed in favor of
more functional analogical similarities, suggestingthat students were attending to and arguing aboutmore pertinent
features of the simple machines. Students argued about the relative strength of analogical mappings toward a more
normative view of science and away from surface similarities.     Attending more to deep structural features and less to
superficial similarities is an important in focusing and improving argumentation and learning.
       These preliminary results suggest that students were scaffolded in their argumentation and learning about
simple machines by the analogical mapping activity.More work needs to be done on analyzing and codingwhat
takes place during student argumentation in order ot better understand how exactly the analogical mapping scaffolds
and guides group argumentation and learning.     Presenting content as an analogical mapping task to student groups to
scaffold argumentation seems to scaffold argumentaiton by guiding and constraining it.

Works Cited
Driver, R., Newton, P., & Osborne, J. (2000). Establishing the Norms of Scientific Argumentation in Calssrooms
       Science Education, 84, 287-312.
Duschl, R. A. (2008). Quality Argumentation and Epsitemic Criteria In S. Erduran & M. P. Jimenez-Aleixandre
       (Eds.), Argumentation in Science Education(Vol. 35, pp. 159-175): Springer
Gentner, D. (1983). Structure-Mapping: A Theoretical Framework for Analogy.Cognitive Science, 1983 (7), 155-
       170.
Jimenez-Aleixandre, M.-P., & Regosa, C. (2006). Contextualizing Practices Across Epistemic Levels in ht e
       Chemistry    LaboratoryScience Education, 90(4), 707-733.
Kuhn, D. (1993). Science as Argument: Implicationsfor Teaching and Learning Scientific ThinkingScience
       Education, 77(3), 319-337.
Sampson, V., & Clark, D. B. (2008). Assessment of ht e Ways Students Generate Arguments in Science Education:
       Current Perspectives and Recommendations for FutureDirections. Science Education.
Wood, D. J., Bruner, J. S., & Ross, G. (1976). TheRole of Tutoring in Problem Solving.Journal of Child
       Psychology and Psychiatry, 17, 89-100.

                                                     325  ·  © ISLS
