                                                    ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

Interactional Achievement of Shared Mathematical Understanding
                                          in a Virtual Math Team
                                      Murat Perit Cakir, Gerry Stahl, Alan Zemel
                                Drexel University, 3141 Chestnut St, Philadelphia PA
                          mpc48@drexel.edu, gerry.stahl@drexel.edu, arz56@drexel.edu

          Abstract: Learning mathematics involves specific forms of social practice. In this paper, we
          describe  socially   situated,  interactional  processes    involved    with collaborative    learning  of
          mathematics in a special online collaborative learning environment. Our analysis highlights
          the methodic   ways    group   members     enact  the   affordances  of  their situation  (a)  to visually
          explore a mathematical pattern, (b) to co-construct shared mathematical artifacts, (c) to make
          visible the  meaning     of the construction,     (d) to translate  between    graphical,  narrative  and
          symbolic representations and (e) to coordinate their actions across multiple interaction spaces,
          while they are working on open-ended math problems. In particular, we identify key roles of
          referential and representational practices in the co-construction of deep mathematical group
          understanding. The case study illustrates how mathematical understanding is built and shared
          through the online interaction.

Introduction
Developing pedagogies and instructional tools to support learning math with understanding is a major goal in
mathematics education (NCTM, 2000). A common theme among various characterizations of mathematical
understanding in the math education literature involves constructing relationships among mathematical facts
and procedures    (Hiebert   &   Wearne,    1996).   In particular,   math   education   practitioners  treat recognition  of
connections   among    multiple  realizations    of  a  math   concept   encapsulated    in various  inscriptional   forms as
evidence of deep understanding of that subject matter (Kaput, 1998; Sfard, 2008; Healy & Hoyles, 1999). For
instance, the concept of function in the modern math curriculum is introduced through its graphical, narrative,
tabular, and symbolic realizations. Hence, a deep understanding of the function concept is ascribed to a learner
to the extent  he/she  can   demonstrate    how   seemingly     different  graphical,  narrative,  and  symbolic   forms   are
interrelated  as  realizations  of each   other  in  specific   problem-solving    circumstances    that  require the  use of
functions. On the other hand, students who demonstrate difficulties in realizing such connections are considered
to perceive actions associated with distinct forms as isolated sets of skills, and hence are said to have a shallow
understanding of the subject matter (Carpenter & Lehrer, 1999).
          Multimodal   interaction    spaces--which      typically    bring  together  two   or   more  synchronous    online
communication technologies such as text-chat and a shared graphical workspace--have been widely employed
in CSCL     research   and   in  commercial      collaboration    suites  such as   Elluminate     and   Wimba    to  support
collaborative learning activities of small groups online (Dillenbourg & Traum, 2006; Soller, 2004; Suthers et al.,
2001). The way such systems are designed as a juxtaposition of several technologically independent online
communication tools not only brings various affordances (i.e. possibilities-for and/or constraints-on actions),
but also carries important interactional consequences for the users (Cakir, Zemel & Stahl, 2009; Suthers, 2006;
Dohn 2009). Providing access to a rich set of modalities for action allows users to demonstrate their reasoning
in multiple semiotic forms. Nevertheless, the achievement of connections that foster the kind of mathematical
understanding    desired by    math   educators   is conditioned      upon  team  members'     success   in devising   shared
methods for coordinated use of these rich resources.
          Although    CSCL     environments    with    multimodal     interaction spaces    offer rich  possibilities for  the
creation, manipulation,      and   sharing    of mathematical      artifacts online,   the   interactional  organization   of
mathematical meaning-making activities in such online environments is a relatively unexplored area in CSCL
and in math education. In an effort to address this gap, we have designed an online environment with multiple
interaction  spaces   called Virtual   Math   Teams     (VMT),    which    allows  users  to exchange     textual as  well as
graphical contributions online (Stahl, 2009). The VMT environment also provides additional resources, such as
explicit referencing and special awareness markers, to help users coordinate their actions across multiple spaces.
Of  special  interest to researchers,    this environment     includes   a  Replayer   tool to  replay  a chat session  as  it
unfolded in real time and inspect how students organize their joint activity to achieve the kinds of connections
indicative of deep understanding of math.
          In this paper we focus on the practical methods through which VMT participants achieve the kinds of
connections   across  multiple     semiotic   modalities  that    are often  taken  as   indicative of   deep  mathematical
understanding. We take the math education practitioners' account of what constitutes deep learning of math as a
starting point, but instead of treating understanding as a mental state of the individual learner that is typically
inferred by outcome measures, we argue that deep mathematical understanding can be located in the practices of

                                                        325  ·   © ISLS
                                                       ICLS 2010     ·  Volume 1

collective multimodal reasoning displayed by teams of students through the sequential and spatial organization
of their  actions.   In an       effort to    study   the   practices   of   multimodal   reasoning  online,  we   employ       an
ethnomethodological case-study approach and investigate the methods through which small groups of students
coordinate  their   actions      across multiple     interaction    spaces  of   the VMT   environment  as   they collectively
construct, relate and reason with multiple forms of mathematical artifacts to solve an open-ended math problem.
Our analysis has identified key roles of referential and representational practices in the co-construction of deep
mathematical understanding.

Data & Methodology
The excerpts we analyze in this paper are obtained from a problem-solving session of a team of three upper-
middle-school students who participated in the VMT Spring Fest 2006. This event brought together several
teams  from the    US,  Singapore,      and   Scotland      to collaborate   on  an  open-ended math   task  on  combinatorial
patterns. Students were recruited anonymously through their teachers. Members of the teams generally did not
know each other before the first session. Neither they nor we knew anything about each other (e.g., age or
gender) except chat handle and information that may have been communicated during the sessions. Each group
participated in four sessions during a two-week period, and each session lasted over an hour. Each session was
moderated by a Math Forum staff member; the facilitators' task was to help the teams when they experienced
technical difficulties, not       to instruct    or participate   in   the problem-solving  work.   Figure  6 below     shows         a
screenshot of the VMT Chat environment that hosted these online sessions.
         During their first session, all the teams were asked to work on a particular pattern of squares made up
of sticks (see Figure 1 below). For the remaining three sessions the teams were asked to come up with their own
shapes, describe the patterns they observed as mathematical formulae, and share their observations with other
teams through a wiki page. This task was chosen because of the possibilities it afforded for many different
solution approaches ranging from simple counting procedures to more advanced methods, such as the use of
recursive functions and exploring the arithmetic properties of various number sequences. Moreover, the task had
both algebraic and geometric aspects, which would potentially allow us to observe how participants put many
features of the VMT software system into use. The open-ended nature of the activity stemmed from the need to
agree upon a new shape made by sticks. This required groups to engage in a different kind of problem-solving
activity as compared to traditional situations where questions are given in advance and there is a single "correct"
answer--presumably already known by a teacher. We used a traditional problem to seed the activity and then
left it up to each group to decide the kinds of shapes they found interesting and worth exploring further (Moss &
Beatty, 2006; Watson & Mason, 2005).

                                                                       Session I
                                        N    Sticks  Squares
       (1) 4 sticks, 1 square           1      4        1               1.   Draw the pattern for N=4, N=5, and N=6 in the
                                        2     10        3                    whiteboard. Discuss as a group: How does the
                                                                             graphic pattern grow?
                                        3     18        6               2.   Fill in the cells of the table for sticks and squares in
       (2) 10 sticks, 3 squares         4      ?        ?                    rows N=4, N=5, and N=6. Once you agree on these
                                        5      ?        ?                    results, post them on the VMT Wiki
                                                                        3.   Can your group see a pattern of growth for the
                                        6      ?        ?                    number of sticks and squares? When you are ready,
                                        ...   ...       ...                  post your ideas about the pattern of growth on the
                                        N      ?        ?                    VMT Wiki.
       (3) 18 sticks, 6 squares

Sessions II and III
   1.   Discuss the feedback that you received about your previous session.
   2.   WHAT IF? Mathematicians do not just solve other people's problems - they also explore little worlds of patterns
        that they define and find interesting. Think about other mathematical problems related to the problem with the
        sticks. For instance, consider other arrangements of squares in addition to the triangle arrangement (diamond, cross,
        etc.). What if instead of squares you use other polygons like triangles, hexagons, etc.? Which polygons work well
        for building patterns like this? How about 3-D figures, like cubes with edges, sides and cubes? What are the
        different methods (induction, series, recursion, graphing, tables, etc.) you can use to analyze these different
        patterns?
   3.   Go to the VMT Wiki and share the most interesting math problems that your group chose to work on.
                                      Figure 1: Task description for Spring Fest 2006

                                                             326  ·  © ISLS
                                               ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

         Studying the collective meaning-making practices enacted by the users of CSCL systems requires a
close analysis of the process of collaboration itself (Stahl, Koschmann & Suthers, 2006; Koschmann, Stahl &
Zemel, 2007). In an effort to investigate the organization of interactions across the dual-interaction spaces of the
VMT environment, we consider the small group as the unit of analysis (Stahl, 2006), and we apply the methods
of Ethnomethodology     (EM)   (Garfinkel, 1967;  Livingston,   1986)  and  Conversation  Analysis  (CA)  (Sacks,
1962/1995; ten Have, 1999) to conduct case studies of online group interaction. Our work is informed by studies
of interaction mediated by online text-chat with similar methods (Garcia & Jacobs, 1998; O'Neill & Martin,
2003), although the availability of a shared drawing area and explicit support for deictic references in our online
environment as well as our focus on mathematical practice significantly differentiate our study from theirs.
         The goal of Conversation Analysis is to make explicit and describe the normally tacit commonsense
understandings and procedures group members use to organize their conduct in particular interactional settings.
Commonsense understandings and procedures are subjected to analytical scrutiny because they "enable actors to
recognize and act on their real world circumstances, grasp the intentions and motivations of others, and achieve
mutual   understandings" (Goodwin    & Heritage,   1990,    p. 285).  Group  members'    shared  competencies  in
organizing their conduct not only allow them to produce their own actions, but also to interpret the actions of
others (Garfinkel & Sacks, 1970). Since members enact these understandings and/or procedures in their situated
actions, researchers can discover them through detailed analysis of members' sequentially organized conduct
(Schegloff & Sacks, 1973).
         We subjected our analysis of VMT data to intersubjective agreement by conducting numerous CA data
sessions (ten Have, 1999). During the data sessions we used the VMT Replayer tool, which allows us to replay a
VMT chat session as it unfolded in real time based on the timestamps of actions recorded in the log file. The
order of actions--chat postings, whiteboard actions, awareness messages--we observe with the Replayer as
researchers exactly matches the order of actions originally observed by the users. This property of the Replayer
allows  us to study  the sequential unfolding  of events    during   the entire chat session. In short, the  VMT
environment provides us a perspicuous setting in which the mathematical meaning-making process is made
visible as a  joint practical achievement  of participants   that is  "observably and  accountably  embedded   in
collaborative activity" (Koschmann, 2001, p. 19).

Analysis
The following sequence of drawing actions (Figures 2 to 6 below) is observed at the beginning of the very first
session of a team in the VMT environment. Shortly after a greeting episode, one student, Davidcyl, begins to
draw a set of squares on the shared whiteboard. He begins by drawing three squares that are aligned horizontally
with respect to each other, which is made evident through his careful placement of the squares side by side (see
Figure 2 below). Then he adds two more squares on top of the initial block of three, which introduces a second
layer to the drawing. Finally, he adds a single square on top of the second level, which produces the stair-step
shape displayed in the last frame of Figure 2. Note that he builds the pattern row-by-row here.

                       6:24:30          6:24:37                6:24:48            6:24:50
                              Figure 2: First stages of Davidcyl's drawing activity.

         Next, Davidcyl starts adding a new column to the right of the drawing (see Figure 3). He introduces a
new top level by adding a new square first, and then he adds 3 more squares that are aligned vertically with
respect to each other and horizontally with respect to existing squares (see second frame in Figure 3). Then he
produces a duplicate of this diagram by using the copy/paste feature of the whiteboard (see the last frame in
Figure 3). Here, he builds the next iteration by adding a new column to the previous stage, starting the new
column by making visible that it will be one square higher than the highest previous column.
         Afterwards, Davidcyl moves the pasted drawing to an empty space below the copied diagram. As he
did earlier, he adds a new column to the right of the prior stage to produce the next stage. This time he copies
the entire 4th column, pastes a copy next to it, and then adds a single square on its top to complete the new stage
(Figure 4). Next, Davidcyl produces another shape in a similar way by performing a copy/paste of his last
drawing, moving the copy to the empty space below, and adding a new column to its right (see Figure 5). Yet,
this time the squares of the new column are added one by one, which may be considered as an act of counting.
In Figure 4, the new column is explicitly shown to be a copy of the highest column plus one square. In Figure 5,
the number of squares in the new column are counted individually, possibly noting that there are N of them. The

                                                  327  ·   © ISLS
                                              ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

likelihood that the counting of the squares in the   new   column    is related to the stage, N, of the pattern is
grounded by Davidcyl's immediately subsequent reference to the diagrams as related to "n=4,5,6".

                              6:24:51                6:25:00                 6:25:07
             Figure 3: Davidcyl introduces the 4th column and pastes a copy of the whole shape.

     6:25:13            6:25:42              6:25:45                    6:25:47               6:25:52

                  Figure 4: Davidcyl uses copy/paste to produce the next stage of the pattern

             6:26:04                6:26:10                  6:26:14                    6:26:20

                                Figure 5: Davidcyl's drawing of the 6th stage

       Shortly after his last drawing action at 6:26:20, Davidcyl posts a chat message stating, "ok I've drawn
n=4,5,6" at 6:26:25. Figure 6 shows the state of the interface at this moment. The "ok" at the beginning of the
message could be read as some kind of a transition move (Beach, 1995).      The next part "I've drawn" makes an
explicit verbal reference to his recent (indicated by the use of past perfect tense) drawing actions. Finally, the
expression "n=4,5,6" provides an algebraic gloss for the drawings, which specifies how those drawings should
be seen or treated. Once read in relation to the task description, Davidcyl's recent actions across both spaces can
be treated as a response to the first bullet under session 1, which states "Draw the pattern for N=4, N=5, and
N=6 in the whiteboard" (see Figure 1 above for the task description). The discussion that immediately followed
Davidcyl's drawings and his last chat statement is displayed in Table 1 below.
       Davidcyl's posting at line 26 is stated as a declarative, so it can be read as a claim or assertion. The
references to "n" (i.e., not to a particular stage like 2nd or 5th) invoke a variable as a gloss for referring to the

                                                 328  ·   © ISLS
                                               ICLS 2010    ·   Volume 1

features of the general pattern. Moreover, the use of the clause "more...than" suggests a comparison between
two things, in particular the two cases indexed by the phrases "nth pattern" and "(n-1)th pattern" respectively.
Hence, Davidcyl's     posting can be read   as a  claim   about  how   the number   of squares changes      between    the
(n-1)th and nth stages of  the  pattern at  hand. The   two     cases compared   in the  posting correspond       to   two
consecutive stages of the staircase pattern. Davidcyl's prior drawing work included similar transitions among
pairs of particular stages. For instance, while he was drawing the 4th stage, he added a column of 4 new squares
to the right of the 3rd stage. Hence, Davidcyl's narrative uses the drawings for particular cases as a resource to
index the properties of the general pattern, which is implicated in the regularity/organization projected by his
prior drawing actions.

    Figure 6: The state of the VMT environment when Davidcyl posted "ok I've drawn n=4,5,6" at 6:26:25.

Table 1: Chat discussion following the drawing activity
 Chat    Time Start     Time ofIndexTypingPostingAuthorContent
 26      18:27:13       18:27:32   davidcyl    the nth pattern has n more squares than the (n-1)th pattern
         18:27:30       18:27:47   137         [137 has fully erased the chat message]
         18:27:47       18:27:52   137         [137 has fully erased the chat message]
 27      18:27:37       18:27:55   davidcyl    basically it's 1+2+..+(n-1)+n for the number of squares in the nth pattern
         18:27:57       18:27:57   137         [137 has fully erased the chat message]
 28      18:28:02       18:28:16   137         so n(n+1)/2
 29      18:27:56       18:28:24   davidcyl    and we can use the gaussian sum to determine the sum: n(1+n)/2
 30      18:28:27       18:28:36   davidcyl    137 got it

        In the next line, Davidcyl elaborates on his description by providing a summation of integers that
accounts for the number of squares required to form the nth stage. In particular, the expression "1+2+..+(n-
1)+n" describes a method to count the squares that form the nth stage. Since Davidcyl made his orientation to
columns explicit through his prior drawing work while he methodically added a new column to produce a next
stage, this expression can be read as a formulation of his column-by-column counting work in algebraic form. In
other words, Davidcyl achieves a (narrative) transition from the visual to the algebraic, which is informed by
his methodic   construction   of specific  stages of  the   staircase pattern that  allowed him  to isolate      relevant
components of the general pattern and derive a systematic counting method.
        As   Davidcyl   composes   a  next  posting,  137    posts  a so-prefaced   math expression at      line 28,   "So
n(n+1)/2"   that (a) shows 137   has been   attending to    the organization  of Davidcyl's ongoing        exposition, (b)
displays 137's recognition of the next problem-solving step projected by prior remarks, (c) offers an algebraic
realization of the procedure described by Davidcyl, and (d) call on others to assess the relevance and validity of

                                                   329    ·  © ISLS
                                                    ICLS 2010   ·   Volume 1

his claim. Davidcyl's message at line 29 (which is produced in parallel with line 28 as indicated by the typing
times) is a more elaborate statement that identifies how his prior statements, if treated as a Gaussian sum, yield
the same expression that 137 put forward at line 28 (viz. "n(n+1)/2"). Given that 137 anticipated Davidcyl's
Gaussian sum, Davidcyl announces in the very next posting that "137 got it," which recognizes the relevance of
137's posting at that particular moment in interaction, and treats 137's coordinated contribution as an act of
understanding.

Discussion
Given the characterization of deep mathematical understanding in the math education literature, methodic ways
through which    participants  coordinate    their  actions   across  the whiteboard      and chat   spaces   are of   particular
interest to our investigation of mathematical understanding or meaning making at the small-group level. The
episode we analyzed above includes a situation where a user, who has been active in the whiteboard, moves on
to the other  interaction  space  and  posts    a  message    referring  to  his prior    drawing   work. The     chat message
sequentially followed the drawings, and hence presumed their availability as a shared referential resource, so
that the interlocutors can make sense of what is possibly referred to by the indexical expression "n=4,5,6"
included in the posting. Davidcyl's explicit orientation to timing or sequencing is further evidenced by his use
of the past perfect tense and his temporal positioning of the message immediately after the final step of the
drawing. Moreover, the chat posting reflexively gave further specificity to the prior drawing work by informing
everyone  that  the   diagrams  should    be   seen as  specific  cases   of the    staircase pattern  described   in  the task
description. This suggests that temporal proximity among actions can serve as an interactional resource/cue for
the participants to treat those actions in reference to each other, especially when the actions are performed
across different  interaction  spaces.    In short, Davidcyl      has demonstrated      a method    that one   can call  verbal
referencing,  which   is   employed   by     VMT    users  when     they  need    to  communicate      to each    other  that a
narrative/symbolic account needs to be read in relation to a whiteboard object.
        Davidcyl's use of the algebraic reference "n=4,5,6" at this moment in interaction is also informative in
terms of respective limitations of each medium and their mutually constitutive function for communication.
Davidcyl's   chat message   not  only  provided     further   specificity to    the recently  produced    diagrams,    but also
marked  or   announced     the completion      of  his drawing      work. This   is  revealing    in terms    of  the  kinds  of
illocutionary  acts (Austin,   1962)  that   can   be  achieved   by   users in  this   dual-media   online   environment.    In
particular, although a drawing and its production process may be available for all members to observe in the
shared whiteboard, diagrams by themselves cannot fulfill the same kind of interactional functions achieved by
text postings such as "asking a question" or "expressing agreement." In other words, whiteboard objects are
made interactionally relevant through chat messages that either (a) project their production as a next action or
(b) refer to already produced objects. This can also be seen as members' orientation to a limitation of this online
environment as a communication platform; one can act only in one space at a given time, so it is not possible to
perform  a  simultaneous    narration  of    a  drawing    as   one can   do  in  a  face-to-face    setting. Therefore,   each
interaction space as a communicative medium seems to enable and/or hinder certain kinds of actions, i.e., they
carry specific communicative affordances (Hutchby, 2001) for collaborative problem solving online.
        The way Davidcyl has put some of the features of the whiteboard --like dragging and copy/paste--into
use in the episode described above demonstrates some of its key affordances as a medium for producing shared
drawings. In particular, we have observed how copying and pasting is used to avoid additional drawing effort,
and how collections of objects are selected, dragged, and positioned to produce specific stages of a geometric
pattern. Such possibilities for action are supported by the object-oriented design of the whiteboard. Davidcyl's
drawing actions show that, as compared to other physical drawing media such as paper or blackboard, the
electronic whiteboard affords unique possibilities for constructing and modifying shared mathematical diagrams
in ways that have mathematical, collaborative, semantic and communicative power.
        It is analytically significant that Davidcyl changed from building the pattern row-wise in Figure 2 to
building it column-wise subsequently and that he "computed" the height of the new column in several different
ways in Figures 3, 4 and 5. This indicates that he did not have an explicit solution "in his head"--a mental
model  that  he  just had  to  illustrate in   the  world  with   the  whiteboard.    Rather,    he worked    out  the   solution
gradually  through    emergent  whiteboard      activities and    his recognition    of what   appeared   in  the  whiteboard.
Significantly, the other group members could observe the same thing.
        An important concern for our group-cognitive approach is to investigate how students make use of the
technological features available to them to explore mathematical ideas in an online environment like VMT.
Drawing   features    such as   copy/paste,     dragging,   coloring,   etc.  are   important    affordances   of  the   shared
whiteboard   not  simply   because  of    their respective    advantages     as compared      to other   drawing   media.  The
mathematical significance of these features relies on the way single actions like copy/paste or dragging are
sequentially  organized    as  part of    a  broader   drawing      activity that   aims   towards    constructing     a shared
mathematical artifact. For instance, through such a sequence of drawing actions Davidcyl demonstrated to us (as
analysts) and to his peers (a) how to construct a stair-step pattern as a spatially organized assemblage of squares,

                                                       330    ·  © ISLS
                                                 ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

and (b) how to derive a new stage of the stair-step pattern from a copy of the prior stage by adding a new
column of squares to its right. Moreover, Davidcyl's engagement with the squares (rather than with the sticks
that make up the squares) displays his explicit orientation to this particular aspect of the shared task (i.e., finding
the number of squares at a given stage). Hence, the availability of these drawing actions as a sequence of
changes unfolding in the shared visual space allows group members to witness the reasoning process embodied
in the sequential and spatial organization of those actions. In other words, the sequentially unfolding details of
the construction   process  provide  specificity (and  hence   meaning)    to  the mathematical      artifact that  is being
constructed.
         Besides figuring out ways to connect their own actions across dual-interaction spaces, VMT users also
coordinate their actions with the actions of their peers to be able to meaningfully participate in the ongoing
discussion. The ways participants produce and deploy mathematical artifacts in the shared space implicate or
inform what procedures and methods may be invoked next to produce other mathematical artifacts, or to modify
existing ones as the discussion progresses towards a solution to the task at hand. For instance, 137's competent
contribution to Davidcyl's sequentially unfolding line of reasoning in Table 1 shows that shared mathematical
understanding at the group level is an interactional achievement that requires coordinated co-construction of
mathematical artifacts. The co prefix for the term "co-construction" highlights the intersubjective nature of the
mathematical artifacts produced during collaborative work; they are not mere mental constructs easily ascribed
to certain individuals. As we have just observed in the excerpt above, intersubjectivity is evidenced in the ways
participants organize their actions to display their relevance to prior actions. 137's anticipation and production
of the next relevant step in the joint problem-solving effort serves as strong evidence of mutual understanding
between him and Davidcyl. Moreover, the term construction signals that mathematical artifacts are not simply
passed down by the mathematical culture as ready-made Platonic entities external to the group. Once enacted in
group discourse,   culturally   transmitted artifacts  such    as "Gaussian    Sum"  need    to   be  made    sense  of   and
appropriated in relation to the task at hand. Hence, our use of the combined term co-construction implies an
interactional process of sense making by a group of students--even in an excerpt like the present one in which
one individual takes an extended turn in the group discourse to develop a complex presentation. The fact that it
is a visible construction worked out in collaborative media and designed for reception by others makes it a co-
construction from which the speaker is as likely to learn as are the other group members.
         When co-construction takes place in an online environment like a chat tool, the construction process
must take place through observable interactions within technical media. This requires student groups to invent,
adapt or   appropriate  methods  to  co-construct   mathematical    artifacts. It  also makes     it possible  for  them   to
explicitly reflect on  the  persistent  traces  of  their co-constructions     by  investigating     the persistent  content
provided by the technology. Therefore, the persistent nature of actions provides the necessary infrastructure for
joint action, and hence is a key affordance of CSCL environments like VMT, where actors work at a distance in
a disembodied environment. In addition, the persistent records of interactions also allow researchers to analyze
the co-construction process as it unfolded in real-time, as this paper demonstrates.
         Through similar case studies of other VMT sessions, we observed that students make use of additional
resources  (such   as the explicit  referencing  tool, locational   pronouns,  color names      in   chat) to methodically
achieve referential relationships between shared diagrams and chat messages (Cakir, Zemel & Stahl, 2009).
Chat postings use a broad and sophisticated array of such methods to refer to matters constructed graphically.
Due   to their recurrent    appearance  as  a  practical  concern    for the   participants  in   this   dual-media    online
environment, we refer to the collection of these methods as referential practices. Referential practices are of
particular importance to the study of mathematical understanding as a group-cognitive phenomenon, because
they are enacted in circumstances where participants explicitly orient to the task of achieving relationships
between the textual and graphical contributions that they have been exchanging online--a phenomenon that is
given significance    in  the  math  education   literature    as characterizing   deep  mathematical       understanding.
Likewise, one can use the term representational practices to refer to the spatial and temporal organization of
whiteboard   actions   that  produce   shared   diagrams,    which   simultaneously     give further     specificity   to the
mathematical   artifacts  that  the team    has  been  working     on--e.g.,   Davidcyl's    methodical     sequencing     of
copy/paste   operations   to   indicate growth     patterns.   Through   referential    and  representational    practices,
participants co-construct mathematical artifacts that reify mathematical understandings. The understanding or
meaning is not simply located inside students' individual brains or in the chat/drawing artifacts themselves. The
meaning is embodied in the sequentially organized and coordinated actions through which those artifacts were
co-constructed.  To   sum   up, group   referential and   representational    practices  play   a  key   role in the   ways
mathematical artifacts are (a) appropriated by active teams from historically developed cultural tools, and (b)
emergent   from  ways    of communicating     and   symbolizing    within local   collectivities   as  shared, meaningful
resources for mathematical discourse, collaborative learning and group understanding.

                                                    331   ·   © ISLS
                                              ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

References
Austin, J. L. (1962). How to Do Things with Words. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Beach, W. A. (1995). Conversation analysis: "Okay" as a clue for understanding consequentiality. In S. J.
        Sigman (Ed.), The consequentiality of communication (pp. 121- 162). Hillsdale, NJ: LEA.
Cakir, M. P., Zemel, A., & Stahl, G. (2009). The joint organization of interaction within a multimodal CSCL
        medium. International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 4(2), 155-190.
Dillenbourg,  P.,  &  Traum,  D.  (2006).  Sharing      Solutions: Persistence      and Grounding    in  Multimodal
        Collaborative Problem Solving. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 15(1), 121-151.
Dohn,  N.  B. (2009). Affordances    revisited: Articulating  a Merleau-Pontian     view.  International  Journal of
        Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 4(2), 151-170.
Garcia, A., & Jacobs, J. B. (1998). The interactional organization of computer mediated communication in the
        college classroom. Qualitative Sociology, 21(3), 299-317.
Garfinkel, H. (1967). Studies in Ethnomethodology. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Garfinkel, H., & Sacks, H. (1970). On formal structures of practical actions. In J. Mckinney & E. Tirvakian
        (Eds.), Theoretical sociology: Perspectives and developments (pp. 337-366). New York: Appleton.
Goodwin, C., & Heritage, J. (1990). Conversation Analysis. Annual Review of Anthropology, 19, 283-307.
Healy, L.,  & Hoyles,  C. (1999). Visual  and   symbolic    reasoning  in mathematics:    Making   connections  with
        computers. Mathematical Thinking and Learning, 1(1), 59-84.
Hiebert, J., & Wearne, D. (1996). Instruction, Understanding, and Skill in Multidigit Addition and Subtraction.
        Cognition and Instruction, 14(3), 251-283.
Hutchby, I. (2001). Conversation and technology: From the telephone to the internet. Cambridge, UK: Polity.
Kaput,  J. (1998).  Representations, Inscriptions, Descriptions    and   Learning:   A  Kaleidescope   of Windows.
        Journal of Mathematical Behavior, 17(2), 265-281.
Koschmann, T. (2001). Revisiting the paradigms of instructional technology. In G. Kennedy, M. Keppell, C.
        McNaught     & T.  Petrovic   (Eds.),   Meeting   at the  crossroads. Proceedings      of  the  18th Annual
        Conference of the Australian Society for Computers in Learning in Tertiary Education (pp. 15-22).
Koschmann, T., Stahl, G., & Zemel, A. (2007). The video analyst's manifesto. In R. Goldman, R. Pea, B. Barron
        & S. Derry (Eds.), Video research in the learning sciences. Mahwah, NJ: LEA.
Livingston, E. (1987). Making sense of ethnomethodology. New York, NY: Routledge.
Moss, J., & Beatty, R. (2006). Knowledge building in mathematics: Supporting collaborative learning in pattern
        problems. International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 1(4), 441-465.
Mühlpfordt, M., & Wessner, M. (2005). Explicit Referencing in Chat Supports Collaborative Learning. In T.
        Koschmann, D. Suthers & T. Chan (Eds.), Proceedings of the 2005 conference on Computer support
        for collaborative learning (CSCL): the next 10 years! (pp. 460-469). Taipei, Taiwan: ISLS.
NCTM. (2000). Principles and standards for school mathematics. Reston, VA: NCTM.
O'Neil, J., & Martin, D. (2003). Text chat in action. In K. Schmidt & M. Pendergast (Eds.), GROUP '03:
        Proceedings of the ACM SIGGROUP on Supporting group work (pp. 40-49). New York, NY: ACM.
Sacks, H. (1962/1995). Lectures on Conversation. Oxford, UK: Blackwell.
Schegloff, E. A., & Sacks, H. (1973). Opening up closings. Semiotica, 7, 289-327.
Sfard, A.   (2008).  Thinking  as  communicating:      Human     development,  the      growth  of discourses,  and
        mathematizing. New York, NY: Cambridge University Press.
Skemp, R. (1976). Relational understanding and instrumental understanding. Mathematics Teaching, 77, 20-26.
Soller, A. (2004). Understanding knowledge sharing breakdowns: A meeting of quantitative and qualitative
        minds. Journal of Computer Assisted Learning, 20, 212-223.
Stahl, G. (2006). Group Cognition: Computer Support for Building Collaborative Knowledge. Cambridge, MA:
        MIT Press.
Stahl, G. (Ed.). (2009). Studying virtual math teams. New York, NY: Springer.
Stahl, G., Koschmann, T., & Suthers, D. D. (2006). Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning. In R. K.
        Sawyer (Ed.), The Cambridge Handbook of the Learning Sciences (pp. 409-426). New York: CUP.
Suthers, D. D. (2006). Technology affordances for intersubjective meaning making: A research agenda for
        CSCL. International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning (ijCSCL), 1(3), 315-337.
Suthers, D., Connelly, J., Lesgold, A., Paolucci, M., et al. (2001). Representational and Advisory Guidance for
        Students Learning Scientific Inquiry. In K. D. Forbus & P. J. Feltovich (Eds.), Smart Machines in
        Education: The Coming Revolution in Educational Technology (pp. 7-35). Menlo Park: AAAI Press.
ten Have, P. (1999). Doing conversation analysis: A practical guide. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.
Watson,  A.,  & Mason,  J. (2005).   Mathematics   as   a   constructive  activity: Learners   generating examples.
        Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.

                                                   332  ·  © ISLS
