                                               ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 2

    Community Knowledge Advancement and Individual Learning
 Nancy Law, Johnny Yuen, Jing Leng & Wing Wong, University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam Road, Hong Kong
        Email: nlaw@hku.hk, johnny.yuen@gmail.com, lengjing2001@gmail.com, owwong@gmail.com

         Abstract: This paper reports on a preliminary attempt to examine the relationship between
         community   knowledge    advancement    and    advances   in  understanding made   by   individual
         learners based    on Popper's   (1971) Darwinian     theory   of knowledge   and  the   view  that
         theoretical, more abstract knowledge is at a higher level than specialized instances of that
         knowledge. The study is carried out using online discourse data collected over a period of
         about two weeks in the context of an international knowledge-building program.

Introduction
Knowledge building (KB) as proposed by Scardamalia and Bereiter (1999, 2003) is both a theory about how
human knowledge is created through intentional collaborative efforts of communities to extend the frontiers of
knowledge and a theory that even young children can engage in KB and that learning in schools can take place
through the process of knowledge building. This pedagogical approach directly addresses the need for education
in the knowledge society to prepare learners to contribute to knowledge creation. There has been accumulated
literature from different parts of the world that show students, including young elementary school children, can
engage in KB (Messina, Reeve, & Scardamalia, 2003; Zhang, Scardamalia, Lamon, Messina, & Reeve, 2007).
         Unlike   learning organized  in  traditional classrooms,   the   KB process  is necessarily  an  intentional
community effort, and is not possible simply as an individual enterprise. In the KB literature, priority has been
given to the description of knowledge advancement for the community and individual advancement through the
process is less discussed. On the other hand, schools as social institutions are vested with the responsibility to
ensure that individual learners achieve some baseline levels of knowledge and competence. How do individual
and collective advances in knowledge and understanding relate to each other? What is the interplay between
individual learner's changes in knowledge and understanding, and the knowledge advancement made by the
entire class of students as they engage in learning activities designed on the basis of KB pedagogical principles?
These are the questions explored in this paper. The context of this study is an international knowledge-building
project centered on the theme of the sustainability of caves involving online asynchronous work on KF as well
as face-to-face activities, including two field trips to limestone caves and experimental work on water samples
collected from the caves. The study traces the knowledge advancement of the community as a whole, as well as
those of 14 individual learners during the process.

Theoretical background
What counts as knowledge advancement? This paper takes, as its point of departure, Popper's (1971) view of
knowledge growth as a process of natural selection. According to this view, knowledge always starts from
problems, practical or theoretical ones, and grows through a process of conjectures and refutations as it proceeds
from old problems to new problems. The knowledge at any point in time may be partial or inadequate for the
problem at hand, and it grows by being corrected or modified. Popper argues that the process is one of the
natural selection of hypothesis   (authors' emphasis)      ­ only  those  hypotheses  that are   able to show  their
comparative advantage in relation to others can survive while those hypotheses proven to be "unfit" through the
process of criticism and   refutation are eliminated.   Scientific  knowledge   grows    through the  elimination of
mistaken beliefs and unfit theories by the process of scientific criticism. In this study, we identify the idea units
found in the learners' online KB discourse, examine whether we can see changes in the "population" of such
idea units over time, and whether such changes do indicate the emergence and survival of "fitter" ideas when
compared to advances as documented in the subject discipline itself. In keeping with the Darwinian evolutionary
conception, we adopt the term "meme" first coined by Richard Dawkins (1976) to refer to the idea units.
         Another idea put forward by Popper (1971) in the same work is the distinction between applied and
pure knowledge (as in `fundamental research') in terms of the structure of knowledge. The former becoming
more different and specialized as it grows while the latter grows towards increasing integration and unified
theories. A large part of the knowledge as specified in school curricula also falls into the latter category ­
focusing on understanding that can answer how and why questions in the specific disciplinary area covered.
Here, Biggs' SOLO taxonomy (Biggs & Collis, 1982) is used as an appropriate analysis scheme to discriminate
levels of increasing integration and complexity in students' understanding and presentation of a subject.

Study context
In this study, since we    are primarily  examining     the  ideas expressed  by learners  on  the online   platform
Knowledge Forum®, we will restrict our exploration of individual and collective knowledge advancement to the

                                                    326  ·  © ISLS
                                                ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 2

realm  of stateable knowledge.     The context  of  this study  is  an event titled "Tomorrow's    Innovators  2009"
(TI2009) organized as part of the Knowledge Building International Program (KBIP during which students were
to tackle the problem of the sustainability of caves). Students' work was categorized into four stages: project
kick-off, pre-field trip asynchronous discussion, field trip and final day of intensive face-to-face and online
work. For the part of this study concerned with the analysis of individual knowledge advancement, we focus on
the online work of the 14 students from Hong Kong (7 were elementary school students from grades 5 and 6,
and the remaining 7 were secondary school students from grades 8 and 9) as on average they have written more
notes, all of which were written in English. We examine the knowledge advancement students made from two
perspectives ­ the memes related to the subject matter content, in this case the sustainability of caves, and the
levels of generalization as reflections by the structure of the notes using SOLO taxonomy.

Summary of findings and discussions
In this paper we examine the knowledge advancement of the community of learners taken as a whole, as well as
a selection of individual learners as they engaged in knowledge building around the theme of sustainability of
caves. We found that at the individual level, of the 14 Hong Kong students participating in the program, 11
showed some form of advancement. The most common is the increase in meme diversity (type I), and is found
in the work of all of the 11 students who made some advancement. The other two forms are the emergence of
higher-level memes (type II) and higher levels of structure and abstraction based on SOLO taxonomy (type III).
Types II and III advancement do not appear to be hierarchically related. This way of examining knowledge
advancement systematically at the individual level has not been reported in the work on knowledge building. It
is very preliminary work and needs to be further explored, together with the collection of more information on
student background     characteristics in order  to  seek  a  better   understanding of   the conditions  that would
contribute  to individual advances,    including   characteristics  such  as students'  motivation   in  engaging  in
collaborative  inquiry activities. We  hope   that this  work  will  also stimulate debates   and discussions  on the
appropriateness of the indicators we have selected for assessing knowledge advancement, as well as viable
alternatives.
          We have also examined the population distribution of memes and the mean SOLO level of the all
students' notes written during the four stages of the TI2009 program. We find that the most "productive" period
for the community in terms of increases in the diversity and levels of memes is stage 2, when the students were
working asynchronously at their own time to look for information and discuss with each other their views. The
three days of intensive face-to-face activity have contributed to students taking up the various memes circulating
in the community and hence to the types I and II knowledge advances among individuals. However, there is no
evidence that less "fit", lower level memes have become less popular or that any of the higher level memes have
emerged as more dominant in terms of the total population of memes expressed by the students.        These findings
point to the importance of providing students with longer periods of asynchronous work for individual and
social construction  of  understanding.   Unfortunately   the face-to-face  work  of  the TI2009   program  was   not
followed  by   an online asynchronous     collaboration.  These findings   also indicate  that collective knowledge
advancement is possibly more difficult to achieve than individual advances.

References
Biggs, J. B., & Collis, K. F. (1982). Evaluating the quality of learning: The SOLO taxonomy (Structure of the
          Observed Learning Outcome). Academic Pr.
Dawkins, R. (1976). chapter 11. Memes: the new replicators The Selfish Gene: Oxford University Press.
Messina, R., Reeve, R., & Scardamalia, M. (2003). Collaborative structures supporting knowledge building:
          Grade 4. Annual meeting of the American Educational Research Association.
Popper, K. (1971). Evolution and the Tree of Knowledge Objective knowledge (2nd ed.): Oxford University
          Press, USA.
Scardamalia, M., & Bereiter, C. (1999). Schools as Knowledge Building Organizations. In D. H. Keating, C.
          (Ed.), Today's Children, Tomorrow's Society: the developmental health and wealth of nations (pp. 274-
          289). NY: Guilford.
Scardamalia, M., & Bereiter, C. (2003). Knowledge Building. In Encyclopedia of Education. NY, USA:
          Macmillan Reference.
Zhang,  J., Scardamalia,  M.,  Lamon,     M., Messina,    R., &  Reeve,   R. (2007).  Socio-cognitive   dynamics   of
          knowledge building in the work of nine- and ten-year-olds. Educational Technology Research and
          Development, 55(2), 117-145.

Acknowledgments
The authors would like to acknowledge the funding support from the IT Strategic Research Theme of University
of Hong Kong.

                                                    327  ·  © ISLS
