                                               ICLS 2010    Volume 2

              Moving Towards Learning with One-to-One Laptop:
    A Longitudinal Case Study on Tools, People, and Institutions

 Arnan Sipitakiat, Chiang Mai University, 239 Huaykaew Rd., Muang, Chiang Mai, Thailand, arnans@cm.edu

        Abstract: The purpose of this study is to investigate how new learning possibilities could take
        place in environments where students are saturated with laptops. Specifically, this work draws
        upon in situ examples collected from three schools in Thailand over a one year period to
        highlight how the schools are evolving using a theoretical framework that treats change as a
        developmental process.

Overview
This paper is a result of Thailand's first longitudinal study of learning with one-to-one laptop. We offer an
analysis of the case studies based on a theoretical framework offered by Papert and his colleagues. When
looking at how schools are embracing or resisting change, Papert sees the process as developmental. That is,
change itself is a learning process (Papert, 1997; Cavallo, 2004). Comparing this process to Piaget's notion of
assimilation and accommodation, Papert suggests that it is normal for schools to initially resist innovation by
assimilating the change into the exiting school structure (Papert, 2002). Resistance is essential for the eventual
shift to a completely different way of thinking (accommodation). Thus, it is not so important whether or not a
particular school is  doing  things "right" or "wrong".    What   really matters is that the school keeps moving
forward in the development of their thinking.
        The three schools involved in this work have used XO-1 laptops from the One Laptop per Child
(OLPC) non-profit association for the entire duration of this study. The focus of this paper is, however, to
present an analysis of learning opportunities with one-to-one computing and not on the particular benefits or
drawbacks of the XO machine offered by OLPC. The intention is to put the spot light on the people and the
institutional factors that play a significant role in  the  fate of one-to-one laptop programs  regardless of the
hardware choices.

The Pilot Schools
There were three schools involved in this work. The first site, Ban Samkha, is a small rural school while the
later two sites, Ban Sankhumpang and Tessaban-4, are large urban schools. Ban Samkha school has twenty
eight students and everyone have received a laptop. Ban Sankhumpang has received three hundred machines
and they have been given to primary students from grads one to six. Tessaban-4 has experimented with one-to-
one computing in two classes. They have forty seven laptops.
        This work follows the development of learning activities from the participating schools over the course
of one year, starting in August 2008. The data collected for this work was gathered from three main sources: my
own observation from site visits, interview sessions with teachers and students, and written documents from
student journals and teachers' monthly reports.

Case Studies

Household Accounting
In the late   1990s,  Ban  Samkha   was suffering  from   debt problems   and villagers  who cannot  manage their
finances were losing their homes. The village responded by creating a local debt-relief fund for those in trouble.
There was a condition that those who which to receive help must build up a good financial habit by keeping a
log of their income and expenses. Given that many villagers were illiterate, their children became helpful in
keeping the account book up to date (see Figure 1 left). This activity unsurprisingly led to the idea of using a
computer spreadsheet. Since the students were allowed to take the laptops home, the spreadsheet idea really
worked (Figure 1 right). Khru Srinuan, a teacher at the school, described that the parents immediately became
interested in the idea. Being able to utilize the technology at home made the activity much more personal and
lowered the existing metal barrier towards technology.

The Laptop Band
This activity involved students forming a band mixing the laptops with traditional Thai music instruments. The
idea emerged after a group of students became fascinated using the laptop to create music. A parent who is a
vocalist from a traditional Thai band saw what the students were doing and engaged them to sing along. The
group then came up with an idea that the laptops can serve as instruments in the village's band. This band (see
Figure 3) became extremely popular and they performed at many shows including a few in Bangkok.

                                                   328     ISLS
                                                  ICLS 2010    Volume 2

         Because the laptop band became rather popular, the two other schools in this pilot program took on the
idea and created their own version of the band. However, these later bands were different. The activity was
adapted from its original context of a small rural school to an urban setting with a much larger class size. The
activity was not a failure. In fact, feedback from students and teachers were highly positive. But the quality and
authenticity of the activity were different from Ban Samkha. The differences observed of the same activity in
different schools show how learning is tightly coupled to the local context at which it takes place. Such learning
activities do not transfer easily.

 Figure 1. (Left) An account book logged by students. (Center) Example of an account book created in Google
                  Docs. (Right) Students taking pictures with the laptop's built-in webcam.

Rich Media and Storytelling
Many teachers were able to utilize the fact that most students love the laptop's built-in camera to develop novel
learning activities. For example, Khru Srinuan in Ban Samkha School organized a photography fieldtrip along
the nearby mountain. The assignment was for the students to take pictures of plants or flowers that they do not
recognize in the forest as shown in Figure 1 (right). They would then show the pictures to their friends and try to
figure out what the plants are and write descriptions for others to later see. Other observed examples include
video assays showing indigenous medicine using captured video interviews, stage acting using the computer
screen for props and making sound effects, and making animated electronic cards for teachers and friends
during the New Year's celebration.

Innovation as a Developmental Process
Despite the described case studies of how one-to-one laptop can open up new learning opportunities, it has been
clear to the researcher that the schools' primary responsibility is to deliver the content defined in the national
curriculum.  Any intervention      or innovation  must  first  address how    this  ultimate responsibility can  still be
fulfilled. Curriculum mapping has been the most commonly used technique to deal with this issue. Teachers
would evaluate students' projects and map what was learned to items in the curriculum. This method satisfied
the school system while giving room for project-based activities. It is important to note that teachers do not see
this as a compromise. Instead, they usually promote this practice as a standard procedure
         We believe this situation is an example of how assimilation is taking place in the schools. Curriculum
mapping is a good example of how the new is assimilated into the old without requiring a major change to the
system's foundation.   However,     this is  a kind of assimilation   less   severe than many   other cases  where     the
innovation is transformed entirely to keep every aspect of the traditional schooling the same. The schools have
changed in many ways (i.e. long-term projects are possible), but some key aspects of traditional schooling are
still kept the same. Thus, from a Papert's perspective, these schools are well in their developmental stages. It is
essential, though, that they continue to evolve. Otherwise there is a danger of becoming too comfortable with
the current  practices that they    may  become     stuck in   an artificial stable state. For  example,    even though
curriculum-mapping allows for project-based activities, project ideas often stem from the need to cover a certain
topic in the curriculum  more      than  the students' interests. All  parties involved  must   work  together   to keep
pushing things forward in a positive direction.

References
Cavallo, D. (2004). Models of growth: towards fundamental change in learning environments, BT Technology
         Journal, 22 (4), 96-112.
Papert, S. (1997). Why School Reform Is Impossible, The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 6(4), 417-427.
Papert, S. (2002). The turtle's long slow trip: Macro-educological perspectives on microworlds. Journal of
         Educational Computing Research, 27, 7-27.

                                                      329     ISLS
