                                                  ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 2

Using      a   designed,          online        games          based      affinity      space        as    a  quasi-
natural ethnographic context and experiment lab
Constance  Steinkuehler,  Elizabeth  King,   Esra Alagoz,    Yoonsin  Oh,   Sarah  Chu, Bei Zhang,   Aysegul  Bakar,  &
Crystle Martin; UW-Madison, 225 North Mills Street, Madison WI 53706, constances@gmail.com

          Abstract: This  poster  outlines an   two-year  ethnography    of an informal  after  school lab   for
          adolescent boys using the online game World of Warcraft. The purpose of the lab was to promote
          academic  interests and  practices to participants   who   were generally  disengaged   in traditional
          school settings. A variety of data was collected including chatlogs, multimedia fieldnotes, etc. The
          data was coded and analyzed, and general findings show that academic skills were used in a non-
          academic setting.

Introduction
For the past two years, we have hosted an informal after school lab called the GLS (Games, Learning, and Society)
Casual Learning Lab on the University of Wisconsin-Madison campus for adolescent boys from local (mostly rural)
areas using the online game World of Warcraft as a vehicle for the development of pro-academic practices and
dispositions such as digital and print literacy, problem solving, and prosocial skills (Steinkuehler & King, 2009).
Twenty-two local male youth ranging in age from 12-18, six undergraduate students, and six education researchers
met regularly during the week for gaming sessions (as part of an in-game "guild") and monthly for face-to-face
Saturday pizza parties on campus over the period of eight months (two years if we include the pilot). The pilot
program ran from October 2007- May 2008, while the official program was from October 2008 ­ May 2009. The
boys chosen for participation were described as "at risk" or chronically "disengaged". This population, adolescent
boys, has been traditionally marginalized in studies and programs related to literacy (Newkirk, 2006), and have
become increasingly disengaged in school (Steinkuehler & King, 2009). At the start of the program the graduate and
undergraduate students provided mentoring and leadership for the guild; with the transfer of the leadership of the
guild occurring as the study progressed.

The goal of this program was to use the natural tendencies of online gaming communities as a way to re-engage the
academic interests of local youth who love gaming but hate school. Examples of skills that were promoted in the lab
include distributed expertise and collective intelligence (Levy, 1999).At the same time, the lab functioned as both a
quasi-naturalistic setting for ethnographic work and as a lab for conducting comparative studies of their academic
practices, performances, and attitudes in the context of school (formal learning context) versus games (informal and
unintentional learning context).

Data Collection
From this study we collected a variety of multimedia data, both in person and virtually. Data types included in-game
chatlogs, multimedia fieldnotes including screenshots of game play, interviews, forum discussions, photos, videos
and transcription, and school versus games studies data. The data because of its many faceted nature required strict
organizational rules. A naming scheme was created, as well as a folder hierarchy, while the datawas being collected
for chatlogs, fieldnotes, video,  photos,  and  study data.  Proper   naming conventions  were   essential to good  data
organization. Once the data were collected it was prepared for analysis. The fieldnotes, chatlogs, and photos were
loaded into NVIVO, qualitative data analysis software. The videos themselves were kept separate due to their size
and incompatible format with NVIVO. However, the videos and interviews were transcribed and these transcripts
were included in NVIVO for analysis. The smaller school versus games studies were also kept separate from the
main data set because they were intended to be analyzed individually. The data in NVIVO was analyzed through the
use of a priori and emergent coding. The other studies were each analyzedwith methods determined by their design.

Analytical Framework
The analytical framework developed for this data set included both a priori and emergent coding. The a priori coding
set included a total of 11 themes. These themes included argument, problem solving, reading, information literacy,
digital media  literacy, design  thinking, model-based    reasoning,   attitudes, sociocultural learning,  cross cultural
fluency, and work place literacy. With sub-themes there were a total of 48 codes that were used a priori during
analysis. This  framework     of themes   allowed  us  to   trace the development    of key practices,  capacities, and
dispositions longitudinally. Coding was undertaken in pairs with each code having two people coding to ensure

                                                      330  ·  © ISLS
                                                   ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 2

inter-coder reliability, with   an inter-coder  reliability rate of   90%  or  higher deemed  acceptable. Actual coder
agreement was 98%.

School versus games studies
There were a series of five studies conducted within the larger ethnography that were all designed to examine each
phenomena in a school versus games context. The five topics were chosen to target key domain areas. The studies
conducted included a study on the participants' epistemological beliefs, an ethical decision making study, a reading
study, an online reading comprehension study and a model-based reasoning study. A description of a sample of
these studies is presented here. The ethics study conducted supplied the participants with two hypothetical scenarios,
one being set in everyday life, the other in-game. These scenarios were designed to compare ethical decision making
of the participants in   life versus in the  game. Another    of the  studies was a reading study that was designed to
discover if the participants read at a higher level on a text that they read for interest as opposed to a standard school
text, miscue analysis    was  used in   the analysis of this  study.  Also an  online reading comprehension  study was
conducted modeled on the study by Coiro and Dobler (2007). For this study, the participants were asked to answer a
set of questions from a website about Tigers and one about Murlocs (small Non-Player Characters from World of
Warcraft). The participants were asked to think aloud and were video recorded. The data was analyzed using the
coding scheme developed by Coiro and Dobler (2007).

General Results
Figure 1 illustrates the data saturation of the aforementioned themes.     Interesting patterns have been seen in overlap
between codes such as the overlap that occurs between collaborative problem solving (which is a sub-theme of the
theme sociocultural learning) and information literacy, which illustrates that information literacy is happening as a
collaborative instead of an individual process in this virtual world. Another insight from the data was that practices
of civic engagement (which is a sub-theme of the theme attitudes) are used by the participants to establish good
practices within their guild.

                                         Figure 1: Coding Saturation for Themes

References
Coiro, J. & Dobler, E. (2007). Exploring the online reading comprehension used by sixth-grade skilled readers to
         search for and locate information on the Internet. Reading Research Quarterly,42(2), 214-257.
Levy,  P.   (1999). Collective   intelligence:  Mankind's     emerging    world in  cyberspace  (R. Bononno,  Trans.).
         Cambridge, MA: Perseus Books.
Newkirk, T. (2006). Misreading masculinity: Boys, literacy and popular culture. Protsmouth, NH: Heinemann.
Steinkuehler, C. & King, B. (2009). Digital literacies for the disengaged: Creating after school contexts tosupport
         boys' game-based literacy skills. On the Horizon, 17(1), 47-59.

                                                       331  ·  © ISLS
