                                               ICLS 2010    Volume 2

 Facilitation of reform based teacher identity development in pre-
          service teachers using post-activity reflection debriefs
        Michael Occhino, April Lynn Luehmann University of Rochester, Warner School of Education,
                               Dewey Hall, PO Box 270425, Rochester, NY 14627
                   michael.occhino@warner.rochester.edu, aluehmann@warner.rochester.edu

          Abstract: An exploratory case study approach was used to study twenty pre-service secondary
          science teachers to  learn: What impact   does    post-activity reflection debriefs have on  teacher
          identity development as a reform-minded science teacher? Analysis of debrief video and audio
          recordings revealed that debriefs provide opportunities for pre-service teachers to wrestle with
          issues related to practice and the struggle to enact the reform-based practices that they are learning
          about and believe they should implement.

Introduction
There  is significant research on the  benefits of reform-based    practices specifically defined  by the NRC     as
inquiry into authentic questions generated from student experiences (NRC,1996, pp. 32-33). Our reform-based
teacher preparation program provides several field opportunities that are designed to afford pre-service teachers
opportunities to take risks in a safe and nurturing environment, and learn from them through semi-structured
reflection events. One of the instantiated reflection events is the post-activity reflection debrief. We argue that
post-activity reflection debriefs can be an effective and integral part of a multi-pronged unified approach to
identity repair (Gee, 2003) to facilitate an identity trajectory toward more reform-minded orientations.
          There remains little evidence that reform-based practices occur in science classrooms today (Anderson,
2002). When we engage them in a reform-based teacher preparation program, the ensuing cognitive dissonance
can be difficult to overcome. Post activity reflection debriefs are a vehicle to support the necessary changes in
pre-service teacher identity toward reform-mindedness.

Literature Review and Theoretical Framework
Recent literature (Darling-Hammond & Bransford, 2005) has identified the complexity involved in adequately
preparing novice teachers to reconcile a reform-based image of instruction with personal, prior beliefs (Kagan,
1992), position themselves within a larger community of practice (Windschitl, 2002), develop confidence and
manage the emotional dimensions of personal development (Alsup, 2006), and integrate theory and practice
(Feiman-Nemser,    1990).  Program    elements identified   as successful  include coherence   between theory    and
practice, developmentally appropriate curriculum, and teacher learning situated in supportive, authentic contexts
(Darling-Hammond & Bransford, 2005) We have much to learn about the unique challenges faced by beginning
science teachers who are not only preparing to be expert practitioners but also agents of change.
          Identity theory is a powerful lens for considering pre-service teachers trajectory in their professional
development. Professional identity theory, addresses some of the unique challenges of the learning involved in
becoming a reform-minded science teacher (Luehmann, 2007) and offers a lens in which one's experiences are
considered in light of how they impact one's professional practices, values, and commitments. (Flores & Day,
2006). Professional identity development is the means by which one becomes a full participant in a community
of practice (Lave & Wenger, 1991). We have argued elsewhere (Luehmann, 2007) that this framework offers
the field of science teacher preparation two primary insights: 1) Trying on a new identity within a community of
practice (especially when it is counter to the norm) involves assuming risks; and 2) Learning as identity work
occurs in the interpretation, narration, and thus recognition of that participation (by self and others). Studying
post-activity reflection debriefs affords an opportunity for understanding how recognition events afford greater
access to identity resources so we can map trajectories of identity development.

Research Design
An exploratory case study approach was used where the unit of analysis was twenty pre-service secondary
science teachers in a teacher preparation program that foregrounds reform-based science teaching and social
justice. These pre-service teachers constitute the most recent cohort in this fifteen-month teacher preparation
program. The two research questions we posed were: What impact does post-activity reflection debriefs have on
teacher identity development as a reform-minded science teacher? What are the nature of the debriefs that
contribute to meaningful change in teacher identity? Two core field experiences for these pre-service teachers
completed thus far: 1) leading a summer science camp for urban middle school students; and 2) leading an after-
school science club for urban middle school girls (Science STARS), have afforded us the opportunity to engage
in debriefs with the pre-service teachers directly after a teaching event where semi-structured debriefs were
employed as a routine. There were five days of the summer camp and ten days of Science STARS. The debriefs
all use a "plusses and arrows" format whereby participants record plusses - elements of the lesson that went well

                                                   332     ISLS
                                                 ICLS 2010     Volume 2

- and arrows - elements that can be improved or suggestions for improvement. These are generated in small
group (including faculty) then shared with the large group.
           The primary data sources for this study were video of summer camp debriefs and video and audio
recordings of STARS debriefs. Secondary sources facilitated triangulation and included personal professional
blogs  that  pre-service  teachers keep   for  the entire   fifteen-month  program    and   semi-structured     interviews
targeting inquiry-based science teaching and social justice. Transcripts of debriefs were coded independently by
two researchers with respect to: 1) the focus of the plusses and arrows; 2) the type of recognition; 3) statements
of understanding of, appreciation for, commitment to, or confidence in using inquiry; 4) specialist language
usage related to inquiry or reform-based science teaching or social justice. Blogs that correlated to these debriefs
were  analyzed    for any  carryover  of these  into public    spaces and  what   shifts in perspective    and  stories or
reporting occur. Due to this approach, two illustrative cases emerged and were explored in more detail.

Results
Our analyses revealed that the debriefs provide opportunities for pre-service teachers to wrestle with issues
related to practice and the struggle to enact the reform-based practices that they are learning about and believe
they should implement. The major issues raised in debriefs are: making learning engaging to students, moving
away from teacher-centered lessons to student-centered lessons, scaffolding inquiry as a process to get students
to design and carry out their own investigations. The activity structure of debriefs creates a bidirectionality
between partner and group such that participants are not an island, can support each other in their quests for
improvement as they articulate their struggles, tensions and dilemmas. Acknowledgement of things done well,
recognition by self and others fosters a greater sense of commitment to a common purpose. The power of the
debriefs in fostering safe exploration of reform-based identity is evident in the perceived failures that are coaxed
into being true arrows and mechanisms for change; Reflection to move forward and continue desirable practices
and change out-of-line practices into in-line practices within the tenets of reform-based science teaching that
we, as a group, care about.

Discussion & Implications
Plusses and arrows facilitate recognition and enticement to change the pre-service teachers outlook and practice
of what they do to purposefully become more reform-minded. Debriefs serve to establish an equilibrium toward
greater congruency of who the pre-service science teachers are and who they want to be. These debriefs serve as
a strong pathway to change teacher identity toward a more reform-minded path. Giving pre-service teachers
access to a variety of supports for interpretation and recognition is essential to supporting professional teacher
learning with reform-based teaching.
References
Alsup,  J.  (2006).   Teacher identity discourses:   Negotiating  personal   and  professional     spaces. Mahway,   NJ,
           Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc.
Anderson, R. D. (2002). "Reforming science teaching: What research says about inquiry." Journal of Science
           Teacher Education 13(1): 1-12.
Darling-Hammond,       L. and  K.  Hammerness      (2005).  The  design   of teacher  education     programs.   Preparing
           teachers for a changing world: What teachers should learn and be able to do. L. Darling-Hammond and
           J. Bransford. San Francisco, Jossey-Bass.
Feiman-Nemser, S. (1990). Teacher preparation: Structural and conceptual analysis. Handbook of research on
           teacher education. W. R. Houson, M. Haberman and J. P. Sikula. New York, Macmillan: 212-233.
Flores, M.   A.,  &   Day, C.  (2006).   "Contexts   which  shape   and  reshape  new    teachers'  identities: A  multi-
           perspective study." Teaching and Teacher Education 22: 219-232.
Gee,  J.P., (2003).   What  video  games   have  to  teach  us  about    learning and    literacy. New  York:   Palgrave
           Macmillan
Kagan, D. (1992). "Professional growth among preservice and beginning teachers." Review of Educational
           Research 62(2): 129-169.
Lave,   J. and    E. Wenger   (1991).  Situated  learning:  Legitimate    peripheral  participation.   Cambridge,   UK,
           Cambridge University Press.
Luehmann (2007). Identity Development as a Lens to Science Teacher Preparation. Science Education, 91 (5),
           822-839.
National Research Council (1996). National science education standards. Washington D.C., National Academy
           Press.
Windschitl, M. (2002). "Framing constructivism in practice as the negotiation of dilemmas: An analysis of the
           conceptual,  pedagogical,  cultural and   political challenges  facing  teachers." Review    of   Educational
           Research 72(2): 131-175.

                                                     333     ISLS
