                                                  ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 2

    Designing Environments to Encourage Collaborative Creativity:
                           Two Case Studies in Higher Education
          Abstract: Collaborative creativity often is lacking in university learning, despite its relevance
          to the  21st Century  workplace.   We    describe  two   case studies  of designed   environments    to
          teach collaborative creativity, along with the successes and challenges that we found in each
          approach.    Overall, we   found   both environments,    though   different, to   foster collaborative
          creativity, while there are still areas for improved instruction.

Teaching Collaborative Creativity to University Students
There  is  a modern    emphasis    on creativity--evidenced     in part by  a  68.3%   increase    in  the level of  patent
applications from 1996-2001--that has led our emerging society to be called the "creative economy" (Banahan
& Playfoot, 2004) where creative skills are critical to job and business success (Ogunleye, 2006). There is an
additional emphasis on collaboration in the creative process, as this is the "secret to breakthrough creativity"
and "group genius" (Sawyer, 2008, p. 3). Some researchers have found that collaborative creativity can be
effectively  taught   in higher  education.   For  example,    Hokanson   (2006)    found   that  students  who    received
creativity instruction improved their creative thinking. Ginamarie, Leritz, and Mumford (2004) reported in their
meta-analysis that well-designed creativity programs produced performance gains. Driver (2001) argued that
creativity  education    could  be effectively   integrated  into  business education.    Finally,    Cole, Sugioka,   and
Yamagata-Lynch (1999) found that supportive classroom environments promoted more creativity in higher
education. However, higher education systems still often lack quality instruction in collaborative creativity.
Ramocki    (1994)   argued, "we    must   be concerned    with  how   creativity   operates within    groups" (p.  17) but
lamented that marketing education has neglected the teaching of essential group creative skills.

Research Questions and Methods
The purpose of this research agenda was to analyze two examples of how collaborative creativity might be
taught in higher education. Specifically, the research questions for this study were:
    1.    How    well  did  each   instructional  experience   assist students   in  learning  to  develop   collaborative
          creativity?
    2.    What   shared   principles  might  be  extracted  from   both contexts   to inform   the  effective teaching  of
          collaborative creativity in higher education?

Research Design and Participants
This study compared two case studies from two different settings. The first setting was a Design Studio for
graduate-level instructional designers, occurring winter semester 2009. This Studio consisted of three courses
with high levels of student collaboration within and between the different courses. Students were directly taught
creativity principles during one class period, and then implicitly encouraged to be creative through faculty
mentoring and the open and shared nature of the Studio community and class assignments. Four participants
were  selected   as representative   case  studies from    the  Studio  setting. The   second  research    setting was  an
Innovation   Boot   Camp    for technology    and  engineering     undergraduate    students. The   Boot    Camp   was  an
intensive one-week experience where students from different departments were explicitly taught group problem
finding, brainstorming, convergent thinking, prototyping, and other activities key to group innovation as they
developed solutions to problems they identified in their community. This camp was repeated once a month over
two semesters with 10-30 new students each time.

Data Collection
A combination of methods were used to explore the nature of the collaborative creativity process within the
Studio   community.    In  studying   the Studio,  we followed     Seidman's    (2006) strategy    for phenomenological
interviewing, except for one modification. In Seidman's process, the first interview is designed to understand
the participant's background relevant to the experience at hand; the second interview asks for specific details
about the experience itself, and in the third interview the participant and researcher co-interpret the significance
and meaning of the experience. We conducted the first and third interviews, and in lieu of Seidman's second
interview,   we  collected  weekly   5-10  minute  voice   memos     from the   four  participants.   This  provided more
specific  details of   how  their  ideas  developed   through   weekly   group     collaboration.  This information    was
triangulated with an analysis of the students' weekly design journals and through first-hand observation.
          In studying the Boot Camp, we observed and video-recorded several of the groups in each iteration.
We also collected pre- and post-participation survey data about their learning outcomes and the emergence of
creativity and community-related elements in their groups. Survey items related to creativity were drawn from
the literature  and  an   innovation  process   developed    by the   instructors.  Items related   to the  emergence   of

                                                      336  ·  © ISLS
                                                ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 2

community were drawn from Rovai's (2002) Sense of Community scale and Anderson and West's (1996)
innovation climate instrument.

Data Analysis Methods and Rigor Guidelines
Qualitative data were analyzed using constant comparison coding techniques for forming categories and theories
derived from categories. Trustworthiness was developed through member checking case study reports with the
participants, asking independent coders to analyze uncoded portions of the data to confirm emerging themes,
peer review of the theoretical and methodological frameworks, and the use of multiple data sources.

Findings
Several positive outcomes were found in the design of the Studio. Students reported a high sense of community
(50 comments), and collaboration (173 coded comments). The students also reported that a high percentage of
their creative  ideas  coming   through  interactions   with  other people  (78%   of total new    ideas  identified).
Interestingly, the students reported learning not only from being critiqued by their peers but in giving critiques
and assistance as well. While this data indicated some success in fostering collaborative creativity, challenges
from the Studio setting included an overt focus on task completion and grades rather than creativity, a lack of
time  and  prerequisite  skills for developing  and   implementing     ideas, and  superficial  collaboration in  the
community at large (outside of a tight peer group).
          From the surveys about the Boot Camp, we discovered several positive outcomes. These surveys were
reported on a 7-point rating scale, with 7 representing the strongest level of agreement. Students reported high
levels of community within their groups (5.5 average), innovation team climate (5.6) and a perception that the
Boot Camp successfully taught them principles of creative thinking (5.8). We are currently analyzing the video
and observational data to understand why these trends existed in the survey data, as well as to better understand
the process of idea generation and development within the groups of the Boot Camp.

Implications for Creativity Instruction in Higher Education
As Greeno (1997) said, we need to understand "which combinations and sequences of learning activities will
prepare students best for the kinds of participation in social practices that we value most" (p. 9). Because
collaborative creativity is crucial to our students' success in the workforce, understanding how collaborative
creativity can be successfully fostered in successful higher education experiences is critical.

References
Anderson,  N.,  &  West,    M.  A.  (1996). The  Team      Climate  Inventory:   Development    of the TCI    and its
          Applications  in Teambuilding   for  Innovativeness.     European   Journal of Work      & Organizational
          Psychology, 5(1), 53.
Banahan,   E., &  Playfoot,  J.  (2004). Socio-organisational    challenges   in the  creative economy.    In L.  M.
          Camarinha-Matos    &   H.  Afsarmanesh (Eds.),      Collaborative networked  organizations:    A research
          agenda for emerging business models. Boston: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Cole,  D. G.,  Sugioka,  H. L.,  and Yamagata-Lynch,       L. C. (1999). Supportive   Classroom    Environments   for
          Creativity in Higher Education. Journal of Creative Behavior, 33(4): 277-93.
Driver, M. (2001). Fostering creativity in business education: developing creative classroom environments to
          provide students with critical workplace competencies. Journal of Education for Business, 77(1), 28-
          33.
Ginamarie, S., Leritz, L. E., & Mumford, M. D. (2004). The effectiveness of creativity training: A quantitative
          review. Creativity Research Journal, 16(4), 361­388.
Greeno, J. G. (1997). Response: On claims that answer the wrong questions. Educational Researcher, 26(1), 5-
          17.
Hokanson, B. (2006). Creativity in the design curriculum. Journal of Visual Literacy, 26(1), 41-52.
Ogunleye, J. (2006). A review and analysis of assessment objectives of academic and vocational qualifications
          in English further education, with particular reference to creativity. Journal of Education & Work,
          19(1), 95-104.
Ramocki, S. P. (1994). It is time to teach creativity throughout the Marketing Curriculum. Journal of Marketing
          Education, 16(2), 15-25.
Rovai,  A. P.  (2002).  Development   of an  instrument    to measure   classroom  community.    Internet &   Higher
          Education, 5(3), 197.
Sawyer, R. K. (2008). Group genius: The creative power of collaboration. Cambridge:
          Perseus Books Group.
Seidman, I. (2006). Interviewing as qualitative research: A guide for researchers in education and the social
          sciences (3rd ed., p. 162). New York: Teachers College Press.

                                                    337  ·  © ISLS
