                                               ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 2

        Teachers' Understanding of Partitioning When Modeling
                                        Fraction Arithmetic

Chandra Hawley Orrill, University of Georgia, LPSL ­ 611 Aderhold Hall, Athens, GA 30602, corrill@uga.edu
  Andrew Izsák, San Diego State University, Dept. of Mathematics & Statistics, 5500 Campanile Drive, San
                                Diego, CA    92182, aizsak@sciences.sdsu.edu
    Erik Jacobson, Zandra de Araujo, University of Georgia, LPSL ­ 611 Aderhold Hall, Athens, GA 30602
                             Email: erikdjacobson@gmail.com, dearaujo@uga.edu

        Abstract: We analyze how middle grades teachers in a professional development program
        reasoned about fraction arithmetic using length and area models. We discovered that teachers'
        abilities to partition length and area quantities were critical. In particular, we focus on ways
        that teachers'  used  multiplication factor/product    relationships, distributive reasoning, and
        levels of units. Our findings contribute to the learning sciences' growing understanding of
        what teachers must know in order to use drawn representations effectively in instruction.

Theoretical Issue & Significance
External representations are important for organizing, recording, and communicating relationships in both
mathematics (NCTM, 2000) and science (National Research Council, 1996). Given this importance, it is natural
that representations would hold an important place in discussion of teacher knowledge. When introducing the
construct of pedagogical content knowledge, Shulman (1986) emphasized knowledge of students' thinking
about particular topics, typical difficulties that students have, and representations that make mathematical ideas
accessible to students. More recently, Ball and colleagues (e.g., Ball, Thames, & Phelps, 2008) have developed
the notion of mathematical knowledge for teaching (MKT) that refines Shulman's categories. MKT emphasizes
the mathematics that teachers use to accomplish tasks central to their practice­­for instance, using curricular
materials judiciously, choosing and using representations, skillfully interpreting and responding to students'
work, and designing assessments. Clearly, using representations is important for teachers.
        Despite scholars' acceptance of the importance of PCK and the inclusion of external representations in
theoretical perspectives on teacher knowledge, educational researchers do not know much about what teachers
can do with drawn representations of problem situations and what they need to learn in order to use drawn
representations effectively in instruction. The present study examines the knowledge that teachers need for
reasoning about fraction arithmetic with drawn models. Fractions are an essential foundation for the study of
algebra and functions that are used widely in mathematics and the sciences.
        Research on teachers' knowledge of fractions for teaching has concentrated on fraction division. One
finding that cuts across studies is that teachers can confuse situations that call for dividing by a fraction with
ones that call for dividing by a whole number or multiplying by a fraction (e.g., Ball, 1990; Ma, 1999). Ma not
only reported such constraints but also began to unpack PCK by indentifying knowledge packages that consist
of numerous subtopics that are connected to one another and that support the teaching of a larger topic. To
illustrate with the example most relevant to the present study, Ma described a knowledge package for fraction
division in terms of the meanings of addition, multiplication, and division with whole numbers; the concepts of
inverse operation, fraction, and unit; and the meaning of multiplication with fractions (p. 77). Other researchers
(e.g., Behr, Khoury, Harel, Post, & Lesh, 1997; Izsák, 2008) have focused on the conceptual units that teachers
form when using drawn models and manipulatives to reason about fraction arithmetic. This requires a more
fine-grained perspective on knowledge than the subtopics Ma used to describe knowledge packages. In the
present study, we extend this more fine-grained work by considering the knowledge teachers need to partition
(e.g., subdivide) quantities when reasoning about fraction arithmetic. Understanding the fine-grained knowledge
required to use drawn representations in instruction can inform more effective learning experiences for teachers.

Methodological Approach
We collected data for this study during a 15-week professional development course on fractions, decimals, and
proportions offered to 14 middle grades teachers. The course emphasized solving problems in small groups and
comparing solutions during whole-class discussions. Using drawn representations (e.g., number line and area
models) to  solve  fractions problems   was  a central    theme   for the course. Software   that allowed  flexible
manipulative of area models was often used by the teachers to support their reasoning. The teachers came from
one large, urban   school district. The course  met    once  a week,   and  each  session  lasted three hours.  We
videotaped all sessions using  two   video cameras,    one  to capture  the participants and  one  to capture  their
inscriptions. We analyzed the videos to identify the key mathematical challenges that teachers encountered.
Through this analysis we discovered that teachers often have trouble partitioning quantities in ways that lead to
problem solutions.

                                                   338  ·  © ISLS
                                                ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 2

Findings, Conclusions, & Implications
We found that teachers' abilities to partition quantities were critical to their success in reasoning with drawn
representations of fraction arithmetic. Specifically, we identified three aspects of partitioning that mattered.
First, teachers' ability to anticipate factor/product pairs was vital. Teachers who did not invoke this whole-
number knowledge were unable to anticipate how they might use subdivisions on a number line or in an area
model. To illustrate, if a number line was partitioned into thirds and teachers needed to find fourths, many
teachers did not understand that partitioning into 12ths would show thirds and fourths at the same time.
         Second,   teachers varied  in their abilities  to  think   about   partitions distributively. In one   example,
teachers were asked to share two candy bars evenly between five people. The teachers partitioned each candy
bar into five pieces but struggled with the question of how much of one candy bar each person got. They
determined that two people got 2/5 of one bar, two people got 2/5 of the second bar, and the fifth person got 1/5
from each bar. The teachers recognized that 2/5 and 1/5 + 1/5 were the same numerically, but about half the
class was unable to reconcile that getting 2/5 of one bar or 1/5 from each bar were the same.
         Third, we noted that the teachers often resisted thinking in terms of nested levels of units. Research on
students' multiplicative reasoning (e.g., Steffe, 1994), which includes fractions, has indentified nested levels of
units as essential and  challenging    for students. To     illustrate, one  teacher   was trying  to  use   drawings to
demonstrate why 2/3 ÷ 1/4 = 8/3. She drew a rectangle, partitioned it into thirds, and shaded two of the thirds.
She then discarded one of the thirds and explained that the problem only asked about 2/3. She divided each of
the remaining thirds into four pieces and said that these eight pieces corresponded to the numerator in the
numerical answer and that the thirds gave the denominator in the answer. Her interpretation of fourths in this
answer was incorrect, and a fundamental difficulty appeared to be that she did not maintain correct relationships
among fourths, nested in thirds, nested in the whole. (A correct explanation would describe 8/3 and the number
of fourths that are in 2/3.) More generally, teachers who simplified tasks by ignoring "missing" parts struggled
to make sense of their answers because they had eliminated the units to which the answers referred.
         Our  findings  suggest that teachers  need    to   develop a   set of  understandings  related   to partitioning
quantities if they are  to  reason with drawn   representations     of  fraction arithmetic  effectively.  Furthermore,
teachers must be able to reason with drawn representations for themselves before they can use similar drawings
in instruction. More   generally,  although  researchers    have  investigated   teachers'  understanding    of fraction
arithmetic, most studies have not examined teachers' knowledge at a sufficiently fine grain-size to specify with
precision what teachers must know in order to use representations in instruction. By uncovering the knowledge
teachers need to use to interpret and reason with representations and drawings, we will be better able to provide
the professional learning opportunities necessary to support teachers.

References
Ball, D. L.   (1990). Prospective  elementary  and   secondary    teachers'   understanding  of    division. Journal  for
         Research in Mathematics Education, 21(2), 132-144.
Ball, D. L., Thames, M. H., & Phelps, G. (2008). Content knowledge for teaching: What makes it special?
         Journal of Teacher Education, 59(5), 389-407.
Behr, M., Khoury, H., Harel, G., Post, T., & Lesh, R. (1997). Conceptual units analysis of preservice elementary
         school teachers' strategies on a rational-number-as-operator task. Journal for Research in Mathematics
         Education, 28(1), 48-69.
Izsák, A. (2008). Mathematical knowledge for teaching fraction multiplication. Cognition and Instruction, 26,
         95-143.
Ma, L. (1999). Knowing and teaching elementary mathematics: Teachers' understanding of fundamental
         mathematics in China and the United States. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
National Council of Teachers of Mathematics (2000). Principles and standards for school mathematics. Reston,
         VA: Author.
National Research Council (1996). National science education standards. Washington, DC: Author.
Shulman, L. S. (1986). Those who understand: Knowledge growth in teaching. Educational Researcher, 15(2),
         4-14.
Steffe, L. (1994).  Children's  multiplying  schemes.     In  G.  Harel   &  J. Confrey    (Eds.), The  development   of
         multiplicative reasoning in the learning of mathematics (pp. 3-39). Albany: State University of New
         York Press.

Acknowledgments
The work reported here was supported by the National Science Foundation under grant number REC-0633975.
The results reported here are the opinions of the authors and may not reflect those of the NSF. Chandra Orrill
can be reached at University of Massachusetts Dartmouth, Kaput Center for Design & Innovation in STEM
Education, 200 Mill Rd, Suite 150B, Fairhaven, MA 02719, corrill@umassd.edu.

                                                    339   ·  © ISLS
