                                               ICLS 2010     Volume 2

          Putting the pieces together: The challenge and value of
   synthesizing disparate graphs in inquiry-based science learning

                 Itay Asher, Ben Gurion University of the Negev, Israel, asher.itay@gmail.com
                       Samira Nasser, Beit Berl College, Israel, nassersamira@yahoo.com
                   Lina Ganaim, Al-Qasemi High school, Israel, lena_gnaim@hotmail.com
                   Iris Tabak, , Ben Gurion University of the Negev, Israel, itabak@bgu.ac.il

         Abstract: A   comparative    synthesis  of multiple  graphs   is  a common     practice in  scientists'
         work as well as in everyday contexts. We refer to this process as graph meta-analysis. We
         present findings   from a  classroom    enactment    in  which cultivating    students'  graph  meta-
         analysis skills was one aspect of fostering scientific literacy through an inquiry-based unit on
         socio-scientific dilemmas. We highlight the challenges that learners and teachers encountered,
         and their implications for future instruction and design.

Scientists conducting a literature review or citizens searching the web often encounter the same conundrum:
making sense of an abundance of sources, each of which provides only a partial answer to the search question.
In many cases, these may even be contradictory answers. This creates a need to synthesize and compare the
different sources. Research articles that deal with similar questions often test different variables, operationalize
the same variables in different ways, use different experimental manipulations or sample different populations.
A  simple comparison    or aggregation   of  the information  can  yield  erroneous    conclusions.   Therefore,  special
meta-analytic steps need to be taken to juxtapose and synthesize the information, such as using effect size to
normalize findings to a common scale. This can be a complex and demanding process.
         We have chosen to address this issue in the context of graph comprehension (Bertin, 1983). Graphs are
central communication    devices   in   most  empirical  reports,  especially    in science.   Not  surprisingly,  graph
interpretation and production    skills are  emphasized in    national  science   standards   (NRC,   1996).    However,
several studies  have  shown  that full  competence   in reading   and  producing     graphs  is not  achieved   even   by
college and university graduates (Bowen, Roth, & McGinn, 1999; Leinhardt, Zaslavsky, & Stein, 1990). Bowen
and Roth (2005) found that pre-service teachers, most of whom had a BSc degree, lacked basic skills in graph
interpretation, and reached the sad conclusion that "preservice teachers do not seem to be ready to teach data
collection and analysis in the way suggested by reform documents." These findings highlighted the need for
concerted instructional attention on graphic literacy skills (di Sessa et al., 1991; Shah & Hoeffner, 2002). If
making sense of a single graph is a difficult task,then having to glean information from a comparative synthesis
of multiple graphs  is even  more   challenging.   This activity,  which   we   refer  to as  graph  meta-analysis, is   a
common feature in the work of scientists (and other professionals) when they analyze their own data or when
they review data published by others. A similar challenge is faced by citizens who encounter graphs when they
make  decisions  about  science-related  issues  based  on   information   that  they  garner  from   news   reports, web
searches or other similar sources.
         We examined the ways in which 10th grade students (N= 35) and their teacher (in a pilot study) tried to
contend with a graph synthesis task. The students compared drug effectiveness studies for four pharmacological
smoking cessation treatments in order to recommend the best treatment for a particular case. This activity was
part of a broader research project ("CoReflect") that aims to cultivate scientific literacy among European youth
by having   them  produce   evidence-based    decisions,   explanations   and   recommendations      on socio-scientific
dilemmas. The project uses web-based inquiry environments, one of which was developed by the authors and
concerns nicotine addiction.
         The specific inquiry task on which we focus required the students, who worked in pairs, to extract data
from two  graphs  (one  bar graph  and   one  line graph)  in order to  rank  the   4 treatments by   their  success rate,
defined as  abstinence  from smoking.    The  graphs  were    modified  from    recent published   articles. Each  graph
contained data from a different clinical study, in which only 2 or 3 treatments were compared, in addition to a
placebo  control group, but  none  of   the graphs  contained  data concerning    all  4  treatments. This   is typical of
clinical studies (and applied science in general), because very few studies compare all available treatments and
the overall ranking of treatments requires a process of meta-analysis, involving measures of effect size. Another
feature of  the  meta-analytic   process    represented in   this task  is   the need     to handle   variability in    the
operationalization of the same variable, mainly, one study defined abstinence as refraining from smoking since
the inception of the study, while the other defined it as refraining from smoking over the past seven days. We
recorded the responses of the students to these graphs in the form of computerized worksheets ("templates"). In
addition, we used audio recordings to document discussions between the teacher and student pairs, as well as
whole-class discussions. These recordings were consulted in combination with retrospective reflections of the
teacher in order to identify points of impasse and progress on the part of the students.

                                                    340     ISLS
                                                 ICLS 2010         Volume 2

Preliminary findings
Not  surprisingly,    the students   found  the overall  investigation    very    challenging and  even  frustrating. Their
science  studies   to date did   not prepare  them   to deal    with the  demands   of complex    graph  interpretation and
synthesis. Some students were completely helpless,and did not make any progress prior to teacher intervention.
Others seemed oblivious to the fact that the two studies used different operational definitions for abstinence.
Therefore, they simply used raw data (percentages) in order to rank the treatments. . The teacher tried to raise
students' awareness of these issues through discussions with individual groups while they were workingon their
investigation,    and through    the asynchronous    feedback      notes that attach  to the  students'  workspace.  These
mediations were not enough, so the teacher also held an impromptu whole class discussion that delved deeper
into these issues. Obviously, the challenge for students became a challenge for the teacher, who played a central
role in  providing    guidance   (Tabak,   2004)  that  was     not  provided  by  the   computerized   environment.    This
challenge is amplified in settings where students work in small groups, each of which faces different obstacles
in different time points.
           Some of the specific challenges faced by students include:
1. Merging data from different graph types. Similar data (independent variables: time, treatment type; dependent
variable: abstinence rate) were presented using a bar graph and a line graph, making the synthesis even more
difficult.
2. Focusing on specific features of data in the line graph. In this task, abstinence rates were plotted as a function
of time using multiple lines of different colors. One of the challenges was to differentially focus on the latest
time points depicted, in order to discern long-term abstinence. The second challenge had to do with noting and
understanding that two lines crossing each other means that one treatment is superior in the short run and the
other in the long run.
3. Understanding      the implication   of different operationalizations      for the same   variable. Students  needed   to
realize that "raw" success rates could not be used to merge the findings from the two studies, becauseone used a
much stricter criterion to consider a participant as abstaining from cigarette smoking.
4. Understanding the need to consider effect size. The data in the graph showed that one treatment was the best
in both  studies   and therefore   should  be ranked    first   of the four.  However,   identifying the 2nd,   3rd and  4th
treatments required students to estimate the effect size of each treatment, using the data from the control groups.

Conclusions and implications
We realized that answering inquiry questions through a synthesis of existing disparate sources of information,
especially scientific research reports, relies on a better understanding of the nature of experimentation, and on
specific   synthesis  strategies as  we described   above.    This  informed   some   redesign  decisions  that include: (a)
replacing the bar graph with a second line graph, thus ameliorating the cognitive load on students (see point 1
above); (b) adding prompting questions and hints in the text that accompanies the graphs and adding "synthesis
templates" in the students' computerized workspace. These additions focus students on key issues and structure
the synthesis process, and are aimed to reduce the load on the teacher as an agent of scaffolding. In fact, the
added text was based on stimulating questions asked by the teacher (in class or using the feedback notes); (c)
adding an introductory class on placebo effects and control groups in clinical trials. This class introduced the
importance of the use of control group data in order estimate effect size. The efficacy of this redesign is to be
tested  in  a second   enactment,    conducted   in  the same school.      Our    hope is that  this work   will yield   key
instructional strategies for supporting the critical, but neglected skill of graph meta-analysis.

References
Bertin, J. (1983). In Berg, W. (trans.), Semiology of Graphics: Diagrams, Networks, Maps, The University of
           Wisconsin Press, Madison, WI.
Bowen,     G. M.,  &   Roth,   W.  M.  (2005).  Data    and   graph  interpretation   practices among   preservice  science
           teachers. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 42, 1063-1088.
Bowen, G. M., Roth, W. M., & McGinn, M. K. (1999). Interpretations of graphs by university biology students
           and practicing scientists: Toward a social practice view of scientific representation practices. Journal of
           Research in Science Teaching, 36(9), 1020-1043.
diSessa, A.A., Hammer, D., Sherin, B., & Kolpakowski, T. (1991). Inventing graphing: Meta representational
           expertise in children. Journal of Mathmatical Behaviour, 10, 117-60.
Leinhardt,    G., Zaslavsky,   O., &  Stein, M.  K.  (1990).    Functions,    graphs, and graphing:    Tasks, learning, and
           teaching. Review of Educational Research, 60(1), 1-64.
NRC. (1996). National science education standards. Washington, DC: National Research Council.
Shah,  P.,  &  Hoeffner,    J. (2002).  Review    of  graph     comprehension     research:   Implications for  instruction.
           Educational Psychology Review, 14, 47-69.
Tabak,   I. (2004).   Synergy:   A   Complement   to  Emerging Patterns       of  Distributed Scaffolding. Journal   of  the
           Learning Sciences, 13(3), 305-335.

                                                      341        ISLS
