                                                ICLS 2010  ·   Volume 1

Distributed Creativity Within a Community of Student Instructional
                                                  Designers

          Abstract:   This  study   explored  the    development     of  a  Communities     of   Innovation
          (COI)  framework      for  understanding    distributed   creativity within  a    community     of
          graduate student instructional designers. After presenting distributed creativity as a
          theory  of    collaborative   creativity based     on  established   principles   of   distributed
          cognition,    I present   the  Communities       of  Innovation    framework      as a  potential
          representation     of   distributed     creativity.    I   then   discuss    a    study    where
          phenomenological      interviewing    (Seidman,     2006)  and    Critical Incident    Technique
          (Flanagan,    1952),   were   used to    explore   the   experiences   of  four   members   of  a
          graduate    community     of designers   with   many     characteristics  emblematic    of COIs.
          Findings included evidence for the inclusion of some aspects of the proposed COI
          framework. In addition, I identify challenges and recommendations to establishing a
          COI within a graduate educational setting and possible new directions for research
          using a variety of different methods to better understand the nature of COIs and how
          to effectively develop them.

Understanding Distributed Creativity
Creativity research has often replicated and adapted the theoretical frameworks and research methodologies of
cognitive science. For example, creativity researchers have drawn on cognitive principles such as knowledge
and memory structures, representations, interference, and so on (for example, see Smith, Ward, & Finke, 1995)
in an effort to try and understand the nature of human creativity. However, when cognitive scientists began
exploring the potential distribution of cognition across multiple people, creativity researchers largely remained
behind. While some writers explored the relationship between individual creativity and the overall system
(Csikszentmihalyi, 1999) or the group or workplace climate (Amabile, Conti, Coon, Lazenby, & Herron, 1996;
Anderson & West, 1996), few have studied the creative process in distributive terms. More recently, there has
been a stronger   emphasis    on group,  or  collaborative,   creativity--a trend  offering great promise   for traits
increasingly valued in our society (West, 2009).
          In this paper presentation, I first discuss key principles necessary for understanding the theory of
distributed cognition. I then extend Sawyer and DeZutter's (2009) application of these principles to the concept
of distributed creativity and discuss the Communities of Innovation framework as an example of distributed
creativity.  Finally, I discuss findings from   a  study  of a community    of student designers   where  distributed
creativity was theorized to occur. I conclude with implications from this research for the design and research of
distributed creativity within student communities.

Distributed Cognition
Distributed Cognition theories emerged in the 1990s as companions to situated cognition theories, and in fact
bear many similar definitions, constructs, and theoretical foundations (Moore & Rocklin, 1998). Researchers
developed this theory as an alternative to traditional information processing models of cognition, which often
neglected the impact of social variables, by integrating ideas from anthropology, social psychology, sociology
and the Russian cultural-historical school of psychology (Cole & Engestrom, 1993). Salomon (1993) believed
there were three reasons for the development of distributed cognition theories: 1) the increasingly important role
of technology for intellectual tasks--something that has grown exponentially true since Salomon's original
essay, 2) the re-emphasis on Russian cultural-historical theories, and 3) dissatisfaction with the limitations from
conceiving of cognition as bounded within individuals.
          In the past   two decades  of  theoretical and   research-based   work  on distributed  cognition  theories,
different conceptualizations    have   emerged. For   example,   Hutchins   (1995)   wrote  that socially distributed
cognition has a parallelism that can't be found in individual processing because multiple complex tasks can be
simultaneously completed within a system, but not within an individual. Second, tools (including language)
always mediate communication between persons in a system, and this creates a problem of the "bandwidth of
communication" (p. 284) between members of the system. Hutchins gave the example of a complex navigation
system that had some cognitive processes held interpsychologically between the system members that could
"never be internalized by a single individual" (P. 284). Hutchins believed that "all divisions of labor, whether
the labor is physical or cognitive in nature, require distributed cognition in order to coordinate the activities of
the participants" (p. 176). Nardi (1996) added the understanding of "functional systems" to redirect analysis to

                                                    341  ·   © ISLS
                                                  ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

the systems level, or the level of individuals and artifacts, and the coordination between these two. He explained
that distributed cognition focused on structure, or representations, both inside and outside a person's individual
cognition. Another way of conceptualizing distributed cognition might be through the kinds of interactions used
to distribute the processing. For example, Hwang, Hsu, Tretiakov, Chou, and Lee (2009) explored the roles of
interaction (productive collaboration), overaction (social, off-task, but necessary conversation between people),
and intra-action (distributing thinking within one person through note taking, tool use, etc.). They found that
intra-action had the strongest relationship with learning outcomes, suggesting the particularly important role that
tools and non-human systems can play in cognition.
          Moore and Rocklin (1998) summarized distributed cognition as representing two different frameworks.
The first, "individual-plus," conceives of cognition as primarily residing within individuals but influenced by,
and occasionally    distributed   among,  the   interacting   social   and artifact (tools) systems.    Moore     &  Rocklin
explained that this perspective conceptualizes cognitions as "divided among an individual, objects, and other
people" (p. 107).
          A second framework described by Moore and Rocklin (1998) is that of the "social-only" perspective,
which conceives of cognition as so thoroughly distributed that one cannot speak of cognition as an individual
process because     it resides within    the group. This   brings    a realization  that  "not  only   do  social and  other
situational factors    have an    impact on   cognitions  that  occur   in  one's   mind, but   that   the social processes
themselves should be considered cognitions (Greenberg & Dicketman, 2002, p. 19, emphasis in original). Cole
and Engeström (1993) expanded this framework with a description of Activity Theory, emphasizing cognition
and problem solving as occurring through the interactions between individuals, the environment, and the tools
or artifacts (conceptual and physical) of the environment. From this view, the "natural unit of analysis for the
study of human behavior is activity systems" (p. 9)--or in other words, the study of cognition within social
contexts. Thus, when discussing distributed cognition, there are various interpretations of how distributed the
cognitive processes must be, leaving room for additional research and clarification.

Theoretical Application to Distributed Creativity
Traditionally, the   psychological   study   of creativity  focused    on  individual  perspectives,   taking its cue   from
information processing cognition models (Mandler, 1995). A trend towards representing individual creativity
with cognitive terms and models has also gained support (Smith, Ward, & Finke, 1995; Ward, Smith, & Finke,
1999). However, beginning in the late 1980s and 1990s, some creativity researchers started describing creativity
in ways similar to the "individual-plus" model of distributed cognition. For example, Csikszentmihalyi (1999)
developed a systems model of creativity, explaining that individual creativity is influenced and defined by the
system in which it resides. Other researchers explored the role of the social climate within an organization that
might enable innovation (Anderson and West, 1996; Amabile et. al, 1996), or how knowledge is structured and
managed within creative enterprises (McAdam, 2004).
          Sawyer    and  DeZutter   (2009)    have  recently  described    distributed   creativity differently,  in a  way
comparable to the social cognition branch of distributed cognition. They argue that "creativity is embedded in
social groups" and "significant creations are almost always the result of complex collaborations" (p. 81). They
defined distributed creativity as pertaining to collaborating groups that collectively produce a creative product,
in either  predictable  and  constrained,    or unpredictable    and   unconstrained,  environments.    They    believe that
collaborative emergence, or the unpredictable and unexpected emergence of distributed creativity, occurs when
activities have unpredictable      outcomes;  interdependency    within    the group   such  that   a  person's actions  are
influenced and constrained by the actions of others; and collaboration (equal member contribution).
          A possible framework representing Sawyer and DeZutter's conception of distributed creativity within
adult learning  and    working    communities   could be    that of    Communities    of  Innovation   (West,   2009).  This
framework was developed by combining principles drawn from theoretical and research-based discussions in
psychology, social learning theory, and organizational development. It proposes that innovation emerges in
communities that have the following characteristics:
    ·     Dynamic      expertise, characterized  by "continuous    efforts  to surpass    one's earlier achievements     and
          work at the edge of one's competence" (Hakkarainen, Palonen, Paavola, & Lehtinen, 2004, p. 243)
    ·     Group flow, which Sawyer (2008) described as including: 1) a shared goal, 2) close or deep listening to
          each other, 3) complete concentration, 4) being in control of the group's actions and environment, 5)
          blending of individual egos, 6) equal participation, 7) members' familiarity with each other, 8) constant
          communication,    9)    elaboration of each others'    ideas,   and  10)  frequent   failure (and  learning   from
          failure).
    ·     Entrepreneurship     and  ownership.    Innovative    communities    need    to develop      the unique   type of
          environment that allows enough structure to keep the community together and focused, but enough
          flexibility to allow individual members to take ownership over their own projects and ideas (Coakes &
          Smith, 2007; McFadzean, O'Loughlin, & Shaw, 2005)

                                                      342   ·  © ISLS
                                                ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

     ·   Inquiry. Hakkarainen et al. (2004) found that "all models of innovative knowledge communities . . .
         highlight the role of problems and questions that guide the process of knowledge creation" (p. 197).
     ·   Group   reflectiveness.  Hakkarainen    et al.  (2004)  argued    that both  interpersonal    and intrapersonal
         reflection was important and others incorporated similar ideas in their models (Bielaczyc & Collins,
         2006; Engeström, 1999; Sawyer, 2008).
     ·   Diversity. Justesen (2004) described diversity in techne and cognition as so critical that she described it
         as "innoversity." Others have echoed these sentiments (Bielaczyc & Collins, 2006).
     ·   New community boundaries, visions, and goals. In COIs, it is more likely that members network with
         persons both within and outside the community (Sawhney & Prandelli, 2000) and are less controlled by
         management and typical beauracracy (Benton & Giavagnoli, 2006).
     ·   "Hacker"-like motivation. Himanen (2001) and Raymond (2003) explained that hackers care deeply
         about their work and quality, becoming so intensely motivated by their projects that it becomes almost
         playful or joyful. Hacker-like motivation can be found in areas outside of computer programming
         where innovation emerges.

         These   principles, drawn   from    these and   other sources,  were    organized  into   the Communities     of
Innovation framework, and formed the basis for this study, which was an initial exploration of how robust this
framework could be when applied to a higher educational setting.

Research Questions and Methods
The purpose of my research agenda was to study the nature of distributed creativity from a Communities of
Innovation perspective, within student design communities in the context of higher education. Specifically, my
research questions for this study were:
     1.  Do elements of a community of innovation emerge among members of a graduate instructional design
         studio?
     2.  If so, how do members of this community describe those elements? If not, what do members report
         might have impeded the development of a COI in this setting?

Research Design and Participants
This   study combined     phenomenological      interviewing   (Seidman     2006)   and   Critical Incident   Technique
(Flanagan,   1952) to study   the emerging    distributed   creativity during   one semester  of   a design   Studio   for
graduate-level instructional designers at a large, Southern university. This Studio consisted of three courses: A
beginning  course  focused   on  gaining expertise   utilizing design   technologies;   a second   course  involving   an
individual design project, and a third course involving a larger, group design project. There were high levels of
collaboration among students within each course, as well as students between the different courses as newer
students were required to serve as assistants for the more experienced students' projects, and more experienced
students were required to mentor newer students in their projects. All three courses met together for general
instruction and discussion of design principles each week. From this setting, four students (Jamie, Robin, Boyd,
and Lori), representing all three Studio courses, were selected as case studies based on their background and
inclination towards collaborating in their creative works.

Data Collection Methods
A   combination  of  methods    were used    to explore   the  nature   of  distributed creativity   within  this Studio
community. This research study followed Seidman's (2006) strategy for phenomenological interviewing, except
for one modification. Seidman outlines a three-interview process. The first interview is designed to understand
the participant's background relevant to the experience at hand. I conducted this interview at the beginning of
the semester   about  the participants'  previous   engagements     in  creative and  collaborative    school  activities.
Seidman   then  recommends    a  second  interview   for  specific  details about   the experience   itself, and  a third
interview where the participant and the researcher co-interpret the experience to understand its significance and
meaning.
         In lieu of Seidman's (2006) second interview, and in order to better understand the specific details of
how ideas developed through group collaboration, each participant recorded a weekly 5- to 10-minute voice
memo detailing the "critical incidents" (Flanagan, 1952) of their group design activities. In other words, they
explained 1) what happened that week that was significant to their project, 2) who was involved in the incident,
and 3) why this incident positively or negatively impacted their project. This method enabled the students to
provide  more   thorough  details into  their weekly     group collaborations    than they  would    have  been   able to
remember in a single interview. This information was triangulated with an analysis of the students' design
experiences  as  reported in  their required    weekly   design journals.   I also  observed  first-hand   many   of   the
participants' interactions with their peers.

                                                     343  ·  © ISLS
                                              ICLS 2010  ·   Volume 1

         I then concluded the semester by conducting the third of Seidman's interviews and co-interpreting with
the participants how their group actions enabled or frustrated the creative process. In addition to these data
sources, I interviewed the Studio instructors in order to understand their rationale, goals, and perspectives on the
Studio setting.

Data Analysis Methods and Rigor Guidelines
Data were analyzed using constant comparison coding techniques for forming categories and theories derived
from categories. This analytic method is similar to the form of analysis suggested by Flanagan (1952) for
Critical Incident data, which I collected via the student voice memos. Initial categories were derived from the
COI model    (group flow, hacker  ethic, entrepreneurship,   etc.). Additional     categories   were  created  from    the
analysis process   to describe  emerging   significant   events  or   patterns     in  the participants'    experiences.
Trustworthiness  was  developed  through  member   checking     case  study  reports    with  the  participants,  asking
independent coders to analyze uncoded portions of the data to confirm emerging themes, peer review of the
theoretical and methodological frameworks, and triangulation of methods and data sources.

Findings
Findings  included  the emergence   of several  elements    of the  Community       of Innovation     framework    in  the
experiences of the participants (flow, hacker ethic, and entrepreneurship). In addition, new themes emerged
representing additional  ideas that could  be   added    to the  framework      (perspectives   on    collaboration   and
mentoring, interactive  idea generation,  sense of    community,    learning    through    design  criticism,  and    idea
prototyping). Finally, some COI elements were not found in this study (see Figure 1).

                                                                 Existing COI Elements Supported by
                                                                 the Data

                                                                 Flow
                                                                 While      Group      Flow    (Sawyer,     2008)     was
                                                                 theorized to be specifically important to COIs,
                                                                 it  was difficult     to  detect Group   Flow    in  this
                                                                 study (12 coded statements). This could be due
                                                                 to the lack of group flow or to the difficulty of
                                                                 capturing      it within   the   questions    and   self-
                                                                 reports used in this study. However, individual
                                                                 flow   (Csikszentmihályi,        1990) emerged      as a
                                                                 significant    theme   (30  statements,    found  in   all
                                                                 four case studies' experiences), and was coded
                                                                 as   situations   when    participants reported   being
                                                                 completely        engaged   to   the  point   of  losing
                                                                 consciousness of their surroundings and time, in
                                                                 part because they felt competent to complete the
                                                                 task, understood      the  bounds    and   rules of   the
                                                                 activity,   and    found   it  personally     enjoyable.
                                                                 While       the   flow    experience     was     mostly
                                                                 described      as    individual,  it  appeared    to   be
                                                                 fostered    by    community    characteristics   such  as
                                                                 project ownership; student agency; and a fertile,
                                                                 creative environment.

                                                                 Hacker ethic
                                                                 Hacker      ethic    was   coded     when    statements
                                                                 described the participants' work as interesting,
                                                                    playful, or    completed   because  of  a  desire  for
 Figure 1. Revised Communities of Innovation framework              quality  or  satisfaction  rather  than  a grade,   or
                                                                    involving high levels of enthusiasm. From the
literature (Himanen, 2001; Raymond, 2003) and this research, I interpreted flow as an experience that happens
to people, whereas a hacker ethic is something innate that a person brings to an experience. Data in this study
supported this distinction, but participants often indicated that both existed simultaneously. All four participants
described having a hacker ethic for learning the skills needed to complete high-quality projects, although Jamie
least so (6 coded statements compared with an average of 22 statements for each of the other three).

                                                  344  ·  © ISLS
                                              ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

Entrepreneurship and autonomy
Entrepreneurship/autonomy    was  coded  when   participants  discussed  the ability  to create  their own    projects,
define their own goals, or take ownership in their work. All participants indicated that Studio enabled them to
become innovative by allowing autonomy in selecting and designing projects. Boyd remarked, "It [Studio] lets
you have your own goals not compared to somebody else" and "they really give you free reign" over tools,
learning design/theory, etc. He continued, "Really the only thing that can impede you . . . would just be your
own limitations."

Collaboration and mentoring
"Collaboration," defined as repeated interactions focused on achieving a goal such as developing a project
component   or  learning new   skills, was  evident    in   173 comments.    All  four   participants  reported    that
collaboration was  crucial to developing  their projects,   although  they  defined   collaboration  differently   and
benefited from different kinds of collaborative relationships. The participants often indicated a desire for even
more collaboration  (32  statements).  Interestingly, despite all four  participants  being very   comfortable     with
Internet technologies and two of them living far away from the university, only Lori indicated collaborating
with friends on the Internet, while the others strongly preferred face-to-face collaborations.
       Some of the collaborations reported by the participants were minor interactions with other community
members that either pulled the participants away from or reinforced a particular decision, or gave emotional
support for a chosen action. These small nudges in a particular direction were coded 34 times. Sometimes,
however, the participants indicated more dedicated, consistent, and one-on-one collaboration that was coded as
mentoring  (30  statements).  All participants reported   some    degree of  mentoring,   usually   to support     their
technical skill development.

Interactive idea generation
       In this study, we flagged every instance where participants mentioned a new idea, and coded these
ideas as having originated from the participants themselves, through interactions with others, or from materials
such as textbooks or tutorials. In general, participants reported mostly receiving ideas through interactions with
others, especially other Studio members (134 coded statements, see Figure 2), as well as from connections
outside of Studio (37 statements). Participants also drew ideas from assigned textbooks (8 statements), and from
searching on the Internet (41 statements). Mostly they reported their ideas were generated interactively with
others. Some of these ideas were related to technical issues and learning new technologies. Most ideas were
related to minor design changes, usability issues, and aesthetic improvements. Robin eventually changed the
entire template for her project because Boyd, in a desk critique, questioned the viability of her previous design.
In return, Robin and others offered ideas to Boyd about adding interactive elements to his Web site and
improving his font and color choices. Boyd noted, I received some really great feedback, . . . which led directly
to changes

                                                            Sense of community
                                                            Sense  of  community     was coded   a  total of  50 times
                                                            when   participants   indicated being    emotionally    or
                                                            psychologically  connected    with,  trusting,    receiving
                                                            support   and    encouragement      from,     and   feeling
                                                            friendly  with  their Studio   peers.   [Note:    Although
                                                            collaboration   could  be    another   indication   of the
                                                            strength of a community, I coded collaborative events
                                                            separately   to  allow    specific   analysis    of  those
                                                            interactions.]

                                                            Learning through critiquing
                                                            Learning    through   critiquing     was   coded     when
                                                            participants   indicated  learning  or  gaining   insights
                                                            from  the  peer  feedback  process   or from   evaluating
                                                            other  designs,  and   it was   coded    39   times.   For
                                                            example, Lori mentioned that she and a friend sat in
                                                            on   each   others' prototyping    meetings    with    their
                                                            instructor.  During   the  discussion   of    her friend's
                                                            prototype, Lori contributed advice that caused her to
 Figure 2. Where participants reported receiving            reflect on her own project: "In just some of the things
 their ideas.                                               I suggested to her I was like wait a minute, I could be

                                                  345   ·  © ISLS
                                              ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

doing that for my project." She further observed, "so much more happens when you can actually sit and talk
about your project."

Idea prototyping
Participants discussed the importance of prototyping ideas to facilitate idea generation through observation and
improvisation. However, the evidence for including this element in the COI framework is still tentative (13
coded statements in this study). This concept is supported by models of rapid prototyping, which is an approach
to design that emphasizes a "rapid, iterative series of tryout and revision cycles . . . until an acceptable version is
created" (Baek, Cagiltay, Boling & Frick, 2008, p. 660). Often, rapid prototyping involves users in testing the
product, but this study indicated that it was also necessary for engaging members of a COI in developing
innovative ideas. Participants suggested that prototyping might be most influential when it begins early in the
design process and when sufficient to facilitate one-on-one or small-group discussions about the prototype.

Challenges to Implementing a COI
From this study, several challenges to implementing a Community of Innovation in an educational setting were
evident. First, there was a lack of time for completing the tasks sufficiently, causing participants to often focus
solely on completing tasks instead of considering the most innovative or effective way to produce their projects.
Another impediment for the students was their lack of technology skills, particularly for Boyd and Lori who had
innovative ideas but could not develop them due to limited technical skills. Thus, while Hakkarainen, et al.
(2004) noted the importance of dynamic expertise that is adaptable to changing problems, there appears to be a
need also for domain-specific expertise as a prerequisite to innovative collaboration and improvisation.
          Finally, participants reported receiving ideas, social support, and feedback from peers, but this support
was usually superficial unless it came from a member of their close peer group. The clearest example was Lori,
who described working closely with a dedicated and skilled mentor, but reported almost no collaborations with
anyone else. Robin and Boyd did not have dedicated mentors but instead formed a group with Studio friends
that provided quality feedback and support. Like Lori, however, they collaborated little with anyone else. Jamie
worked closely with her team members, but reported little interactions outside of her team. Thus, COI support
and collaboration   may impact   innovation only    among    members   of local, helpful peer  groups  within the
community. If so, connecting community members with "innovation champions" (Coakes & Smith, 2007) or
developing expert networks (Hakkarainen et al., 2004) may prove especially important.

Conclusions: Reexamining the Formative COI Framework
In this study, I employed a formative Communities of Innovation framework, an adaptation of theories about
communities of learning/practice and creativity research, to describe the innovative potential of adult groups.
Not all of the theorized COI elements were evident in the data. Findings included evidence for some aspects of
the proposed COI model (flow and hacker ethic, entrepreneurship, collaboration and mentoring, interactive idea
generation, sense of community, and learning through design criticism), moderate support for others (dynamic
expertise and idea prototyping), and no evidence supporting other proposed components from the previous
iteration of the model  (West,  2009--developing    adaptable  knowledge    and  expertise,  symmetrical expertise
within the   community,    community   reflection,  shifting  interpersonal roles, or   benefiting from   cultural/
educational/skill/other diversity). There was not evidence that these latter components are not important to a
COI, only that they weren't evident in this study.
          Based on these findings, the COI framework was tentatively revised to differentiate original elements
that were strongly and weakly supported by data in this study, new elements supported by the data, and those
original elements that were not supported by the evidence in this research (see Figure 1). This distinction is
helpful for designing and researching COIs, as it creates priorities for emphasizing specific elements in a given
community.

Implications for Future Research
As Greeno (1997) explained, we need to seek to understand "which combinations and sequences of learning
activities will prepare students best for the kinds of participation in social practices that we value most" (p. 9).
Because   graduates  enter a workforce that is increasingly   demanding   creativity as  the currency for success
(Banahan & Playfoot, 2004), it is important to continue researching how we can foster effective distributed
creativity in higher education in order to best replicate the kinds of social practices and activities graduates will
engage in when they fully enter society. The conceptualization of COIs described in this paper is formative.
Support for some components was apparent in this study, but several unanswered questions for future research
remain, including:
    1.    What is the nature of group flow and how can it be developed within a community?
    Flow was common across participants' experiences, but was usually manifested as individual rather than
group flow, which may have been due to methodological limitations. Future research is warranted to delineate

                                                   346  ·  © ISLS
                                               ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

the differences between individual and group flow, articulate the nature of individual and group flow, and
examine  what   influences group  flow.  To   address   these  questions,   conversation analysis--a  methodology
designed to rigorously capture routine, everyday activities occurring in naturalistic settings in a manner that is
reproducible and defensible (Sawyer & DeZutter, 2009)--might be used.
   2.    How do COI designers balance structure and scaffolding with autonomy?
   In this study, autonomy and entrepreneurship were key characteristics of COIs. Yet, this freedom created
challenges for participants as they struggled to identify the vision for their projects. Future research is needed to
understand how   to balance  structure and    scaffolding,   especially for novices, and  the autonomy   needed to
promote  innovation. Researchers     might   employ quasi-experimental      studies with control and  experimental
groups to account for varying levels of scaffolding and structure. Results could be compared according to expert
judgments of the innovativeness of the final products, or by utilizing a measure of creative potential (Kim,
2007) or divergent thinking (Runco, 1993). Qualitative methods could explore the nature of the scaffolding
found to be most effective, and how participants perceived, experienced, and benefited from this scaffolding.
   3.    What is the nature of community within a COI and how does this compare with other communities?
   Research is needed to articulate the nature of the community within a COI and how this differs from other
kinds of communities, such as learning communities and communities of practice. These questions could be
studied via social network analysis in order to quantify the social capital of relationships making up COIs.
   4.    How is knowledge and expertise acquired in a COI?
   This   study provided   tentative findings  related to  how  innovation   develops  through  the peer  critiquing
process and that how dynamic expertise influences innovation. However, research is needed to verify these
findings and extend  our   understanding   of these principles.   Case   study methods   could prove  valuable  for
documenting how dynamic expertise is developed, relying on a combination of critical incident recall and close
researcher observation with a small participant sample. Video analysis may also be helpful in capturing the
nuances of expertise development. Conversation analysis could again be useful in microanalyzing the discourse.
   5.    What is the value of COIs? Do they produce more innovative ideas or products?
   A significant, and largely unanswered, question concerns whether COIs stimulate more innovation than
other social structures. Researchers could use historical approaches by first identifying major innovative ideas
and working backwards to analyze archival data concerning the social structure surrounding the innovation.
Another  approach   would  be for    experts to review    the products   generated  by a  COI  and  other kinds of
communities to develop a reliable instrument for analyzing the innovative potential of group ideas.

References
Amabile, T. M., Conti, R., Coon, H., Lazenby, J., & Herron, M. (1996). Assessing the
         work environment for creativity. Academy of Management Journal, 39(5), 1154-1184.
Anderson, N., & West, M. A. (1996). The Team Climate Inventory: Development of the
         TCI and its Applications in Teambuilding for Innovativeness. European Journal of Work &
         Organizational Psychology, 5(1), 53.
Banahan, E., & Playfoot, J. (2004). Socio-organisational challenges in the creative economy. In L. M.
         Camarinha-Matos & H. Afsarmanesh (Eds.), Collaborative networked organizations: A research
         agenda for emerging business models. Boston: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Baek, E.-O., Cagiltay, K., Boling, E. and Frick, T. (2008). User-centered design and development. In J. M.
         Spector, M. D. Merrill, J.J. van Merrienboer & M. F. Driscoll (Eds). Handbook of research on
         educational communications and technology (3rd ed.). 659-670.
Benton, S., & Giovagnoli, M. (2006). The wisdom network: An 8-step process for identifying, sharing, and
         leveraging individual expertise. New York: American Management Association.
Bielaczyc, K., Collins, A., O'Donnell, A. M., Hmelo-Silver, C. E., & Erkens, G. (2006). Fostering Knowledge-
         Creating Communities. In Collaborative learning, reasoning, and technology. (pp. 37-60): Lawrence
         Erlbaum Associates Publishers.
Coakes, E. & Smith. P. (2007). Developing communities of innovation by identifying
         innovation champions. Learning Organization, 14(1), 74-85.
Cole, & Engeström (1993). A cultural-historical approach to distributed cognition. In Distributed cognitions:
         Psychology and educational considerations. (pp. 1-46). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Csikszentmihályi, M. (1990). Flow: The psychology of optimal experience. New York: HarperCollins.
Csikszentmihalyi, M. C. (1999). Implications of a systems perspective for the study of creativity. In R. J.
         Sternberg (Ed.), Handbook of creativity. (pp. 313-38). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press
Engestrom, Y. (1999). Innovative learning in work teams: Analyzing cycles of knowledge creation in practice.
         In Y. Engestrom, R. Miettinen & R.-L. Punamaki (Eds.), Perspectives on activity theory (pp. 377-404).
         Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Flanagan, J. C. (1952). The critical incident technique in the study of individuals. Washington D.C.: American
         Council on Education.

                                                   347  ·  © ISLS
                                              ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

Greenberg, 2000 is what is cited.
Greenberg, J. D., & Dicketman, G. J. (2002). Distributed cognition: A foundation for performance support. The
       ASTD E-Learning Handbook, 303.
Greeno, J. G. (1997). Response: On claims that answer the wrong questions. Educational Researcher, 26(1), 5-
       17.
Hakkarainen, K., Palonen, T., Paavola, S., & Lehtinen, E. (2004). Communities of networked expertise:
       Professional and educational perspectives. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Himanen, P. (2001). The hacker ethic: A radical approach to the philosophy of business. New York: Random
       House.
Hutchins (1995). Cognition in the wild. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Hwang, W., Hsu, J., Tretiakov, A., Chou, H., & Lee, C. (2009). Intra-Action, Interaction and Outeraction in
    Blended Learning Environments. Educational Technology & Society, 12(2), 222-239.
Justesen, S. (2004). Innoversity in communities of practice. In P. M. Hildreth & C. Kimble (Eds.), Knowledge
       networks: Innovation through communities of practice (pp. 79-95). Hershey, PA: Idea Group
       Publishing.
Kim, K.-H. (2007). The two Torrance creativity tests: The Torrance Tests of Creative Thinking and thinking
       creatively in action and movement. In A.-G. Tan (Ed.), Creativity: A handbook for teachers: World
       Scientific.
Mandler, G. (1995). Origins and consequences of novelty. In S. M. Smith, T. B. Ward & R. A. Finke (Eds.), The
       creative cognition approach (pp. 9-26). Cambridge: MIT Press.
McAdam, R. (2004). Knowledge creation and idea generation: A critical quality perspective. Technovation,
       24(9), 697-705.
McFadzean, E., O'Loughlin, A., & Shaw, E. (2005). Corporate entrepreneurship and
       innovation part 1: the missing link. European Journal of Innovation Management, 8(3), 350 - 372.
Moore, J. L., & Rocklin, T. R. (1998). The distribution of distributed cognition: Multiple interpretations and
       uses. Educational Psychology Review, 10(1), 97-113.Nardi (1996). Context and consciousness: Activity
       theory and human-computer interaction. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Nardi, Bonnie A. Context and Consciousness: Activity Theory and Human-Computer Interaction. Cambridge:
       MIT Press, 1996.
Raymond, E. S. (2003). The art of Unix programming. Retrieved March 21, 2008, from
       http://www.faqs.org/docs/artu/ch01s09.html.
Runco, M. A. (1993). Divergent Thinking, Creativity, and Giftedness. Gifted Child
       Quarterly, 37(1), 16-22. doi: 10.1177/001698629303700103.
Salomon, G. (1993). Editor's introduction. In G. Salomon (Ed.), Distributed cognitions: Psychological and
       educational considerations. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Sawhney, M., & Prandelli, E. (2000). Communities of creation: Managing distributed
       innovation in turbulent markets. California Management Review, 42(4), 24-54.
Sawyer, R. K. (2008). Group genius: The creative power of collaboration. Cambridge: Perseus Books Group.
Sawyer, R. K., & DeZutter, S. (2009). Distributed creativity: How collective creations emerge from
       collaboration. Psychology of Aesthetics, Creativity, and the Arts, 3(2), 81-92.
Seidman, I. (2006). Interviewing as qualitative research: A guide for researchers in
       education and the social sciences (3rd ed., p. 162). New York: Teachers College Press.
Smith, S. M., Ward, T. B., & Finke, R. A. (1995). The Creative Cognition Approach. Cambridge: MIT Press..
Ward, T. B., Smith, S. M., & Finke, R. A. (1999). Creative cognition. In R. J. Sternberg (Ed.), Handbook of
       creativity (pp. 189-212). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
West, R. E. (2009). What is shared? A framework for understanding shared innovation within communities.
       Educational Technology Research and Development, 57(3), 315-332. doi: 10.1007/s11423-008-9107-
       4.

                                                 348  ·   © ISLS
