                                                  ICLS 2010      Volume 2

              The Design and Evaluation of Educative Just-In-Time Teacher
                                Supports in a Web-Based Environment

               Hebbah El-Moslimany, Ravit Golan Duncan, Rutgers University, Graduate School of Education 10
              Seminary Place New Brunswick NJ, 08901, hebbah@eden.rutgers.edu, ravit.duncan@gse.rutgers.edu
              Janice McDonnell, Sage Lichtenwalner, Rutgers University, Institute of Marine and Coastal Sciences,
                  School of Environmental and Biological Sciences, 71 Dudley Road New Brunswick NJ, 08901,
                                    mcdonnel@marine.rutgers.edu, sage@marine.rutgers.edu

        Abstract: Researchers have advocated for the development of educative curriculum materials to
        support teachers as they engage in reform-oriented teaching. In this poster we report on the design
        and evaluation of a set of just-in-time, educative, teacher supports for an online project-based unit.
        Our design of the supports was informed by frameworks for educative materials (e.g. Davis &
        Krajcik, 2005), and we analyzed their use with 17 middle and high school teachers in a pilot study.

Introduction
Engaging students in inquiry practices is challenging and effective instructional materials need to support teachers as
they learn and implement reform-based teaching (Varma, Husic, & Linn, 2008). Such materials have been termed
"educative'   by  Davis and   Krajcik  (2005). While  there    is a   growing  body of  research on the  development   of
educative materials, most of it refers to paper-based curricula and much less is known about the ways in which
online inquiry-based environments can be educative for teachers (Davis, Smithey, & Petish, 2004; Varma et al.,
2008). Moreover, educative materials tend to present teachers with a large amount of information. These materials
can seem overwhelming to teachers who often request, and need, just-in-time support as they enact the unit or
lesson. In this poster we describe our efforts to develop and pilot test a set of just-in-time teacher supports embedded
into an online    project-based  learning environment   called    the COOL     Classroom. Specifically, we  designed  the
supports to aid teachers in their implementation of a unit on the impacts of the Hudson River water on the ocean
waters of the Hudson Bay. We conducted a pilot study with middle and high school teachers to ascertain the ways in
which teachers used the set of supports. In our poster we will discuss our design of the teachers support, findings
from the pilot study, and our current attempts to revise the design in ways that address the challenges identified in
the pilot study.

The Instructional Design
The two-week unit, entitled Hudson River Plume, focuses on the impact of non-point pollution from watersheds on
the Hudson Bay ecosystem, and begins with the driving question "How does your watershed impact the ocean?" The
unit included both on-line and off line activities. In this unit students explore Satellite Surface Temperature data sets
to study the interaction between river and ocean water, they learn about non-point source pollution in watersheds,
and they investigate the process of eutrophication through an online simulation.
        The teacher supports, a set of text-box tabs, are superimposed on the student interface and can be toggled
on or off (supports are only visible when the teacher is logged in). There are four support categories that we
developed based on existing frameworks for educative materials. Ball and Cohen (1996) argued that educative
materials can foster teacher learning, and they provided general suggestions to facilitate the development of these
materials, for example the need to help teachers understand and deal with student ideas. Davis and Krajcik (2005)
built on the ideas of Ball and Cohen (1996) and proposed nine heuristics for pedagogical content knowledge for
educative science curricula. The nine heuristics are organized in three strands: pedagogical content knowledge for
science topics,   pedagogical   content knowledge  for  scientific    inquiry, and  developing   teachers' subject  matter
knowledge.    In reference to these frameworks we developed four supports: in-class notes, related activities, student
difficulties, and  resources. In-class  notes  provided just-in-time    information  about running  the    lesson segment
associated with the specific interface (or sequence of interfaces) such as: stopping for discussion, questions to ask
students, etc. The related activities category provided information and links to additional offline activities relevant
to the content on the current interface. Under student difficulties, we provided information about common student
alternative conceptions and potential misunderstandings. The latter three categories provided pedagogical content
knowledge     for science topics in terms  of  teaching strategies,   relevant  student ideas and difficulties. The  final
category, resources, provided teachers with additional background information about the scientific phenomenon to
extend their subject matter knowledge. Text in these tabs was kept      as succinct as possible and tabs only appeared if

                                                      342     ISLS
                                                   ICLS 2010    Volume 2

there was relevant information for that specific interface. Our design goal was to provide support to teachers, that
they could use in a just-in-time manner, as they engaged students with specific activities on the specific interface.

Methods
To study teachers' use of the supports we conducted a pilot study with 17 middle and high school teachers. We
collected three sources of data from the pilot teachers: (a) teacher journals in the form of an online survey that we
asked teachers to complete on a daily basis whenever the unit was implemented; (b) videotape recordings of a focus
group session in which the teachers discussed their positive and negative experiences using the unit; and (c) small
group exit interviews focused on teachers' experience with the implementation of a handful of specific activities and
in particular the teacher supports for those activity pages.
         We analyzed the data in terms of the following questions: (a) when did teachers use the supports? (b) which
supports   were useful   for the teachers,  and   which    were  not  as  useful?  and (c)  in what ways  did  teachers'
implementation of the unit vary from the instructions provided in the supports and what was their reasoning for
these deviations? We began by looking at the teacher journals to ascertain trends in teachers' evaluation of the utility
of the supports. We then analyzed the focus group sessions and small group interviews to determine when and how
teachers were using the supports, as well as to characterize the reasons for low fidelity implementations.

Results and Discussion
Our findings suggest that teachers varied in how they used the supports, specifically there were variations in the just-
in-time use of the supports, as well as the chunking or lesson segmentation. The latter variations were often due to
underdeveloped or underspecified supports, and the use of supports in a just-in-time manner. Some of the variations
in lesson segmentation, such as finding it difficult to have class discussions at times designated in the in-class notes,
were  due  to  teachers' misinterpreting    the lesson segmentation     information  provided,  or disagreeing with   the
segmentation as defined in the online environment. A solution to this issue is to make salient, via the web interfaces,
where activity sets begin and end. We intend to revise the environment to introduce a third view that will provide a
simultaneous view of a segment as a set of thumbnail images of the interfaces included in that segment. This will
allow  the teachers to   view   the sequence  of  segments,   and  what   is included  in each  segment. We  found  that
sometimes the variation in implementation were due to a lack of information in the supports. This was due to one of
two reasons: (a) we as the designers did not anticipate and address problems relating to certain aspects of an activity
or students' engagement with it; (b) we as designers provided instructions for implementation but did not explain the
reasoning behind these instructions. The solution to the first problem is to more fully develop these supports given
new information about the implementation of each activity obtained in the pilot study. The underspecified supports
problem was often due to our attempt to keep the text of the teacher supports simple and brief. In our redesign we
will supplement the text of the supports to include the missing rational as well as provide additional information
about the design in the teacher lounge section of the environment. While we designed the supports for just-in time
use (to reduce the cognitive load placed on teachers as they implement), we did not find evidence that teachers used
them in such a manner. Most teachers read the supports prior to teaching the day's lesson. It may be that just-in-time
supports are not conducive for first-time implementations. A solution to this issue is to enable teachers to print out
the teacher supports (with thumbnail images of the student interface) as one document that can help them see the
unit in its entirety as well as the specific supports for every student page. In addition we may include an automated
prompt to remind teachers to log in so that they can view the supports as they are teaching.

References
Ball, D.L., & Cohen, D.K. (1996). Reform by the book: What is or might be the role of curriculum
       materials in teacher learning and instructional reform? Educational Researcher, 25(9), 6 -8, 14.
Bransford, J. D., & Schwartz, D. L. (1999). Rethinking transfer: A simple proposal with multiple implications.
       Review of Research in Education, 24(1), 61-100.
Davis, E.  A.,  & Krajcik,   J. S.  (2005). Designing   educative  curriculum     materials to promote teacher learning.
       Educational Researcher, 34(3), 3-14.
Davis, E. A., Smithey, J., & Petish, D. (2004). Designing an online learning environment for new
       elementary science teachers: Supports for learning to teach. Proceedings of the 6th International
       Conference on Learning Sciences, 594-594.
Varma,   K., Husic, F.,  &   Linn,  M. C.   (2008). Targeted    support  for using technology-enhanced   science inquiry
       modules. Journal of Science Education and Technology, 17(4), 341-356.

                                                       343     ISLS
