                                               ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 2

   Students' Investigations with Physical Activity Data Devices
         Victor R. Lee, Maneksha DuMont, Utah State University, 2830 Old Main Hill, Logan, UT 84322
                         Email: victor.lee@usu.edu, m.dumont@aggiemail.usu.edu

         Abstract: Through a design experiment, we explored the potential for a suite of commercial
         physical activity monitoring devices to be used as data collection tools. Two pairs of high-
         school students were asked to engage in a week-long set of data investigations of physical
         activity that culminated in the design and implementation of their own mini-studies. This
         poster reports on those mini-studies, the challenges associated with the technologies used, and
         the supports that needed to be introduced.

Introduction
There has been a great deal of interest in the Learning Sciences around the potentials for portable technologies
to support engagement in authentic disciplinary practices (e.g., Aleahmad & Slotta, 2002). These potentials arise
because such technologies allow students to model phenomena, record observations, test hypotheses, and gather
data. The latter potential is of particular interest for the current work. We are exploring the use of a portable
athletic technology as a data collection device that      can be  used to support student engagement  with  data
modeling practices (Lehrer & Romberg, 1996).        Specifically, we are exploring the use of portable heart rate
monitors and accelerometers students can use to collect data about their physical activities. We began this work
under the assumptions that (1) personal relevance can make data about one's self intrinsically interesting for
students and (2) prior knowledge about one's body and activities can bootstrap understandings students must
develop in order to analyze and make sense of personalized data.
         Operating under those assumptions, we conducted a first-iteration design experiment (Brown, 1992) in
which a week-long, out-of-school learning experience was designed and implemented. Over the course of five
two-hour sessions, two pairs of high school students (ages 14-16) conducted four inquiries into bodily activity,
two of which were researcher-designed and two were student-designed. We had multiple goals in conducting
this design experiment. First, we wanted simply to determine the feasibility of repurposing commercial athletic
devices as data collection instruments for students. Second, we wished to ascertain what supports might be
necessary in order to engage students in data analysis practices when working with physical activity data. Third,
we hoped to make some initial determinations regarding the quality of investigations students would design,
with guidance, after having been introduced to these technologies.

Technological Devices and Software
For this design experiment, we obtained a Garmin ForeRunner 50 device set for each student. The ForeRunner
50 is a multi-instrument set consisting of a sport watch that wirelessly communicates with a heart rate monitor
chest-strap and a "Footpod®" accelerometer secured to one's shoe. The chest strap, worn underneath one's
shirt, calculates heart rate in beats per minute based on the natural electrical activity of the circulatory system.
The Footpod® approximates speed and distance measurements based on specific changes in acceleration due to
foot impact. Every five seconds, a reading from both devices is automatically stored on the watch's memory,
producing a hundred data points within five minutes. These records can be immediately uploaded onto a Mac or
PC via an included wireless USB antenna. Once uploaded, the data are stored in specialized, easily accessed
.xml files. We developed a script to extract the data from these files and append them with additional metadata
such as who wore the device and what activity was being monitored.
         As a data exploration and modeling tool, we chose the TinkerPlots software (version 1.1) (Konold &
Miller, 2005) as it allowed for rapid importation of our enhanced data files. Although recommended for grades
4-8, our initial exploration of the software and review of other interventions that used TinkerPlots led us to
conclude it was powerful enough for our sample of students to use for their data analysis purposes.

The Learning Experience
As stated above, the students participated for five two-hour sessions facilitated by a single researcher during the
students' summer break. On the first day, the four students were introduced to the devices, shown how to collect
data, and given a tour of the athletic facilities they would be provided access to throughout the intervention. On
day two, they explored the TinkerPlots software, collected heart rate data of themselves as they were sitting at
their computers, and under the researcher's guidance, devised and executed a plan to collect data enabling them
to compare heart rates and distances when playing the basketball game "H.O.R.S.E". against repeatedly tossing
a flying disc (e.g., a Frisbee®). On day three, the students explored the previous day's data and worked in pairs
to design a physical activity investigation of their own choosing. The student-designed investigations compared
distances and heart rates in different running environments (tracks and treadmills) and compared heart rates

                                                   344  ·  © ISLS
                                                  ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 2

when using two cardiovascular machines that involve fluid, cyclical motions (elliptical trainers and stationary
bicycles). Data for these two student-designed investigations were collected by all participants on the fourth
day, and then examined and analyzed by both pairs of students on the fifth and final day. Details of each
investigation, such as the students' data collection plans and their results, will be presented on the poster.

Data Sources and Analysis
Video   recordings   of each     pair's work  with   TinkerPlots      on the  computer    and  all   group  discussions  of
investigation planning were collected on days 1, 2, 3 and 5. Students completed short worksheets each day that
served to help the researcher assess prior knowledge related to representing data, estimating heart rates, and
students' perceptions of what constituted scientific and mathematical activity. Several of these worksheets were
repeated at the   end   of day   5 in   order to  gauge  any    change   in   opinions, perceptions,  or   intuitions about
mathematical and scientific practices and their bodies' reactions to physical activity. Finally, all ForeRunner-
obtained data files and student-modified TinkerPlots files were collected.
         Selected video clips of student pairs were transcribed and analyzed qualitatively. Codes were assigned
based on the mathematical content being discussed (e.g., averages, distributions, rates of change), the students'
understandings of what the data showed, and explicit references to personal knowledge of their bodies or the
data collection experience (e.g., "that can't be right! I know I didn't work that hard then.") Design notes, video
of group discussions, post-mortem review of the design process, and ad-hoc instructional modifications from the
week were reviewed in order to generate design recommendations for future iterations.

Results
With  respect  to  feasibility,  our  conclusion    from  the   first design  iteration is that these   devices    could be
repurposed and used relatively easily by students for data collection. Students were generally successful in
operating the devices, and at the end of the week, all reported the equipment was easy to wear and use "once
you got the hang of it". All students reported that they often forgot they were wearing the equipment. During a
closing  discussion  about   the   experience,  all students    expressed   that the  technologies   provided   interesting
feedback about their bodily efforts and expressed interest in using them in their math or PE classes.
         However, problems emerged in the preparation of the data. The students did not have the technical
know-how to convert the data to the appropriate formats. Despite development of scripting tools, an effort on
Day  1  to provide   instruction   on   how to  upload   and   convert   data  was  unsuccessful.    As a  result, the lead
researcher provided support by manually uploading, converting, and preparing the data in TinkerPlots between
sessions. A refined software tool is currently in development to simplify data preparation and transfer.
         Additional support was required to encourage student data analysis. On the first days of examining data
in TinkerPlots, the students were quick to decide on an answer to an overarching question with only a cursory
glance at the data displays. In response, the researcher added a set of open-ended data-related questions for
students to answer on subsequent days. The written responses to these were generally poor, in that they were
often sentence fragments and often did not answer the given question. However, the quality of discussions that
took place  with   respect   to   the   questions showed     a  great    deal of sophistication    and  engagement     with
mathematical   and   statistical ideas,  such as  how   to compare     two    populations  or measures   of center.   Those
observations were encouraging and validate some of our core assumptions about the utility of these devices.
         During days 3-5, the students successfully devised and enacted data collection plans. However, despite
having designed their own investigations, the level of engagement in the data analysis appeared much lower
than in the researcher-planned investigations. This result was surprising, and we believe could be attributed in
part to the predictability of the outcomes of the student-designed investigations; all students had easily predicted
the  outcome    of   their designed     investigations.  This    suggests     more  actively   steering   student-designed
investigations toward   questions    that produce   ambiguous    results  may    be   more fruitful. We   are hopeful  that
observation and other lessons learned through this first-iteration design experiment will support our planned
classroom enactments to take place later this year.

References
Aleahmad,   T., &    Slotta, J.  (2002,   June,  2002).  Integrating     handheld   technology  and    web-based    science
         activities: New     educational    opportunities.   Paper     presented   at the  14th  World     Conference    on
         Educational Multimedia, Hypermedia and Telecommunications (ED-MEDIA 2002), Denver, CO.
Brown,   A. L.  (1992).    Design  experiments:   Theoretical   and    methodological   challenges   in creating   complex
         interventions in classroom settings. Journal of the learning sciences, 2(2), 141-178.
Konold, C., & Miller, C. (2005). TinkerPlots. Dynamic Data Exploration. Statistics software for middle school
         curricula. Emeryville, CA: Key Curriculum Press.
Lehrer, R., & Romberg, T. A. (1996). Exploring children's data modeling. Cognition & Instruction, 14(1), 69-
         108.

                                                      345  ·  © ISLS
