                                                ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 2

               A dual-level approach for investigating design in
                                         online affinity spaces
                 Sean C. Duncan, Miami University, School of Education, Health, and Society &
                  Armstrong Institute for Interactive Media Studies, sean.duncan@muohio.edu

         Abstract: In order to address "design talk" within online gaming fan spaces, content analyses
         were used first to classify the predominant forms of design talk, then to provide a principled
         segmentation of forum data to come under further Discourse analysis. Serial implementation
         of these two approaches affords researchers of informal learning the ability to (1) identify
         productive   exchanges    within gaming    affinity  spaces  to   come  under  further d/Discursive
         analysis and (2) combine analyses of learning using both nomothetic (content analysis) and
         idiographic (Discourse analysis) approaches.

Learning in Gaming Affinity Spaces
Recently,  learning  scientists   have focused   on the   educational     implications of productive, "in   the wild"
(Hutchins, 1995) communities that have arisen to discuss games online (e.g., Steinkuehler & Duncan, 2008)
and,  within  which,   participants  can   develop  sophisticated     peer  instructional materials  (e.g., Squire  &
Giovanetto, 2008), tools for others to interact with games, and environments in which participants can negotiate
the meaning of their gaming experiences. In this light, both the designed and ad hoc communities of practice
(Lave &    Wenger,   1991)   that have  come  to exist  "around"    games   are increasingly relevant for   researchers
interested in moving   beyond     appropriating games   for   traditional learning models  toward   understanding  the
dynamics of learning with popular media.
         A renewed focus on social affiliations, collaborative problem-solving, the development of projective
identities (Gee, 2003), and concomitant other skills and dispositions associated with gaming has become an
important new emphasis for games and learning research, leading to a shift in focus from the individual gamer
to communities of learners that critique, modify, and further explore game play. Toward this end, I investigate
Gee's (2004) concept of "affinity spaces," or fan sites, often instantiated online, with shifting memberships in
which   participants can   develop  and  express an affinity   for  a like-minded  group  around  a particular  media
artifact. Although it has been a productive concept for understanding engagement with digital media (see Black,
2008; Duncan, in press; Gee and Hayes, in press), important methodological questions abound, including how
best to analyze textual interactions within affinity spaces, as well as how to relate different forms of analysis
with one another.
         In this poster, I argue for the use of both content analysis (Mayring, 2000) and Discourse analysis (Gee,
2006) as productive means to make sense of the learning practices present within these affinity spaces.         Using
examples from analyses of online discussion forum text in the affinity spaces around three different games,
game  series, or gaming     distribution platforms  (World    of Warcraft,  The  Legend   of Zelda, and Kongregate,
respectively), I forward an explicitly dual-level implementation of these methodologies.

Content Analysis
By "content analysis," I refer to the principled means of applying a qualitative coding scheme to the text present
within the online discussion forums that make up much of the asynchronous, distributed discussions present
within gaming affinity spaces.    Mayring's (2000) content analysis model has similarities to other approaches for
assessing verbal data (e.g., Chi, 1997), and has seen parallels with attempts to understand other phenomena,
such as informal scientific reasoning  within online gaming      forums (Steinkuehler  & Duncan, 2008).   By  applying
a fundamentally nomothetic -- or attempting to discern a general "state of the world" -- approach to online
discussion  forum    text, we  can  highlight the  prevalence    of   the learning practices  being studied  within a
potentially representative sample, and make generalizations regarding the typicality of the learning practices
within the case(s) being analyzed.
         I have developed a coding scheme to capture elements of design thinking (the iterative collaborative
and competitive construction of artifacts) within the online discussion forums around three gaming affinity
spaces. Basing the coding scheme largely upon Donald Schön's (1983; 1988) theories of design, this coding
scheme was developed to assess discursive practices, design practices, and content of each case's forum text.
Applying the coding scheme to representative samples of each case (World of Warcraft n = 242 posts; Zelda n =
125 posts; Kongregate n = 130 posts) the applicability of Schön's scheme was found to be only partial, with
some codes highly applied while others found to be a poor fit to the particulars of a case.      And yet, these were
only the first step in the analysis: Addressing the prevalence of the design codes was useful for determining
their general applicability and the overall commonality of some design practices, but did little to help "unpack"
the finer details of specific meaning-making exchanges within the forums.

                                                    346  ·  © ISLS
                                                 ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 2

Discourse Analysis
Across  a  wide  range   of  domains,   Gee's    (2006)  "big-D    Discourse  theory"  has   put   an   emphasis   upon
understanding   language acts   as situated  within   cultural and  social frameworks.    As    a methodology,    it has
provided a great deal of utility for the investigation of meaning-making, learning, and the social construction of
knowledge (see, for example, Steinkuehler's, 2006, analysis of in-game Discourses).       In terms of online gaming
affinity spaces, the methodology's key utility is in helping to make sense of specific interchanges between
participants in an online affinity space, and identifying the ways that particular turns of phrase represent larger
social and cultural concerns.
          Thus, following   the content  analysis   methodology     presented  above,  I have     conducted    Discourse
analyses on specific exchanges within each of these three affinity spaces (World of Warcraft, The Legend of
Zelda, and Kongregate).     Shifting focus from analyzing design practices within each space to isolating how a
subset of debates within the forums formed and evolved, I argue that Discourse analysis provides an important
idiographic  --  or characterization  of    unique  and  situated   meaning-making   --  approach      to understanding
learning within these spaces.   In the three affinity space cases, these led to the uncovering of common framing
narratives regarding the  design   practices  within  each    space (design as   a "science,"   design    as a "technical
literacy" and design as "fan activity"). For, as Discourse analysis ideally helps to situate specific exchanges in
social and cultural frameworks, the results of the analyses can be revealing regarding important phenomena
(e.g., framing narratives) that could not be easily uncovered via a content analysis based on an a priori coding
scheme (a la the one based upon Schön's 1983; 1988 work).

A Dual-Level Interpretation of Text
The  staged, dual-level  approach   described    here is beneficial  for two  key   reasons.    First, content  analysis
addresses the overall coding saturation of a particular interpretive scheme, but does so necessarily divorced
from individuals' unique trajectories of meaning-making; by incorporating Discourse analysis, we are thus able
to address the "gaps" in one method by the judicious use of another method on a subset of the same data.
Second, Discourse analysis is necessarily fraught with issues of sampling, and the results of a previous content
analysis can help to provide justification for why certain excerpts of data are chosen for subsequent Discourse
analysis.  By using the results of a content analysis to justify which segmentation of the data is most promising
to further investigate using Discourse analysis, assessments of the text within online affinity spaces become
multi-faceted.  In understanding learning within these spaces, researchers need to both be able to address the
overall prevalence of a given learning practice, while also developing a stronger basis for data selection when
using qualitative methodologies such as Discourse analysis.

References

Black, R. (2008). Adolescents and online fan fiction.    New York: Peter Lang.
Chi, M.   (1997) Quantifying    qualitative analyses  of   verbal data: A  practical guide.  Journal   of  the Learning
          Sciences, 6, 271-315.
Duncan, S. C. (in press). Gamers as designers: A framework for investigating design in gaming affinity spaces.
          Manuscript for E-Learning and Digital Media, upcoming special issue on game design literacy.
Gee, J. P.  (2003). What    video  games    have to   teach us  about   learning and  literacy. New    York:    Palgrave
          Macmillan.
Gee, J. P. (2004). Situated language and learning: A critique of traditional schooling. London: Routledge.
Gee, J. P. (2006). An introduction to Discourse analysis: Theory and method, 2nd. ed. New York: Routledge.
Gee, J. P. and Hayes, E. R. (in press).     Women and gaming: The Sims and 21st century learning. New York:
          Palgrave Macmillan.
Hutchins, E. (1995). Cognition in the wild. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Lave, J. & Wenger, E. (1991).     Situated learning: Legitimate peripheral participation.     Cambridge: Cambridge
          University Press.
Mayring, P. (2000). Qualitative content analysis. Forum: Qualitative Social Research, 1 (2). Retrieved from
          http://www.qualitativeresearch.net/index.php/fqs/article/view/1089/2385
Schön, D. A. (1983).  The reflective practitioner.    New York: Basic Books.
Schön, D. A. (1988).  Designing:   Rules, types, and  worlds.   Design Studies, 9(3), 181-190.
Squire, K. and Giovanetto, L. (2008). The higher education of gaming,E-Learning, 5(1), 2-28.
Steinkuehler, C. A. (2006). Massively multiplayer online videogaming as participation in a Discourse.             Mind,
          Culture, & Activity, 13(1), 38-52.
Steinkuehler, C. A. & Duncan, S. C. (2008). Scientific habits of mind in virtual worlds. Journal of Science
          Education and Technology 17 (6), pp. 530-543.

                                                    347  ·  © ISLS
