                                                 ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 2

      Designing for an Informal Learning Environment: Towards a
Participatory Simulation Design Process for Public Policy Planning
                     Chandan Dasgupta1, Leilah Lyons1,2, Moira Zellner3,4, Andrew Greenlee3
              Learning Sciences1, Comp. Sci.2, Urban Plan. & Policy3, Inst. for Env. Sci. & Policy4
              University of Illinois at Chicago, 1007 W. Harrison St.(MC 057), Chicago, IL 60607
                     cdasgu2@uic.edu, llyons@uic.edu, mzellner@uic.edu, agreen4@uic.edu

          Abstract: Modern planning practices recruit stakeholders to add specialized expertise to the
          planning   process, but   this expertise often  remains  inert, leading   to superficial and  circular
          discussions. By encouraging stakeholders co-construct an external shared representation, more
          nuanced debates could emerge. This work reports on formative interviews that will inform the
          design of software that will allow stakeholders to articulate and share their knowledge, and to
          inspect the underlying assumptions of others and the outcomes of the system.

Introduction
Watershed   planning   brings    together  diverse  representatives   (e.g. local govts., advocacy     groups,   business,
industry, and  academia)      to contribute  specialized   knowledge   to   water   use policy,   but  devising  effective
recommendations      requires a  comprehensive     understanding   of outcomes    emerging    from  interactions between
natural processes and human actions (Zellner, 2008). This work's ultimate aim is to design a computer-based
tool to encourage stakeholders to share knowledge, learn from one another, and develop a systemic perspective.

Study & Findings
We observed one public session to understand meeting dynamics, and conducted telephone interviews with four
stakeholders  representing    business,  municipality,  county  government,   and    academia/public   interest  to assess
their perceptions regarding modeling tools. Our preliminary findings focus on the means, content, and context of
presenting models to stakeholders.

Means ­ Tools & processes to support stakeholder participation
Unlike Decision Support Systems (DSS) which are designed for a specific case and thus have limited reusability
and require extensive data and resources to build (Densham, 1991), we are interested in repurposable software
that can leverage the knowledge of attending stakeholders. Existing attempts at creating stakeholder-accessible
models (e.g., MetroQuest, http://www.metroquest.com) tend to mask the system complexity by only eliciting
pre-defined   inputs and presenting   pre-defined   outputs.   Our interviews  found    that this restriction on decision
makers' ability to modify the model caused some of the stakeholders to view them as an unreliable "black box"
as evidenced by this remark: "I feel it [software] was biased... I looked at the results and said it's not worth
something to look at. This was a conclusion that somebody had and they wrote a survey and study to come to
that conclusion."   Another   stakeholder,  whose   ideology   was  more    aligned with  the outcome   of the  software,
indicated complete confidence in the outcome. Both respondents seemed to be suffering from a confirmation
bias (Lord, Ross, & Lepper, 1979). These black-box models thus do not allow for the skeptics to explore how
the outcomes emerge and do not encourage the believers to question their assumptions.
          One strategy to address the black box problem is to migrate to more transparent Agent Based Models
(ABMs),   which   allow  stakeholders    to inspect   the system's rules  and potentially    even  use their  expertise to
modify or create rules for agents. Our goal is to maximize participation so that every stakeholder's ideas and
viewpoints get reflected. We found that stakeholders are more likely to bring mobile devices than laptops, which
suggests an "audience response system"-style form factor, seen in participatory simulations augmented with a
shared display (Wilensky & Stroup, 2000). This has the added benefit of grounding the conversation in a shared
artifact, allowing the stakeholders to learn from their peers and to build a more nuanced mental model of the
policies  and their  effects. Some   findings  (e.g., Brignull  &  Rogers,   2003)   suggest  that anonymity    improves
participation in such contexts but we found that stakeholders strongly felt that ideas and actions needed to be
attributed to the creators. Thus a mechanism is needed for clearly identifying the originator of any changes to
model settings, as evidenced by this quote: "No I don't think [anonymous contributions are] a good idea. There
are  many  groups    represented  by  the  planning   group  members   and they   bring  up   many  viewpoints   and  it's
important that those viewpoints be acknowledged as belonging to that particular group."

Content ­ What is to be simulated?
Some classroom-based implementations of ABMs required students to build entire systems so that they have an
understanding of all the agents in the system (Wilensky & Reisman, 2006). However, it is impractical at best to
ask  each of  the more   than    35 stakeholders   to build  a model  of  an  entire   system when    they often lack   an

                                                      348  ·  © ISLS
                                                    ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 2

understanding   of  or  an   interest in   issues outside   of those which   affect   them  directly, as  indicated   by the
following quote: "I never speak up during the meeting... [the local government] viewpoint is well represented
and I don't think there are major issues for us as there are for the environment and business." The interviewee
seems to believe that policies that concern business and environmental interest groups will not impact the local
government. There is obviously a need for the gestalt understanding that one could get by virtue of building
everything,   but  an  alternate  strategy   may    be  to present   the model  content  so  as   to emphasize    the  inter-
connectedness between model elements, so that even when stakeholders do not fully understand the position of
another interest group, they are at least aware of how their interests intersect.
          Sometimes, though, disconnects result from the difficulty in understanding how actions compound over
time: "[We] have maintained wetlands, even created wetlands [and] open space, have ... water facilities that
meet   &   exceed   the     EPA   standards...    [The  cities   don't]  and  yet  we   keep   hearing    [from   them   and
environmentalists]     that [we]  need    to have   growth  control, slow down     or  stop to avoid  urban   sprawl."   The
interviewee is justly upset over a perceived "do as I say, not as I do" argument originating from city officials,
but neglects   that over    time, their community      may  begin   to resemble  the  city. Making    the trajectory  of the
decision   path evident  (i.e.  when    a  decision was    formalized,   identifying  what model   elements   informed   the
decision,  identifying  what    elements     are  affected  by that  decision, and    characterizing  the  effect  on  those
dependent elements, etc.) might help in identifying andplanning for "unintended" consequences of decisions.

Context ­ Where, how long, and how often.
Interviews revealed the stakeholders were willing to use a computer-based tool for the entire duration of the
meeting if it did not distract them from interacting. For example: "If the software is a facilitation tool, it can be
used  to run   the  meeting,"   or,  "[It]   should not distract  from   meeting   ­  interaction should   be  live and  not
dependent on software." However, most existing classroom-based ABM projects require extended interaction
with the model over several weeks (e.g., Klopfer, Yoon, & Um, 2005). This kind of interaction is not feasible in
our  context,  where   stakeholders     meet  once   every  month    for  3 hours. Consequently,     we   have  to  consider
facilitating participation and interactions between the stakeholders outside the meeting space. We found that
the stakeholders had internet access at home and were willing to use the model outside the meeting setting for
about 10-20 hours every month. In order to support extended interaction, the ABM tool should provide multiple
access points for the stakeholders so that they can access the model from any location. Also, while allowing
multiple accesses, we have to ensure that all the content generated for the model is credited to their creators.

Conclusion
The design guidelines that emerged from these preliminary findings were italicized above, and are summarized
here. With relation to the means of presenting models, we found that model-based tools for diverse adult users
in an  informal   learning   environment     should  allow  for  inspection  (and  alteration/creation)  of the underlying
model rules, suggesting the use of ABMs. With respect to the content of the models, we found that contributions
to the models     must  be   clearly  credited,   and  the  model   should emphasize    element   interconnectedness     and
decision trajectories to help stakeholders adopt a more comprehensive perspective. With respect to the context
of use, we found that stakeholders will need multiple points of access, even outside meetings. Future work will
be focused on implementing and refining these recommendations.

References
Brignull, H., & Rogers, Y. (2003). Enticing people to interact with large public displays in public spaces. In
          Proceedings of, (p. 17). Ios Pr Inc.
Densham,    P.  (1991).  Spatial    decision  support   systems.  Geographical     information    systems:  Principles   and
          applications, 1, 403-412.
Klopfer, E., Yoon, S., & Um, T. (2005). Young Adventurers- Modeling of Complex Dynamic Systems with
          Elementary & Middle School Students. Journal of Computers in Math and Science Teaching, 24(2),
          157-178.
Lord,  C., Ross,   L., &    Lepper, M.    (1979). Biased   assimilation  and  attitude polarization:  The   effects of prior
          theories on subsequently considered evidence. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 37(11),
          2098-2109.
Wilensky, U., & Reisman, K. (2006). Thinking Like a Wolf, a Sheep, or a Firefly: Learning Biology Through
          Constructing   and   Testing    Computational    Theoriesâ"An      Embodied    Modeling    Approach.    Cognition
          and Instruction, 24(2), 171 - 209.
Wilensky, U., & Stroup, W. M. (2000). Networked Gridlock: Students Enacting Complex Dynamic Phenomena
          with  the HubNet     Architecture.   In   Proceedings  of  Fourth  International   Conference    of the  Learning
          Sciences, Ann Arbor, MI, USA, (pp. 282-289). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Zellner,  M.  (2008).   Embracing     Complexity      and  Uncertainty:   The  Potential of  Agent-Based      Modeling   for
          Environmental Planning and Policy. Planning Theory and Practice, 9(4), 437-457.

                                                        349  ·  © ISLS
