                                                ICLS 2010    Volume 2

                     Online Science Classroom Collaborations: A
Comparison of Domestic and International Learning Communities
    Steve Kerlin, Northern Kentucky University, BEP 277, Highland Heights, KY, 41099 kerlins1@nku.edu
Elizabeth Goehring, Pennsylvania State University, 208 Mueller, University Park, PA, 16802, exg15@psu.edu
William Carlsen, Pennsylvania State University, 150 Chambers, University Park, PA, 16802 wcarlsen@psu.edu

          Abstract: Students' views of their online collaboration and samples of scientific writing were
          studied within  a   principal contrast of  U.S.    students  in domestic      or international   class
          partnerships. Results show that U.S. students in international partnerships maintained a higher
          level of excitement about their partnership and wrote a larger number of accurate scientific
          claims using more evidence and certain discourse components. Findings from this study have
          implications for further research and classroom practice.

Introduction
Current   science learning  communities   are  often constrained     within  the physical   walls   of  a classroom.  In
contrast, scientific  communities  expand   beyond    the  physical   confines   of a   laboratory   or   meeting  room.
Scientists often engage in ongoing discourse with colleagues from all over the world. They participate in and
contribute to peer-reviewed    journals, newsletters,   list-serves, conferences,   and    web seminars.   The   science
education community can make use of online communication tools, as scientists have, to help students and
teachers venture out of their classroom and become involved in global learning communities (GLCs). Research
and thinking in this area of learning communities has focused on the contexts of group work, single classrooms,
or limited online interactions (e.g. Lave & Wenger, 1991; Kelly & Green, 1998). However, global science
education is emerging as a new area of research that has the possibility to significantly impact student discourse
and the structure of science education.

Context
This research is set in the context of the From Local to Extreme Environments (FLEXE) instructional unit on
energy concepts. FLEXE is an Earth Systems Science Project funded by the U.S. National Science Foundation
and developed     in partnership with   Global   Learning    through  Observation   to     Benefit the  Environment,  a
worldwide web-based science and environmental education program. In FLEXE, students and teachers from
United States, Thailand, Australia, and Germany along with deep-sea scientists engaged in online discussions
about scientific  data. FLEXE    (both   classroom  based    and on-line)    activities promote    student discourse  in
comparisons of local and extreme environments.
          Approximately 1400 students and 50 teachers were involved in the FLEXE program during the spring
of 2009. Most students were in grades seven through nine in Earth Science, General Science, or a related course.
Students worked locally in pairs to complete classroom activities and submit online responses. Students then
communicated      by way   of asynchronous    online  communication       in class  profiles,  peer  reviews     bioassay
experiments,  student-scientist  forums,  and  a wrap-up     deep-sea  research    cruise.  Local   environmental   data
provided by students were used in these and other online and in-class activities. A principal contrast of domestic
U.S. and U.S. to international class partnerships was established to study online learning communities. For a
thorough description of the design decisions considered during the construction of FLEXE online collaboration
tools see Kerlin, Goehring, Carlsen, Larsen, & Fisher (2009).

Methodological Approaches
A mixed methods approach was used to study the GLC established in the FLEXE program. Embedded surveys
called quick questions (QQs) were employed to gather students' reactions to their class partnerships. Qualitative
argumentation analysis of students' written scientific arguments characterized how students used evidence from
different sources to back their scientific claims. One QQ from each of two sets of questions was randomly given
to students upon completion of each online activity. The first, a multiple-choice question, was from a set about
science content and processes. The second question, a Likert scale question, was selected from a set of students'
views of the nature of science, attitudes toward science, and views of their class partnership. At this point, the
six Likert scale questions that characterized students' views of their class partnership have been analyzed and
are available for discussion. The Likert scale responses from samples of students are treated as interval data.
The treatment of the responses as such allows for the comparison of the responses using T-tests and univariate
two-way ANOVAs to determine differences between the two partnerships.
          Qualitative analysis of student writing samples was conducted to characterize U.S. students' scientific
writing. A framework for analysis of students' arguments with different data sources was applied to a stratified
random sample of two student arguments associated with each U.S. teacher from four activities within the unit.

                                                    350     ISLS
                                                 ICLS 2010     Volume 2

A few additional randomly selected student arguments were added to the samples to equalize the number of
samples from each partnership. The framework was iteratively refined throughout initial analysis but has its
foundations in an earlier studies by Kerlin, McDonald, & Kelly (2009), Jimenez-Aleixandre, Rodriguez, &
Duschl (2000), and Kelly, Regev, & Prothero (2005). This study also expands on earlier work by Kerlin et al.
(2009) and Hug and McNeil (2008) to gain understanding of how students use various primary and secondary
scientific data sources to justify scientific claims.

Findings
The trends from initial analysis of students' views of partnerships and student scientific writing all support the
hypothesis that international partnerships lead to favorable educational outcomes The embedded QQ results for
questions   about  student   excitement   of their    partnership  show    that  U.S.  students    in  international class
partnerships maintained    a  higher level   of excitement,    throughout    the instructional   unit, to learn  about the
environment of their partner school and the lives of students in that environment than U.S. students in domestic
class partnerships.
         Argumentative discourse analysis of samples of student writing from four different activities showed
favorable trends for participation of U.S. students in international partnerships. U.S. students in international
partnerships wrote a higher number and greater percentage of correct scientific claims than U.S. students in
domestic U.S. partnerships in three out of four of the activities analyzed. Students in international partnerships
used larger count, mean, and median bits of evidence to support their scientific claims. We also found that
students in international partnerships had fewer incorrect or invalid bits of evidence. In addition, U.S. students
in international class partnerships had greater use of contrast, experience, and causality evidentiary discourse
components.

Conclusions
The results from this study provide insight into student use of a complex set of data sources and views about
online class partnerships. Variation in environmental data provided by students in different online partnerships
and unfamiliarity   of perceived audiences      may   account  for   the results   described  above.   For example,   U.S.
students in international class partnerships examined environmental data from their partners that had a greater
chance of being dissimilar to their local environmental data than their counterparts in domestic partnerships.
Students innately considered and used the disparate scientific data more carefully and more thoroughly because
the data itself prompted them to think from different perspectives and reconsider scientific reasoning from a
global  stance.  The second   factor that may    account   for the   results is  a function   of the   perceived audience.
Throughout the activities students wrote responses to their teacher, scientists, and/or other students. Students
with international partners seemed to place more stock in the use of data to justify their written arguments.
         The methodologies employed have implications for use in other research projects and instructional
practice. The embedded QQ survey method may be particularly useful in other large-scale projects with on-line
components. The use of the argumentation analytic is useful in other studies of how students use data to support
their scientific arguments. The instructional implication from this study is that students should be provided with
opportunities to communicate with peers and use data sources from outside their classroom. The findings show
that science classrooms should begin to incorporate online communication tools and engage in GLCs.

References
Hug, B., McNeill, K. L. (2008). Use of first-hand and second-hand data in science: Does data type influence
         classroom conversations? International Journal of Science Education, 30(13), 1725-1751.
Jimenez-Aleixandre, M.P., Rodriguez, A. B., & Duschl, R. A. (2000). "Doing the lesson" or "doing science":
         Argument in high school genetics. Science Education, 84, 757-792.
Kelly,  G.  J., &  Green,  J. (1998).  The   social   nature   of knowing:    Toward   a sociocultural     perspective on
         conceptual change and knowledge construction. In B. Guzzetti & C. Hynd (Eds.), Perspectives on
         conceptual change: Multiple ways to understand knowing and learning in a complex world (pp. 145-
         181). Mahwah, N.J.: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Kelly, G. J., Regev, J., & Prothero, W. A. J. (2005, April 4-7). Assessing lines of evidence with argumentation
         analysis. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the National Association for Research in Science
         Teaching, Dallas, TX.
Kerlin, S., Goehring,   E.,  Carlsen, W.,    Larsen,  J., Fisher,  C.  (2009).   Design  of    an  online  global learning
         community: International collaboration of grades 7-9 science students. CSCL 2009 Proceedings Vol. 2.
Kerlin, S., McDonald,    S.,  Kelly, G. (2009).   Complexity      of secondary     scientific data sources  and   students'
         argumentative discourse. International Journal of Science Education, iFirst Article, 1-19.
Lave, J., & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning: Legitimate peripheral participation. Cambridge: Cambridge
         University Press.

                                                      351     ISLS
