                                                 ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 2

                                           Mathematics at Play
         Abstract: Based on interviews with 21 families, we found that school-aged children and their
         families engage in rich forms of mathematical reasoning as they engage in play and leisure
         activities at home. We present examples of the wide variety of activities and kinds of math
         reported,   as well  as an  in-depth   look at a  few   cases.  From   our  results,  we draw   design
         implications for linking formal and informal mathematics learning.

Introduction
Although addressed by important visionaries in education (Vygotsky, 1967; Piaget, 1932), play and leisure are
largely perceived   to  be  orthogonal  to  children's  learning, especially once   children   reach  school age   (Okan,
2003).  Research suggests that play activities may be valuable for learning (Rieber, 1996), particularly in the
domain of mathematics (Guberman & Saxe, 2000; Siegler & Ramani, 2008).               However, relatively little research
relates play and mathematics learning in the context of the home setting. The aims of this project are three-fold:
First, we seek  to  investigate  how   families encounter    and  engage  in mathematical     practices  during   play and
leisure activities. Second, we aim to provide a broad, cross-family account of the kinds of math involved in
these  activities,  as well  as  an in-depth   analysis within    case  families. Third, we    hope   to develop    design
implications from our results that bridge the informal mathematics learning we see in families with the formal
mathematics in schools.

Method
21 families, who represented the racial and economic diversity of the San Francisco Bay Area, participated in
semi-structured    interviews as  part of   a larger study   (Goldman   et. al, 2006;   Pea et. al,   forthcoming).    The
interviews occurred in the home, lasted approximately two hours each, and centered on contexts in family life
previously shown to be fertile for mathematical problem solving. The current analysis draws on this data set to
specifically consider    the many   instances   in the  interviews   where   play   and leisure  organically     came  into
conversation as families discussed mathematics. To conduct the analysis, we revisited our previously cataloged
database to look at all the instances in which families discussed a problem they believed to have involved math,
looking for instances that involved play and leisure as defined by Rieber (1996).
 We coded each instance, noting the family, the members of that family participating in the activity, an overall
summary of the activity, and the kinds of math that were involved. The play/leisure activities were broken into
three  categories:  hobbies  and  projects, games,   and informal  sports   related activities (i.e., activities related to
sports but that were not being officially organized by a coach at the time).      See Table 1 for a small sample of the
full table of play/leisure activities reported thatinvolved mathematics.

Table 1: A short excerpt of our Play and Leisure Analysis; includes hobbies and projects as well as games

Family Name        Who was involved?        What was the event?        Kinds of Math
Echevarria         Daughter                 Inventing make-            Arithmetic, Comparing Magnitudes,
                                            believe businesses         Decimals, Optimization, Proportional
                                                                       Reasoning
Pulepule           Mom, Daughters,          Making Tongan mats         Arithmetic, Estimation, Measurement,
                   Relatives, and                                      Proportional Reasoning
                   Friends
Walters            Daughter, Son,           Playing bridge             Arithmetic, Logic, Probability
                   Grandfather, and
                   Grandmother
Muntz              Daughter                 Playing Neopets            Arithmetic, Comparing magnitudes, Data
                                            game online                analysis, Interest Rates

Case Studies
In addition to the cross-family analysis, we examined several cases in more depth.          Given the space limitations
of this paper, we highlight two of our examples.

Playing Neopets

The Muntz family includes the father, Donald, the mother, Nancy, and a 6th grade daughter, Erin. Like another
middle school girl in our sample, Erin's plays Neopets, an online game where players care for computer pets. In
this environment, players can buy things with Neopoints, which they earn by playing games. Erin buys things at

                                                     352   ·  © ISLS
                                               ICLS 2010   ·   Volume 2

the Neopoints store, and then later sells them for a profit at an auction. The balance of Neopoints is kept in an
online bank account, which earns interest. To earn Neopoints, Erin sends in the scores she received playing a
game. She is only allowed to send in three scores per day, so if she gets a score of 100, she has to decide if later
she is more likely get a higher or lower score, and whether to send it in. Erin says she thinks about her average
score in making the decision.    From this small excerpt from the data, we can start to link how Erin is using
standard financial practices such as maximizing interest and profit to achieve her goals in the game.

Imaginary Businesses
In a second    example, the  entire family  is  involved   in  a  play activity, supporting    the middle  school-aged
daughter's mathematical activity. The Echevarria family is from Columbia. The mother has lived in the US for
14 years, the father for 19 years. Their two children--the younger 6th grade daughter Sabrina and the older 9th
grade daughter Rebecca--were born in the USA.       The dad noted how "Sabrina loves to set up businesses, here,
at home," as she "goes off by herself" to create make-believe businesses. Sabrina described a recent example, a
laundry business: "I have to set up everything, like a stand, and figure out what materials I will need, and make
things on paper for it to work out.   I have to figure out how much I have to have in my cash register, and to
spend on things, for the business to work." When asked how she kept track of all of this, she replied: "I have
different prices for different things to be washed - pants $3 and shirts like $2.99. And then from these prices I
kind of figure out how much I'd need for washing machine costs. And how many people's things coming in I
would need to make my business work." The family reviewed the list of businesses she had developed in this
way: magic shows, laundry, bank, restaurant, grocery store, play house. Her father said: "She goes off all by
herself until she invites us to the show or to buy things ­ she plays the lady who sells the tickets at the entrance
and also plays the star of the show." These businesses have large socio-dramatic components: she dresses up,
prices items, and requires her family to come and buy things.

Design implications
In this analysis we look specifically at play and leisure activities to understand how math is understood in the
context  of informal  and fun activities. Family  members      discussed  hobbies,   projects, games,  and sports.  We
found that these events involve various family members and a range of math, including 2D and 3D geometric
reasoning, estimation, arithmetic, probability, and proportional reasoning. The diversity of math-related problem
solving in these activities, their repetitive nature, and the co-participation of family members make them ripe
contexts for math  learning, especially   since these play    and leisure activities are  a matter  of pleasure for the
family members. Activities such as these are mathematically engaging, and in some cases, have links to other
STEM fields such as engineering, science and technology.
         The analysis of play and leisure is helpful as we move into creating designs for tools that encourage
mathematical identification, problem solving, and support. It is also instrumental for building our design and
cross-setting research work in and between homes and schools. We see more profound opportunities to craft
boundary-crossing supports for mathematizing experience and supporting mathematical alignment across home
and  school settings. Our  upcoming   work  builds  off    of these results, providing   tools for family members to
identify and treat daily activities in math-rich ways, raising awareness of math in family life and encouraging
family conversations and problem solving with mathematics. For schools, we will design resources for upper
elementary and middle-school that help teachers recognize and utilize families as resources for mathematics
learning and thinking.

References
Goldman, S., Martin, L., Pea, R.,   Booker, A., & Blair, K. P. (2006). Problem Emergence, Problem Solving, and
         Mathematics   in Family  Life. Proceedings   of the  7th International  Conference  of the Learning Sciences,
         Bloomington, Indiana. 1088-1093.
Guberman, S. R., & Saxe, G. B. (2000). Mathematical Problems and Goals in Children's Play of an Educational
         Game. Mind, Culture, and Activity, 7(3), 201-216.
Okan, Z. (2003). Edutainment: is learning at risk? British Journal of Educational Technology, 34(3), 255­264.
Pea, R., & Martin, L. (forthcoming). Values that occasion and guide mathematics in the family. In O'Connor,
         K., & Penuel, W.R. (Eds.), Research on Learning as a Human Science. New York: Teachers College.
Piaget, J. (1932). The Moral Judgment of the Child. Glencoe, Ill.: Free Press.
Rieber,  L. P. (1996).  Seriously considering   play: Designing     interactive  learning environments   based  on  the
         blending  of   microworlds,     simulations,    and    games.    Educational    Technology     Research    and
         Development, 44(2), 43-58.
Siegler, R. S., & Ramani, G. B. (2008). Playing linear numerical board games promotes low-income children's
         numerical development. Developmental Science, 11(5), 655-661.
Vygotsky, L. S. (1967). Play and its role in the mental development of the child. Soviet Psychology, 5(3), 6­18.

                                                   353   ·  © ISLS
