                                               ICLS 2010    Volume 2

                   Learning as mediated by a nodal ecology:
Findings from studies of Gamestar Mechanic and Quest to Learn
!
        Abstract:    The   authors  present    two research    studies related   to game-based     learning
        environments designed to help middle and high school students develop systems thinking
        skills. Pre and post testing and mixed-methods (quantitative and qualitative) longitudinal
        collection methods were used.       The two studies focus on: (a) Gamestar Mechanic, an
        online video game, and (b) Quest to Learn, a games-based school which recently opened
        in New     York   City. Both  studies   assessed  middle    school students'   ability  to develop
        system-thinking skills as result of participating in these educational interventions. Levels
        of change in the development of systems thinking will be described in the paper, but the
        authors' main focus concerns how these gains were attained by the students. What role
        did context play in the learning process?         The authors argue that a "nodal ecology" of
        redundant   and   predictable learning  experiences     serve  to explain   changes  in  cognitive
        development.
!
This poster presentation presents two studies that assessed middle school participants' development of
systems thinking after participating in games-based learning environments.            Both learning environments
were designed   using   a  "nodal  ecologies   framework,"     and  claims    about   cognitive development     have
therefore been  analyzed   to   understand  the efficacy    of this framework.      Conceptualization   of  learning
contexts as learning ecologies was guided by research and theories pointing to meaning making, cognitive
development, and identity formation as a process whereby individuals travel through sets of varied but
inter-related learning spaces (Bronfenbrenner & Morris, 1998; Goldman-Segall, 1998; Lave & Wenger,
1991; White, 2008).   The learning ecologies for both studies discussed in this paper have been framed
around a set of interacting, interdependent learning nodes.         Nodes in a particular ecology are defined as
interconnected, but distinct physical or virtual spaces that house predictable and redundant instances of
specialized content (e.g, systems-thinking, algebra, fashion, basketball), social activity, learning tools, and
a discourse the defines certain ways of knowing and doing.

        One study employed a game called Gamestar Mechanic, intended to help middle and high school
students develop basic game design skills. Both game design, as well as systems thinking skills, were
conceptualized as dialogic in nature. The overall study, designed using design-based research methods
(Barab, 2006; Barab & Squire, 2004), focused on testing the viability of using Gamestar Mechanic--and
the learning ecology it instantiated--to improve students' systems thinking skills. A principal research
question that guided the study was: Does a learning ecology generated and mediated by the game design of
Gamestar Mechanic improve participants' ability to engage in systems thinking?

        The second study, which is currently underway and uses both qualitative and quantitative methods
(Shute, 2009), similarly considers the nodal ecology of Quest to Learn, a new games-based school that
opened  in New   York   City  in September     2009,   in relation  to middle    school students'   development  of
systems   thinking skills.   Similar  to   the  Gamestar    study,   Quest    to Learn  has    designed a   learning
environment framed around a nodal ecology of learning experiences.         Enabling students to develop systems
thinking is also a core goal of the school.

Brief overview of systems thinking
We are currently witnessing a foregrounding of complexity as one of the defining characteristics of our
new  century. Stephen   Hawking    (2000)   has  said  that  we   are  living in  the era of   complexity   and that
complexity itself will form the science of the 21st century. Similarly, Heinz Pagel (1988) has written that
those who master this science will form the economic, political, and cultural superpowers of this new
century (see also Rambihar & Rambihar, 2009).        Systems thinking for both studies is defined as the ability
to see and understand the "big picture."    This requires learners to solve problems using a wholistic versus a
reductive (e.g., considering discrete variables) approach (Shute, Masduki, Donmez, et al., in press; Torres,
2009a, 2009b).  Specific systems thinking skills that both studies assessed include:       dynamic thinking (i.e.,
the abilty to account for reciprocal interactivity between variables), closed-loop thinking (i.e., the ability to

                                                   354     ISLS
                                            ICLS 2010    Volume 2

account for reinforcing and balancing feecback dynamics and time delays), and model transfering (the
ability to see how similar system dynamics may be present in other seemingly dissimilar systems).

The crux:    Implications and significance
While this presentation will offer an overview of systems thinking, along with quantitative learning gains
students have made in their systems thinking development, the key issue concerns the research and design
of learning environments. In most schools, students are   given opportunities to learn in one primary node--
the classroom  context.  Furthermore, in   most instances   they   are learning about  something  instead  of
learning to be something, such as a chemist, historian, journalist, and so on.  Seeing learning as intricately
tied to identity development, both leaning interventions discussed here ask students to step into roles and
specific identities (e.g., game designer, scientist, historian). The two studies we report on depart from a
customary "learning about" approach to teaching and learning. Indeed, the notion of cognitive development
resulting from social, physical, and mental activity through the passage of nodes offers a striking departure
from the design of learning environments in schools today.

References
Barab, S. (2006). Design-based research:   A methodological toolkit for the learning scientist. In R. K.
        Sawyer (Ed.), The Cambridge handbook of the learning sciences. Cambridge, England:
        Cambridge University Press.
Barab, S., & Squire, K. (2004). Design-based research: Putting a stake in the ground The Journal of the
        Learning Sciences, 13(1), 1-14.
Bronfenbrenner, U., & Morris, P. (1998). The ecology of developmental processes. In W. Damon & R. M.
        Lerner (Eds.), in Handbook of Child Psychology. New York: John Wiley & Sons.
Goldman-Segall, R. (1998). Point of viewing children's thinking. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
        Associates, Inc.
Hawking, S. (2000). Science in the next millennium Retrieved December 20, 2008, from
        http://clinton4.nara.gov/ Initiatives/Millennium/shawking.html
Lave, J., & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning:   Legitimate peripheral participation. New York:
        Cambridge University Press.
Pagel, H. (1988). The dreams of reason:   The computer and the rise of the sciences of complexity. New
        York: Simon and Schuster.
Rambihar, V. S., & Rambihar, V. (2009). Complexity science may help in defining health. BMJ.      Retrieved
        on February 2, 2009, from http://www.bmj.com/cgi/content/extract/338/jan09_1/b32
Shute, V. (2009). Assessing Quest to Learn, MacArthur Funding Proposal, August 2009 to January 2011
        (18 months).
Shute, V. J., Masduki, I., Donmez, O., Kim, Y. J., Dennen, V. P., Jeong, A. C., & Wang, C-Y. (in press).
        Assessing key competencies within game environments. To appear in D. Ifenthaler, P. Pirnay-
        Dummer, N. M. Seel (Eds.), Computer-based diagnostics and systematic analysis of knowledge,
        New York, NY: Springer-Verlag.
Torres, R. J. (2009a). (Dissertation) Learning on a 21st century platform:  Gamestar Mechanic as a means
        to game design and systems-thinking skills with a nodal ecology. Ann Arbor: UMI ProQuest.
Torres, R. J. (2009b). Learning on a 21st century platform:    Gamestar Mechanic as a means to game
        design and systems thinking within a nodal ecology. New York University: ProQuest
        Dissertations.
White, H. C. (2008). Identity and control: How social formations emerge. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
        University Press.

!
!

!

                                                355     ISLS
