                                                ICLS 2010    Volume 2

The        Role      of        Student         Agency           and          Sustained            Inquiry         on
Collaboration and Learning of Science Practices

         Abstract:   We  redesigned   a  traditional  inquiry-based    science  unit,  creating a  unit  that
         incorporates student agency and sustained inquiry during science inquiry experiences.         Using
         a quasi-experimental   design, the two  units  were   compared.     Fourteen  teachers in 5th grade
         classrooms in one school district in the Pacific Northwest participated.     Data collected include
         an  embedded  inquiry    assessment and  video-recordings      of student discourse.   Preliminary
         findings show that students in the redesigned unit saw gains in both collaboration skills and
         scientific practices.

Major Issues Addressed
At present, many schools employ hands-on science curricula to help students become proficient in aspects of
science inquiry and knowledge. However, our analysis suggests that for the most part these curricula do not
engage students in what might be considered authentic science practice in the sense that students do not conduct
sustained, original inquiry nor have agency in determining the course of their inquiry.
         Research suggests that students can develop and pursue--with teacher scaffolding--their own program
of research related to a complex problem (Chinn & Malhotra, 2002; Metz, 2004).           Building on this work, we
conjecture that students, when provided with the opportunity and appropriately supported to engage in authentic
science, will be motivated and more likely to engage in sense-making and knowledge-building in the context of
their work, and hence, more likely to acquire a deep understanding of science concepts and inquiry processes.
         To evaluate these ideas, we examined collaborative learning processes (Herrenkohl & Guerra, 1998)
and learning outcomes in elementary classrooms using two different hands on science units--one (of our own
design) that offered students   greater agency  and   opportunities    for sustained, original  inquiry, and  one that
involved a series of discrete investigations directed by the classroom teacher.

Potential Significance of Work
This research has the potential to contribute to our understanding of how student-driven, authentic science
inquiry influences student engagement, discourse, and learning of science concepts and processes. It also has the
potential to contribute to our understanding of effective design principles for science curricula.

Theoretical and Methodological Approach
Taking Science to School (Duschl, Schweingruber & Shouse, 2007) suggests that teaching "science as practice"
involves "engaging children in designing and conducting investigations and answering complex questions" (p.
256). In inquiry science classrooms, students are purposefully engaging in scientific practices, grappling with
important science ideas, and building conceptual understanding through meaningful discourse and activity. In
contrast to this idealized depiction, current classroom practice more often involves a teacher giving students the
questions and procedures for a series of discrete science investigations, and students' scientific work involves
conducting   these investigations and   interpreting the   results. In these classrooms,  students'   work is largely
procedural, and lacks personalization and consequence (other than a grade).
         In the present study, we compared a "traditional" science inquiry unit to a unit reformulated to embody
more authentic science inquiry practices. Both units addressed similar concepts and skills, involved student
collaboration, and were "hands on." The cornerstones of the "authentic" unit were student-choice/agency and
student-guided  collaborative   investigations related    to an over-arching    problem   (Vye,    Schwartz,  Barron,
Bransford, Zech & CTGV, 1998).       Namely, small teams of students were challenged to design and conduct a
series of investigations that would inform their design of a habitat for isopods. We hypothesized that students in
the Isopod Habitat unit would participate more productively in inquiry practices--that is, show greater evidence
of sense   making  and knowledge-building      over  time--and  be   relatively more   proficient  at science inquiry
practices.
         The study involves a quasi-experimental design. Demographically matched schools were randomly
assigned to either a comparison (i.e., traditional unit) or intervention (i.e., isopod habitat unit) group. A total of
fourteen 5th grade teachers in one school district in the Pacific Northwest participated for 12 weeks each. Eight
teachers and 122 students participated in the Isopod Habitat unit; 6 teachers and 72 students participated in the
Comparison unit.
         Data sources presented in this paper will include: a) students' performance on an embedded inquiry
assessment that was conducted during week 10 in both the Comparison and Isopod Habitat classes; and b)
videos of students' designing two investigations (during the first and last quarters of the unit).
         In the embedded inquiry assessment, students in both conditions were asked to generate their own

                                                    356     ISLS
                                               ICLS 2010    Volume 2

research ideas including an investigative question, a prediction, and an explanation for their prediction. They
conducted the study, interpreted their findings, and then were asked to decide upon and justify a good follow-up
study. Two coders "blind" to treatment condition scored students' responses.
          For the purposes  of  this paper,   we have  selected   one group  from each  of  2  classes in both   the
Comparison and Isopod Habitat conditions (for a total of 4 student groups).       For the Comparison classes we
selected the 2 expert teachers who had provided students with an opportunity to design a study.        Similarly for
the Isopod Habitat classes, we selected 2 teachers whom we thought had implemented the unit with special
fidelity. The groups were chosen based on the completeness of the video     records.
          For each of the 4 student groups, we selected videos of their design work early and late in the unit.
This affords us the opportunity to examine the extent to which students' discourse changed over time as well as
a comparative   perspective  on discourse   processes  under  conditions  of greater/lesser agency   and  sustained
thinking.  The video records were transcribed for discourse analysis.

Preliminary Findings, Conclusions and Implications
As illustrated in Figure 1, results from HLM analysis of items comprising the embedded inquiry assessment
indicate that Isopod Habitat Challenge students performed significantly better than Comparison students in the
following areas: generating a quality investigative question (p < .0005), prediction (p < .1) and, design for
follow-up study (p < .05). This association cannot be considered causal, since the assignment procedure was not
random. However, in these analyses, differences in baseline achievement are not a likely explanation for the
estimated effects, since students' previous year's achievement scores on the Washington Assessment of Student
Learning (WASL) standardized tests were used to control for prior achievement.

Figure 1. Performance on Embedded Inquiry Assessment

          The discourse analyses    are on-going; however,    preliminary analysis   indicates that Isopod Habitat
students show greater evidence of knowledge-building over time.       More students contributed during discussions,
and there were more knowledge-building interactions between students.     Lengths of exchanges were longer, and
the Isopod Habitat students used greater precision in their language.     In addition, engagement was markedly
higher for the Isopod Habitat students.  Preliminary findings indicate the value of building sustained inquiry and
student agency into scientific inquiry experiences.

References
Chinn, C., & Malhotra, B. (2002).    Epistemologically authentic inquiry in schools: A theoretical framework for
          evaluating inquiry tasks. Science Education, 86, 175-218.
Duschl, R. A., Schweingruber, H. A., & Shouse, A. W. (Eds.). (2007). Taking science to school: Learning and
          teaching science in Grades K-8. Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
Herrenkohl, L., & Guerra, M. R. (1998). Participant structures, scientific discourse, and student engagement in
          fourth grade. Cognition and Instruction, 16(4), 431-473.
Metz, K. E. (2004). Children's understanding of scientific inquiry: Their conceptualization of uncertainty in
          investigations of their own design. Cognition and Instruction, 22(2), 219-290.
Vye, N. J., Schwartz, D.L., Bransford, J.D., Barron, B.J., Zech, L.K., & Cognition and Technology Group at
          Vanderbilt (1998). SMART      environments   that  support  monitoring, reflection,  and  revision. In D.
          Hacker, J. Dunlosky & A. Graessar (Eds.), Metacognition in educational theory and practice (pp. 305-
          346). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported in part through NSF grant # 0354453 and a grant from the Bill and Melinda Gates
Foundation. However, the ideas expressed in this article are not necessarily those of either these agencies.

                                                   357     ISLS
