                                                  ICLS 2010    Volume 2

Reviving Dewey's "Reflective Thinking" Framework for the Design
 of Problems in Virtual Learning Environment-based Assessments
                                        of Content and Inquiry
   David M. Majerich, Diane J. Ketelhut, Catherine S. Schifter, Temple University, Philadelphia, PA 19122
                   Brian C. Nelson, Younsu Kim, Arizona State University, Temple, AZ 85287
   Email: majericd@temple.edu, djk@temple.edu, brian.nelson@asu.edu, css@temple.edu, ykim@asu.edu

        Abstract:      This poster  presentation  revives    Dewey's    "reflective   thinking"   framework     to
        inform    the  design  of   problems  for virtual   environment-based    assessments    of   content and
        inquiry.   After describing  "reflective  thinking"  and illuminating a conceptualization of what is
        a   problem,   we   show  how   we are using  the   "reflective  thinking"    framework   to  inform  the
        design of problems in our SAVE Science virtual environment assessment modules.

Virtual Learning Environments (VLEs)
Since digital    media are  increasingly  becoming   a   part  of  students'  lives   in and  out  of school,   VLEs and
supporting technologies can be woven into the fabric of their everyday school science experiences to prompt
reflective thinking.   It has been shown that contemporary education using virtual methods of inquiry can play a
significant role  in   substituting for physical   experimentation      in K-12, because     they  obviate   the need  for
expensive equipment and minimize the impact of deficient training for teachers on how to implement inquiry
(Ketelhut and Nelson, in press; Nelson & Ketelhut, 2007).           Furthermore, it has also been shown that virtual
environments have the advantage of giving students time to `reflect' on their course of action (Schank & Cleary,
1995). But, what are the design heuristics necessary for prompting reflective thinking? In this paper, we propose
a framework for designing problem-based VLEs to promote reflection based on Dewey's Reflective Thinking
Framework (1910). We discuss how this framework was used to design modular assessments in an NSF-funded
project, called Situated Assessment in Virtual Environment for Science Content and Inquiry (SAVE Science).

Reflective Thinking
"Reflective thinking," according to Dewey (1910), is "[a]ctive, persistent, and careful consideration of any
belief or supposed form of knowledge in the light of the grounds that support it, and the further conclusions to
which it tends" (p. 6).     Reflective thinking is part of the critical thinking process of analyzing and making
judgments about what has occurred or what problem has been posed.               Reflective thinking ranges from simple
acceptance of a judgment to deep inquiry into posed problems.
        Dewey developed and articulated the four steps required for reflective thinking, or problem solving.
The four steps are:    1) identify or define the problem; 2) suggest solution; 3) collect evidence; and 4) conclude.
Although the steps are enumerated, reflective thinking (problem solving) does not necessarily occur in that
order or in a linear fashion.  One does not have to complete the first step in order to proceed to the second.         The
formal steps involved in reflective thinking are less important than a sequence that results in the solution to the
specific problem.     Furthermore, during reflective thinking the problem solver goes back and forth through
general stages before settling on a solution.

Reflective Thinking Problem Design
Problems    that arise from   experiences  can be  arrayed     on a continuum    with    simple problems   (easy   task) to
complex problems (hard task) as extremities.       Simple      problems  are  those   that typically appear  in  classroom
science and mathematics and can be solved easily.        The simplest of all problems would be solved progressing
through each of Dewey's four reflective thinking stages only once before a conclusion is made.                   However,
problems in life are never this easy.      Complex   problems      can  be  difficult social  problems, like  hunger   and
poverty, and are hard to solve.     As problems become increasingly more complex, the problem solving pathway
through the reflective thinking stages can occur multiple times before a conclusion is drawn.
        According to Dewey (1910), experiences are imbued with rich sources of problems.               He believed that a
problem  causes    a   "state of  perplexity,  hesitation,   [or]  doubt"   (p.  9)   creates a   tension  mental    unrest
(disequilibrium) and   suspense.  This  imbalance was a precondition       for inquiry and  reflective thinking.   Indeed,
the perception of a disturbance "would lead to an act of search or investigation directed toward bringing to light
further facts which serve to corroborate or to nullify the suggested belief" (p. 9).           Dewey assumed that this
tension was   often  vague  and  not clearly  focused.    In fact,  his first state of reflective thinking   was   a search
performed within the environment for information that would clarify the problem.
        What are the characteristics of a good problem that creates this mental unrest? Drawing on Dewey's
notion of genuine problems (1910), Polanyi (1957) suggests that good problems should: 1) hint that there is a

                                                     358     ISLS
                                                     ICLS 2010     Volume 2

known but hidden solution; 2) result in the amount of effort matching the reward of finding that solution; and 3)
have clues that hint at or are part of the solution. Dewey (1910) further recommended that the problem should
be based in a story, and should have interest for the solver. Foreshadowing Csikszentmihalyi's concept of flow
years later (1990), Polanyi (1957) cautions that the "logical gap" (the difference between what is known and
what is needed to be known to solve the problem) is a major factor to be considered in designing the problem.

Applying Reflecting Thinking Problem Design to SAVE Science
The SAVE Science project is designing and implementing a series of virtual environment-based assessment
adventures (or quests) used for assessing both science content and inquiry in middle grades. To do this, we are
creating assessment    quests    for  students   to solve  using    knowledge   they  have  gained  in   their middle  school
science classroom. We are using the above framework to guide our design of our assessment quests. "Sheep
trouble" is  the first quest     that we   designed  to  assess   student  understanding   of  concepts   of   adaptation   and
structure/function. First, to create a problem with a knowable but hidden solution, we have students greeted bya
medieval farmer who asks them to help him find a scientific solution for why his new sheep are dying. His
brother and many of the townsfolk think that there is no findable solution, but he is convinced that there is and
that the student-scientist can help him find it. Second, we are supporting student effort as they progress through
the problem by foregrounding relevant elements and events in the virtual environment. We are doing this by
highlighting computer agents and other interactive items. Third, students are provided clues to the solution
through posters, computer agents, and the design of the actual world. For example, a poster shows that the new
sheep come from a very different locale (flat, snowy island) from the current farm (hilly, rocky, and dry). By
exploring, students also discover that to find the best grass to eat, the sheep need to climb the hill. Finally, the
problem is firmly based in a narrative that includes helping the farmer save his sheep from the town executioner
who is under orders to destroy them unless proof that they are not `bad magic' is found.

SAVE Science Pilot
A pilot was conducted in May 2009 in a mid-Atlantic school. Twenty students participated in the sheep trouble
module. While this was primarily a usability implementation, we were also evaluating our problem design
framework. Using students' own words (see table 1), we discovered that our problem narrative was interesting.
All students felt that the solution was discoverable as witnessed by their engagement with the project. Students
used the provided clues to solve the problem and when questioned, pointed to those clues in their rationale.
Finally, students indicated that our `logical gap' might have been too small as many students asked for more
complexity or difficulty in future modules.
Table 1. Example student comments on the four aspects of our design framework (n=20).
Solution availability             Effort-benefit ratio            Clues to problem         Narrative interest
it   was    fun   with     the    It     was     really    fun    I  liked   how     you   its really fun
evidence  that   you   had    to  because    you    got to go     could    interact with
find on  the    two kinds    of   around and explore why          the different people
sheep                             the new sheep were sick
the   game       was    very      it     was   sort     of   a    Give  a  second    hint  its real enough     looking that  I
intriguing.  It was  a  brain     challenge.                      about      what     the  can really get into it.
puzzle but still lots of fun                                      problem is
I think this a great way for      I   think  the barriers   of    I need more stuff to     But the story will get old and it
students to test their skills     the game was too small.         interact with            would    probably    be  better   if
                                                                                           there were different challenges
You   get    to  figure    out    It was fairly easy              (need) more clues or     It  seemed     like   a  real-life
what's wrong                                                      hints                    question
the  most   interesting  part     Make     a bit harder    and                             It  was  fun    and   realistic.  It
was trying to find out what       longer                                                   didn't   feel like  we  were   just
was wrong with sheep.                                                                      taking a test on a blank screen.

References
Csikszentmihalyi, M. (1990). Flow: The psychology of optical experience. New York: Harper Perennial.
Dewey, J.   (1910).  How we think.       Boston: Heath.
Ketelhut, D.J., and Nelson, B. (in press). Designing for real-world scientific inquiry in virtual environments.
         Educational Research.
Nelson,  B., and    Ketelhut,    D.   J. (2007). Scientific  inquiry    in multi-user  virtual environments.    Educational
         Psychology Review 19(3), p. 265-283.
Polanyi, M.  (1957).   Problem solving.      British Journal for the Philosophy of Science, 8(30), 89-103.
Schank,  R. and Cleary, C.    (1995). Engines for education. Hove, UK: Lawrence Erlbaum             Associates.

                                                         359     ISLS
