                                               ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 2
iMVT for Science Learning

            Developing an iMVT Pedagogy for Science Learning

             Baohui Zhang (baohui.zhang@nie.edu.sg), Xiaoxuan Ye, See Kit Foong, Peichun Chia
                 National Institute of Education, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore

          Abstract: We summarize an emerging pedagogical approach to learning science subjects as
          iMVT (Modeling and Visualization Technology Integrated Inquiry-based Learning) based on
          our school-based research and the literature of technology for science education. The authors
          use evidence in their chemistry, biology, and physics studies to show the potential of using
          iMVT as a uniformed theoretical framework for designing effective learning environments to
          support science learning.

1. The iMVT Innovative Pedagogy
We summarize an innovative pedagogy that applies to chemistry, biology, physics, and perhaps other subject
learning as iMVT (Modeling and Visualization Technology integrated inquiry-based learning). It is a
collaborative inquiry-based pedagogy to address student science learning difficulties. AModeling approach
allows students to represent and construct understanding of science phenomena as complex systemsby
elaborating on variables, relationships, and the interaction among the components of the systems. Visualization
is to simulate abstract and invisible interactions (e.g. particle level interaction during chemistry reactions)
through visible manipulative. This usually involves the use of Technologies. Figure 1 provides a process model
of the iMVT pedagogy according to a chemistry study of our project Enhancing Inquiry-based Science Learning
through Modeling and Visualization Technologies. Students started from asking questions like `what affects the
speed of chemical reaction'. Next they made their hypotheses, designed and carried out lab investigations,
collected data to analyze how different variables (e.g. temperature and concentration) affect the speed of
chemical reaction, and then derived the conclusions. Based on their observations in real lab, they further
explored what might happen at particle level that affected their data by drawing paper models to explain the
micro-level interaction like the example shown in Figure 2. However, this was not as efficient and effective as
running computer models such as NetLogo chemistry models as shown in Figure 1. Also in Figure 1, we can see
that students actually worked in pairs collaboratively and their teacher served as a facilitator to guide their
model-based inquiry process. The elaboration of this iMVT approach used data from the project mentioned
above. The process model is similar to a modeling-based inquiry process described in a paper by Hay and his
colleagues (Hay, Kim, & Roy, 2004 ). Although learning sciences through the i, M, V. T described above is not
uncommon, to put them together to form an iMVT framework can be a new paradigm to reshape the science
learning pedagogy when using technology. The core idea is that student modeling and visualization practices
were not "add-ons" to teacher-centered instruction but an integrated part of student-centered inquiry processes.

Figure 1. The iMVT pedagogy                Figure 2. Paper model: How temperature affect the speed of reaction

2. Subject Characteristics
Chemistry is a science that systematically studies the composition, properties, and reactivity of matter at the
atomic and molecular level. Johnstone (1982) indicated three worlds of chemistry: the macroscopic, the
microscopic, and the symbolic world.    The symbolic or representational world is used by scientists to reason    and
represent the dynamic interactions in the micro world and how the visiblephenomena appear to our senses.
Modeling is central to chemists' work to describe, explain, and even predict the behaviors of chemical
phenomena using chemistry representations. When the micro-level phenomena are visualized using models, it is
easier to understand and learn (Gilbert & Treagust, 2009).   Physics is concerned with the observation,
understanding and prediction of natural phenomena and the behavior of man-made systems. In order to create
quantitative predictions, physics uses mathematical models of experimental observations; the equations for the
model are generated and the model formed related back to what is observed experimentally (Quality Assurance

                                                                                                                   1

                                                   360  ·  © ISLS
                                                ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 2
iMVT for Science Learning

Agency for Higher Education, 2008). Biology is the subject of life and living organisms. Biologists answer
questions about diversity and about the common characteristics of living organisms through their investigation
(Quality Assurance Agency    for Higher  Education, 2008).    Models take up    the intermediate position between  the
observed reality of phenomena and the theory explaining it (France, 2000). Biological models are used in
biology to represent the empirical systems such as DNA double-helical structure and biologists often describe
models as having three components ­ parameters, variables, and laws, while laws are the relationships between
parameters and variables (Otto & Day, 2007). Modeling process is utilized by biologist to express this
relationship and make sense of life. The iMVT approach is in essence central to chemistry, physics and biology;
students should also benefit from iMVT when learning natural and probably social phenomena as systems.

3. Empirical Findings
In our project, there were three studies on chemistry, biology, and physics, respectively. Each had one learning
sciences research agenda. The studies were carried out in two Singapore secondary schools to explore the ideal
conditions for using iMVT to facilitate student learning. The chemistry study compared two different modeling
software in supporting students to learn the same chemistry topic. We studied how equation-based modeling
tool (Model-It) and agent-based modeling tool (NetLogo) facilitated student learning the Speed of chemical
reaction as described at the beginning of this paper. The results showed that students in both classes improved
their content understanding significantly measured by pre- and post-tests (Zhang, Deng, Jacobson, & Kim,
2008). The physics study went beyond using algebraic models for teaching the physics of electricity, which was
supported by real laboratory experiments that verify Ohm's law, formulae for resistance of series and parallel
circuit. With NetLogo models, we enabled students to visualize the electricity phenomenon at microscopic level,
such as the behavior of electrons under varying voltage and resistances; the software also allowed for relating
voltage to velocity, current to number of electrons and resistance to the time taken for electrons to travel from
one point  to another.  The number    of  electrons  and  time  are  concrete concepts   as compared  to   current and
resistance that are more abstract in nature. Students overcame many misconceptions and learning difficulties.
Analysis  of  pre-tests and post-tests   showed   large  improvements    in understanding   (Pathak, Jacobson,  Kim,
Zhang, & Deng, 2008). The biology study compared different conditions in applying visualization software
called Biologica to  facilitate secondary    four students  in learning  genetics. Results  showed   the open-inquiry
environment with manipulative in general improved student understanding significantly measured by pre- and
post tests (Zhang et al., 2008). All the three studies collected both process (e.g. video recordings of student
computer screen activities and conversation when using modeling and visualization tools) and outcome data
(e.g. student understanding of modeling measure by survey questionnaires). Preliminary analysis results showed
a combination of i, M, V, T had great potential in engaging students in representing, simulating, and testing their
ideas about how things were related in natural phenomena to gain conceptual understanding of science.

4. Conclusions and Discussion
In this short paper, we analyzed subject characteristics of chemistry, biology, and physics to argue that iMVT
can be a pedagogy that applies to all the three and perhaps more subjects. We present results from our project to
show the efficacy of the iMVT pedagogy. Adapting scientific models and visualization tools in education has
been the focus of important research not only for physical models (Lehrer & Schauble, 2000) but also for
computer models (Loh et al., 2001). Edelson, Gordin, and Pea (1999) suggest that technology support (e.g.,
computer modeling and visualization) is an important principle for implementing inquiry-based learning. Our
iMVT   pedagogy   is  aligned   with the  above   proposals.   The  empirical   results have  proved  that the iMVT
combination is more powerful in facilitating student learning difficult science concepts such as the speed of
chemical  reaction, genetics,   and  the physics  of electricity.   The well-designed   tools have software­realized
scaffolding in addition to human face to face scaffolding as a way of thinking about and exploring disciplines
(Guzdial, 1995). We hope to invite more research to explore how iMVT combination might have changed the
way science is represented and learned by students to argue for the novelty of the iMVT pedagogy.

5. Selected References
Pathak, S. A., Jacobson, M. J., Kim, B., Zhang, B. H., & Deng, F. (2008). Learning the physics of electricity
         with agent-based models: The paradox of productive failure. Paper presented at the 16th International
         Conference on Computers in Education.
Zhang, B. H., Deng, F., Jacobson, M., & Kim, B. (2008). Exploring the representational affordances of two
         types of modeling tools. Paper presented at the Annual meeting of the American Education Research
         Association.
Zhang,  B. H.,  Jacobson,   M.,  Kim,    B., Deng,   F., Lin,  X.,  &   Pathak, S. (2008).  Exploring modeling     and
         visualization technology (MVT) enhanced biology teaching and learning in SingaporePaper presented
         at the The International Conference for the Learning Sciences (ICLS), Utrecht, the Netherlands.

                                                                                                                    2

                                                     361  ·  © ISLS
