                                               ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 2

Units of length: A notational system for conceptual understanding
                                           of size and scale
           Cesar Delgado, University of Texas at Austin, 1 University Station D5700, Austin, Texas,
                                       Cesar_Delgado@austin.utexas.edu

        Abstract:  A   cross-sectional  study (101 grade    6-14  students) and teaching    experiment    (24
        grade 6-8 students) suggest measurement units are important in conceptual understanding of
        size and scale. Students were significantly better at absolute size than relative size estimation
        after the teaching experiment. Students appear to off-load the requirement for fractions or
        decimals onto the notational system of measurement units. A planned cross-cultural study will
        indicate likely improvements if US students had greater schooling in metric units.

Introduction
The concepts of size and scale are important both in science and for science learning. Size is a characteristic of
every object, and is the magnitude or extent of the object. The size of an object is established by comparing it to
a standard, which functions as a scale. Scales are "the spatial, temporal, quantitative, or analytical dimensions
used by scientists to measure and study objects and processes" (Gibson et al. 2000, p. 219). Tools that allow the
exploration of new size regimes have opened entire scientific fields, e.g., the invention of the optical microscope
led to microbiology and the development of atomic force microscopes to the nanotechnology revolution.            Scale
is a "common theme" that pervades science, and can be used to unify student learning (AAAS, 1993).

Theoretical Background
Vygotsky (1978, 1985) pointed out the importance of cultural tools to thinking and learning. More recently, Pea
(1988) noted that "intelligence   is often distributed  by  off-loading  what could  be    elaborate  and  error-prone
mental reasoning processes as action constraints of either the physical or symbolic environments." (p. 48),
including "notational systems such as algebra equations" (p. 54). Research revealed that experts and gifted
seniors in high school use units as a notational system on which to distribute intelligence, by visualizing small
units (e.g., the nm) "as a new unit (rather than as a fraction of a meter)", with this unitizing possibly underlying
conceptual understanding of spatial scales (Tretter et al., 2006, p. 1063). The research reported in this poster
studies whether and how typical middle school students use units to construct understanding of size and scale.

Methods
The  data used in this poster  were   obtained from   a  cross-sectional study  with  101   students   in grades  6-14
(Delgado, 2009), and a teaching experiment involving 24 students who had finished 6th through 8th grades at a
diverse, low SES public school district in a small Midwestern city, during a summer camp (Delgado, Short, &
Krajcik, 2009). The curriculum for the teaching experiment was built following a construct-centered design
(CCD)  approach   (Pellegrino  et al., 2008)  and  incorporating   findings  from   the cross-sectional    study.  The
instructional activities (Delgado et al., 2009) were designed to build conceptual understanding of size and scale
by having students explore four aspects of size (ordering by size, grouping by size, relative scale or how many
times bigger one object is than another, and absolute size) and the connections among the aspects. An engaging
driving question ­ How can nanotechnology keep me from getting sick? ­ provided the context for the 12-hour
curriculum. Participants  were audiotaped   while  being    individually interviewed;   in the case   of  the teaching
experiment, one week before camp, and after completion of the curriculum on size and scale. The interview
includes questions about the smallest known unit of length, estimating the relative scale of atom, red blood cell,
human, and Earth (relative to a 1-mm pinhead), and estimating the absolute size of the same four objects. The
author coded the interviews according to a rubric; a second rater coded 10% of the interviews with inter-rater
reliability above 90%. Paired-sample t-tests or McNemar tests (depending on the type of variable) were used to
test for changes in the means of student performance pre- and post- instruction, as well as independent-sample t-
tests or McNemar tests to compare groups or variables at a given point in time.

Findings
In the absence of the teaching experiment curriculum, next to no pre-university students knew of units of length
smaller than the millimeter, yet students often felt a need for these. While any length can be expressed using any
unit, many students asked what unit was smaller than a millimeter when prompted to estimate the absolute size
of a red blood cell or atom. In the cross-sectional study, around 41% of students mentioned units larger than a
millimeter (e.g., centimeter or inch) for the smallest unit they knew. Half of these students did not use the
millimeter even after this unit had been provided to them in subsequent interview tasks. Students who continued
to use the  centimeter or inch scored   significantly  lower  than those  who   did not    initially respond  with the

                                                   362  ·  © ISLS
                                                  ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 2

millimeter but later used it (p < 0.01 for t-test, and effect sizes above 1 [calculated using pooled standard
deviation]). Additionally, students became significantly more accurate at absolute size estimation compared to
relative scale estimation at the end of the teaching experiment (p < 0.01), while there was no statistically
significant difference at the beginning of the teaching experiment. This is noteworthy because previous research
focusing on perception has shown that relative size is more accessible than absolute size (e.g., Vasilyeva et al.,
2004), and research focusing on size estimation has found no consistent difference (Tretter et al., 2006).

Discussion and Implications
The power of units may reside in their allowing students to work with more familiar numbers. Many students
struggled to find fractions, decimals, or powers of 10 to express the size of the cell or atom in millimeters,
centimeters, or inches. Units may be allowing students to off-load the requirement for fractions or decimals onto
the notational system (Pea, 1988) of measurement units. Despite having introduced students to micrometers and
nanometers as fractions of a millimeter, most students resorted to micrometers and nanometers when expressing
the size of a  cell or an   atom in   the post-teaching   experiment    assessment,    rather than  using fractions  of a
millimeter. The few students who did use fractions of a millimeter mainly estimated grossly inaccurate sizes.
         While  scientists  around    the world    near-universally   employ   the  SI system,  the   United  States still
employs English units like the foot and mile for everyday use. Most other countries have long employed the
metric system or are further along than the US in their transition from English to metric. Non-US students may
be enjoying an advantage in their learning about size and scale by virtue of being more familiar with the metric
system of units compared to US students. Finding better ways to help students construct their understanding of
"common themes" (AAAS, 1993), including scale, through better curriculum and instruction may be a powerful
way  of  improving  US   science   education.    A  planned  cross-cultural   study will shed   light on  what  kinds   of
improvements, if any, we might expect if US science and mathematics education included earlier and more
extensive instructional experiences with the metric system, with the intention of supporting greater student
learning and understanding of the common theme of scale. The data collection phase of this new study is
scheduled to be completed shortly before ICLS 2010; preliminary findings will be included in the poster.

References
American Association for the Advancement of Science [AAAS]. (1993). Benchmarks for science literacy. New
         York: Oxford University Press.
Delgado,   C.  (2009). Development     of   a research-based      learning  progression    for  middle  school   through
         undergraduate      students'  conceptual    understanding     of   size   and   scale.  Unpublished     doctoral
         dissertation, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor.
Delgado, C., Short, H., & Krajcik, J. (2009, April).    Design, implementation, and evaluation of the effectiveness
         of a  12-hour   middle   school   instructional     unit for size  and  scale.  Paper   presented   at  National
         Association of Research in Science Teaching (NARST) Annual Conference, Garden Grove, CA.
Gibson, C., Ostrom, E., & Ahn, T.-K. (2000). The concept of scale and the human dimensions of global change:
         a survey. Ecological Economics, 32 (2), 217-239.
Pea, R.  D.   (1988). Practices  of   distributed  intelligence   and designs  for  education.   In   Salomon,  G.  (Ed),
         Distributed   cognitions:  Psychological    and    educational    considerations. Cambridge      &  New   York:
         Cambridge University Press, pp. 47-87.
Pellegrino, J., Krajcik, J., Stevens, S., Swarat, S., Shin, N, Delgado, C., et al. (2008). Using Construct-Centered
         Design  to   align curriculum,   instruction, and     assessment  development     in emerging    science. In G.
         Kanselaar, V. Jonker, P.A. Kirschner, & F. Prins, (Eds.). Proceedings from ICLS '08: International
         perspectives in the Learning Sciences: Creating a learning world (vol. 3, pp. 314-21). Utrecht, the
         Netherlands: International Society of the Learning Sciences.
Tretter, T.R., Jones,   M.G.,   &   Minogue,     J. (2006).    Accuracy    of scale  conceptions    in  science:   Mental
         maneuverings   across   many     orders of spatial  magnitude.    Journal  of Research    in Science   Teaching,
         43(10), 1061-1085.
Vasilyeva, M., & Huttenlocher, J. (2004). Early development of scaling ability. Developmental Psychology, 40,
         (5), 682-690.
Vygotsky, L. S. (1978) Mind in society: The development of higher psychological processes. London, England:
         Cambridge University Press.
Vygotsky, L. S. (1985). Thought and language.        Cambridge, MA: M.I.T. Press.

Acknowledgments
This research  was    funded  by the   National    Center   for   Learning and   Teaching  in   Nanoscale   Science   and
Engineering, grant number 0426328, from the National Science Foundation. Any opinions expressed in this
work are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent those of the funding agencies.

                                                      363  ·  © ISLS
