                                              ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

                     Concrete vs. Abstract Problem Formats:
                          A Disadvantage of Prior Knowledge
          Andrew F. Heckler, Department of Physics, Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210
                                            Email: heckler.6@osu.edu

       Abstract:    Three  experiments   examine  the   effects  of varying   the relative concreteness  of
       physics  word    problems   on student  performance.Previous     studies  have   found that concrete
       representations    benefit  performance    for   relatively  simple problems,    whereas    abstract
       representations are beneficial for more complexproblems. These findings are replicated in a
       physics context. More importantly,a significant disadvantage for concrete representations is
       identified   for some  questions. When   a    problem potentially elicits  prior knowledge   that is
       contrary to scientific knowledge, e.g. a scientific "misconceptio"n, it is found that the concrete
       representation   invokes   incorrect answers   more  frequently   than abstract  representations. In
       addition, an interaction is found between the final course grade of the student and the abstract
       vs. concrete problem format, with higher grade students performing disproportionally better
       on   abstract problems.     This  is consistent   with previous   findings   in  reasoning   and  an
       explanation is provided that involves the cuing of familiar, automatic knowledge and skills vs.
       explicit deliberate processes.

Introduction
One  truism in education  research  is  that student responses   to a particular  question depend  on the   how the
question is represented. This idea can be applied in a productive way forthe topic of problem solving: while it is
clear that student performance on problem solving depends on the represetnation (or context) of the problem,
one can gain a better understanding of the nature of student problem solvingby determining which dimensions
of representational variation matter   and how  the   variations affects performance (e.g.,   Kotovsky,  Hayes,       &
Simon, 1985; Collins & Ferguson, 1993, Zhang, 1997).
       This paper builds on a series ofprevious studies that examine the effects of varying the dimension of
concrete vs. abstract problem representations on student performance.These studies indicate that there is often a
tradeoff between concrete and abstract representations. In particular, in cases where the problem complexity is
substantial, abstract problem representations have been found to be beneficial for problem performance
(Koedinger, Alibali, & Nathan, 2008), and have been foundto facilitate transfer in problem solving performance
(Goldstone & Son, 2005; Kaminsky, Sloutsky & Heckler, 2008).
       In contrast, concrete representations can bebeneficial because, for example,       previous knowledgecan
facilitate situated reasoning that allows for the use of familiar, intuitive strategies practiced frequentlyK( intsch
& Greeno, 1985; Carraher, Carraher, & Schliemann, 1987; Nathan et al., 199;2Pollard & Evans, 1987) and
provides redundancy that is helpful for avoiding and detecting errors (e..g, Koedinger, Nathan, 2004;
Koedinger, Alibali, & Nathan, 2008).
       We consider two points regarding abstract and concrete problem representations. First, while grounded
or concrete problem representationsmay produce problem-solving benefitsvia the cuing ofhelpful prior
knowledge of a specific situation, it may also be the case that the grounded representation can cue knowledge
that drives the solver toward anincorrect solution path. Potential examples of this are thewell known findings
of patterned and "incorrect" student answering to simpleconceptual questions about physical phenomena(e.g.,
Pfundt & Duit, 2000). Some have interpreted these findings as evidence of coherent "scientific misconceptions",
while others have explained it in terms ofthe cuing of "knowledge in pieces" or "resources" (diSessa, 1988;
Hammer, 2000). In either case,the patterned incorrect answers are a result of prior knowledge of some type.
       The second point to consider is that individual differences can elucidate important insihgts into the
nature of the effect of representational variation.For example, in reasoning studies involving the Wason card
task, Stanovich and West (1998) provide evidence that both high and low SAT (test score) participasntcan
easily solve the task insome concrete, familiar represenat tions, but in the generic formthe task is more difficult
and is solved much more frequently by high SAT participants. Theyargue that concrete, familiar tasks tend to
invoke practiced and automatic knowledge that is independent of ability, and abstract tasks require higher orde,r
more deliberate thinking skills.
       Therefore in this paper weaddress two questions. First, if prior knowledge can in some cases include
"incorrect" scientific knowledge, thenin these cases will concrete, familiar representations tend to cue this
incorrect knowledge more frequently than abstract and less familiar representation?Put more plainly, will
students display misconceptions more frequently in concrete problems than abstract problemsS?econd, will
there be a significant interaction between ability level of the student and the representational format? A
disproportionate increase in performancefor high abilityon abstract questions students would lend more

                                                  365  ·  © ISLS
                                                   ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

support for the idea that concrete representations cuefamiliar and automaticsolution methods that are common
to all students.

Experiment 1
The goal of the first experiment is to replicateprevious studies which demonstrate that concrete, more grounded
problems are more successfully solved than more abstract, generic problems if the problems are sufficiently
simple and familiar (e.g., Koedinger       et al., 2004;  2008). A  simple  physics   problem is posed in  wt o different
contexts: abstract and generic vs. concrete and familiar. In addition, the problem is constructed to include a
physical situation which is known to elicit misconceptions.

Participants
The participants   were 170  university     studenst  enrolled   in the first quarter of a  calculus-based introductory
physics course at a large research university. They completed this assignment for participation credit as part of
their total course grade. Participants were randomly placed in one of two conditions, the abstract (n=92) and
concrete (n=78) contexts conditions.

Materials, Design, and Procedure
Participants were given one of the two physics probelms shown in Table 1. They were given 15-20 minutes to
complete the task at the beginning of a physics lab class in a proctored environment, and were given creditofr
participation. The  problems are simple mechanics         problems    that would  be  typically  found ni the back   of a
textbook or on an exam, and are given routinely in homework assignments.The problem is typically solvedby
determining the two unknowns in the problem (friction and acceleration) viasolutions to (a minimum of) two
simple equations, one involving the definition of friction force (Ffriction = µFnormal = µmg) and Newton's second
law (Fnet = Fapplied ­ Ffriction = ma).
        While it may not be obvious at first glance, even to the expert, the physical situation described btyhe
problem is somewhat counterintuitive. In particular, the net force resulting from the two horizontal forces on the
object (applied force and friction force) is in the direction opposite the motion. That is, the appiled force is less
than the friction force. Nonetheless, the object can still be moving, just slowing down. It is wel-lknown that
many students have difficulty with the idea that the net force can be opposite the direction of mootin (Viennot,
1979; Clement, 1982).

Table 1. Question Set 1: isomorphic abstract and concrete versions of a force-motion show-work problem.

                    Abstract version                                              Concrete version
A force F is exerted on an object in the positive               In front of a house, a boy is pulling on a large toy
direction. The object is sliding on a surface in the            rocking-horse in the direction towards the driveway.
positive direction toward a mark on the surface. At the         The rocking-horse is on the sidewalk sliding toward
very moment the object passes the mark, the force F is          the driveway. At the very moment the rocking-horse
80N. The mass of the object is 32Kg and the                     crosses onto the driveway, the boy is pulling it with a
coefficient of friction between the object and the              force of 80N. The mass of the large toy rocking-horse
surface is µk=0.3.                                              is 32Kg and the coefficient of friction between the toy
  What is the magnitude and direction of the                    and the concrete is µk=0.3.
acceleration of the object at the moment it passes the              What is the magnitude and direction of the
mark?                                                           acceleration of the toy rocking-horse at the moment it
                                                                crosses onto the driveway?

         Figure 1. Student performance on Question 1, separated by condition. Error bars are 1 SEM.

                                                      366  ·   © ISLS
                                                  ICLS 2010       ·   Volume 1

Results and Discussion
As indicated    in Figure  1, students  were    significantly     more    successful    in obtaining   a correct solution in      the
concrete condition (86%) than the abstract condition (62%),!2(1) = 13.2, p < .0001, effect size d = .6. These
results  are   consistent  with     previous findings  that       concrete,   grounded     context  results in   better student
performance compared to the abstract context. Further analysis ofthe solutions supported a previously described
explanation for this difference(e.g. Koedinger et al. 2004), namely that the abstract condition inhibits the use of
familiar knowledge that may help in understanding and solving the problem. In the abstract condition, the most
common errors involved issues ofnot properly understanding the physical situation described in the problem
text. For example in the abstract condition a 10/92 students confused (i.e., switched) the values of the two of the
forces provided in the problem (the applied force and the weigh,t via mass). In addition, 5/92 students in the
abstract condition ignored friction. In contrast, none of the students in the concrete condition made these errors;
the most common error in the concrete condition was a simple algebraic error. Therefore, these results suggest
that students in the abstract condition were less able to understand the physical details of the problem,and this
lack of physical understanding could in turn inhibit them in their solution to the problem.
          However, responses from a small number of students suggest thatin some cases the concrete context
can interfere with success in solving the problemas well. In particular, the common conceptual error that an
object must be moving in the direction of the net applied forcewas made by a small number of students (4/78)
in the concrete condition. For example, one of these students wrote, "Because net force is less than zero, static
friction was   not overcome    and   acceleration  is  zero". In     contrast,  none    (0/92) of the  students  in the abstract
condition made this error.     However,      the elicitation      of this misconception     may   have   been minimized   in      the
particular concrete context given, as the friction force (large toy on concrete) is fairly salient ocmpared to the
force in the direction of motion (via aboy). This may partially explain why only a small number of students
displayed the misconception.

Experiment 2
Experiment 1 replicated the finding that the concrete condition provides benefits to problem solvin.gHowever,
there was also an indication that more concrete contexts can cue misconceptions more frequently. The purpose
of Experiment 2 is to determinemore directly whether a concrete context cues a misconception more frqeuently
than an abstract context. We elicit the same misconception as in Experiment 1, namely the student belief that the
direction of the net force on an object andits velocity must be in the same direction.

Participants
Two hundred     and  fifty-two     participants were  enrolled       in the  first quarter  of  a calculus-based    introductory
physics series at a large research university. They completed this assignment for participation credit as prat of
their total course grade.

Table 2. Question Set 2: isomorphic abstract and concrete versions of a forc-emotion conceptual question.
                     Abstract version                                                     Concrete version
At a particular instant of time, there are several forces actingon an object inboth the positive and negative direction, butthe forces in the negative direction (to the left) are greater.Which statement best describes the motion of the object atthis instant?a)it is moving to the rightb)it is moving to the leftc)it is not movingd)both a and b are possiblee)both a and c are possiblef)a, b, and c are possibleA force sensor is attached inside a soccer ball that is usedduring a match. The force sensor measures the forces actingon the ball. At a randomly chosen instant during the game,the sensor detects that there is only one horizontal force onthe ball, and that force is directed toward the home-teamgoal. Which statement best describes the motion of the ballat this instant?a)the ball is moving toward the home team goalb)the ball is moving away from the home team goalc)the ball is not movingd)both a and b are possiblee)both a and c are possible
                                                                          f)  a, b, and c are possible
Note: For both questions,answer f is the correct answer.

Materials design and Procedure
Experiment 2 is a within-subject design. Participants completed the multiple choice questions shown in Table 2
in a quiet, proctored room. These two questions were part of a larger set of multiple choice questions and the
design was counter-balanced for question order (no reliable differences in order were found).The validity and
reliability of the multiple choice questions was verified through extensive testing and interviews(Rosenblatt,
Sayre   & Heckler,   2008).   These   two    questions are      designed     to elicit student beliefs   about the  relationship
between the direction of net force on an object and the direction of itsvelocity1.

                                                      367       ·  © ISLS
                                            ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

         The final course grades of the students were also collected. The student were then categorized as the
High grade students (n =123) and Low grade students (n = 119), indicating whether they were in the top half or
bottom half of the class as measured by the final course grade.

Results and Discussion
While both questions were difficult overall, students answered the Abstract question correctly more often (20%)
than the Concrete question (9%), McNemar'stest p < .001, effect size d = 0.32. Figure 2 shows the proportion
of students choosing the correct answer choiceseparated out by High and LowGrade students. Inspection of
Figure 2 reveals that High and Low grade students perform similarly (poorly) on the Concrete questnioand the
High Grade students perform significantly better on the Abstract question than the low grade studesn.t A
repeated measures analysis, with question type as the repeated measure and grade rank as the ebtween student
factor, reveals significant main effects of question type (F(1) = 18.4, p < .001), and rank (F(1) = 4.5, p = .035),
and there is a reliable interaction between question type and grade rank,F(1) = 8.0, p = .005. This interaction is
mainly due to the High Grade students choosing thecorrect answer more often for the abstractquestion (26%)
than for the concrete question (10%), McNemar's test, p < .001. There is no significant difference in choosing
the correct response between the concrete (12%) and abstract (8%) question for Low grade students,
McNemar's test p = .5.

               Figure 2: Student performance onQuestion set 2, separated byHigh course grade
              students (n = 123) and Low course grade students (n =119).Error bars are 1 SEM.

Experiment 3
The purpose of this experiment is two-fold, first it is to replicate the finding that while concrete context help
with simple problems, more complicated problems mayhave increased performance in more abstract problem
representations (Koedinger et al., 2008). Therefore, we pose a slightly more complicated problem (involving
three rather than two equations and unknowns). The second purpose is somewhat exploratory. Experiments 1
and 2 indicate that everyday knowledge may in some cases hinder problem solving because it may misguide the
solver to an incorrect solution path. In Experiment 3, we pose a simple kinematics problem that lends itself to
using everyday knowledge, but may also present cues in the concrete context that lead to incorrect assumptions.

Participants
The participants were68 university students enrolled in the first quarter of a calculu-sbased introductory physics
course at a large research university. They completed thisassignment for participation credit as part of their total
course grade. Participants were randomly placed   in  one of    two conditions, the abstract (n=32) and  concrete
(n=36) contexts conditions.

Materials design and Procedure
Participants were given one ofthe two physics problems shown in Table 3. They were given 1-520 minutes to
complete the  task in a quiet, proctored room.  The   problems   are  simple kinematics  problems   that wouldbe
typically found in the back of a textbook or on an exam, and are given rouint ely in homework assignments. The
problems are typically solved by determining three unknowns, the distance that each person travelledand the
acceleration of one of them. This involved using three equations: the total distancedtot = d1 + d2, the kinematic
equation for  the constant velocity person d1 = v1t, and  the   kinematic equation  for the  constant acceleration

                                                368  ·  © ISLS
                                               ICLS 2010         ·  Volume 1

person  d2 =   a2t2/2. Therefore  this problem   is slightly     more   complicated   than the problem in  Experiment         1,
which only needed two equations and two unknowns.

Table 3. Question Set 3: isomorphic abstract and concrete versions of a kinematics show-work problem.

                      Abstract version                                                Concrete version
Two objects are 60 kilometers apart and move toward each
other such that they will meet at a point inbetween the            Two friends, Kevin and Claire, live 60 kilometers apart and
original starting positions. The first object travels in the       decide to meet in a town called "Tristville" in between them.
positive direction toward the meeting point at a constant          Claire drives eastward toward Tristville at a constant speed
speed of 18 meters/second. The second object begins at zero        of 18 meters/second. Kevin begins at zero speed and
speed and constantly accelerates in the negative direction         constantly accelerates westward toward Tristville. If they
toward the meeting point. If both objects meet in exactly 30       both reach Tristville in exactly one-half hour, what was
minutes, what was the acceleration of the second object?           Kevin's acceleration?

Results and Discussion
There are three important results from Experiment 3. First, unlike Experiment 1, students were equally
successful in obtaining a correct solution in the concrete condition (47%) than the abstract condiotni (53%),
!2(1) = .2, p = .6. Second, Figure 3 shows the proportion of students obtaining the correct solution, separated out
by High and Low Grade students.Inspection of Figure 3 revealsa pattern similar to the results in Experiment 2:
High and Low grade students perform similarly on the Concrete questionand the High Grade students perform
significantly  better  on the abstract question than the     Low Grade   students. A two-way Generalized   Linear      Model
(question type ! grade rank) with a binary response analysis reveals a significant main effects of rank (Wald
!2(1) = 9.9, p = .002), and there is a reliable interaction between question type and grade rankW, ald !2(1) = 4.1,
p = .04. This interaction is mainly due to the High Grade students choosing the correct answer more oftenofr
the abstract question (87%) than for the concrete question (57%). While there may be a trend for students
choosing the correct response     in theconcrete condition (41%)compared to the abstract condition (24%)for
Low Grade students, the difference is not statistically reliable.
         The   third   result  comes   from a closer         examination   of   the solution methods  which    reveals       an
unanticipated and fairly frequent misundersat nding of the problem. In particular, 28% (10/36) of the students in
the concrete condition made the same mistake of explicilty assuming that the two friends in the problem met
halfway when in fact it is only stated in the problem that they met"in between" the starting points. None (0/32)
of the  students in    the abstract condition made      this     erroneous assumption.Students'    remarks in  debriefing
revealed that the most plausible explanation for this assumption is that the studentsin the concrete condition
assumed that "friends meet halfway". In the abstract condition, the "friends" are replaced with "objects", and
none  of the  students  appeared  to be cued  to assume        that the objects met halfway.   Therefore, this is a case      in
which the concrete context appears to be interfering with the correct solution. It is important to onte however,
that the fraction of students in the concrete condition making this assumption did not depend on grade rank
!2(1) =  .8, p = .4.   Therefore, if this "misconception"          (which could  also be   viewed as simply an  incorrect
assumption) is responsible for the difference in score between the abstract and concrete conditions for the High
Grade students, it remains to be explained why the Low Grade students did nothave a similar gain in score. It
may be that the low grade students are such poor performers that switching from concrete to abstracst imply
involves switching from one incorrect method to another incorrect method.

                       Figure 3: Student performance on Question Set 3. Error bars are 1 SEM.

                                                    369        ·  © ISLS
                                                    ICLS 2010    ·   Volume 1

General Discussion
There are four main results from this study. First, the advantage of concrete problem representation found in
Koedinger   et   al. (2004,   2008)    was  replicated   for a   relatively simple  physics    problem. This    experimet nwas
different from the previous studies in that both of the representations were in"story" format. Nonetheless, the
nature of the advantage in the concrete representation, namely better comprehension of the problem appears to
be consistent with these previous studies.
         The second finding was a significant interaction between abstract vs. concrete problemrepresentation
and student    course   grade    for a  simple    conceptual   question    that is known    to strongly  elicti a well-known
scientific  misconception.       In  particular,   the   concrete,    familiar  representation    was   likely  to    elicit  the
misconception    at   a similarly high      level for  both  High    and  Low   Grade   students;  however,   in  the  abstract
representation, the High Grade students performed significantly better than the Low Grade students. This result
could be interpreted as support for the idea that incorrect answering in the concrete representationis due to
cueing of everyday, familiar knowledge common to all students while the abstract representation isesls likely to
cue such knowledge. The High Grade students may answer correctly more often in the abstract context because
they may tend to use explicit reasoning skills rather than on relying on automatic, prior knowledge. Another
possible explanation is thatboth High and Low Grade students began the course at floor onthese questions, and
the High Grade students have learned the abstract representationsimply because the course may have presented
more abstract than concreteexamples, thus they would perform better on the abstract questions. In contrast,the
Low Grade rank students may have simply not learned the material ye,t thus they score low on both abstract and
concrete questions. Understanding the distinction between these two possibilities is worth further investigation,
and it is possible that both may be at work.
         The third finding was a lack of difference in class-averaged performance of the concrete and abstract
representations   for   a problem      that was   slightly   more  complex (as     measured  by    number  of   equations     and
unknowns    to   solve) than  the    problem   in  Experiment      1. This  is  somewhat    consistent  with   the   findings of
Koedinger   et   al. (2008)   in  that they  found    an increase    in advantage   of the  abstract representation    when   the
problem difficulty was increased.
         The   fourth   finding   is similar  to  the  second,   but  for a quantitative   problem  rather than   a  conceptual
question. In particular, High and Low Grade students perform similarly in the concrete representation, but High
Grade students perform significantly better in the abstract representation.A similar proportion of High and Low
Grade students displayed an incorrect assumption in the concrete representation that was apparently acused by
the familiar nature of the representation, and no students displayed this assumption in the abstractcondition.
Once again it is not clear what causes the difference in performance between the High and Low Grade students.
The two explanations given above for the second finding remain viable. The concrete representation may be
cueing familiar automatic problem solving processes and the abstractmay be cuing (in High Grade students)
more   explicit, deliberative    processes.  On    the other  hand,   it  may  be  the case that  (effectively) onlyrelatively
abstract examples are practiced in the course and only the High Grade students have learned them. In any case,
it is clear that the concrete representation is cuing knowledge that inhibits the soltuion process, at least in High
Grade students.
         In sum, while some advantages of concrete representation have been replicated, thisstudy identifies an
important   disadvantage      for concrete   representations:      they   can  cue familiar  knowledge     that   is contrayr to
scientific knowledge      and this   in turn  can  lead  solvers   to   incorrect solution  paths. This raises  somepractical
issues about   the   relative usefulness    of    concrete and   abstract   questions  as a diagnostic  instrument.    From    a
psychometric     perspective,    the abstract  representation      would    be  preferable  over the  concrete    represetnation
because the former is more successful at discriminating betwene students, at least as measured by final course
grade. However, from a pedagogical perspective,the results from this study suggest thatboth high and low level
students   are susceptible    to  misconceptions      cued   by  problems     posed in  the concrete   representaotin  format.
Therefore, concrete problem representationsare important for determining whether bothHigh and Low Grade
students have overcome the relevant scientific misconceptions. Once again, theseresults highlight the important
tradeoffs between problemswith concrete and abstract representations.

Endnotes
(1) Note that the two questions are not exactly isomorphic: theabstract question mentions forces in two directions and the
concrete question mentions only one force in one direction. Howevre, in our previous work in constructing itemsof this type
we found that this difference does notreliably or consistently change student answering patterns.

References
Carraher, T. N., Carraher, D. W., & Schliemann, A. D. (1987). Written and oral mathematicsJ.ournal for
         Research in Mathematics Education, 18,83­97.
Clement, J. (1982). Students' preconceptions in ni troductory mechanics.American Journal of Physics, 50, 66-71.

                                                         370   ·  © ISLS
                                          ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

Collins, A., & Ferguson, W. (1993). Epistemic forms and epistemic games: Structures and strategiesotguide
       inquiry. Educational Psychologist, 28, 25­42.
diSessa, A.A., (1988). Knowledge in pieces. In G. Forman & P.B. Pufall (Eds.)Constructivism in the Computer
       Age (pp. 49-70). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc.
Goldstone, R. L., & Son, J. Y. (2005). The transfer of scientific principel s using concrete and idealized
       simulations. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 14, 69­110.
Hammer, D. (2000). Student resources for learning introductory physicsA, merican Journal of Physics,68, S59.
Kintsch,W., and Greeno, J. G. (1985). Understanding and solving word arithmetic problemsP. sychological
       Review, 92, 109­129.
Koedinger, K. R., Alibali, M. W., & Nathan, M. J. (2008). Trade-Offs Between Grounded and Abstract
       Representations: Evidence From Algebra Problem Solving.Cognitive Science, 32, 366-397.
Koedinger, K. R., & Nathan, M. J. (2004). The real story behind story problems: effects of representations on
       quantitative reasoning.Journal of the Learning Sciences, 13, 129-164.
Kotovsky, K. , Hayes, J.R., & Simon, H. A. (1985). Why are some problems hard? Evidence from Towerf o
       Hanoi. Cognitive Psychology, 17(2):248­294.
McCloskey, M., Caramazza, A., & Green, B., (1980). Curvilinear motion in the absence of External focres:
       Naïve Beliefs about the motion of objects.Science, 210, 1139-1141.
Nathan, M. J., Kintsch,W., & Young, E. (1992). A theory of algebra word problem comprehension andits
       implications for the design of computer learning environments.Cognition and Instruction, 9(4), 329­
       389.
Pfundt, H., Duit, R. (2000).Bibliogaphy: Students' Alternative Frameworks and Science Education(5th Ed.).
       Kiel, Germany: Institute for Education Science.
Pollard, P., & Evans, J.St.B.T. (1987). Content and context effects in reasoningA. merican Journal of
       Psychology, 100, 41­60.
Rosenblatt, R., Sayre, E. C., & Heckler, A.F. (2008). "Toward a comprehensive picture of student
       understanding of force, velocity, and acceleration," inC. Henderson, M. Sabella,& L. Hsu (Eds.)
       Proceedings of 2008 Physics Education Research Conference. Melville, New York: AIP Conference
       Proceedings.
Sloutsky, V. M., Kaminski, J. A. & Heckler, A. F. (2005). The advantage osfimple symbols for learning and
       transfer. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 12, 508­513.
Stanovich, K.E. and West, R.F. (1998) Cognitive ability and variation in selection task performanceT.hinking
       and Reasoning 4, 193­230.
Viennot, L. (1979). Spontaneous reasoning in elementary dynamics,Eur. J. Sci Educ. 1, 205-221.
Zhang, J. (1997). The nature of external representations in problem solvingC. ognitive Science, 21, 179­217.

Acknowledgments
This research is supported by the Institute of Education Sciences,U.S. Department of Education, through grant
#R305H050125. The opinions expressed are those of the authors and do not represent views of the Institute or
the U.S. Department of Education.

                                              371  ·  © ISLS
