                                                 ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 2

  Argumentation at the table-talk level of middle school students
                                participating in scientific cafés

      Gerald P. Niccolai, Zeynab Badreddine, Christian Buty, UMR ICAR (Interactions, Corpus, Learning,
  Representations), CNRS - University of Lyon,        15 parvis Réné Descartes - 69342 Lyon cedex 07 - France,
            Email: gerald.niccolai@ens-lsh.fr, zeynab_badreddine@yahoo.fr, christian.buty@inrp.fr

         Abstract:    "Scientific café"  refers  to  the public    discussion of  socially  pertinent questions
         which have scientific content in an informal setting, typically a bar. This scheme has been
         adapted   to middle   and    high  school   class  settings.  This paper   presents  an  experimental
         organizational scheme which uses electronic voting. The scheme is evaluated with respect to
         student   engagement   and   participation, as  well   as the relationship  between  the preliminary,
         private discussion in the small groups and students' public space interventions.

Current practice
Beginning in 1997, scientific cafés have been developed as a means of engaging the general public in discussion
and debate of scientific research. Stated goals of the organizers include not only the advancement of general
scientific literacy with regards to current trends in research and technology, but also the reunion of individuals
having   widely different  experiences   and attitudes   to  discuss  the social  consequences   of   recent advances  in
technology.  Stated otherwise, the scientific café has the objective of forming better informed, more engaged
citizens by proving     a context  for rational  discussion     and  debate of   science related  social  issues. French
curriculum  standards     echo this   objective: starting    at the   middle   school level  an   accent  is  placed  on
pluridisciplinary approaches (including social sciences) to the examination of complex issues such as global
warming, genetically modified organisms in agriculture or sustainable development. Indeed, argumentation in
class has been widely studied as a practice for building students' ability to make explicit their representation of
facts and  phenomena,     validate  common   representations     and   articulate them   to everyday   experience.  (For
reviews of the study of argumentation in school setting facilitate a variety of teaching goals, see von Andriessen
2006 and Aufschnaiter 2008) For this reason, the format has been transposed to middle and high school settings
with varying results ("café junior").
         Under the classical organizational scheme of a junior scientific café, the organizer will invite two or
three experts who answer questions which have been prepared by some of the students. Most often, an attempt
is made to reproduce the café setting, and so the students are often arranged in a disordered fashion, in groups of
4-6 around tables, and they may actually be served refreshments. The basic interactional scheme of the scientific
café is maintained: there is a public debate/discussion which is organized by a neutral leader who gives the floor
in turn to experts and students and guides the advancement of the subject. There is however a second level of
discussion in the scientific café, that is the small discussions held sotto voce around the tables. It is assumed that
this private discussion space should enrich the public discourse.

Research-based development
The authors have been leading an action research project in collaboration with several nonprofit associations
which aims at the adaptation of the scientific café format so as to better engender the engagement of the students
in discussion and facilitate their participation in the public debate. A preliminary observation of current practice
in café junior organization based on the scheme described above found a general lack of engagement on the part
of the students in the subject. In short, the interaction was often reduced to simple question-response between
confident students and the experts. This fell short of the organizers' ambitions (and the teachers' objectives) for
the café format. We found that the presence of identified experts under this scheme was a major factor limiting
student  participation. We  also  observed   the tendency    of  the  students to  discuss  among   themselves,   and the
tension that exists between the desire to foster discussion with the need for classroom order in order to have the
public debate.
         We proposed and developed a novel organizational scheme designed to relieve some of these obstacles.
In the experimental, the scientific café revolves around the results of real-time polling of the students rather than
interactions with experts. One subject has been fully developed and has been deployed (in six 8th grade classes,
two hours of café each) using this organizational scheme. The title question of this café is "Why do people drink
bottled water?" and the café is organized around four thematic phases: water on earth, water in your body, water
in the city, water pollution. The café is run by a discussion leader who has some expertise in the subject of the
café (but is not announced as an expert) who poses a series of multiple choice questions to the students using the
presentation software included in the ActiVote (1) public response system. After reading each question, the
leader  explicitly allows  time   for small group    discussion    around the  table  before calling  for a  vote on  the
question. The collective results of the vote are immediately displayed. The discussion leader incites discussion,

                                                      366  ·  © ISLS
                                                  ICLS 2010   ·   Volume 2

particularly   for opinion questions    (see  below),  by  asking   for   justification  for  both majority   and   minority
responses.
         Depending on the nature of the question, a public discussion of the result may ensue. After a question
for which a single valid response is possible (e.g. "What percentage of your body weight is water?"), discussion
is  limited to resolving  any    misunderstanding   on the    part of students.  In  a  typical  thematic  phase, four  such
knowledge questions will be followed by an opinion question, for which there is no single valid response (e.g.
"In your    opinion, which    of these waste   water sources    is the most   polluting."   ­  "bath  water", "toilet",  "car
washing",   "dish   washing",    "cleaning the floors",   "watering   crops").   The   students  are  given more    time  for
private discussion before voting these opinion questions, and the public discussion of the results of the opinion
polls represents nearly half of the time spent in the café junior.

Methodology
The  scientific café  corpus     analyzed  consists of   three  major   elements:    the questionnaire   together   with  the
individual responses of each student to each question as recorded by the ActivStudio software; the public debate
as recorded by minimally guided video camera placed behind the students; and a sample of private space student
discussion,  recorded   by unmanned       hidden cameras      and  body   microphones    on   each  student   at two  tables.
Primary analysis of the audiovisual corpus focused on identifying each phase of the event, notably the private
space interactions. Independent schemes are used to code group leader and student verbalizations, each of which
are evaluated quantitatively as indicators for the evaluation of the efficiency of the new debate organizational
format (see below). Systematic transcription is limited to the short private space discussions. Cross analysis
identifies  relationships between     most notable   between    private   space  utterances   with not   only the   student's
anonymous electronic vote, but also with his eventual public space interventions.

Results and perspectives
As stated, the action research goal for this study is stated as greater student engagement and participation. We
have developed criteria for the evaluation of these aspects. Engagement is evaluated by measuring the time that
the students'   stay "on   topic"  during  private   space    discussion   versus time   spent   talking  about  extraneous
subjects. Student participation is evaluated in terms of public space discussion: organizational schemes are thus
compared through the actions of the discussion leaders (for example, how often must the leader solicit student
interventions  to  keep the   discussion   moving)   and   through  the   nature  of student   public utterances    (does the
student make a statement, ask for information, refute another statement, ask for clarification, etc.). Early results
indicate that  the  experimental   café organizational   scheme     performs  better   than  the classical  café scheme   as
judged by these criteria.
         The broader research subject considers finer aspects of students' interactions during the event and the
articulation between the informal, private space discussion and the more ordered public space discussion. Early
analysis on  the   corpus (twelve   hours  of  private space    discussions)  has   identified  episodes  where   individual
students put   forward  first in  the private, table-talk  space   tentative  positions  before  intervening  in  the public
debate.  Of particular interest will be the incidence of group co-construction of arguments and the eventual role
of  peer validation  as a  factor  leading to  public  space    intervention. In  an extension   of  our  previous  studies,
(Buty,   2009)  attention will   also  be given  to  the  position  adapted   by  the    student with  respect   to his own
responses: does he intervene publicly to justify or explain his own response or, rather, does he comment on
positions he does not support? Does he identify with his true position, as recorded in the electronic vote?

Endnotes
(1) http://www.prometheanworld.com/server.php?show=nav.15999

References
Andriessen, J. (2006). Arguing to Learn. In: K. Sawyer (Ed.) Handbook of the Learning Sciences (pp.443-459).
         Cambridge: Cambridge University press.
Buty, C., & Plantin, C. (2009). Variété des modes de validation des arguments en classe de sciences. In C. Buty
         &   C. Plantin   (Eds.), Argumenter    en  classe  de  sciences   ; du  débat   à l'apprentissage  (pp.  235-280).
         Lyon: INRP.
von Aufschnaiter, C., Erduran, S., Osborne, J., & Simon, S. (2008). Arguing to learn and learning to argue: Case
         studies of how students' argumentation relates to their scientific knowledge. Journal of Research in
         Science Teaching, 45(1), 101-131.

Acknowledgments
The  authors    wish  to   acknowledge     the  Rhône-Alpes        region  (project  AROMES)       and    the Institute   for
Communications Sciences of the CNRS (projet ArguVote) for financial support.

                                                       367  ·  © ISLS
