                                                  ICLS 2010     Volume 2

   Effects of Case-Based Professional Development on Teacher
               Technological Pedagogical Content Knowledge

                                                  Chrystalla Mouza
                          University of Delaware, 219D Willard Hall, Newark, DE 19716
                                                Email: cmouza@udel.edu

         A bst r act : This study  investigated  the efficacy   of  case-based   professional   development in
         helping teachers build    capacity for technology   integration.  Specifically, it examined the ways
         in which case discussion and case development helped teachers deepen their understanding of
         the relationship between technology, content, and pedagogy.            Data sources included content
         analysis of    case  discussions,   examination     of written   cases, and    teacher questionnaires.
         Findings indicated that the use of cases enhanced teacher understanding of the inter-relations
         between technology, content, and pedagogy.

Introduction
         In recent years, researchers emphasized that some of the most powerful professional development
opportunities available for teachers are grounded in the systematic study and analysis of classroom practice
(Ball & Cohen, 1999). A specific pedagogical approach that engages teachers in a form of practice-based PD is
the use of case methods, such as case analysis and case development. During case analysis, teachers engage in
critical assessment of practice and exploration of complex pedagogical issues by discussing cases developed by
other teachers (Merseth, 1996). During case development, teachers turn their classrooms into a site of inquiry
and critically examine their own practice in order to develop cases from which other teachers can learn from (J.
Shulman,  2002).  Despite    the   potential of the case  approach,   little is  still known  about the impact  of case
methods on teacher knowledge and practice, as well as the specific features and instructional interactions that
make cases most effective (Merseth, 1996).
         This paper has three inter-related objectives. First, it investigates the ways in which teachers assessed,
interpreted and made sense of teaching with technology when they read and analyzed cases developed by other
teachers. Second, it looks at how they integrated different facets of knowledge as they discussed and analyzed
the cases under study. Third, it examines the ways in which teachers connected knowledge to practice as they
designed, enacted and reflected on their own technology enhanced activities in the context of case development.

Theoretical Framework: Defining Teacher Knowledge of Technology Integration
Research has recently conceptualized a new form of teacher knowledge required for effective application of
technology in teaching      called Technological  Pedagogical      Content   Knowledge    (TPACK;   Mishra  &   Koehler,
!""#$%& '()*+),-& (./,& 0%& 12(*34,56& 7/89& :;<=#$>& ?@ABC& D/,6)6E6& /F& E28GG& .8)348H& I/+)G6& /F& 9,/7*G+-GJ&
Technological Knowledge (TK), Content Knowledge (CK), and Pedagogical Knowledge (PK). TK refers to
computer literacy and the ability to apply technological tools for everyday tasks. CK is concerned with the
knowledge of the subject matter to be taught. PK involves knowledge of general teaching and learning methods,
knowledge of learners, and knowledge of assessment and classroom management strategies. More importantly,
TPACK emphasizes the links and relationships that exist between these bodies of knowledge. The relationship
between  technology     and  content, for example,   results    in Technological   Content   Knowledge   (TCK),   which
focuses on the manner in which technology and content are reciprocally related. Similarly, the relationship
between content and pedagogy results in Pedagogical Content Knowledge (PCK), which involves knowledge
for teaching within a specific discipline (Shulman, 1986). Finally, the relationship between technology and
pedagogy results in Technological Pedagogical Knowledge (TPK). TPK includes the ability to identify specific
pedagogical techniques and the ways in which they can be applied to the use of technology. Together, these
bodies of knowledge represent TPACK, the ability to integrate TK with CK and PK to enhance student learning.

Methods
The study was conducted in the context of graduate level course offered at a Mid-Atlantic University, titled
Cognition and Technology, taught by the author over a period of 14 weeks. The course focused on learning
sciences theories and    their role  in the  design  and  use   of  educational  technology   in real-world settings. In
addition to reading relevant materials, participants explored a range of computer-based learning environments
developed within a learning sciences framework. As a culminating activity, students were required to complete
a project that centered on case development. The course used a hybrid design whereby students met every other
week for three hours. When not meeting face-to-face, all students engaged in asynchronous online interactions

                                                      368     ISLS
                                                ICLS 2010     Volume 2

where  they   discussed  course  readings and  analyzed    cases  developed    by other   K-12 teachers.   To facilitate
communication and interaction a course management system available at the university was used.

Participants
A total of 12 students participated in the course. All participants engaged in case discussion and analysis. Of
those 12 participants, 8 held K-12 teaching positions and completed the case development project. Three of
those teachers    taught at the  elementary  level. The    other five   taught mathematics,    science, social  studies,
language arts or foreign languages at the middle and high school level. Six teachers were in their first 5 years of
teaching. One teacher had 5-10 years of experience while the other one was seasoned with more than 10 years of
experience. With the exception of one teacher, all others taught at public schools.

Use and Pedagogy of Case Methods in this Study
The use of case methods in this study was divided in two phases. In Phase 1 (Weeks 2-9), participants discussed
and analyzed a set of three cases developed by other K-12 teachers who had previously engaged in a case
development project. Each case provided a detailed account of a real teaching experience that focused on the
design and implementation of a technology enriched curriculum unit consistent with state standards. All cases
were built around the same format and included both a narrative and a reflective section. Teachers discussed the
cases online using the communication features of the course management system. A set of open ended questions
was provided to scaffold case discussions and analysis.
        In Phase 2 (Weeks 4-14), 8 participants engaged in a case development project. The process of case
development was divided in four stages. In stage 1, teachers identified a current pedagogical problem from their
classrooms (e.g., helping students see the application of mathematics in real-world) and considered ways in
which technology can offer solutions to this problem. In stage 2, teachers developed a technology integration
plan to address the identified problem. In stage 3, teachers enacted their technology integration plans in their
classrooms and collected relevant artifacts. In stage 4, teachers wrote a narrative case based on the cycle of
preparation, enactment, and reflection of the technology integration plan in their classroom. To facilitate case
development participants followed a template, which incorporated a series of writing and reflection prompts.

Data Collection and Analysis
Data  were  collected from   three sources:  online case   discussions,  examination  of   written cases,  and  written
questionnaires on the value of case analysis and case development. These data were first analyzed qualitatively
to identify emerging patterns. Subsequently, verbal analysis (Chi, 1997) was employed to count and represent
facets of knowledge evident in participants5 discussions and cases, using an a priori coding scheme.

Findings
Findings indicated that case analysis provided an engaging context for discussing technology integration where
multiple perspectives were generated and theoretical principles were illuminated through practice. Further, both
case analysis and case development helped teachers strengthen their knowledge by helping them build or link
connections among the different facets of TPACK. What is most promising is the fact that issues related to
technology    did not dominate   case   discussions or  case   narratives,  as is typical  in  traditional professional
development    opportunities  on the  use of   technology.    Rather, issues related to   pedagogy  such   as  learners,
instruction and assessment, both independently and in relation to technology were emphasized. In addition,
teachers did not only strengthen their knowledge of technology integration, but they also had an opportunity to
connect their knowledge to the daily work of the classroom.

References
Ball, D.L.,   & Cohen,   D.K.   (1999). Developing   practice,   developing  practitioners: Toward   a  practice-based
        theory of professional education. In L. Darling-Hammond, & G. Sykes (Eds.), Teaching as the learning
        profession: Handbook of policy and practice. (pp.3-32). San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Chi,  M.T.  (1997).   Quantifying  qualitative analyses    of verbal  data:  A  practical guide. The    Journal of the
     Learning Sciences, 6(3), 271-315.
Merseth, K. (1996). Cases and the case method in teacher education. In J. Sikula (Ed.), Handbook of research
        on teacher education (pp. 722-746). New York, NY: Simon & Schuster/Macmillan.
Mishra, P., & Koehler, M. (2006). Technological pedagogical content knowledge: A framework for teacher
        knowledge. Teachers College Record, 108(6), 1017-1054.
Shulman,   J. H.  (2002, April). H appy  accidents:  Cases    as opportunities  for learning.  Paper presented  at the
        annual meeting of the American Educational Research Association, New Orleans, LA.
Shulman, L.S. (1986). Those who understand: Knowledge growth in teaching. Educational Researcher, 15(2),
        4-14.

                                                    369     ISLS
