                                                    ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 2

           Integrating Philosophy into Learning Sciences Research
                                        on Epistemic Cognition
    Clark A. Chinn, Luke A. Buckland, Rutgers University, GSE, 10 Seminary Place, New Brunswick, NJ 08816
                                 clark.chinn@gse.rutgers.edu, lukebuckland@gmail.com
         Ala Samarapungavan, Steven C. Beering Hall of Liberal Arts & Education, 100 N. University Street,
                                     West Lafayette, IN 47907-2098, ala@purdue.edu
      Discussant: James Blachowicz, Philosophy Dept, Loyola University Chicago, 6525 North Sheridan Road,
                                           Chicago, IL 60626, jblacho@luc.edu

          Abstract: The purpose of this symposium is to provide a forum for exploring how contemporary
          developments in philosophy can enrich learning sciences research on epistemic cognition (EC). In
          three papers, we discuss ways in which research on epistemic cognition can profit greatly from
          closer attention  to   the  philosophical   literature.  The    first paper  reviews   a broad  range   of
          philosophical   literature to identify  philosophical     topics  and   subtopics  which  are   potentially
          relevant to research on epistemic cognition but which have not yet been much investigated by EC
          researchers. The second paper discusses implications of philosophical work for the assessment of
          epistemic   cognition. The    third paper discusses     implications   of  recent philosophical  work  on
          underdetermination for both assessment and instruction in science education.

Rationale for the Symposium
There has been rapid growth in psychological and educational research on epistemic cognition (EC)--by which we
refer to research  on  people's  cognitions   related very   broadly   to knowledge    and  knowing,  including  research on
learners' personal    epistemologies,   epistemological    beliefs, and    their  understanding  of  the  nature of   science.
However, research on epistemic cognition has made relatively little contact with relevant scholarship in philosophy,
particularly contemporary philosophy. We think that this lack of contact has had negative consequences for research
on epistemic cognition, because the philosophical analyses provide many insights that can enrich EC research.
          To determine the extent to which educators cite philosophical works, we examined 128 articles addressing
EC in six major educational journals from 2004 through 2008 (Journal of Educational Psychology, Contemporary
Educational Psychology, Educational Psychologist, Science Education, Journal of Research in Science Teaching,
Journal of the Learning Sciences, and Cognition and Instruction). The modal number of philosophical citations was
0; the average was about 1. Even fewer of the citations referred to recent developments found in contemporary
epistemology and philosophy of science. Contemporary philosophical research raises a variety of important issues
and problems     that are relevant for  research on   EC,  but  it appears  to   us that EC researchers   have not  yet much
considered this body of philosophical work.
          The purpose of this symposium is to explore how contemporary developments in philosophy can enrich
learning sciences research on epistemic cognition. We present three papers that highlight a variety of ways in which
EC research could be improved by drawing on insights from philosophy.
          With its strong commitment to multidisciplinary and interdisciplinary research, the learning sciences are
the field of educational research that should be at the forefront of bringing insights from philosophy into research on
epistemic cognition. This ICLS symposium will provide a forum for presenting and discussing critical implications
of contemporary philosophy (epistemology and the philosophy of science) for educational research. The symposium
includes  three  presentations,  each   discussing  distinct   ways  in   which   philosophical  research can  help   learning
sciences  researchers  expand   and  improve   research relating    to epistemic    cognition. The discussant  will be  James
Blachowicz, a philosopher, who will comment further on implications of philosophy for educational research.
          We think that philosophical insights have the potential to transform EC research in at least four different
ways. We describe each below.

1. Scope of Issues Addressed in Research on Epistemic Cognition
In the first paper, we argue that philosophers have discussed many epistemological issues that should be of interest
to EC researchers but that EC researchers have seldom or never addressed. For example, philosophers ask manifold
questions  about  social  dimensions    of knowledge    and    about   reliable  processes  for producing  knowledge    (e.g.,
Goldman, 1986, 1999), but researchers have not addressed human cognitions related to these and many other topics.
Thus, attention to philosophy can dramatically expand the scope of dimensions of issues that EC researchers address.

                                                        37   ·  © ISLS
                                                    ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 2

2. Conceptualization of Important Epistemic Constructs
On many EC topics, philosophical work provides insights into how important dimensions of epistemic cognition
should be conceptualized or analyzed. For example, we argue in the second paper that philosophical work indicates
that relativism  should  be   defined  differently  from the   way    in which    EC  researchers  have   defined    it, and--as   a
result--EC  research  falls   short of providing    adequate   evidence   for  their claims   that people    in certain   stages  of
epistemic development are relativists.

3. Formats for Assessments
Recent developments in contemporary epistemology have strong implications for the development of assessments of
personal epistemology and understanding of the nature of science. Many EC researchers have employed interviews
or  questionnaires  that ask  students  to  reflect on fairly  abstract  statements   (see  Hofer   &   Pintrich,  2002).   Recent
philosophical work, including new trends in experimental philosophy, challenges the usefulness of such measures
and argues for more contextualized approaches to assessment. These issues are a main focus of the second paper.

4. Goals for Instruction
The philosophical literature provides insights into new goals for instruction. For example, we note in the first paper
that social epistemologists    have  discussed  processes   in    the media    that  reliably produce   true  beliefs    as well  as
processes that do not (e.g., Goldman, 1999). Given the importance of the media in influencing the formation of
beliefs in a society, this suggests that understanding the "nature of media" is an important form of epistemological
knowledge, one that has been little studied by educational researchers.           As another example, the review in the third
paper  of the philosophical    literature on  underdetermination      suggests    new goals   for  science   instruction    that will
provide science students with more powerful tools for resolving conflicts between competing knowledge claims.

Overview of Session
A central goal of the session is to provide a forum to begin discussing philosophical work relevant to the learning
sciences and the implications of this work for research on epistemic cognition. Our hope is that greater contact
between philosophy, psychology, and education will inspire psychological and educational research both on new
topics and subtopics relevant to personal epistemologies as well as on new approaches to addressing some of the
topics that have   already  been    investigated.   We believe    that   this symposium     could  help   spur  the  initiation   of
productive new lines of research on epistemic cognition.
          The session    will  begin   with   three presentations     reviewing   philosophical    research     with a   focus    on
applications to educational issues. Clark Chinn will present findings from a very extensive review of the range of
epistemological   topics  addressed    in  contemporary     philosophical     research.  He    shows    that  philosophers       have
discussed many topics that are highly relevant to EC research but that have so far been neglected in educational
research. Luke   Buckland     will  review  the same   corpus     of  philosophical   books    and  journals    with  a  focus    on
implications for assessments of personal epistemology and understanding of NOS. Ala Samarapungavan will review
the  philosophical  literature on   underdetermination     and    discuss   critical implications   for   the design     of science
instruction as well as the design of instruments to measure students' understanding of the nature of science. The
discussant  will be James   Blachowicz,     a philosopher   of science    at  the University  of   Loyola  in   Chicago.    He   will
discuss further philosophical issues that educators may want to consider, as well as comment on the issues discussed
by the three presenters. The session will conclude with a period of time for extended, in-depth discussion with the
audience about these interdisciplinary issues.

Papers

Paper 1:    Broadening the Scope of Research on Epistemic Cognition: Implications from
Epistemology and Philosophy of Science
Presenter: Clark A. Chinn, Rutgers University

Goals
This  paper  presents a   review    of important    topics  addressed    in   philosophical   literatures in  epistemology       and
philosophy of science. An important goal is to identify important epistemological topics that have heretofore been
neglected  by research   on   epistemic   cognition (EC).   Currently,   many     researchers have  focused     on the   following
components    of epistemic    cognition:  the nature  and   structure  of knowledge     (including   theories   and  laws    or  the
complexity of knowledge), the certainty of knowledge, and the sources and justification of knowledge (e.g., Hofer &

                                                         38  ·  © ISLS
                                                      ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 2

Pintrich, 1997;    Lederman     et al, 1992).   Philosophical     scholarship    suggests   other   components    that   should  be
considered as part of epistemic cognition, and we aim to identify some of these components.

Philosophical Works Reviewed
The review of philosophical work surveys two voluminous literatures that discuss epistemological topics: analytic
epistemology    and   the  philosophy    of  science.   To identify     epistemological     topics  of  potential interest  to   EC
researchers, we analyzed epistemological topics and subtopics covered in 8 recent handbooks and anthologies of
epistemology and 8 recent handbooks and anthologies of philosophy of science; in 5 years of each of 10 philosophy
journals; and   in 150   significant books   in contemporary      epistemology      and philosophy    of science. From    all these
sources, we compiled and structured a large list of epistemological topics addressed in the philosophical literature.

Topics Addressed in Philosophical Works and Some Implications for
The  topics  and   subtopics identified   in the   review  were   grouped    into   six categories, which   are  summarized      and
discussed briefly below. Within each of these six broad categories, there are many new topics that are worthy of EC
research but that have received little or no attention as yet from EC researchers. A few of these are discussed below.
          1. Knowledge     and  other   epistemic   attainments     and   their limits. EC  researchers    have tended   to   define
epistemic cognition as cognition related to the nature of knowledge and its justifications (e.g., students' beliefs about
what  knowledge    is and   how    knowledge    is justified). However,     an  examination   of   what  epistemologists   actually
study reveals that their investigations encompass much more than just these topics. Epistemologists do not focus
only on knowledge, but rather aim to explicate a large network of epistemic phenomena and their interrelationships,
including knowledge, belief, acceptance, understanding, wisdom, epistemic virtues and responsibilities, rationality,
emotion, information, objectivity, meaning, explanation, model, theory, truth, "truthlikeness," consensus, memory,
testimony, perception, observation, subjectivity, objectivity, justification, warrant, explanation, evidence, standards,
inquiry,  methods,   aims,  and   many  others  (e.g.,  Goldman,    1986,    1999;  Kvanvig,   2003;   Zagzebski,    1996).   Thus,
following the practice of philosophers, EC researchers can investigate students' ideas and practices related to many
diverse concepts besides knowledge and justification. Philosophers treat these topics as highly interconnected. This
suggests  to  us that   epistemic  cognition    should  be treated     as a  system   of   interconnected  cognitions--or     as an
epistemic  network.   If  we assume    that  different  aspects   of   this network     may be  activated  at  different  moments
(Rosenberg et al., 2006), the network could be best viewed as a dynamic epistemic network.
          2. Epistemic and nonepistemic aims, values, and virtues. One core topic discussed by philosophers is what
kinds of epistemic aims there are (e.g., true beliefs, knowledge, understanding, good explanations that fit the data--
whether true or not--and so on).       Another topic is the extent to which people actually adopt epistemic aims. Some
have argued that epistemic aims are of little interest to most people, who seek instead aims such as happiness and
family   welfare (e.g.,  Stich, 1990).  Other   philosophers     argue  that epistemic    aims are  important   because    they  are
highly conducive to achieving nonepistemic aims, as when accurate knowledge of how to eat healthily is conducive
to family welfare (e.g., Bishop & Trout, 2005). Philosophers also investigate issues related to epistemic virtues,
including  what    human   traits  should be  regarded    as   epistemic    virtues (e.g., intellectual  courage)    or vices (e.g.,
intellectual laziness) and what people's epistemic obligations are (Montmarquet, 1986; Zagzebski, 1996).
          This set of topics discussed by philosophers raises many relatively unexplored issues for EC research. Few
studies  have examined     students'   epistemic   aims or their    epistemic   cognition   related to  topics  such  as epistemic
virtues, vices,  and  responsibilities.  EC  researchers   could    examine     what epistemic   aims   students  adopt  and  what
kinds of epistemic virtues and vices students exhibit in their practices (e.g., whether they exhibit virtues such as
intellectual courage    and  intellectual carefulness   during   inquiry    experiences).   EC  researchers    could  also  present
students with vignettes posing dilemmas related to intellectual virtues and obligations, such as vignettes directed at
finding out how well informed students think citizens are obligated to be about issues such as global warming.
          3. Sources    and  justification   of  knowledge     and     other epistemic     attainments.  The   third    category of
epistemological    topics we    consider  include   the sources     of knowledge    (and   of other epistemic   attainments)     and
justifications for claims of knowledge or belief. EC researchers have extensively investigated students' beliefs about
the sources of knowledge, particularly authority and experience. Many philosophers frame these sources differently
(e.g., they break experience into different kinds of experiences such as perception, introspection, and reasoning; and
they view authority more broadly as testimony, which is often viewed as a necessary and positive source of most of
human knowledge) (e.g., Lackey, 2008). This suggests new EC investigations that address sources such as these.
          Philosophical research on justification addresses a wide variety of issues that go beyond the typical EC
focus  on  whether    people justify   knowledge     using experience,       authority,  evidence,  and  the   like. Philosophical
research  addresses   many   other   issues,  including   the    foundations    (if any)   of belief,  the role   of coherence    in
justification, whether and how the validity of methods of inquiry can be justified, basic reasoning schemes such as

                                                          39   ·  © ISLS
                                                    ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 2

induction and abduction, contextual standards that may be used for justification, and the nature and varieties of
evidence. Many of these topics are likely to be fruitful topics for EC research, as well. We think that a particularly
useful avenue of research will be to investigate the standards or criteria that students employ and can articulate for
evaluating theories, evidence, and arguments. (Paper 3 provides examples of criteria for evaluating theories.)
         4. Disagreement.     The    category   of disagreement      encompasses    philosophical work    on  the  causes  of
disagreement and their prospects for rational resolution. Much of this work is in philosophy of science, where a
large literature has arisen in response to the arguments of philosophers such as Thomas Kuhn (1962) that proponents
of rival theories have different epistemic practices and standards that cannot be resolved by any rational means.
Many of the philosophical works that are cited by EC researchers are works that tend to deny that rational, data-
driven theory choice   is  possible  in   science. However,    our   review  highlights  the work  of  many   different post-
Kuhnian philosophers who have argued against radical views, and these philosophers are cited much less frequently
in the EC literature (e.g., Boghossian, 2006; Haack, 2003; Kitcher, 1993). We therefore suggest that EC researchers
could find new directions for EC research in a broadened exploration of post-Kuhnian philosophy of science. This
research has developed new ideas about the strategies used by scientists to make rational decisions despite the threat
that theories are underdetermined by data. It would be of great psychological interest to consider students' epistemic
cognition in light of these new ideas. These issues are discussed in greater depth in Paper 3 of this symposium.
         5. Causal processes that produce knowledge. Reliabilism is an influential contemporary epistemological
theory which analyzes knowledge in terms of the reliable causal processes that produce true beliefs (e.g., Goldman,
1986). For reliabilists, epistemology investigates all aspects of the causal processes by which true beliefs are reliably
produced,   including the  generation     of new   ideas (discovery    or invention),   inquiry methods   (methodology    and
epistemic practices), methods of resolving disagreement and achieving consensus, and so on (Bishop & Trout, 2005;
Kornblith,  2003). It would   be   difficult to overemphasize     the  degree   to which reliabilism   expands the  scope  of
epistemology (and hence the potential scope of EC research). Reliabilism suggests that people's ideas about various
processes that facilitate or impede true beliefs (memory processes, perceptual processes, processes by which groups
and institutions produce knowledge, etc.) should be viewed as part of epistemic cognition. In line with these ideas,
EC researchers can examine students' ideas about topics such as when the processes underlying vision are and are
not trustworthy, how to make observations in a reliable way, how research should be conducted in order to reduce
chances of erroneous findings, when people's testimony can be trusted and when it cannot, and so on (Goldman,
1986; Haack, 2003). Research into people's ideas about such matters may illuminate much about how they endeavor
to produce knowledge and how they evaluate knowledge claims.
         6. Social epistemology. The final category of epistemological topics discussed by philosophers addresses
the social dimensions of knowledge and other epistemic attainments (Coady, 1992; Goldman, 1999; Kusch, 2002).
The subtopics in this category are too numerous to enumerate in this brief summary. One topic of particular interest
concerns   students'  understanding     of   reliable social   processes    for producing    knowledge,   such   as people's
understanding of journalistic and media processes that tend to enhance knowledge of significant truths in a society
versus those that  tend to    spread falsehoods.   More   generally,   EC   researchers  can investigate  people's  epistemic
cognition in relation to a wide variety of putative knowledge-producing processes, ranging from how groups can be
best organized to generate knowledge to how the formal policies and sanctions of institutions affect knowledge-
producing processes of their members. Despite the intense interest by educators in social and sociocultural theories
of learning, it seems to us that most EC research has focused on individualistic dimensions of epistemic cognition,
so that there is a great need for research into the social dimensions of epistemic cognition.
         Our  research  suggests   that   epistemic   cognition   encompasses    a  broader  diversity of topics  than  many
previous researchers have considered. We propose as a working hypothesis that students' epistemic cognition be
viewed as a network of interconnected cognitions clustered into these categories: (a) epistemic aims, (b) cognitions
related to the nature and structure of knowledge and other epistemic achievements such as understanding, (c) the
sources, and justification and certainty     of knowledge; (d) epistemic virtues, vices, and responsibilities; (e) good and
poor processes  of    achieving   epistemic   aims    (including  cognitive   processes,  methods   of  inquiry,   and  social
processes); and (f) social as well as individual features of epistemic cognition.

Paper 2: Implications of Philosophy for Assessing Epistemic Cognition
Presenter: Luke A. Buckland, Rutgers University

Objectives & Theoretical Framework
Educational  researchers   in the  fields of  "Personal  Epistemology"     (PE)  and the "Understanding    of  the  Nature of
Science"  (UNOS)     suggest  that attending    to learners'   ideas about  the  nature, sources  and  limits of  knowledge
promises a better account of cognitive development and real prescriptions for improving educational practice (e.g.

                                                         40  ·  © ISLS
                                                     ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 2

King & Kitchener, 1994; Hofer and Pintrich, 2002; Lederman et al., 2002). These research efforts share at least three
central aims: (1) Expose the epistemic frameworks implicit in cognition and learning; (2) Ascertain the relations
between these frameworks and the activities of formal and informal learning environments; and (3) Design targeted
instruction for the effective and reliable improvement of students' epistemic cognition. The assessments used to
investigate epistemic dimensions of learning are clearly crucial to the achievement of each of these goals--both for
accurately charting psychological attitudes and dispositions, and for measuring instruction-driven change. In paper
1, we explored ways in which the contemporary philosophical literature might represent a considerable yet under-
exploited resource for research on new components of epistemic cognition. This study focuses on the design of the
instruments used in this research, reviewing these in light of insights from philosophical practice.

Methods
A broad range of PE and UNOS research assessments are reviewed, with a particular focus on written and verbal
questionnaire formats. Assessments are critically analyzed in terms of the scope of the philosophical issues they
address, as well as in terms of the ways in which their constituent questions are formulated. New and modified
assessment items are suggested for both PE and UNOS research, as informed by consideration of the psychology of
survey response and the philosophy literature described in Paper 1 of this symposium. Finally, alternate methods for
eliciting and measuring epistemic cognition are considered.

Results
The assessments used in UNOS research cover a very broad range of topics, many of which overlap in complex
ways and resist straightforward classification. Although PE instruments do present students with a fairly diverse set
of questions, there are fewer of them, and correspondingly fewer dimensions of epistemic attitudes surveyed (e.g.,
the role of experience and authority as sources of knowledge, the certainty of knowledge attributions, etc.). PE
assessments   generally   do    not display the   scope and    fine-grained coverage    of  UNOS     assessments,  and would
particularly  benefit from  a   much  greater  engagement    with  research  in  epistemology.   Paper   1 in this symposium
canvasses a very large number of topics and subtopics that epistemologists have considered important, and many of
these have not yet been subject to psychological investigation.
        Resources      from  philosophy     provide  for  the   improvement      of   several existing   educational research
constructs. For example, consider a student who hears about two sets of experts with persistent disagreement on the
safety of a food additive, and who concludes that "both groups of experts are right" (King & Kitchener, 1994). This
kind of response is traditionally identified as "relativist." However, variation in the semantic role of "safe" may well
influence the student's pattern of responses, with any sensitivity to the interest-relative meanings of "safe" leading to
the ascription of relativism. Further, assessment items are insufficiently sensitive to ontological relativism (i.e. that
there is no objective fact, or truth, of the matter) versus epistemological relativism (i.e. that it is not possibly to
objectively compare methods, reasons, and justifications). Finally, students may well commit to an uncontroversial
descriptive   relativism (i.e., that different communities     can disagree  about    what is true or  justified) without also
committing to a fully normative relativism (i.e., that there are no objective facts regarding what is true or justified),
yet would    still be characterized   by  this research  program   as   "relativist." Alternatively, students  might  take an
approach to knowledge based on verisimilitude, or "truthlikeness" (Niiniluoto, 2002), such that the views of each of
the disagreeing expert groups are considered to approximate the truth to some degree, and so to "both be right." This
example    of a    problematic  construct is   of particular interest,  given the   popularity  of epistemic   developmental
trajectories in which students are considered to progress from "absolutist" to "relativist" to "evaluativist" stances
(e.g., Kuhn & Weinstock, 2002).
        A number of items used in UNOS and EC assessments also seem likely to confound ontological, semantic,
or social aspects of cognition with epistemic aspects. For example, Greene et al., 2008 correctly note that there is an
ontological dimension associated with beliefs about the simplicity of knowledge. However, there is evidence from
philosophical practice that beliefs about the simplicity of knowledge have a significant epistemic dimension, as well.
Philosophical work provides resources for disentangling epistemological, ontological and semantic dimensions of
cognition, and suggests that students' responses to survey questions might imply philosophical stances that may be
quite different from what EC researchers have previously assumed.
        Assessment items can also be considered in terms of three general levels at which they are presented: (1)
reflection on   general  questions    or statements  about   the   nature of  science   and   knowledge;   (2) metacognitive
reflection on epistemic practice; and (3) engagement in actual epistemic practice. Assessments in both UNOS and
PE  research   are  dominated    by  abstract  questions from     level 1 (e.g., "What   is   science?") and   so  assume  that
participants have a high degree of introspective access to the epistemic underpinnings of their own cognition. They
also assume that students can engage in some fairly sophisticated philosophizing, and that their explicit beliefs about

                                                         41  ·  © ISLS
                                                    ICLS 2010  ·   Volume 2

knowledge and science align with their actual epistemic practices. These assessments therefore neglect the role that
implicit epistemic attitudes might have on natural deliberation (i.e., deliberation in authentic contexts of inquiry and
belief formation) rather than in contexts of involving the rating of agreement with abstract statements about science
or knowledge. While a considerable amount of research has been directed at level 3--at revealing students' actual
epistemic practices--far less has been directed at level 2, for example, asking students to justify their selection of
the better theory and to explain why their justification is a good one.
          Perspectives on survey design are also drawn from work in experimental philosophy, a nascent field of
study in which surveys are used to explore traditional philosophical problems as well as to map the philosophical
attitudes and assumptions of the "folk" (i.e. non-philosophers). Weinberg, Nichols, and Stich's (2001) study is a
representative  example,   assessing  variation  in epistemic    norms   within  and across   cultures. The  experimentalist
movement in contemporary philosophy has involved a shift from a focus on normative, a priori, and intuition-driven
practices in philosophy, towards more descriptive, a posteriori and empirical practices. In particular, this research
has downplayed the degree of introspective access participants have to the philosophical underpinnings of their own
cognition.  Experimental   philosophers   thus  expect that   people  might   engage  effectively  in  an  epistemic  practice
without being able to articulate a good understanding of it; for example, nonscientists might exhibit facility with
some of the reasoning practices of science without being able to reflectively articulate what these practices are. This
therefore  represents a  challenge   to  the educational   research   communities'   reliance on  questionnaires  that  elicit
general, abstract beliefs.
          Assessments from both UNOS and PE research would thus benefit from a shift in focus from what learners
can articulate about their epistemic commitments, towards the study of their epistemic practices when engaged in
authentic  inquiry. Real   benefits  are likely to  flow  from    a greater reliance on   more   detailed  vignettes, thought
experiments,  case-based   reasoning,   rich and intensive    interviews,  and real inquiry  tasks  for both  PE and   UNOS
research.

Conclusions
The philosophical literature represents an excellent and under-utilized resource for educational researchers, both for
improving assessments of epistemic cognition and for better interpreting participants' responses. A richer and more
authentic set of tasks and environments is likely to enhance assessment, revealing the influence of both implicit and
explicit epistemic attitudes during real learning, reasoning and decision-making. An explicit focus on "enacted,"
contextualized epistemic cognition is therefore likely to enrich research in this area.

Paper 3: Underdetermination in Philosophy of Science and Science Education
Presenter: Ala Samarapungavan, Purdue University

Objectives
The goal of this paper is to provide a theoretical review of the post-positivist literature in the philosophy of science
on the underdetermination of theories by evidence. The results of this analysis have implications both for the scope
of issues discussed in EC research and for the goals of science instruction.

Modes of Inquiry, Sources, and Theoretical Framework
The methods comprise a theoretical analysis of underdetermination arguments in the philosophy of science and the
application  of these    ideas  in  science   education.   A     wide range   of   contemporary    philosophical  works    on
underdetermination    including  recent  books  and  anthologies    that address   issue related to underdetermination     are
included in the review. Philosophers of science and sociologists of scientific knowledge whose works are reviewed
include Achinstein,   Bloor,   Cartwright,   Clough,  Cole,   Collins,  Daren,   Fuller, Galison,  Giere,  Haack, Hacking,
Harding,   Kitcher, Knorr   Cetina,  Kuhn,   Latour, Laudan,     Longino,   Machamer,    Mayo,   Newton-Smith,   Niiniluoto,
Pickering, Popper, Solomon, Staley, Thagard, van Fraasen, Wylie, and Zammito. The paper draws especially on
Nersessian's  work   (2002,  2008)   on  conceptual  change    in the  history of  science and   on Laudan's   (1977,  1990)
arguments   against the  claim  that scientific  theories  are   so underdetermined   by   evidence   that the rationality of
science is in doubt (e.g., Bloor, 1981; T. Kuhn, 1962). Grounded in these works, the paper discusses postpositivist
arguments   against  the   epistemic relativism  implied   by    strong  forms  of underdetermination     in philosophy  and
identifies situations in   which   rational  theory choice    is possible.  The  theoretical  analysis  developed from     the
philosophy of science literature is then applied to the science education literature.

Results and Conclusions

                                                        42  ·  © ISLS
                                                     ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 2

Analyses    in the philosophical    literature (buttressed  by  historical  case studies) show   how   disagreements   among
competing scientific paradigms might be rationally resolved. For instance, Laudan (1977) used historical examples
(such as the disagreement between the Cartesians and the Newtonians with regard to whether the earth was a perfect
sphere or an oblate spheroid which bulged at the equator and was flattened at the poles) to show that rival paradigms
often resolve    disagreements   at the factual  level   on  methodological   grounds  because   they  agree   on the relevant
methodological rules. Nersessian (2002, 2008) argued that incommensurability arguments of the kind advanced by
Thomas Kuhn (1962) are mistaken in focusing excessively on a comparison of the products (i.e. end theories such as
Newtonian theory) rather than the cognitive processes of generating and evaluating theoretical alternatives (see also
Kitcher, 1993). Boghossian (2006) and other philosophers have argued that there are epistemic standards that can be
used to adjudicate between competing theories in situations in which theories are underdetermined by data. The
problem     that the data    themselves  may    be   theory-laden   can   be ameliorated   by   strategies that   increase the
independence of data and theories (Haack, 2003).         In short, the review of the philosophical literature discloses many
strategies used by scientists to avoid underdetermination in actual practice.
        The implications for science education are complex. On the one hand, the normative content of formal
school science may be even more underdetermined for students than competing scientific theories are for practicing
scientists. For example, while scientists who favor rival paradigms often share methodological norms, the typical
science novices in the classroom probably do not. Moreover, students are aware of much less data that constrain
theories than scientists are. Thus, available theories may often be genuinely underdetermined for science students.
Although    many   science   educators  recognize    the problem   of underdetermination,    there has been    less success in
developing     instructional strategies that   might reduce  specific   forms  of  underdetermination   for  science  learners.
There has also been little work on helping students learn epistemic practices that they can use to try to resolve
disagreements between competing theories. Our review of the philosophical literature identifies learning goals and
instructional strategies for science classrooms. For example, developing and applying methodological standards and
epistemic   values   to theory   evaluation  and choice   should   be   a specific focus  in the design of   science  learning
environments.
        Philosophical scholarship provides analytic tools that science educators can use to identify specific forms
of underdetermination faced by science learners, to design ways of reducing underdetermination in instruction, and
to teach students strategies that can ameliorate problems of underdetermination. In addition, philosophical work
points to existing work in cognitive development and conceptual change that successfully addresses problems of
underdetermination. For example, cognitive research points to effective instructional strategies that help students
understand     radically  new    and  incompatible     knowledge      frameworks    that  can   contribute  to    problems  of
underdetermination. Examples of these strategies include refining student intuitions through progressive abstraction
(Nersessian, 1992), using bridging analogies (Clement, 1993), and facilitating model articulation with the use of
electronic visualization and simulation technologies.
        As noted earlier, one way in which scientific theories may be underdetermined for students during science
learning is that unlike practicing scientists, students may not share or even be aware of the existence of certain
epistemic and methodological standards and practices. For example, the work of cognitive psychologists has shown
that non-scientists, especially children, typically do not use methodological strategies such as the control of variables
strategy (e.g., Chen & Klahr, 1999) and often focus on gathering confirming evidence in hypothesis evaluation
instead of trying to systematically build and evaluate a comprehensive body of evidence that includes a search for
potentially  disconfirming    evidence.  Philosophical   analyses   suggest  a wide  range   of standards  for evaluating  and
choosing among theories in the face of uncertainty; these include evidential criteria (e.g., explaining the broadest
array of data), consistency criteria (e.g., internal coherence of the theory; coherence with other accepted theories),
criteria concerning the theoretical precision of terms and measures, criteria of testability, methodological standards,
simplicity, relevance to practical human needs, and so on. These criteria could be explicitly discussed by students as
a way of helping them develop strategies for dealing with situations in which theories are partly underdetermined by
data. This is an area that is currently under-analyzed and under-researched in science education. One problem is that
many science education researchers fail to pay attention to important differences in methodological and epistemic
norms and practices within different areas of science (Samarapungavan, Westby & Bodner, 2006). Helping students
understand the epistemic and methodological norms and practices that form the foundation of normative scientific
knowledge in different areas of science is critical to reducing underdetermination for students.

References
Bishop, M.     A., & Trout,   J. D. (2005).    Epistemology  and    the psychology  of human     judgment. Oxford,   England:
        Oxford University Press.

                                                          43  ·  © ISLS
                                                 ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 2

Bloor, D. (1991). Knowledge and social imagery (2nd ed.). Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press. (First edition
       published 1976)
Boghossian,  P. A.  (2006).  Fear of  knowledge:  Against   relativism  and   constructivism. Oxford,  England:   Oxford
       University Press.
Chen, Z., & Klahr, D. (1999). All other things being equal: Children's acquisition of the control of variables strategy.
       Child Development, 70, 1098­1120.
Clement, J. (1993).  Using   bridging analogies  and anchoring     intuitions to deal with  students' preconceptions   in
       physics. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 30, 1241-1257.
Coady, C. A. J. (1992). Testimony: A philosophical study. Oxford, England: Oxford University Press.
Goldman, A. I. (1986). Epistemology and cognition. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Goldman, A. I. (1999). Knowledge in a social world. Oxford, England: Oxford University Press.
Haack, S. (2003). Defending science: Between scientism and cynicism. Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books.
Hofer, B. K., & Pintrich, P. R. (1997). The development of epistemological theories: Beliefs about knowledge and
       knowing and their relation to learning. Review of Educational Research, 67, 88-140.
Hofer, B. K., & Pintrich, P. R. (Eds.). (2002). Personal epistemology: The psychology of beliefs about knowledge
       and knowing. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
King, P. M., & Kitchener, K. S. (1994). Developing reflective judgment: Understanding and promoting intellectual
       growth and critical thinking in adolescents and adults. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Kitcher, P. (1993). The advancement of science: Science without legend, objectivity without illusions. New York:
       Oxford University Press.
Kuhn, D., & Weinstock, M. (2002). What is epistemological thinking and why does it matter? In B. K. Hofer & P.
       R. Pintrich (Eds.), Personal epistemology: The psychology of beliefs about knowledge and knowing (pp.
       121-144). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Kuhn, T. S. (1962). The structure of scientific revolutions. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Kusch, M. (2002). Knowledge by agreement: The programme of communitarian epistemology. Oxford, England:
       Oxford University Press.
Kvanvig, J. L. (2003). The value of knowledge and the pursuit of understanding. Cambridge, England: Cambridge
       University Press.
Lackey, J. (2008). Learning from words: Testimony as a source of knowledge. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Laudan, L. (1977). Progress and its problems: Toward a theory of scientific growth. Berkeley: University of
       California Press.
Laudan, L. (1990). Demystifying underdetermination. In C. W. Savage (Ed.), Scientific theories (Vol. 14, pp. 267-
       297). Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
Lederman,   N.  G., Abd-El-Khalick,   F.,  Bell, R.  L., &    Schwartz,  R.   S. (2002). Views   of  Nature   of Science
       Questionnaire:    Toward   valid  and meaningful    assessment   of learners' conceptions of   nature  of science.
       Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 39, 497-521.
Kornblith, H. (2002). Knowledge and its place in nature. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Montmarquet, J. A. (1986). Epistemic virtue. Mind, 96, 482-497.
Nersessian, N.  J.  (1992). Constructing  and  instructing:   The  role of 'abstraction  techniques'  in developing  and
       teaching scientific theories. In R. Duschl & R. Hamilton, (Eds.), Philosophy of science, cognitive science,
       & educational theory and practice (pp. 48- 68). Albany, NY: SUNY Press.
Nersessian, N.  J.  (2002). Kuhn, conceptual   change,   and  cognitive  science.  In T. Nichols  (Ed.),  Contemporary
       philosophers in focus series (pp. 178-211). Cambridge University Press.
Plantinga, A. (1993). Warrant and proper function. New York: Oxford University Press.
Stich, S. (1990). The fragmentation of reason. . Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Nersessian, N. J. (2008). Creating scientific concepts. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Niiniluoto, I. (2002). Critical scientific realism. Oxford, England: Oxford University Press.
Rosenberg, S., Hammer, D., & Phelan, J. (2006). Multiple epistemological coherences in an eighth-grade discussion
       of the rock cycle. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 15, 261-292.
Samarapungavan,     A., Westby, E.   L., Bodner,  G. M   .  (2006)  Contextual    epistemic development    in science: a
       comparison of chemistry students and research chemists. Science Education, 90, 468­495.
Stich, S. (1990). The fragmentation of reason. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Weinberg, J., Nichols, S., & Stich, S. (2001). Normativity and epistemic intuitions. Philosophical Topics, 29, 429-
       460.
Zagzebski, L. T. (1996). Virtues of the mind: An inquiry into the nature of virtue and the ethical foundations of
       knowledge. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.

                                                     44  ·  © ISLS
