                                                   ICLS 2010    Volume 2

      Learning in mathematics: Effects of procedural and conceptual
                     instruction on the quality of student interaction
                          Dejana Diziol1, Nikol Rummel1, Hans Spada1, & Stephanie Haug2
                              Institute of Psychology, University of Freiburg, Germany
                            Email: 1{diziol, rummel, spada}@psychologie.uni-freiburg.de
                                                2stephanie.haug@web.de

         Abstract: Quantitative analyses from our previous research indicated that collaboration is more
         effective when learning with conceptual instruction than when learning with procedural instruction.
         To explain this differential effect, we analyzed student interaction during instruction. First analyses
         show that the conceptual instruction elicited more fruitful interaction behavior than the procedural
         instruction. Furthermore, in the procedural condition, students more often split potential learning
         opportunities between each other, yielding decreased practice opportunities.

Introduction
While research has generally shown that collaboration may facilitate student learning in mathematics, such positive
effects are not always found (Lou et al., 1996). Quantitative analyses from our previous research indicated that the
impact of collaboration may depend on the type of knowledge students are expected to acquire during the interaction
(Diziol, Rummel,     & Spada,    2010).  The study  compared     the  effect  of four  conditions on   student  learning in
mathematics.  In  two  procedural   conditions, students   learned the execution   of  computational   procedures  that  are
necessary to solve equations; in two conceptual conditions, students learned to translate between verbal and algebraic
representations   of basic  mathematical     concepts. During     instruction,   students  worked   either  individually or
collaboratively. Post-test results indicated a differential impact of collaboration on the individual learning outcome:
When    learning  with   procedural  instruction,  collaboration   impeded    student  procedural knowledge     acquisition
compared   to individual   learning; when    learning  with   conceptual  instruction,  collaboration  improved    students'
conceptual understanding. Furthermore, collaboration had a different influence on student learning behavior during
instruction depending on the type of tasks they solved. As indicators for student learning processes, we assessed the
time students spent prior to problem-solving steps and the time after errors. While collaboration reduced the time
prior to steps for procedural instruction, it increased the time prior to steps and after errors for conceptual instruction.
How can this differential impact of collaboration be explained? Following the interaction paradigm introduced by
Dillenbourg,  Baker,  Blaye, and  O'Malley   (1996),   we  argue  that the  different task types that  students worked   on
during instruction elicited different types of interactions, and that the elicited interactions were not equally effective
to promote student learning. To evaluate the influence of the instruction material on student interaction, we analyzed
student  learning processes  during   instruction. The   results  of  these  process  analyses  can   help to increase  our
understanding of when and why collaboration is helpful.

Evaluation of students' learning processes
Seventy-nine high-school students were randomly assigned to four conditions: individual vs. collaborative learning
with procedural instruction, and individual vs. collaborative learning with conceptual instruction. During instruction,
students  worked   in  a computer-supported     learning   environment    on   linear algebra  problems.   The  instruction
alternated between   worked  examples    and tutored   problem-solving.    During  tutored  problem-solving,   the learning
environment provided immediate feedback to student actions: Errors were marked in red, and correct answers were
marked in green. To ensure that students would not get stuck, the learning environment automatically launched a hint
after the third incorrect student attempt which told students the correct solution to the problem-solving step. The
procedural and conceptual instruction differed in the following way: In the procedural conditions, students learned to
solve linear  equations. In  the conceptual  conditions,   students   derived  linear equations from   story  problems.  To
enable the comparison of learning processes of individual students and collaborating dyads, half of the students in
both the procedural individual and the conceptual individual condition received additional instruction to think aloud
during problem-solving, and we recorded both audio and video data and students' problem-solving actions (log data).
         To compare students' learning processes during instruction, we developed a coding scheme that evaluates
student  behavior after  making   errors and  receiving  hints.  Earlier  studies have    shown  that errors  and hints  are
important learning opportunities in tutoring environments; however, students do not always take advantage of these
opportunities. Two ineffective learning strategies are trial and error, and hint abuse (i.e. students merely copy the
correct answer from the hint). In contrast, it is more fruitful for learning if students elaborate on how to correct an
error or if they try to understand the solution step proposed by a hint, and particularly the mutual elaboration with a

                                                       370     ISLS
                                                    ICLS 2010    Volume 2

learning partner can promote students' knowledge acquisition. For student behavior following errors, we classified
for each error whether students were able to correct the error, whether they engaged in the ineffective trial and error
strategy, or whether they elaborated on the error (learning processes dimension; for an overview of the categories,
see Table 1). For student behavior following hints, we classified for each hint whether students engaged in hint
abuse,  whether   they elaborated    on the  hint, and  whether   they   were  able to  understand   it. In the collaborative
conditions, we furthermore analyzed if both students capitalized on the learning opportunity (interaction dimension):
Did they collaborate to correct the error or to understand the hint, was only one student responsible for the action
following the error or hint, or did they not discuss the error or hint at all? We expected that students particularly
benefit from collaboration if they interact with each other, while they may not benefit from the learning opportunity
if they are not both engaged in problem-solving. We implemented the coding scheme with Activity Lens (Avouris,
Fiotakis, Kahrimanis, Margaritis, & Komis, 2007). By combining log data from the learning environment and video
recordings, Activity Lens enabled us to navigate to the relevant sequences of the video for the process analysis.
         So far, we concentrated our analysis on the collaborative conditions. Analyses of students thinking aloud are
in progress, and    results will be  presented at  the conference.  The   comparison    of the two  collaborative conditions
suggests   that the conceptual   instruction elicited  more    fruitful learning behavior   than  the procedural  instruction
(learning processes dimension, Table 1). Dyads in the conceptual condition showed higher elaboration following
errors. In contrast, dyads   in  the procedural condition   engaged     more often  in  ineffective learning  behavior:  After
nearly half of the errors that were not immediately corrected, students showed trial and error behavior, and a fifth of
the hints were merely copied by students. Furthermore, in the procedural condition, the learning opportunities after
errors and hints were more often split between learning partners (interaction dimension): Mostly one dyad partner
was responsible for the subsequent solution step (after 49 % of errors and 40 % of hints), while mutual interaction
was rare (32 % of the errors and 20 % of the hints). Frequently, dyads even did not talk about the following step at
all (after 19 % of errors and 40 % of hints). The consequential decrease of practice in the procedural collaborative
condition  can  explain  why    these students did  not   profit from   the interaction with   a partner. In  contrast, in the
conceptual collaborative condition, all hints were verbally addressed by at least one student of the dyad, and in 74 %
of the errors and in 62 % of the hints, students worked together to decide on the next action. Our next steps will be to
statistically compare the learning processes in the four conditions and to evaluate the impact of the different learning
processes on students' learning outcome. These analyses can further increase our understanding of the influence of
the instruction material on the quality of student interaction and reveal when and why collaboration is helpful. At the
conference, we will present the results of these analyses and discuss implications of our research for practice.

Table 1: Percentage of student behavior following errors and hints (learning processes dimension).

                                                                                           procedural    conceptual
error: next step incorrect    trial and error: immediately next error                            44 %         15 %
                              reflection on error, without verbal elaboration                    6%           15 %
                              reflection on error, with verbal elaboration                       50 %         70 %
error: next step correct      immediate correction                                               60 %         32 %
                              reflection on error, without verbal elaboration                    10 %           0%
                              reflection on error, with verbal elaboration                       30 %         68 %
hint                          hint abuse: copying the correct step                               20 %           0%
                              reflection on hint, without verbal elaboration                     40 %         19 %
                              verbal elaboration on hint, but step is not understood             20 %         24 %
                              reflection on hint, with verbal elaboration                        20 %         57 %

References
Avouris, N., Fiotakis, G., Kahrimanis, G., Margaritis, M., & Komis, V. (2007). Beyond logging of fingertip actions:
         analysis of collaborative learning using multiple sources of data. Journal of Interactive Learning Research
         JILR, 18(2), 231-250.
Dillenbourg, P., Baker, M., Blaye, A. & O'Malley, C. (1996). The evolution of research on collaborative learning. In
         E.  Spada   & P.   Reiman   (Eds) Learning    in Humans   and   Machine:   Towards    an interdisciplinary  learning
         science (pp. 189-211). Oxford: Elsevier.
Diziol, D.,  Rummel,    N.,  &   Spada, H.  (2010).  Are  two    heads  always better   than one?   Taking  a closer look   at
         collaborative learning in mathematics. Manuscript submitted for publication.
Lou, Y., Abrami, P. C., Spence, J. C., Poulsen, C., Chambers, B., & d'Apollonia, S. (1996). Within-class grouping: A
         meta-analysis. Review of Educational Research, 66(4), 423-458.

                                                        371      ISLS
