                                                 ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 2

         Beyond epistemological deficits:                              Incorporating flexible
     epistemological views into fine-grained cognitive dynamics
     Ayush Gupta, Andy Elby, Department of Physics, University of Maryland, College Park, MD 20742.
                                     Email: ayush@umd.edu, elby@umd.edu

         Abstract: Researchers have argued against deficit-based explanations of students' troubles
         with mathematical sense-making, pointing instead to factors such as epistemology: students'
         beliefs about    knowledge  and   learning   can   hinder  them   from                activating and   integrating
         productive  knowledge     they have.    But  such    explanations   run the             risk  of  substituting an
         epistemological   deficit for  a  concepts/skills    deficit.   Our analysis              of  an   undergraduate
         engineering   major  avoids this  "deficit  trap"  by  incorporating    multiple,             context-dependent
         epistemological stances into his cognitive dynamics. (Support: NSF 08-335880).

Introduction
Engineering students often have trouble learning and using mathematics effectively (Redish & Smith, 2008),
and  epistemologies  play  a  major  role  in  explaining   these   difficulties (Hammer,                 1994;  Schoenfeld,    1988;
Schommer, Crouse, & Rhodes, 1992).         Our case study of a student who gets stuck while solving a problem
during a clinical interview adds to this literature in two ways. First, we provide a fine-grained account of how
Jim's epistemology  affects his mathematical problem-solving in the moment.                     This complements     large-N studies
showing that epistemological beliefs correlate with approaches to learning and using mathematics and with
performance (reviewed by Muis, 2004).        Second, we show that Jim's "problematic" epistemological stance is
nuanced and flexible in response to conceptual cues, and we provide a toy model that can explain his subtle shift
between epistemological stances.     In this way, we avoid attributing to Jim an epistemological deficit, i.e., an
absence of productive epistemological resources.      Our analysis also has instructional implications:                  instead of
needing to confront and replace "mis-epistemologies" such as the one Jim initially appears to hold, instructors
can create instructional environments that tend to trigger more favorable epistemological stances.

Methods and theoretical framework
We  videotaped   clinical interviews of    Jim and  six  other  engineering  majors                taking a first-semester   physics
course, probing  their  approaches  to  using  mathematics    in physics.    Subjects              were   asked  to  explain both  a
familiar and an unfamiliar equation to themselves and to others, and to solve problems while thinking aloud.
Jim solved one problem easily, but got stuck on another despite his fluidity with mathematical manipulation and
his understanding of the  relevant physical  ideas. We   thought that understanding                why Jim  got stuck   -- and then,
why a particular conceptual cue helped him get past the impasse -- could shed light on the cognitive dynamics
by which epistemological stances and conceptual ideas interact during mathematical problem-solving.
         Our   analysis began   with close   scrutiny   of  the episode   where                Jim gets   stuck  and later  unstuck,
borrowing tools from discourse analysis (Gee, 1999) and framing analysis (Tannen, 1993) to interpret gestures,
word choice, and the contextualized substance of his utterances, taking into account that social expectations and
power dynamics play a role in interviews. We formed explanations for his behavior and looked for confirmatory
or  disconfirmatory  evidence    elsewhere   in  the  interview   (Miles   &   Huberman,                  1984). Working     from  a
knowledge-in-pieces perspective (diSessa, 1993; Minsky, 1986), we did not attribute patterns of behavior to
globally robust (mis)conceptions and epistemological beliefs; we continually considered how contextual cues
might trigger different local coherences in his thinking (Hammer, Elby, Scherr, & Redish, 2005).

Data and analysis:           Brief synopsis
The interviewer asks whether the pressure 7 meters beneath the surface of a lake is greater than or less than
pressure 5 meters   beneath  the  surface.   Jim uses the   equation   p = pat             top + !gh,  to which   he had   just been
introduced (p,  !, and  g denote,  pressure, density  of water,  and   acceleration             due to  gravity, and  h denotes  the
distance beneath the surface.   Jim thinks h must be negative (i.e., 5 meters beneath the surface corresponds to h
= ­5 m), and concludes that the p is greater at a depth of 5 meters. The interviewer tries to correct the sign error:

         Interviewer: Suppose I told you that h is positive.
         Jim:      Always positive?
         Int.:     Yes, ... Would that help you?
         Jim:      I mean, that would just make 7 greater than 5.
         Int.:     Okay. Does that bother you?
         Jim:      I mean... What I keep thinking is that you are going down (gestures down) so 7
                   cannot be greater than 5 and negative. That's why I keep coming back to that.

                                                     372  ·  © ISLS
                                               ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 2

                  Meaning, if you do say it's positive then ... I guess it doesn't bother me. (sighs) 7 is
                  greater than 5 in positive-land.

Jim is skeptical about h being is positive, given that its direction is down from the surface. Jim sighs as he tries
to accept that idea and perhaps tries to distance himself from it by saying it's true in "positive-land," which he
says with a hint of sarcasm.  In the conversation that follows, Jim reverts to thinking of h as negative.
         The interviewer then asks Jim how a friend who doesn't know physics would answer this question.
Jim says that, based on personal experiences, the friend would say the pressure is higher at greater depths.      Jim
acknowledges   the conflict   between the common-sense       answer  and  the mathematical  answer,  but   thinks the
mathematical answer is more trustworthy partly because perceptions can be misleading:

         For an equation to be given to you it has to be like theory and it has to be fact-bearing. So, fact
         applies for everything. It is like a law. It applies to every single situation you could be in. But,
         like, your experience at times or perception is just different - or you don't have the knowledge
         of that course or anything. So, I will go with the people who have done the law and it has
         worked time after time after time.

He doesn't try to reconcile "perceptions" with math, though he has the tools to do so, as shown below.
         At first glance, we might think Jim's behavior stems from the robust conception that downward always
corresponds to negative.  But solving an earlier problem, Jim took downward as positive.       We can also rule out
conceptual or skill deficits, using data we lack space to present here.     The reason he gets and stays stuck, we
argue, is that his perception of how difficult it would be to reconcile common sense and the formal result (while
he's "on the spot" in the interview!) stabilizes his epistemological stance that mathematical formalism and
common-sense ideas need not speak to each other, and that mathematical formalism expresses confirmed truths.
         This stance is more nuanced and flexible than a globally-robust "belief" that mathematical formalism is
disconnected from everyday thinking or the real world.        When the interviewer asks about the sign of g, Jim
immediately   reconciles the  mathematics  with  common      sense:  with  g  and h both taken  as negative,   !gh is
positive and hence the pressure is greater 7 meters beneath the surface.       Upon reaching this conclusion, Jim
displays relief in his physical posture and his vocal pitch while noting that this makes more sense and agrees
with the physical experience of pressure. We argue that his epistemological stance has shifted in this moment
(not necessarily permanently!), towards a greater expectation that mathematical formalism should mesh with
everyday experience.    And this shift is actually quite subtle:  even before the reconciliation, in response to the
interviewer's query about whether the mathematical formalism relates to real-life experiences under water, he
adds, "I think there is some way that just completely links the two together, but it's not obvious what that
relation is."  So,  Jim  always   thought reconciliation   was   possible, but he   thought achieving it    would  be
prohibitively difficult until the interviewer pointed  him   toward  a  path.  In our poster, we will model Jim's
stances before and after the reconciliation as networks of finer-grained knowledge elements, and the subtle
epistemological shift as a cascade resulting from a conceptual cue.

References
diSessa, A. A. (1993). Towards an epistemology of physics. Cognition and Instruction, 10(2-3), 105-225.
Gee, J. B. (1999). An introduction to discourse analysis: Theory and method. London: Routledge.
Hammer, D. M. (1994). Epistemological beliefs in introductory physics. Cognition and Instruction, 12(2), 151-
         183.
Hammer, D. M., Elby, A., Scherr, R. E., & Redish, E. F. (2005). Resources, framing, and transfer. In J. Mestre
         (Ed.), Transfer of learning from a modern multidisciplinary perspective (pp. 89-120). Greenwich, CT:
         Information Age Publishing.
Miles, M. M., & Huberman, A. M. (1984). Qualitative data analysis: A sourcebook of new methods. Newbury
         Park, CA: Sage.
Minsky, M. L. (1986). Society of Mind. New York: Simon and Schuster.
Muis, K. R. (2004). Personal Epistemology and Mathematics: A Critical Review and Synthesis of Research.
         Review of Educational Research, 74(3), 317-377.
Redish, E. F., & Smith, K. A. (2008). Looking Beyond Content: Skill Development for Engineers. Journal of
         Engineering Education, 97, 295-307.
Schoenfeld, A. (1988). When good teaching leads to bad results:        Disasters of well taught mathematics classes.
         In T. P. Carpenter & P. L. Peterson (Eds.), Learning mathematics from instruction (Vol. 23, pp. 145).
Schommer,     M., Crouse,   A., &   Rhodes,   N.   (1992).   Epistemological   Beliefs   and   Mathematical     Text
         Comprehension: Believing it is simple does not make it so. Journal of Educational Psychology,
         84, 435-443.
Tannen, D. (1993). Framing in discourse. New York: Oxford University Press.

                                                   373  ·  © ISLS
