                                                ICLS 2010    ·  Volume 1

      Tension resolution as pattern for practice transformation in
          interdisciplinary teamwork in professional development

                                                       Patrick Sins
               Research Centre Learning in Interaction, Faculty of Social and Behavioural Sciences,
                       Utrecht University, PO Box 80410, 3508 TC, Utrecht, The Netherlands
                                                     p.h.m.sins@uu.nl

         Abstract:   A central   interest in developing     professionalism   resides   in the  potential  for
         professionals to learn from and with one another in ways that support transformations of their
         knowledge    practices.  However,      negotiation    between   multiple    perspectives,  interests,
         practices and traditions intertwines cognitive-epistemic with socio-relational and affective
         aspects, which may lead to tension and conflict. While tension can disable learning, this
         paper argues that identifying these tensions should be viewed as a significant source for
         change and    development.   The    paper   reports   on a   teacher-researcher  collaboration   at a
         secondary school which focuses on the co-design of a learning module. It is shown that the
         identification of tensions during meetings helped participants to focus their efforts on the root
         causes of problems, which led to a reconceptualisation of the current work practices. This
         subsequently helped team members to deviate from established norms and improve their
         practices.

Introduction
Rapid changes   in  current networked     society  present   new   challenges to    human  competence     and  flexibility.
Productive participation in knowledge-intensive work requires that individuals, their professional communities,
and their organizations  develop   new    practices, advance    their knowledge     and their understanding    as well as
produce innovations. This is reflected in developments in professional communities wherein work is increasingly
focused on the deliberate advancement of knowledge rather than on the mere production of material objects
(Bereiter, 2002; Paavola & Hakkarainen, 2005). In order to cope with the cognitive, social, and motivational
challenges of knowledge-based society, tools and pedagogical methods are needed that open up opportunities for
enduring and sustained transformation of professionals' knowledge practices.
         Based on the works of Engeström (1987), Schatzki (2002) and Reckwitz (2002) we define a knowledge
practice as follows: a social-historically created and shared behavioural pattern consisting of an interconnected
and inseparable array of recurrent activities, conventions, rules and norms that play part in the creation of
knowledge  artefacts.  According   to this  conceptualization,    practices are characterized   by their  social  nature,
which means that practices are shaped by and evolve within a knowledge community, ultimately becoming part
of the its identity. In addition, the concept of knowledge practice entails stability as well as change. Stability is
reflected as routines, procedures, conventions, underlying beliefs and values, epistemological conceptualizations
and the set of available tools. At the same time, practices are open to change in that each activity based on this
practice is adapted in response to changing contexts and particular circumstances.
         The rationale for practice transformations is that newly developed practices and tools aim to overcome
the tensions a  particular  knowledge     community   identified    during  certain events  in  their knowledge     work.
Practice  transformations  involve   fundamental     changes   in views,   beliefs, ideas  and  ways   of working   with
knowledge that fulfil a certain need that is relevant for a particular professional community's knowledge work.
These transformations lead towards historically new types of practices based on collaborative, tool-mediated
knowledge  production   that takes    place  as long-term,     sustained processes   and   which   ultimately  lead to a
reconceptualization of the object and motive of the community's knowledge practices to embrace a more diverse
horizon of possibilities than in the previous practice.
         However, practices are difficult to change, not only because this would imply a negative evaluation of
previous socially grounded practices, but also because such transformation involves a period of disorientation
while old practices are gradually unlearned and new practices are gradually developed (Eraut, 2004). During this
period professionals feel like novices, but without having the excuses or discounts on performance normally
assigned to novices. The pain of transformation lies in the loss of control over one's practice when one's tacit
knowledge  ceases   to provide   the  necessary   support;   and  the  emotional    dimension  is  also of   considerable
importance. In addition, Little (1990) reports that professionals view transforming practices as involving high
transactional costs to participatory work in time. According to Argyris and Schön (1978) the central problem for
most professionals is that they are intellectually and emotionally committed to espoused theories which describe
the world as they would like it to be, but which do not necessarily accurately describe their own activities and
constrain possibilities for transforming their practices. Moreover, practices are similar to physical infrastructures

                                                            1
                                                     372  ·   © ISLS
                                                  ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

in a sense that when everything is working well one does not pay attention to them. Consequently, professionals
rely on them even they are not fully aware what constitutes them. Additionally, the practices have been evolved
during a long period. According to these authors, these problems can only be solved               when professionals step
outside their   taken-for-granted world   and    espoused    theories  to actively   search for  genuine  feedback    which
challenge the outcomes of their activities.
         Although practices tend to remain stable and to reproduce socially shared knowledge, this stability is
altered as  internal   or external    disturbances  produce     various   forms   of  tensions   within   activity  systems
(Engeström,   1987,  2007;    Hakkarainen,   Palonen,  Paavola,    &   Lehtinen,    2004).  The  notion  of    developmental
tensions as a driving force of change and development is drawn from the premises of cultural-historical activity
theory (CHAT) (Engeström, 1987; 1999). CHAT draws upon the works of Heidegger (1962), Dewey (1968) and
Leont' ev (1981) converging on the role of tensions and their resolution as a means of revealing the natureof the
world around us. In these socio-historical approaches to learning and knowledge, tensions are conceptualized as
the conditions that open up opportunities for creative efforts in activity and communication and are as such the
driving force behind innovative knowledge practices.
         Changes    in practices  are due    to external  as  well as  internal   disturbances.  According     to Engeström
(1999a; 1999b), identification of tensions in an activity system helps learners to focus their efforts on the root
causes of problems. Barab, Barnett, Yamagata-Lynch, Squire, & Keating (2002) corroborate on this in arguing
that tensions and their resolution helps to identify the dynamic forces of change and comprise an important
constituent and starting point for investigating such processes. The mechanism behind tensions resolution is that
as the tensions of a particular activity system are aggravated, some individual participants begin to question and
deviate from its established norms. Learning is accomplished when tensions lead to a reconceptualization of the
object and motive of a particular activity to embrace a more diverse horizon of possibilities than in the previous
activity. While practices might change when new tools become available or circumstances and contexts shift,
they can also be deliberately altered by those carrying out the activities when they invent new strategies of
working  or activities.   In  addition, members    of a   community       may  experience   difficulties  in   constructing a
connection between the goals or their actions and the object and motive of the collective activity, which may
give rise to tensions.
         For instance, knowledge communities that involve cross boundary practices between different domains
of knowledge embody an epistemic collision of activity systems which generates disturbances and conflicts. This
involves   that in  collaborative contexts,     negotiation   between  multiple    perspectives,    interests, practices   and
traditions intertwines cognitive-epistemic with socio-relational and affective aspects, which may lead to tension
and conflict.   As  practices  inevitably change   when     concrete   activities are carried  out,  the  development      and
transformations of practices proves to be an ongoing and contingent process. Due to this dynamic nature of
practices, the design of a new object might overcome shortcomings of former existing objects, but when they are
employed as tools this will restructure the nature of the current practices and will in this manner create new
opportunities   but  also new    problems    and   challenges.   According     to   this line of    reasoning,    learning or
development     of practices   occurs when   members     attempt   to  negotiate  about    how   to adapt their   knowledge
practices as a results of these disruptions feeding into the shared object.
         In general, what is important here is that a group of professionals has to capitalize on the multiple
perspectives of its members, that the group creates ownership and commitment towards achieving the common
objectives and that members build up on each other willing to learn from tensions. The way to overcome these
tensions is to negotiate possible solutions or design hypotheses for new practices or new tools. Eventually these
new practices and tools lead to new tensions which leads to an iterative sideways movement. Preconditions for
groups  to be   able to solve  tensions   to improve  their   practices   are: 1)   proactive and   continuous    creation  of
common ground, 2) sharing tensions in considerate ways and 3) supporting and recognizing agency (Matusov,
2001). However, what is still lacking in socio-historical accounts and studies of tension resolution as conditions
for practice transformations to occur, is a description of patterns of tension resolution that lead to productive
changes  and    development.    Moreover,    the  investigation   of   trajectories  of  tension resolution    affecting   the
emergence of new knowledge practices located at several timescales and places has rarely been touched upon in
empirical endeavours.
         In the present paper, we will present the data of a study in the field of a school-university partnership at
a secondary school which shows a particular patterns in the cognitive-epistemic consequences and resolution of
tensions. This study focused on the investigation of the practice changes of an interdisciplinary team which
focused on the redesign and implementation of a learning module. Meetings of this team served to reflect upon
and analyze teachers' prevailing practices, as well as envision and implement changes to the module.

The     Setting        and     Knowledge           Practices           of   the      Investigated         Knowledge
Community
This study focuses on describing the nature and scope of transformations in teachers' coaching practices that
followed   from    resolutions of developmental     tensions    that  arose in    an university-school   partnership.    This

                                                              2
                                                      373   ·   © ISLS
                                                 ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

partnership involved the 2-year lasting collaboration at UniC, a secondary school in Utrecht in The Netherlands
that  was   aimed at  the  redesign  of a course  module      based  on  knowledge     creation principles (Paavola    &
Hakkarainen, 2005). One central feature of the knowledge creation approach that was taken up in the design was
the concept of mediation which means that students' activities are directed towards the collaborative creation and
advancement    of shared    knowledge   objects  (e.g., documentaries,    research  reports  or instructional  material)
mediated by specific supporting technological or conceptual tools.
         At    UniC,  students are  coached   towards   the   national  school exam,    complementing     the focus    on
knowledge acquisition by stressing development of competencies, skills and personal development. By clever
organization of compulsory learning materials students are enabled to develop their own talents and interests in a
course module in which they plan and perform projects within or outside of the school context. This means that
every week in the curriculum a half day is reserved for these projects for periods each of which last eight weeks.
The school supports the students and offers possibilities to carry out their projects.
         Within this pedagogical context, teachers' coaching practices traditionally focus on the development of
courses and assignments providing guidance to students' self-directed learning process. UniC expressed the
aspiration to challenge their students more towards meaningful learning. In addition, the teachers' expressed that
their role during these projects was unclear and that they needed more scaffolds to structure their coaching.
Therefore,   a multi-disciplinary  team consisting of    educational   researchers, teachers,   students, dean, process
coordinator and pedagogical experts was set up to flesh out the design based on knowledge creation principles
which matched UniC's general pedagogical approach and objectives. The collaborative design, implementation
and testing of the new course module implied that high demands were placed on coaching practices of the
teachers which provide a platform for tensions to arise. For instance, they had to: (a) comprehend the theoretical
principles behind the knowledge creation metaphor, (b) apply these principles in their practice, and (c) reflecton
their  role as a  teacher  and transform  their  practices    accordingly to  scaffold  students'  knowledge    creation
processes.

Method
Multiple, intertwined methodological approaches and various approaches to data collection and analysis were
combined to elaborate dynamics of incremental changes which reflect practice transformations resulting from
patterns  of  tension  resolution. The  study  involved    ethnographic  analyses   with participatory    observation, a
developmental    intervention  approach,  interviews    and event    sampling  to follow  the   processes towards   new
practices. Our analyses took tensions in partners' activities as a point of departure. We look for episodes in the
material that express problems and materializes as developmental tensions.
         Then we can investigate discursive activities between partners (micro level), elaborate on episodes of
tension  resolutions   over   time  (meso-level)  and    examine     how  patterns  of   tension   resolution relate   to
transformations of practices at the level of trajectories (macro-level). This gives to transformation processes as
they play as professionals deliberately extending shared knowledge and mobilize knowledge types embedded in
the social practice in their problem solving. For framing the analysis we developed the following approach:
     1.  Description of the knowledge practices of the investigated professional community;
     2.  Description of the nature of tensions that occur in these practices. Explore resolutions to the tensions,
          characterize   tension-resolutions and analyze    how   these  contribute  to  transformation   towards   new
         practice over time;
     3.  Examination     of  practice   transformation   including   emphasizing    the   vertical   (socialization  and
         internalization) and/or horizontal dimension (boundary crossing and externalization).
The cases in this cluster examine the nature of these tensions that provide an important starting point to explore
change and development of knowledge practices. To assess the knowledge practices of the actors involved both
studies, we combined data collected from different instruments,      namely:
     !   Material artefacts, such as reports, concept maps, and written comments;
     !   Pre- and post questionnaires;
     !   Semi-structured interviews;
     !   Transcribed recordings and minutes of the meetings.
These instruments were mainly designed to capture critical events during the meetings and to discern how these
events  are  echoed   in the ways  professionals adapted    their practices.  Critical events   were conceptualized    as
articulations  of developmental     tensions  and  were     posteriori  checked   with   the  investigated  knowledge
communities.

Results
Most tensions were observable on the boundary of the intersecting activity systems showing how team members
balanced institutionalized or traditional and newly developed practices. One source for tensions involved the
specific organization of teachers' coaching practices to be more in line with the new pedagogical approach and at

                                                            3
                                                    374   ·   © ISLS
                                               ICLS 2010    ·   Volume 1

the same time foster students' knowledge construction processes. The following excerpt exemplifies this tension
during an interview with one of the participating teachers:

             1        Teacher3             I see that an increasing amount of student groups do not
                                           have a clear view of what they are doing, that is what I am
                                           afraid of, unfortunately
             2        Researcher1          How do you coach these students then?
             3        T3                   Well, you cannot just leave them, than this would lead to
                                           chaos. [...] You can divide tasks in the group and think of
                                           who is going to do what, but then I would be too directive
                                           and I am not sure whether that should be our intention, so
                                           therefore I give them more freedom [...]
             4        R1                   [...] Well you mean that you are still in search of what is
                                           expected of you as a teacher. What do you need in your
                                           coaching?
             5        T3                   First I need to know more about knowledge creation, what
                                           the idea and what the pillars are, so I can eventually adapt
                                           my coaching to that [...] normally I am very clear in my
                                           teaching,  but   in this pilot  it  seems   that   you  have   to
                                           discover what the best ways of coaching are
                      Interview Teacher 3; December 2006

Teacher3 expresses his concern about his impression that students have not been successful in organizing and
structuring their work. When prompted for his ways to cope with this impression in his coaching, he states that
he would like to be more directive, saying " .. you can divide tasks in the group" (passage 3). He identifies a
tension with what he interprets as the coaching practice which would comply with principles of knowledge
creation" but then I would be too directive and I am not sure whether that should be our intention, so therefore I
give them  more  freedom"  (passage  3).   Eventually,    for  him    to overcome     this  dilemma,     more    guidelines for
coaching knowledge construction are needed.
         Thus, this episode points to a tension between what can be interpreted as top-down instruction at one
hand and social distancing at the other. Teacher3 was reluctant to interfere with students' activities too much,
since this would be in conflict with his emergent perspective about what is important when fostering students'
knowledge construction. Still, this coaching practice added to the problem of students, who reported that they
sometimes experienced their teachers' approach as being disruptive in the context of their activities:

            Researcher3    What do you think of your teachers' coaching?
            Student1       Well, sometimes teachers ask us just too often what we are doing and what ourendproductwillbe;whatwewanttoachieve.Butinmostcases,wehad
                           explained  that seven  times   already   and  they  still want   us to  explain it  even
                           further, while we even do not yet know how far we can go, that is quite annoying

                     Interview Student group 4; December 2006

In this episode student1 reflects on their teacher's approach, mainly involves asking explanatory questions about
the nature and status of the group's activities. This is corroborating on what teacher3 stated in the previous
episode. Although  teacher3 adopted   this  coaching     practice   as   his  interpretation   of  what    is  needed to foster
students' knowledge construction processes, this caused a conflict with the observed and experienced processes
of teachers and students. This point was explicated during a subsequent plenary meeting of the design group:

           1          Teacher3             [...] Well, it seems our students do not have a clear idea of
                                           what they have to do
           2          Dean                 Students have to know what the assignment entails [...]
           3          Ped. Expert          [...] So   I would   suggest   that the   teachers  can focus   on
                                           helping to students create these structures. [...]
           4          Researcher3          Students could concretize their ideas in a plan
           5          T2                   So I would like to coach them to make it clearer like what
                                           the object is and its requirements. So far, we have maybe
                                           been too reserved.
           6          PE                   That is very important, and then those group members will
                                           follow their own work structure. [...]
           7          R2                   Still, it is not a bad thing that it going like this, if they first
                                           muddle a little, [...]
           8          PE                   But you shouldn't let that continue too long
           9          T1                   But, what you see now. That we should give a little more

                                                            4
                                                    375   ·    © ISLS
                                              ICLS 2010     ·  Volume 1

                                          structure
            10        T2                  We can ask students to make a so-called Tabasco planning
                                          which they are already used to construct. In this planning
                                          they  have   to   specify  the activities  they   are   going   to
                                          perform, what the end objectives are. This can serve as a
                                          tool for  teachers   to   monitor  students'    progress   without
                                          being too directive or strict [...]
            11        Process             And you could revise this planning, which makes leaves it
                      coordinator         more open for students [...]
            12        T2                  Apparently that is needed
            13        R3                  So, it is our observation that that is needed, yes.
            14        T2                  Well, that is clear by now. This shows that a good start is
                                          necessary. There has to be concrete object and once that it
                                          is there, it will go well
                      Protocol meeting design team; January 2007

       This episode shows the identification of the issue that is at hand ".. it seems that our students do not
have a clear idea of what they have to do" (passage 1), leading to an expression and framing of the tension
between teachers' current approach ".. So I would like to coach them to make it clearer like what the object is
and its requirements. So far, we have maybe been too reserved" (passage 3), and the more directive approach "..
But, what you see now. That we should give a little more structure" (passage 9). The suggestion that is put
forward to overcome this tension is to synthesize both perspectives in a concrete manner, ".. We can ask students
to make a so-called Tabasco planning which they are already used to construct" (passage 10). This is accepted
and taken up by the others ".. apparently that is needed" (passage 12).
       Another issue related to teacher's 3 concern regarding the lack of guidelines for coaching students'
knowledge construction, and the contribution and roles of the members of the design team in the coaching
practices:

               1         T3            Nevertheless,   it is  important  get  more  assistance    during
                                       work sessions because now we're only with the three of
                                       us,. that is my first concern
               2         D             It should be fixed then, we need teachers for this class [...]
               3         T1            Sometimes    you   [Researchers]  are  a   little blunt It is not
                                       criticism but I noticed that you have you own agenda You
                                       don't really help us coach, we just have to take care of it.
                                       In my opinion that is not really being an actor!
               4         R1            Well, the idea was that we didn't want to participate as a
                                       teacher because we don't have that expertise though we are
                                       here to provide    you  with  some    advice and    answer    your
                                       questions, if you have any
               5         T1            [...] I am teaching the knowledge creation project on my
                                       own  which   is not    an ideal situation, I just   want   you to
                                       think with me. Clearly we don't expect you to teach [...]
               7         R1            Well, I believe that is a good thing to hear, I am glad that
                                       this came forward
               8         PE            The researchers are used to stay in the background to be
                                       able to observe the process as objectively as possible
               9         T2            There is a big culture difference because we are used that
                                       everyone is involved You are think as observers
               10        PC            It is a type of participation when you are observing [...]
               11        T2            You could divide one group into two groups so that T1 has
                                       to coach his own groups but that T4 and T1 meet each
                                       other during class to discuss any problems or to ask each
                                       other for advice
               12        D             You  can  then   also  ask   researchers for  feedback     during
                                       coaching [...]
               13        R1            Yes, that would be perfect [everybody agrees]
                         Protocol meeting co-design team; January 2007

       This episode shows a tension between the work traditions of researchers at the one hand and teachers at
the other. The issue that was expressed "..it is important get more assistance during work sessions because now
we're only with the three of us" (passage 1), opened up for explicating the underlying conflict between the
perspectives of researchers and teachers regarding their role during the coaching of students' knowledge creation
processes. Utterance s such as "..You don't really help us coach, we just have to take care of it. In my opinion

                                                            5
                                                  376     ·   © ISLS
                                                 ICLS 2010   ·   Volume 1

that is not really being an actor!" (passage 3) versus "Well, the idea was that we didn't want to participate as a
teacher"  (passage  4) illustrate this   tension. Subsequently       this resulted    in a  framing   of these conflicting
perspectives from the view of the traditional work practices of both groups to create common understanding "..
There is a big culture difference because we are used that everyone is involved You are think as observers"
(passage9). Eventually, partners provided suggestions to overcome this tension by a division of labor ".. You
could divide one group into two groups [...] you can then also ask researchers for feedback during coaching"
(passage 11).
         The abovementioned developmental tensions set the stage for collaborative analysis and for the creation
of a shared understanding to overcome them and change teachers' coaching. Eventually, teachers' coaching
transformed towards an increasing emphasis in the collective construction of a planning together with students.
This  would  help  students to  organize  their   work  and    offered teachers     a tool that enabled  them  to monitor
students' progress during knowledge construction:

                         Phase 1 in coaching knowledge creation
                         !          Do students have a clear plan?
                         !          What are they eventually going to show, what is their object?
                         !          The teacher has a specific role in this process
                         !          `Go' or `no go' decision
                         Slide taken from presentation of Teacher3; March 2007

         In this artefact, i.e. presentation   provided  to    other  teachers at   UniC,   teacher3  shows  that that the
significance of a "planning" is echoed in teachers' coaching practices. This theme can be traced from the tension
that team members   identified   and attempted    to   overcome    earlier. Moreover,      teacher3 took up this  idea and
implemented a `go-no go' decision in his practice. Then students had to negotiate their planning with their
teacher before they were allowed to continue with their knowledge creation projects:

                 R3         How do you see your role as a teacher now, what is most important?
                 T3         Well.  First that students chose   a subject  and that  they  construct a
                            planning. And the task of the teacher is to perform a reality check and
                            argue whether students' planning is a good one or not, to give a `go'
                            or `no go' decision at the start. There is where the teacher plays an
                            essential role and this planning gives a good tool for me to observe
                            what is happening and to ensure that students keep in a `flow' towards
                            the end
                           Interview Student group 4; December 2006

         In this excerpt, teacher3 reports that he had adapted his coaching to such an extent that he now asks his
students to construct a planning and that it is the teacher's task to decide whether students can continue in
pursuing their knowledge construction according to this plan or that they have to construct a more realistic or
challenging planning.
         Tension resolution of conflicting perspectives about division of labor between members of the design
team resulted in creation of a joint venture agreement:

                 For Utrecht University this agreement involves:
                 !    To   perform  research   at UniC   in    collaboration   with   teachers  and
                      students concerning the concept of knowledge creation and support
                      thereof
                 !    To    realize  a   long-term     relationship    between        research  and
                      educational practice, in which knowledge, insights and experiences
                      are exchanged with the aim of learning and capitalizing from each
                      other
                 For UniC this agreement involves:
                 !    To   obtain   more  insight  and   tools   to   experiment      with possible
                      solutions for the challenges and issues which structurally occur in
                      educational practice
                 !    To    realize  a   long-term     relationship    between        research  and
                      educational practice, in which knowledge, insights and experiences
                      are exchanged with the aim of learning and capitalizing from each
                      other
                     Join venture agreement, first version; April 2007

                                                             6
                                                     377  ·    © ISLS
                                                  ICLS 2010   ·   Volume 1

Conclusion
A central challenge in transforming practices of teachers resides in potentials for teachers to learn from and with
each other in the work place as they create and advance shared epistemic artefacts relevant for transforming their
knowledge practices. To advance our understanding of such processes in teachers' practices, we must explore
how  these   practices  evolve.   This study  focused   on  developmental     tensions  between  members     in university-
school partnership, and how their resolution points to practice transformations.
          The findings illustrate that interaction between different knowledge trajectories occurred on both the
individual and collective platform of the design team and how participants stabilized out of flux by changing
their practices accordingly. During meetings practical pedagogical enacted knowledge of teachers intersected
with social practices of the educational researchers. At this level, developmental tensions surfaced on the nexus
of perspectives, agendas and interpretations of the actors involved in the collaborative design in the university-
school partnership.    The  attempts   undertaken    to  overcome    the identified    tensions involved   the  creation  of
artefacts (e.g. the joint venture agreement) that serve to objectify and afford this transformation.
          Tacit  knowledge    (represented    as  the   network   of   implicit  epistemological    beliefs, attitudes   and
knowledge) was explicated during group meetings and ideas expressed were often taken up by the group and
integrated   within existent  practices, or  became   the   driving  force   behind the  development    of   relatively new
pedagogical   practices.  For  instance, the  tension   between   top­down      instruction versus  social   distancing and
differentiation of coaching styles was resolved by a collective envisioning and fleshing out of coaching practices.
More   specifically, more   emphasis    was  placed   on  employing    students'   planning  as  tools  to monitor and    to
scaffold students' knowledge creation.
          In sum,   the study   shows   the  transitions  observed   from    identification of  tensions,  the  attempts  to
overcome     them by   engaging   in transformation   of  coaching     and of   social practices towards   the  creation  of
artefacts that serve to objectify and afford this transformation. Based on socio-historical perspectives on learning
and development, we have appropriated the notion of developmental tensions as a driving force of change and
development. Although we do not claim that developmental tensions are the sole impetus of transformations of
work practices, the investigation of tensions and their resolution helps to identify the dynamic forces of change
and comprise an important constituent and starting point for investigating such processes (Barab et al., 2002;
Engeström, 1987; Koschmann, Kuutti, & Hickman, 1998; Murphy & Rodriguez-Manzanares, 2008). For the
research  reported   here, the  identification   of these   tensions   provides  a starting  point  for investigating    and
explaining practice transformations in knowledge creation contexts.
          Based on the findings reported in this paper, we have derived a generic pattern of managing or resolving
tension, namely: identifying, labeling, framing and solving/suggesting:
    1.    Labelling the issue: Often, tensions are not about the issue at hand (e.g., scheduling a meeting) but
          rather about  what   it represents, such   as  the  experience   of disrespect  or the  illegitimate  exercise  of
          authority. A tension could only arise as the consequence of one of the professionals in the knowledge
          construction work to describe a particular problem at hand;
    2.    Identifying the tension: as a result of professionals knowing what the issue is at hand, the contradictions
          in perspectives, knowledge, attitudes or affects come to the fore explicating the problematic features of
          the practices under scrutiny. These tensions are explicated in the voices of the several professionals in
          the collaborative knowledge construction work;
    3.    Framing the tension: subsequently, the tension is framed employing the self-created language, norms
          and rules of the knowledge community. This framing is necessary for creating a shared understanding
          of the tension and for constructing a representation of the forces acting in preserving and causing the
          problematic practices at hand. This will eventually enable professionals to adapt their practices to be
          able to overcome the tension;
    4.    Constructing solutions: Finally, professionals transform their or shared practices, construct new tools
          and implement them in the ongoing knowledge construction work.
In future  research  this  generic   pattern for  tension   resolution  will  be tested  in other  pedagogical   co-design
settings.

Acknowledgements
The  present    investigation emerged    in   the   context   of research  and   development     of Knowledge-Practices
Laboratory    (www.kp-lab.org,     FP6-2004-IST-4,      integrated   project  27490,    2006-2011)     project  funded   by
Information Society Technologies (IST) program of European Community.

References
Argyris, C., & Schön, D. (1978) Organizational learning: A theory of action perspective, Reading, Mass:
          Addison Wesley.

                                                              7
                                                      378   ·   © ISLS
                                              ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

Barab, S., A., , Barnett, M., Yamagata-Lynch, L., Squire, K., & Keating, T. (2002). Using activity theory to
       understand the contradictions characterizing a technology-rich introductory astronomy course. Mind,
       Culture, and Activity, 9(2), 76-107.
Dewey, J. (1968). Democracy and Education: An Introduction to the Philosophy of Education. New York: Free
       Press.
Engeström, Y. (1987). Learning by expanding: an activity-theoretical approach to developmental research.
       Helsinki.
Engeström, Y. (1999a). Activity theory and individual and social transformation. In Y. Engeström, M.R.
       Miettinen & R.L. Punamäki (Eds.). Perspectives on Activity Theory. Cambridge: Cambridge University
       Press.
Engeström, Y. (1999b). Innovative learning in work teams: analyzing cycles of knowledge creation in practice.
       In Y. Engeström, M.R. Miettinen & R.L. Punamäki (Eds.). Perspectives on Activity Theory. Cambridge:
       Cambridge University Press.
Engeström, Y (2007). From Stabilization Knowledge to Possibility Knowledge in Organizational
       Learning. Management learning, 38(3), 271-276.
Eraut, M. (2004). Informal learning in the workplace. Studies in Continuing Education, 26(2), 247-273
Hakkarainen, K., Palonen, T., Paavola, S., & Lehtinen, E. (2004). Communities of networked expertise:
       Professional and educational perspectives. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Heidegger, M. (1962). Being and time (J. Macquarrie & E. Robinson, Trans.). New York: Harper & Row.
       (Original work published 1952).
Leont'ev, A.N. (1981). Problems of the Development of the Mind. Moscow: Progress Publishers.
Lingard, L., Garwood, S., & Poenaru, D. (2004). Tensions influencing operating room team function: Does
       institutional context make a difference? Medical Education, 38, 691-699.
Little, J. W. (1990). Teachers as colleagues. In A. Lieberman (Ed.), Schools as collaborative cultures: Creating
       the future now (pp. 165-193). Bristol, PA: Falmer Press.
Karlgren, K., Dahlström, A., Lonka, K., & Ponzer, S. (2007). A new educational annotation tool for supporting
       medical teams to improve their teamwork and communication. Paper presented at the ICEM/ILE 2007 ­
       The International Council for Educational Media: Educational Media & Innovative Practices.
Karlgren, K., Dahlström, A., & Ponzer, S. (2008). Design of an Annotation Tool To Support Simulation Training
       of Medical Teams. In Times of convergence: Technologies across learning contexts (Vol. 5192/2008,
       pp. 179-184): Springer Berlin / Heidelberg.
Matusov, E. (2001). Intersubjectivity as a way of informing teaching design for a community of learners
       classroom. Teaching and Teacher Education 17, 383-402.
Paavola, S., & Hakkarainen, K. (2005). The Knowledge Creation Metaphor ­ An Emergent Epistemological
       Approach to Learning. Science & Education 14, 535-557.
Reckwitz, A. (2002). Toward a Theory of Social Practices. European Journal of Social Theory, 5(2), 243-263.
Schatzki, T. (2002). The Site of the Social: A Philosophical Exploration of the Constitution of Social Life and
       Change. . University Park,: Pennsylvania State University Press.

                                                        8
                                                 379  ·   © ISLS
