                                               ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 2

     NetLogo HotLink Replay: A Tool for Exploring, Analyzing and
            Interpreting Mathematical Change in Complex Systems
            Michelle Hoda Wilkerson-Jerde and Uri Wilensky, Northwestern University, Evanston, IL
                                       {m-wilkerson;uri}@northwestern.edu

        Abstract: Some of the most important patterns of change that we encounter in our everyday
        world ­ global warming, fluctuations in the unemployment rate, voter trends ­ are produced
        by   the   interactions and   accumulation   of   many    different individuals  and   events.  This
        interactive poster will demonstrate NetLogo HotLink Replay, a computational tool designed
        to provide students a context to reconcile large-scale patterns of mathematical change with the
        interactions and events that contribute to and are reflected by that change.

Introduction
        One of the primary goals of education should be to equip students with the tools to make sense of and
act  within an increasingly  interconnected  and  changing    world.   Whether   reading a newspaper     report about
increasing  global temperatures   due  to individual  consumption     and   feedback  cycles,  or learning  about   the
dynamics of a predator-prey system (Wilensky & Reisman, 2006), the mathematical patterns we observe in the
world are often reflective of complex systems ­ systems that are comprised of a number of individual agents
(such as consumers, employees and employers, or voters) that interact with one another and their environment
to  produce large-scale  outcomes.  In this sense,   mathematical   change   is  not produced  by  a single  entity or
phenomenon, but by the interactions and accumulations of many. NetLogo HotLink Replay is an environment
designed to help students link the behavior of complex systems to the mathematical trends they generate.

Background
        The NetLogo HotLink Replay software environment leverages findings about the kinds of experiences
that help students to make sense of both mathematical change over time and complex systems. For example,
although the mathematics of change is often considered a difficult topic (Leinhardt, Zaslavsky, & Stein, 1990),
research has shown that educators can leverage students' real-world experiences to address these difficulties ­
primarily in the context of motion (Nemirovsky, Tierney, & Wright, 1998; Roschelle, Kaput, & Stroup, 2000).
From   this literature we  know   that students   can  benefit   especially  from  activities such   as controlling  a
phenomenon that produces change over time (Kaput, 1994; Wilhelm & Confrey, 2003); interacting with time-
series plots and other representations of a value its rate of change (Confrey, Maloney, & Castro-Filho, 1997);
and making linkages between intervals and shapes of plots and the events they represent (Yerushalmy, 1997).
        At the same time, complex systems are becoming increasingly important in education (Jacobson &
Wilensky, 2006). One way to provide students a context within which to think and learn about complex systems
from the perspective of embodied experience is with agent-based modeling environments such as NetLogo
(Wilensky, 1999). An agent-based model is built by defining the agents or individual entities of a system (such
as voters), and the behaviors and interactions of those agents that make that system work (such as the ways that
friends may influence on another's vote). By interacting with and building agent-based models, students can
reconcile behavior and outcomes on multiple levels of a system (Wilensky & Resnick, 1999), and develop
generative and deep understandings of complex systems in a number of domains (Wilensky & Reisman, 2006).

The NetLogo HotLink Replay Environment
        NetLogo HotLink Replay is designed to leverage the strengths of agent-based modeling, which provides
students a means to connect large-scale complex systems to more personal, individual actions; as well as the
strengths of  dynamic,  controllable  mathematics    environments,    while providing   opportunity  and  context   for
student interpretation  and  meaning-making    through   modification   and  annotation. NetLogo     HotLink   Replay
includes a number of features intended to foster a deeper understanding of the mathematics of complex systems:
Dynamically    Linked  Representations.   The  two   primary     representations included  in  the  environment     are
visuospatial agent-based models and time-series plots. These two representations are dynamically linked, such
that students  can click  on critical features of  a  plot   and observe  that  corresponding  point  in  time  in  the
simulation, or play the simulation over time as a cursor indicates the corresponding area on the plot.
Annotation Tools. Students are able to identify any intervals on a plot, and annotate that interval with respect to
the aggregate (whole-system) or agent-based (individual actors) behavior that it reflects.
Numerical Approximation Tools. In addition to plots and visuospatial representations, the environment also
calculates a user-defined piecewise linear approximation of change on any area of a featured model plot.
Recording   Function.  Students  can  opt to  run  a  model   in  the  NetLogo   modeling  environment,    modifying
parameters (for example, infection or illness mortality probabilities in the model featured in Figure 1) and

                                                   374  ·  © ISLS
                                                ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 2

observing the outcomes. These interactions can be captured and replayed, so that students can then reflect on
their own modifications to the system and the resulting mathematical patterns.

                    Figure 1. NetLogo HotLink Replay, featuring an annotated set of "runs" of
                               an agent-based model of virus spread in a population

Pilot and Future Work
         The design of the HotLink environment is informed by preliminary interviews with 12, 10th and 11th
grade  students enrolled  in a   precalculus  course at  a high-performing,     urban public   school.  In one-on-one
interviews, they were asked to interact with a simple NetLogo model of exponential population growth and
describe their understanding of rate of change and accumulation in terms of results of the model, as well as their
understanding of the individual behaviors and their implications for the system. They were then asked these
same questions as they constructed their own models by including different behavior patterns of interest. Each
interview was analyzed along a number of dimensions: to determine which representations students leveraged
(and, at times, coordinated) to think about different properties of systemic change; to identify when students
"slipped between levels" (Wilensky & Resnick, 1999) and how those conflicts were resolved; and to explore
how students' conceptualizations of notions of rate and accumulation changed during those activities.
         We  found   that by noticing  and   attempting   to resolve  differences   between  conventional   (aggregate
trends and  smooth   graphs)  and  computational     (individual behaviors     and  noisy graphs)  representations  of
population growth, students began to consider how factors such as randomness, heterogeneity, and feedback
effect systems  and   how  they  might   or  might   not   manifest   in different  representations, as well  as  how
mathematical  notions   such as  "rate of change"    could   include  or reveal information    about some   real world
events, such as a catastrophic event or shift in the behavior of individuals. We hope that the NetLogo HotLink
Replay environment will leverage these findings, to provide students a more integrated way to interpret and
connect the events and mathematical patterns that characterize complex systems across representations.

References
Confrey, J., Maloney, A., & Castro-Filho, J. (1997). Interacting diagrams: A new learning tool. Paper presented
         at PME-NA 19, Columbus, OH.
Jacobson, M., & Wilensky, U. (2006). Complex systems in education: Scientific and educational importance
         and implications for the learning sciences. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 15(1), 24.
Kaput,  J.  (1994). Democratizing   access    to calculus:   New    routes  to  old  roots. In A.  Schoenfeld    (Ed.),
         Mathematical thinking and problem solving (pp. 77-156). Hillsdale: Erlbaum.
Leinhardt,  G., Zaslavsky,   O., &  Stein,   M.  (1990).   Functions,  graphs,  and  graphing:  Tasks,  learning,  and
         teaching. Review of Educational Research, 60(1), 1-64.
Nemirovsky, R., Tierney, C., & Wright, T. (1998). Body motion and graphing. Cognition and Instruction, 16(2),
         119-172.
Roschelle, J., Kaput, J., & Stroup, W. (2000). Simcalc: Accelerating students' engagement with the mathematics
         of change.  In M.   Jacobson  &   R. B.  Kozma    (Eds.),  Research,   design, and  implementing   advanced
         technology learning environments. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Wilensky, U. (1999). NetLogo: http://ccl.northwestern.edu/netlogo.
Wilensky, U., & Reisman, K. (2006). Thinking like a wolf, a sheep or a firefly: Learning biology through
         constructing and  testing computational     theories - An    embodied  modeling    approach.   Cognition  and
         Instruction, 24(2), 171-209.
Wilensky, U., & Resnick, M. (1999). Thinking in Levels: A dynamic systems perspective to making sense of
         the world. Journal of Science Education and Technology, 8(1).
Wilhelm, J. A., & Confrey, J. (2003). Projecting rate of change in the context of motion onto the context of
         money. International Journal of Mathematical Education in Science and Technology, 34(6), 887-904.
Yerushalmy,  M.   (1997).  Mathematizing     verbal descriptions   of situations:  A language   to support  modeling.
         Cognition and Instruction, 15(2), 207-264.

                                                    375  ·  © ISLS
