                                                 ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 2

 The Impact of Using Video Games and/or Virtual Environments in
            Pre-service Elementary Teacher Science Education
         Janice L. Anderson, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Peabody Hall 307A, CB#3500,
                           Chapel Hill, NC 27599-3500, Email ­ anderjl@email.unc.edu

         Abstract: The purpose of this work is to share findings in using video games and/or virtual
         environments  to   facilitate the  understanding     of basic  science   concepts  with  pre-service
         elementary teachers. We explored the impact of using a game called Supercharged! on pre-
         service teachers'   understanding   of  electromagnetic     concepts   compared   to students  who
         conducted more traditional inquiry oriented investigations. Additionally, we looked at how
         students responded to learning about water quality through their participation in the virtual
         environment known as Quest Atlantis.

The Major Issue
Many scientific domains deal with abstract and multi-dimensional phenomena that students have difficulty with
both  in comprehension     and application.  Mastery of     abstract scientific concepts requires that students  build
flexible and testable mental models (Barnett, Keating, Barab & Hay, 2000; Redish, 1993). Digital technologies
can immerse the learner in worlds that not only represent scientific phenomena, but also behave according to the
rules of physics and  other    scientific phenomenon.       By representing  the  simulation  through  digital gaming
conventions, educators can potentially increase engagement while also fostering deeper learning, as learners
engage in critical and recursive game play, whereby they generate hypotheses about the game system, develop
plans and strategies, observe their results and adjust their hypotheses about the game system (Annetta, 2008;
Gee, 2003; Mayo, 2009; Squire, 2008). Supporting future elementary teachers in learning basic science concepts
has proven to be challenging (e.g. McDermott & Shaffer 2000; Schoon & Boone, 1998). In fact, many science
educators have recognized that elementary teachers struggle teaching science topics conceptually (Forbus, 1997;
diSessa, 2000). Elementary teachers have particular difficulty in comprehending physics concepts, such as the
basics of  electrostatics, which  have    very few real-life     referents and  incorporate  invisible factors, forces
operating at a distance, complex abstractions (Chi, et al., 1991). We believe that educators might use gaming
structures such as fantasy, challenges, cooperation, or competition to create even more powerful learning tools,
coupling the intrinsically rewarding aspects of games with the pedagogical power of simulations in order to
teach complex conceptual science topics (e.g. Cordova & Lepper, 1996).

Context, Methods, and Analysis
This study examined the pedagogical potential of Supercharged! and pre-service teachers engagement with
Quest Atlantis. We first examined the classroom practices that emerged when Supercharged! was used to teach
an electrostatics unit in an undergraduate content course designed for future elementary teachers. The control
group (n=65) participated in a series of scientific investigations that were designed to help them learn the same
concepts as their experimental group (n=71) peers. These investigations included understanding the force of a
magnetic field on a charged particle, the relationship between force on a test charge and distance, and the impact
of electric fields on charges. The experimental group was expected to complete five levels of the Supercharged!
game where at each level there was increased difficulty or the introduction of a new concept. The quantitative
data was analyzed using ANOVA and ANCOVA analysis. The qualitative data was analyzed using naturalistic
methods (Lincoln & Guba, 1985) to examine how learning unfolded during game play. Using the constant-
comparative method (Glaser & Strauss, 1967), researchers generated assertions from the data, consulting video
tapes and field notes to search for supporting and disconfirming evidence.
         The second part of this study examined how pre-service elementary education teachers perceived and
interacted with an immersive, 3D virtual world ­ Quest Atlantis. Students in a elementary science methods
course engaged with Quest Atlantis using the Taiga unit on water quality. The students (n=75) participated in
the water quality activities while, learning the science content as well as the pedagogical tool.      This qualitative
data was analyzed using naturalistic methods (Lincoln & Guba, 1985) to understand students' perceptions of
how these environments could    be used in the classroom setting.     Researchers  generated assertions from the data,
consulting field notes in order to search for supporting and disconfirming evidence.

Results
In general the experimental group outperformed the control group on the conceptual assessment questions.

                                                     376  ·  © ISLS
                                                             ICLS 2010      ·    Volume 2

Table 1: Pre-Post Assessment Results.
   Group                  N              NM         NF       Pre-Test            Std. Dev         Post-Test              Std. Dev       Change
   Experimental           71             30         41       6.2                 1.70             9.4                    1.20           3.2
   Control                65             20         45       5.9                 1.72             8.3                    1.27           2.8

A two-way      ANOVA      was            also   calculated    with     post-test       scores  as     the   dependent         variable.     Intervention
(Experimental     or Control)           and     Gender    (Male     or  Female)          were  between-subjects           variables.    There       was         a
significant difference between the experimental and control groups, F(2,134) = 4.8, p < 0.05, !2=0.59. The
qualitative data supported the idea that the students in the experimental group began to see themselves as the
charge     experiencing forces           which    influenced       their    understanding       of     how    magnetic          fields effect       charged
particles.   Additionally it was shown that the game play supported student conversations on "force vs. distance"
and the trajectory of moving charges and superposition of forces.                             Finally, despite the positive learning gains,
students in the experimental group disliked the playing of the game versus traditional instruction.
           In the Quest   Atlantis          experience,      students       engaged        in the     3D  water        quality   environment.             The
qualitative data exposed the notion that the students were concerned about "the role of the teacher." They had
difficulty   understanding   the         paradigm      shift in     their   role      from being      the "distributer"         to the  "facilitator            of
inquiry." Additionally, students became concerned about student play versus what they perceived to be learning
in the environment.     While content was presented on topics of water quality                              (dissolved oxygen, pH, turbidity,
etc) and ecosystems, this educational value appeared to be lost on these students.                                    Students had very traditional
ideas about what constituted classroom learning.

Conclusions
           Our  findings suggest            that  video     game     designers        should   embed        meta-cognitive         activities       such        as
reflective opportunities into educational video games to provide scaffolds for students and to reinforce that they
are engaged in an educational learning experience. For example, most educational video games that are being
used in     classrooms  have            an implicit    assumption       that     learning     and     skill development,           such  as   scientific
argumentation     practices,        will   unfold   organically.       Steinkuhler         and  Duncan      (2008)       found     that  game-related
forums were rich sites for social knowledge construction where "discursive practices include argument, counter-
argument and the use of evidence to warrant one's claims"(p.541) was prevalent and where "the predominant
epistemological disposition exhibited in the forum posts was `evaluative' and therefore appropriate to science"
(p. 541).    This study supports these notions purported by Steinkuhler and Duncan (2008), but we include the
caveat that learning would be supported if appropriate scaffolds are purposively built into video games.
           Additionally, in the Supercharged! study, we were concerned that the experimental group of students
did not find playing the game to be a learning experience. This perspective was also demonstrated with the
Quest Atlantis pre-service teachers.              There are several reasons for these viewpoints. First,                        Supercharged! has a
relatively unpolished graphical interface compared to what students may experience in game consoles (3D),
television (HD), or movies. Another reason could be that the game-based lab was vastly different from their
expectations and experiences of a typical lab resulting in the students being disconnected from the learning
aspect of the game, instead judging it solely on "entertainment" value.                                 However, the students' writing and
comments suggested that their discomfort with the video game and virtual world was due to the fact that neither
group perceived that video games or virtual worlds could have educational                              value.         This perspective is potentially
problematic; if pre-service teachers do not see video games and virtual environments as a learning tools during
their teacher education years, then it is unlikely that they will experiment with games or use them as a part of
their own practice once they have their own classroom (e.g. Russell, Bebell, O'Dwyer, & O'Connor, 2003).

References
Annetta, L. (2008). Video games in education: Why they should be used and how are they being used? Theory into Practice, 47: 229-239.
Barnet, M., Keating, T., Barab, S.A., & Hay, K. (2000). Conceptual change through building three-dimensional models. In B. J. Fishman & S. F. O'Connor
            (Eds.), Proceedings of the International Conference of the Learning Sciences (pp. 134-142). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Chi, M. T. H., Feltovich, P. J., & Glaser, R. (1991). Categorization and representation of physics problems by experts and novices. Cogntive Sciences, 5.
Cordova, D. I., & Lepper, M. R. (1996). Intrinsic motivation and the process of learning: Beneficial effects of contextualization, personalization, and choice.
            Journal of Educational Psychology, 88, 715-730.
diSessa. A. (2000). Changing minds. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Forbus, K. (1997). Using qualitative physics to create articulate educational software. IEEE Expert, May/June, 32-41.
Gee, J.P. (2003). What videogames have to teach us about learning and literacy. New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
Glaser, B.G. & Strauss, A.L. (1967). The discovery of grounded theory. Chicago, IL:Aldine Publishing.
Lincoln, Y.S. & Guba, E.G. (1985). Naturalistic Inquiry. Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Mayo, M.J. (2009). Video games: A route to large-scale STEM education? Science,323, pp. 79-82.
McDermott, L.C., Shaffer, P.S., & Constantinou, C.P. (2000). Preparing teachers to teach physics and physical science by inquiry. Physics Education, 35.
Russell, M., Bebell, D., O'Dwyer, L., & O'Connor, K. (2003). Examining teacher technology use: Implications for pre-service and in-service teacher
            preparation. Journal of Teacher Education, V. 54: 297.
Schoon, K. & Boone, W.J. (1998). Self-efficacy and alternative conceptions of science of pre-service elementary teachers. Science Education, 82(5),
Steinkuhler, C. & Duncan, S. (2008). Scientific habits of mind. Journal of Science Education and Technology.17:530-543.
Squire, K. (2008). Video game-based learning: An emerging paradigm   for instruction. Performance Improvement Quarterly, V. 21, No. 7.

                                                                    377   ·  © ISLS
