                                                 ICLS 2010    Volume 2

         The Role of Definition in Supporting Mathematical Activity
           Marta Kobiela, Rich Lehrer, Vanderbilt University, Department of Teaching and Learning
                            0230 GPC, 230 Appleton Place, Nashville, TN 37203-5721
                        Email: marta.a.kobiela@vanderbilt.edu, rich.lehrer@vanderbilt.edu

          Abstract: Definition is a form of mathematical activity that is fundamental to the profession's
          emphasis on conjecture, theorem and proof, yet is often treated in school as rote memory. We
          describe an   alternative approach   in   which   sixth-graders invented  and   revised  definitions
          during investigations of space and geometry. Defining led to contest about taken-for-granted
          intuitions. A  mathematical    system     emerged   as  relations  among   defined     objects were
          constructed and extended, first by conjecture and later by theorem and proof.

Introduction
Often, in mathematics classrooms, definitions are learned by mere naming and memorizing. Not only is this
practice  problematic   for  students'   conceptual   development    (Vinner,    1991),  but  it also  denies   students
opportunities for mathematically richer work. Here, we describe an alternative approach, in which sixth-grade
students  (ages 11,12)   created  and    refined mathematical    definitions of   objects featured  in   their school's
curriculum. We conjectured that the activity of definition would encourage analysis of important qualities of
these mathematical objects and would afford opportunities for developing relations among multiple objects.
Reasoning about relations constitutes a mathematical system, and a focus on system is the departure point for
other forms of important mathematical work, such as questioning, conjecturing, and proving.
          The sixth grade class's work with definition was conducted within a curriculum unit on polygons
(Connected Mathematics Project). Our emphasis on space and geometry stemmed from the prospects afforded
by spatial reasoning for a general mathematics education: "Geometry, broadly conceived, can help students
connect with mathematics, and geometry can be an ideal vehicle for building what we call a `habits-of-mind
perspective' (Goldenberg, Cuoco, & Mark, 1998, p. 3)." Goldenberg et al. (1998) stress that a habit-of-mind
entails a close coupling between a specific form of mathematical practice and the grounds for knowing. For
example, proofs should explain even as they secure the foundations of a particular conjecture. Hence, a habit-of-
mind reflects epistemic disposition as well as a particular form of activity.
          Our design for instruction capitalized on students' everyday experiences and conceptions of space,
especially bodily motion, and on everyday forms of argument, especially propensities to categorize and classify.
For example, we anchored students' learning about polygons to paths that they walked (Abelson & diSessa,
1980; Lehrer, Randle, & Sancilio, 1989) and related familiar properties of polygons, such as "straight" sides to
experiences  of unchanging    direction  while   walking.   Working   from   these  embodied     forms of  activity, we
cultivated students'   dispositions toward  posing   questions   and making   conjectures.   We   privileged   forms  of
explanation that were oriented toward the general and that appealed to mathematical system.
          Given this support for reasoning about the mathematics of space, we aimed to support student authority
to create their own definitions as a mathematical community. Here we trace initial mathematical explorations
that emerged as students pursued one deceptively simple question: "What is a polygon?" The teacher asked this
question to get a sense of what students had learned about polygons from a week of previous activity with their
classroom teacher. We illustrate how the dynamic of definition unsettled what students took for granted (e.g.,
straight) and supported the development of a mathematical system. We then illustrate how the initial work of
defining supported later forms of mathematical activity, as we describe how students elevated a conjecture
about the number of diagonals in a polygon to the status of a theorem.

Method
Participants (n =18, 10 male, 11-12 years of age) attended an urban school serving primarily underrepresented
youth in the southeastern region of the United States, where 60 to 80-percent of the school qualifies for free or
reduced lunch each year. One of us served as the primary classroom instructor for mathematics during the
school year. Mathematics class was conducted for 1.5 hours twice each week. Each lesson was videotaped and
digitally rendered.   Field notes were   taken   of whole   group   interactions in order  to contextualize    the video
recordings and serve as a platform for reflection to inform the next day's instruction. Although our choice of
mathematical topics was informed by the school's grade-level standards for mathematics, the conduct of any
particular class was informed by our interpretations of students' questions and by our judgments of their current
levels of  understanding.    The  latter were    informed   by  classroom   interaction,  by  the  results of   periodic
assessments and by summaries written in the students' journals of their understandings and experiences.
          The analysis was informed by our history as participant observers and as designers to focus on themes
that emerged during the course of our year-long involvement with the class. We employed comparative methods

                                                     380     ISLS
                                                ICLS 2010     Volume 2

of interpretation to guide our analysis of the unfolding of student thinking, as suggested by the field notes and
episodes of video. We watched video of lessons and generated preliminary ideas about what we noticed about
the class's developing definitions. We then followed up on selected classroom lessons to refine or refute our
conjectures about the emergence and history of use of particular definitions, focusing on episodes at the start of
the year and several months later. We traced the development of definitions through the first six lessons by
parsing  whole   class activity  into  segments   of  "definitional   activity," which  included    instances where  a
mathematical object (e.g., polygon) was being defined or its definition contested in some form (e.g., is an circle
a polygon?). We then identified links between one definitional activity and another, that is, where discussion
about one mathematical object spurred discussion of another. For example, when defining polygon as "sides and
angles   and closed,"  a  question arose  of what  constitutes   a  "side." We   used  these  references in  classroom
conversation to generate an image of the mathematical system developed within the span of these initial lessons.

Results
Definition was an avenue for developing mathematical qualities of space, especially fundamental notions such
as straight, angle, side and closure. Definitions began with contested claims about an aspect of space. Embodied
activity served as a starting point and definition as means for resolving these contested claims about aspects
such  "straight" and   "bent." Definitions   were made    increasingly  public   via practices  of representation. For
example, rotating his body different amounts (e.g. 90-degrees, 120-degrees), the teacher asked the students to
describe the turns on paper, using words and/or drawings. Students were selected to present their representations
while others were asked to describe, compare and contrast them. The discussion highlighted differences in how
the drawings showed relative amounts of turn and ultimately supported a conception of angle as rotation. As
definitions of these qualities of space were refined and elaborated, they were increasingly interconnected and
related.
         Explorations of central concepts in Euclidean space began by pursuing the definition of a polygon.
Students' initial definitions of polygon introduced new mathematical objects: side, angle and regular polygon,
all of which   were   contested. Students  increasingly     became  more    central participants in discussions  about
definitions. For instance, during the third class, when a student posed a football-shaped object as a possible
polygon (in response to the teacher's question of whether a polygon can have two sides), another group of
students responded with the question, "What's a side, people?" During the first six lessons analyzed, students
constructed  systems   of relations among    defined  qualities. For  instance,   straight participated  in subsequent
definition of vertex.  Moreover,   all of these  were  considered    from   multiple  perspectives: as  dynamic  paths
created by motion (a local view), and as structures emerging from this dynamic activity (a global view). Hence,
definitions increasingly reflected these multiple perspectives on shape and form.
         These central concepts served as building blocks for other important forms of mathematical activity.
For instance, later in the year the definition of diagonal set the stage for the development of a theorem relating
the number of sides of a polygon to the number of diagonals. The theorem, that the number of diagonals of a
polygon is a function of the number of sides [(n2 -3n)/2, where n represents the number of sides], originated in
small-group   investigations   where   students first noticed    and  described     empirical patterns.  The  students'
justifications of the pattern were supported by one student's introduction of the diagonal as a path in which the
direction of connection did not matter. This embodied definition helped students conceptualize the number of
vertices that could be "reached" from a single vertex as (n-3). Because there were n vertices, they reasoned that
the number of "reachable" vertices was n x (n-3). But, as the student had earlier pointed out, reaching via a
diagonal was a special kind of path, one that did not preserve direction. Hence, the expressionmust be n(n-3)/2.
This expression of generalization was built from the particular, but its structure relied on embodied perspectives
of a polygon's diagonal, sides, and vertices. It also was an argument of necessity, an important mathematical
habit-of-mind. Although humble, definition and classification has traditionally resulted in fruitful mathematical
pursuit (Senechal, 1990), and this historic trend was evident in the mathematical activity of the classroom too.

References
Abelson, H., & diSessa, A. (1980). Turtle geometry: The computer as a medium for exploring mathematics.
         Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Goldenberg, E.   P., Cuoco, A. A. & Mark, J. (1998).     In R. Lehrer & D.  Chazan   (Eds.), Designing  learning
         environments    for developing understanding    of geometry and  space (pp. 3-44).   Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Lehrer, R., Randle, L., & Sancilio, L. (1989). Learning pre-proof geometry with Logo. Cognition and
         Instruction, 6, 159-184.
Senechal, M. (1990). Shape. In L. A. Steen (Ed.), On the shoulders of giants. New approaches to numeracy. (pp.
         139-181). Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press.
Vinner, S. (1991). The role of definitions in the teaching and learning of mathematics. In Tall, D. (Ed).
         Advanced Mathematical Thinking. Dordrecht: Kluwer

                                                     381     ISLS
