                                               ICLS 2010    ·  Volume 1

                   Math Engaged Problem Solving in Families
 Shelley Goldman, Roy Pea, Kristen P. Blair, Osvaldo Jimenez, Stanford School of Education, Stanford, CA
                                                       94395
        sgoldman@stanford.edu, kpilner@stanford.edu, roypea@stanford.edu, ojimenez@stanford.edu

       Angela Booker, Lee Martin, UC Davis, School of Education, One Shields Avenue, Davis, CA 95616
                                anbooker@ucdavis.edu, leemartin@ucdavis.edu

 Indigo Esmonde, Ontario Institute for Studies in Education, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, M5S 1V6,
                                            indigo.esmonde@utoronto.ca

         Abstract: Research indicates that people engage in rich mathematical practices in everyday
         activities, yet little is known about school-aged children's mathematics learning within the
         family context. This paper reports results of an interview study with 20 families to understand
         contexts and activities that engage mathematics in the family setting. The results indicate that
         problem  solving is frequent    activity, and  that   mathematics   is engaged   in accomplishing
         problem solutions in a range of contexts or situations. We describe features of math engaged
         problem solving and describe how it is value driven. We see multiple kinds of math and
         multiple people drawn into problem solving, and we identify socially distributed mathematical
         practices. These findings implicate the family as an under-recognized, yet rich source of math
         teaching and learning.

Introduction
We investigate the diverse contexts and activities in which middle school age learners and their families engage
in mathematical practices and problem solving. We describe several features of problem solving for the families
we studied, characterizing the structure of their mathematical activities, and analyzing the social conditions and
arrangements for  their family-based  mathematical     practices.  Several  important   features  of  problem solving
around the home emerge: (1) the family is a setting giving rise to problems to be solved, which also generate
mathematical activity; (2) values steer problem definition, identification, solutions and their judged adequacy;
(3) different types of math and math at different levels come into play concurrently; and (4) it is critical to view
mathematical thinking   and  learning    as embedded     in   activity and  in  a social, historical, and distributed
knowledge environment.
         We first give some background on our approach and describe our research methods. Then we discuss
each aspect of familial problem solving and present one example for each that is characteristic of the feature.
We follow  the descriptions  with  a summary       and discussion  of   the significance  of this characterization of
problem solving with mathematics.

Background and Perspectives
Understanding mathematical problem solving in the complexity of family life activities is supported by certain
orientations to theoretical and analytical approaches. Work on problem solving has had a long history, with
significant roots in Gestalt psychological studies by Wertheimer (1945), Duncker (1945) and others, which had
direct influences on  the  cognitive  revolution    in  studying   thinking    (Newell,   1981;  Simon,   1999). The
mathematician George Polya in How to Solve It was another major contributor to conceptualizing problem
solving processes in mathematics (1957). None of these approaches, however, sought to understand the situated
nature of mathematical practices in relation to everyday life activities. In the 1970's, spurred by everyday
cognition theoretical formulations from Neisser (1976), Bronfenbrenner (1979), and Cole (1971), an ecological
orientation to looking at mathematics use in situ was developed. It was advanced throughout the 1980's by Lave
(1988), Saxe (1988), Nunes et al. (1989), Scribner (1984), and others more recently (Goldman & Booker, 2009;
Hoyles et al. 2001; Nasir, 2000; Satwicz & Stevens, 2008; Stevens et al., 2006). We know from such studies
that people engage mathematically in the course of everyday activities from dieting to shopping to sports to the
work of nursing and dairy order filling.
         We take a view of problem solving that recognizes its complexity and finds problems being generated
in many life situations. Problems and problem solving are part of the social fabric in peoples' lives, and they are
distributed in time, place and across persons. They involve cognitive, social, cultural and physical means in their
definition, generation and solutions, and a direct pursuit of both outside constraints and peoples' desires. We are
especially interested in the problem-solving that people do during their family-based activities, how it both

                                                   380   ·  © ISLS
                                                   ICLS 2010  ·    Volume 1

requires  and   generates   mathematical    practices,    and   how   these   mathematical    problem-solving    practices
instantiate learning.
         We   see  mathematics     practice as  ubiquitous      in people's   family-based   activities. We   also  take a
comprehensive view of learning that is based on activity in practice (Lave & Wenger 1991), and consider the
family as a little examined yet significant cultural environment for activities and social relations that constitute a
sizeable proportion of human experience and involve poorly understood forms of learning (Bronfenbrenner,
1979; Leichter, 1975). In relation to math, Ginsburg and his colleagues document how and what mathematics
young children are "taught" at home (Ginsberg et al., 1999). Jackson and Remillard (2005) and Rogoff, Ellis,
and Gardner   (1984)     show that   the  explicit teaching   softens and    changes  once    children  enter school. The
literature leaves us with a very obscured view of the significant role that families might play in mathematics
teaching and learning, yet with the hopes that math engagements might be ubiquitous in familial circumstances
and activity. Our work enters the family space to better understand the significance of the family as a setting for
mathematics engagement, learning and the development of quantitative literacies (Steen, 2004).

Methods
The Family Math research project investigates the ways families with middle school aged children characterize
their engagement in mathematical problem solving during the course of individual and family activities and
events.1 Our  goal    is to identify  the social,  cultural,  and   material  contexts  that  are relevant to  and   create
opportunities for mathematics learning and practice as well as to characterize similarities and differences in
family math situations. We seek to identify the resources family members use for solving problems together,
characterize the structure of these activities, describe the resources used in solving math-related problems, and
analyze  the social   conditions  and    arrangements   for  family-based    mathematics     practices.  Eventually,  these
understandings of mathematics of family life will help the field identify and design for points of synergy for
strengthening the role of the family in mathematical teaching and learning and to build bridges between math in
the home and math and school.
     In the results reported here we present data based on two-hour interviews with 20 families providing
narrative accounts of math in their daily lives. Narratives provide us with participants' accounts in their own
words and allow for us to have records of how people relate stories about their math related activities, including
family members self-identifying as African-American (N=5), Latino (N=23), Asian (N=7), Pacific Islander
(N=8), Multi Racial (N=6) and white (N=25). The families also represent a spectrum of economic diversity,
ranging from low income (children can receive free lunch) to upper-middle income families.                The educational
levels of the heads of families was also diverse, ranging from high school education through graduate school.

Data collection
We developed a semi-structured interview to have people discuss the activities they engage in as part of family
life, work and school, allowing them to give us particularized versions of how they think about and accomplish
their life tasks. The interview gave family members ample space for describing their experiences, while also
collecting certain information from all families such as education levels, perceived comfort with mathematics,
school attainment, number and description of math classes that parents (and students) have taken, and their
attitudes towards mathematics in general and towards school math. The protocol included two segments to
provide  parity of data   across  all families. Each   family   member      told a "Math   in a Minute"    story about   an
experience of any kind, positive or negative, alone or with others, that they had with mathematics. Each family
also was asked to choose a cell phone plan by using brochures from four providers we provided that would meet
the needs of the family. This task put the family into action and provided observable, interactive accounts of the
family in a problem-solving situation. All interviews were videotaped and took approximately two hours.

Data Analyses
The analyses of the interviews proceeded through several stages and treatments. Three were particularly critical
to the analyses of data for this paper: content logging, identification of talk and interactions involving problem
solving, and development of a Math Inventory. These three data examinations eventually became the basis of a
database on the intersection of problem solving and mathematics. All videotapes were first content logged to
delineate events, turns in conversation topics, stories, events, and sub-topics of interest inside participants'
accounts. Analyses    of  the segments    resulted  in 14  general   categories,   such as formalisms,    gestures,  props,
efficiency, (math) avoidance, emotions, division of labor, and values. This paper emphasizes the categories of
"problem-solving"     and   "type of  mathematics"     so we    could better  understand   the  occasions   where   family
members depicted a situation as creating a problem for them and for which they engaged mathematics. These
categorization processes resulted in a database comprising 315 stories--events that participants described where
they were solving a problem using one or more types of mathematical practices.

                                                      381  ·   © ISLS
                                                ICLS 2010   ·    Volume 1

         We also developed a list of 20 categories for "types of mathematics used," establishing definitions with
exemplars from our dataset for each. To consider overall patterns in our dataset of problems involving math, we
examined the frequency with which the various types of math occurred within the various family activities.

Findings: Four Features of Math Engaged Problem Solving in the Family
Four aspects of math engaged problem solving are described through vignettes based on our families' accounts
of their math engagements. We tell their stories and point out the ways in which they are representative and
characteristic of patterns we saw in the larger data set.

I. Everyday problems lead the math
The most overarching feature of family problem solving is that problems come first, with math following. The
complexity of family life and many interactions among family members and other institutions generate many
contexts that require problem solving. The problems are complex (a need to renovate a bathroom), involve
many steps over significant time periods (training for a race), and often are nested inside larger or connected
problems (playing an extended game). Problems are defined and constrained by life imperatives (we must pay
our credit card bills).
         The knowledge     and solutions derived from       problem   solving    must align with situations and real
constraints. People generally define their problems, and secondarily consider how to solve them, and then when
to use math. Math rarely leads (except when family members directly want to learn or practice math). Single
problems expand to fill the space, time and solution resources available. They may branch, with the resolution
of one problem spawning new or next problems.    People talked of the nesting and cascading of problems to be
solved. We saw great examples of this in home improvement projects. People seem to meet up with problems
once they start improvements, only to realize they must be solved in coordinated or timed ways. This is not to
suggest that all problems are like runaway trains or that every problem facet being solved engages mathematics.
It is to suggest that problems to be solved are complex ones that often require shifting attention, coordination of
multiple nested activities, and unplanned-for triage processes.
         When  is mathematics   brought  to bear on    problems      in   the rough and tumble of problem   solving?
Sometimes people are aware they are bringing math to the situation; other times they are engaging unawares of
their mathematical practice.   We had many    instances       in the database   where  we coded  that the math  was
inferred--that people could not have accomplished what they told us they did without doing some mathematics.
In this way, math could be sub rosa. The problems to be solved are often unique and situation dependent, people
are generally required to evaluate their own solutions, and if correct, decide if the correct solution is really
relevant or appropriate to the particularities of the situation. For example, people described both "doing the
math" and "tossing it" when the idealized math did not fit the local situational constraints. We can see some of
these characteristics of problems in a family's condo renovation project.
         In one family, mom Yali and daughters Vivian and Renee are in the process of renovating a condo that
Yali recently bought. Vivian is in law school and Yali recently became a teacher after a mid-career change.
They want to save money on the renovations and Vivian likes carpentry, so she is managing the renovations and
doing some of the work. Vivian describes how there are so many decisions to make--moldings, the placement
and the size of walls, cabinets, which way to place the tub, where to put the sink? Closets, should there be one
or two? Vivian discusses how they conceived of the renovation.
          Interviewer: Did you use any tools or ways to visualize to make these decisions?        How did
          you actually decide where to put things?
          Vivian: It was a combination of just paper, like drawing a two dimensional...this is a square
          that is the kitchen. Where are the things going to be? And then actually showing up on site.
          I had to go down there a number of times, which was the hardest part, because, you know,
          we're trying to figure out, okay, we have this space between the tub and the toilet and how
          much space do you need for your knees?            So we would just take the tape measure, and
          we're like okay, we want the [height of the] bench by the dining table.           And we're like,
          well, how high is the bench by the dining table? There are these various measurements. So
          we literally took the tape measure and measured our knees from the floor sitting on [the
          bench]. So then you want to design, okay, what are our options?            And you draw those on
          paper and then you actually show up and then you sit on the toilet. How many inches do I
          need, if the tub comes to here will I be able to sit down? <Yali laughs> We will, but if we
          sell the house to someone who's taller, will they? So it was kind of a back and forth.
          Interviewer: So you used your body for some of that?
          Yali and Vivian: Oh Yeah...

                                                   382    ·  © ISLS
                                                ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

          Interviewer: ...And you drew plans. When you drew the plans did you draw them to scale?
          Or did you just free form draw them?
          Vivian: I did both. Some things, well I'd mostly draw the free form just to give to the
          contractor an idea, okay this is what I decided. The tub is going to go here and I'd draw the
          inches...But I actually got on my computer and found some grid to work with to actually get
          more of the proportions. I didn't have a ruler in my whole room. So I couldn't even just
          measure a piece of paper and draw inches myself.      I had to do it all online.
The family enjoys that they measured with their bodies, and upon Vivian's telling of the story, they all move
around and giggle. Vivian's story on managing renovations reveals how informed critical decision-making is to
their home improvement project. Vivian uses math in this work. She draws plans free form, but also draws them
to scale in order to communicate with the contractor. The math involves knowing the dimensions of the large
fixtures and pieces and the dimensions of the spacing they are being placed in. Drawing the scale version of the
plans involves assigning scale units and engaging in proportional reasoning and problem solving. If a bathtub is
60 X 30 inches, how big is that on this particular graph paper? Still, even scaled plans might not be enough, and
the women use their bodies to give a reality check to the calculations to make sure what is accurate on the 2D
scaled paper plan will also work in the 3D world of real people moving around in the spaces. In the renovation
project, daughter Vivian knows not only how to make and use scale models, but also what their limitations are,
and when to switch into reality mode. This back and forth cycling of model to reality is interesting, and typical
in this type of situation.
         The renovation also included a new kitchen and new closets in the entranceway. There was a lot of
figuring and fitting going on. To measure for the stone countertop, Vivian entices thirteen year old Renee into
realizing she could use the Pythagorean theorem to complete the measurements for the counter in the stovetop
corner. There was also clever financial planning around emerging problems as they were discovered, from
having to convert from metric to standard measurements to figure out if the cabinets would fit before ordering,
to balancing loans for the construction costs against 0% financing on appliances and fixtures, with the projection
of a well-paying job when law school was over in a year. The problem space was huge, cascading and needing
attention over an extended period of time. The math identified in the renovation story was extensive as well and
included  arithmetic,      comparing  magnitudes,  geometry,       measurement,   optimization,  unit  conversion;
proportional reasoning, decimals, unit conversion, formula, measurement, estimation, data representation, and
interest rates.

II. Values steer the problem definition
Why engage all of this problem solving? Our analyses revealed that exploring values answered that question.
Why bother to take a student loan to help finance your mom's condo renovation and juggle a huge amount of
debt for several years? Values also answer the how question. Vivian could hire someone to design the new
kitchen and bathroom, or she could figure it herself, especially since she had lots of ideas and she thought she
knew enough to get started. Values drive some of the decision-making around problem solving, and in volatile
emotional moments, steer people into certain practices and solutions (instead of arguing, let's check the figures).
Peoples' preferences and their values actually are determinant in whether or not a problem will even be engaged
(Pea & Martin, 2010).
         When    families   spoke about their problem     solving  strategies and gave examples   of  the kinds of
problems that arose in their lives, family members consistently talked about what they valued. Families often
had to consider the factors that mattered when making decisions. Was getting the "best" deal most important?
Did social relationships play a part? Was time an important consideration? Was it important to make decisions
by taking into consideration all of the relevant information? Each family's answers to these questions varied,
sometimes even from one problem to the next. The answers to these questions often organized the problems to
be solved by defining the constraints, the resources, and the criteria by which the outcomes would be judged.
Values helped families determine how to solve problems once they were identified as such. When one mother
wanted a savings plan to pay down credit card debt, she chose a socially regulated solution that traded the "best"
financial deal for the power of social commitment and cultural participation.
         One family's approach to purchases illuminates not only how values enter into the mathematics of their
decision-making, but in this case, the creation of a new kind of value exchange unit (product goods vs. days
mother has to   work away from home).     The dad, Jim, is   an analyst and the mom, Liz is a part-time financial
consultant. Liz works part-time because she tries to stay at home with the children as much as she can. She does
take consulting jobs to keep up with expenses, but she tries to optimize her time at home with what she can earn
through consulting gigs. When we asked how they handle the purchase of big-ticket items, they responded by
going straight to the importance of their values. Jim said that he and Liz had been thinking about "bigger ticket
item" purchases:

                                                    383  ·  © ISLS
                                              ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

        We have got into an interesting concept about what the value of bigger ticket items is to
        us personally, and value is a very personal thing. Since my wife is a consultant and works
        on billable hours, we have gotten into this thing of looking at something, and if it is a big
        ticket item, thinking about how many hours it     costs for us to get it. Whatever it is: I have
        to work three days, or it will cost me three weeks of effort if I want to do this, whatever
        the big ticket item is. And we sit back and we say, you know: is this really worth three
        weeks? No. Is this worth three days? No. So it depends ­ and sometimes ­ is this worth
        three days worth of effort? Yes. It's an interesting way of thinking of things, and trying
        to assess the value, which we do on bigger ticket items... We oftentimes say, you know,
        it's not worth that to me. I am not going to work five days to get this thing. It's just not
        worth it to me. It is an interesting value concept that just the two of us think about.

The family actually pits Liz's time at home against their wants, knowing they can have one or the other. Liz's
home time usually wins, and the family goes without. This is especially so if the purchase was a flat screen TV.
However other kinds of big ticket items, such as paying to offset the tuition for their middle school aged
daughter's private school, is considered worth the consulting hours. Jim and Liz went on to tell us that even
their children have come to use a similar approach in their own thinking. It started as the children were getting
to the ages where they wanted to purchase souvenirs when the family went on a vacation. They decided to give
their children $10.00 and let their children budget their own purchases, forcing them to ask the question of
whether what they would purchase was worth it.

        Jim: But it has translated down a bit with the kids and the money that we give them on
        vacation, and we...they have ten dollars, and then they go through this value exercise to
        say `do I really want that candy bar for two dollars or not?' And they are starting to make
        value judgments themselves on what is important to them, and whether or not they are
        going to spend the money on a particular item, or save it.

What such a structuring of the values undergirding decision making for bigger ticket purchase items exemplifies
is that how a family weighs, or creates equivalences between, different categories of resource (incremental
earnings, big ticket purchases, family time), affects the decisions that they make in how resources are allocated.
In turn, features of the ideology, as well as of the mathematical practices, can serve as a model that the children
emulate in their own age-relevant versions of the adult problems. For example, the math involved in Jim and
Liz's purchase to consulting hours trade off includes unit conversion, arithmetic, and proportional reasoning. As
the parents discuss family purchases,  the children     are exposed   to mathematical     reasoning   involving these
concepts, as well as the value considerations their parents consider important.

III. Different maths engaged in service of problem solving
Two findings relating to the math family members engaged while problem solving are of special interest. The
first is that a number of problems in our database indicate that people engaged multiple maths on the way to
problem resolution, even when we exclude simple arithmetic or computation from the data set. The second is
that, even for the same problem, family members approach problems with different ways of bringing math to the
solutions. There are  several conditions for   multiple   maths   to  co-occur.    People  in the family  sometimes
approached the same problem in different ways. In some of the cases, they knew the way of another family
member, but chose to use their own. In a few cases, this led to circulation of a problem from one person to the
other, and in these instances, we found family member playing to perceived expertise of others.
        Engaging multiple kinds of math to problem solving is a very interesting and positive aspect of family
mathematical practice, and we see it in stark contrast to how problem solving is taught in school math. In
school, the  approach to math   most  preferred is    a   development-sequential     one.  Math   in school tends  to
concentrate on learning and practicing one kind of math at a time, and this is generally the case, even when
problems are of an applied nature. In school, the applied problem is often designed to practice a singular math
concept; at home, the problem is generally designed to accomplish a goal that is desired and sought, often with
the engagement of a variety of math practices for accomplishment. The family offers children the opportunity to
develop mathematical practice under conditions that matter to them.
        For  one middle  school  boy, Ravi,  a pre-algebra    student, opportunities    to apply  his  new  problem-
solving skills abound at home. His mom talked about how he constantly enjoyed trying to calculate the best
deal. The family told the story of Ravi's part in helping them decide what car to purchase. The family was
looking at various Toyota models, and they were considering a number of factors in making the decision. Ravi
compared the options and saw gas mileage as the deciding factor:
        Ravi: Yeah, uh, so we were considering between a Toyota Corolla, a Toyota Camry, and a
        Prius. And I said that we should buy a Prius because my mom drives a lot of miles [Mom &

                                                  384   ·  © ISLS
                                                ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

          Son laugh]. And so, uh, with a Prius, uh, you get, uh, I believe you get some tax benefits, car,
          auto insurance [Mom & Sister smile].
          Dad: [returns, sits down and pats son on the back while smiling and laughing] You don't need
          to know that.
          Ravi: ... and, a Prius, um, is better for the environment also.
          While Mom and Dad would also take the tax benefits into account, they knew Ravi was not yet ready
to weigh those benefits. Still, he was intent on making a case for the mileage in terms of environmental effects
along with cost savings at the pump and at income tax time. He had figured the differences and savings for his
parents and argued for the ways the pump and environmental impact savings would even out the extra purchase
price. His  interest in  optimizing  was  balanced  by    his knowledge      of  his mom's  commute       and  a general
appreciation in the family for thoughtful, mathematical arguments. Ravi demonstrated how he put what he
learned in school to work for him on the Prius problem:
          Ravi: Yeah, like um, usually in the car, like uh, for the Prius, like miles per gallon.
          When you see 50 miles per gallon, that means if you drive, you will use 1 tank of gas
          if you drive 500 miles. That means, if you fill up your tank you can drive from here
          to LA in that tank.
          In Ravi's example, he set up a problem and argumentation for his choice that would put the mileage
benefits of the Prius into perspective. He knew he could make it from Palo Alto to LA on a 10-gallon tank. It is
important to recognize what drives Ravi to set up a proportional calculation. He wants to find the best of three
car options for his family's needs. His interest in optimizing gas mileage to get his family the best financial deal
while making a responsible environmental decision works nicely with his penchant for math problem solving
generally. The car purchase context sets up the opportunity for Ravi to draw on several types of math problem
solving at once. The car purchase demonstrates the way Ravi is able to draw on his school knowledge inside a
relevant  family  context.    He tackles  everything    from  arithmetic     and measurement      to   optimization and
proportional reasoning in order to support his argument.

IV. Mathematical thinking as activity in distributed knowledge environments
The stories that families told us indicated that math engaged problem solving was most often a social affair.
This was so even when we asked an individual for a story. Children often mentioned how siblings, parents,
grandparents, or friends were part of their math stories. Adult problem solving often involved others, even if
they did not always involve children. Social, historical and cultural practices were deeply embedded in problem
solving. Playing math games with a grandfather, working on puzzles as a family, inventing fantasy businesses
for play, and saving money and managing debt were all deeply social and distributed across persons, time and
setting.  When math was involved, it became entwined with the persons in activity. Math engaged events, like
other  learning situations,   were embedded    and distributed   among       people,  artifacts, activities and  settings
(Gonzales et al., 2001; Pea, 1993).   Individual accounts of how the math practice was distributed differed, yet
we found only few instances in family-based activities where math engagements were isolated or individual.
          Mathematics during a road trip plays out in one family for whom mental math is key, particularly for
the father, Steve. Throughout our interview, Steve's use of mental math to figure out problems is a common
theme recognized by the rest of the family and becomes a source of amusement.           For example, Steve describes
doing "nutrition math" around each meal to stay on the Zone diet and also decrease the amount of cholesterol he
and his wife consume. Such activity involves calculating protein grams, different forms of carbohydrates, and
fat per meal, as well as the amount of cholesterol and total number of calories. According to Steve, "you almost
need a computer  to do the  nutrition analysis of each meal   at this point. So, I have this much saturated fat,  so if I
use olive oil instead of this oil...a lot of [calculations like] that." However, rather than using a computer to keep
track of the calculations, Steve says he adds up the different quantities in his head as he builds a menu. His
comment - "I do it in my head" - causes laughter from his wife, Sharron, and daughter, Elise. Sharron jokingly
asks  us: "Do   you  see a  theme  here?"  -  referring to the father's   focus  throughout      the interview on  doing
calculations in his head. Sharron and Elise also figure cholesterol, but with different methods--one cooks with
no fat, since "zero times zero is zero", and the other computes cholesterol with paper calculations.
          The focus on mental math is not only important to Steve, but it is also passed down to Elise, with the
involvement of the whole family. Elise describes a game she played in the car on a trip with her parents:
          Elise: We were coming home across the Golden Gate Bridge, and I wanted to see if I
          could hold  my   breath  across it. Our guidebook    said   it was  2  miles  long,    and  at 45
          miles/hour, so we had to figure out how long I had to hold my breath, and it ended up
          being 3 minutes. And that's a long time, so... I didn't hold it for the whole entire time.
          Sharron (chimes in laughing):   We drove faster!

                                                    385  ·  © ISLS
                                                  ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

        Steve adds: We realized we'd have to change some of the physics in order for this to
        work, since 3 minutes was too long. So we drove faster and shortened the span to just the
        part that was kind of out there. She figured out the stuff while we were driving. That was
        her project to do the math.
        This game was initiated by Elise, as holding her breath across a bridge was something she had done on
a fieldtrip with her friends. However, it was taken up by the whole family, and became a problem to solve by
the family unit. According to Sharron, for Elise to figure out whether she would be able to hold her breath "was
a good exercise that took part of the time between Santa Rosa and the Golden Gate Bridge."           Once she figured
out that she would not be able to hold her breath long enough, the family unit took it on to figure out how to
help her succeed, both by changing the constraints of the problem, the factors involved, and what would count
as a solution. As a family, they decided that she should not try to hold her breath for the entire bridge, but rather
concentrate on a shorter span of the   bridge that was more    manageable.   The father  also changed the speed of the
car, speeding across a section of the bridge to make it easier for his daughter to succeed.          This episode was
recounted by the family with enthusiasm, with all members actively chiming in to the description. What started
out as a game for the daughter became a challenge for the family to solve.
        This family focus on mental math is not new for Elise, and she gets practice in many situations with her
parents' help: "There are a lot of times in cars when dad has a problemish thing, like if we're going this fast,
how long will it take us to get somewhere."        Steve adds, "That's right. And you have to do it in your head.
Which is hard, isn't it? But really good practice."      At the store, Elise's parents often ask her to help with the
"shopping math," asking her to do price comparisons to figure out which is the best value, as well as figuring
out the nutritional analysis of foods based  on the serving    size they actually eat. In talking about shopping math,
Steve says:

        They try to teach rounding in the schools obviously, but when [Elise] gets a problem that we
        would    just instinctively   round  off, because   we  think, `I'm  never going   to calculate  16.3
        divided by 8.7' or something, she's instinctively trying, you can see, especially - that's why
        it's good to try to do stuff in your head ­ try[ing] in her head to do 16.3 divided by 8.7 (Steve
        gestures as though writing out a long division problem.) And it's like, `ok, this is a good time
        for rounding'.   And she's like 'Oh, well then, 16 divided by 8.     Now it's easy'. But it's not an
        instant conclusion that you leap to.
Sharron adds: "probably more than anything, that ability to get common number sense for everyday use for
quick, (snaps) quick answers just seems to be really key for her, and she's getting there."       Her family is explicit
about using rounding as a strategy, as Elise recognizes. She says about Steve: "You do that a lot.      I have trouble
with a math problem.   And then he says, well what if the numbers are this and     this, could you figure it out then?
Then, it's oh, that's how you do it."

Summary
Four features of mathematically engaged problem solving were found across our interview data: Mathematics
was engaged as people solved problems in their lives; problems that received attention did so because people
valued the end goals related to the problem solving; multiple maths were brought to bear on problems; and,
math was embedded in the socially distributed learning opportunities. Mathematics followed as people attended
to other goals. These features varied across families, situations, and events, to the extent that family position,
histories, styles and cultural practices had a lot to do with how and when problems and math were engaged.
        These results have several implications. First, rich problem solving in the family is not appreciated, and
family mathematics even less so. If mathematical engagements are recognized, they are usually considered to be
of less consequence than the more formal math structures taught in schools. Second, the results of our analysis
indicate that family mathematics practices are socially embedded in some of the families' most important and
valued activities. Family members engage with math because they need to or want to. They support each other
through reliance  on,  and knowledge     of, their  distributed  expertise. Third, children   are often witnesses and
participants in these vital family problem-solving contexts, and the mathematics engaged is definitely providing
learning opportunities--about math and life. Fourth, the mathematics covered has alignment with school math
objectives through pre-algebra--another reason why the learning opportunities available in families are rich
ones.

Endnotes
(1) The Family Math Study is conducted as part of the LIFE Center (NSF REC 0354453).       Eventually, its results will also
    inform a range of studies about learning in both formal and informal learning environments (for more about the LIFE
    Center, http://www.life-slc.org).

                                                     386  ·   © ISLS
                                             ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

References
Bronfenbrenner, U. (1979). The ecology of human development: Experiments by nature and design. Cambridge,
       MA: Harvard University Press.
Cole, M., Gay, J., Glick, J., & Sharp, D. (1971). The cultural context of learning and thinking: An exploration in
       experimental anthropology. NY: Basic Books.
Duncker, Karl. (1945). On problem solving. Psychological Monographs, 58, no. 270, i-112.
Ginsburg, H. P, Inoue, N., & Seo, K. (1999). Young children doing mathematics: Observations of everyday
       mathematics. In J. Copley (Ed.), Mathematics in the early years (pp. 88 ­ 100). Washington, DC:
       National Association for the Education of Young Children.
Goldman, S. & Booker, A.N. (2009). Making math a definition of the situation: Families as sites for
       mathematical practices. Anthropology & Education Quarterly, 40:3, 369-387.
González, N., Andrade, R., Civil, M., & Moll, L. (2001). Bridging funds of distributed knowledge: Creating
       zones of practices in mathematics. Journal of Education For Students Placed at Risk, 6(1&2), 115­
       132.
Hoyles, C., Noss, R. & Pozzi, S. (2001). Mathematising in practice. In C. Hoyles, C. Morgan & G. Woodhouse
       (Eds). Rethinking the mathematics curriculum. London: Falmer Press. 48-62.
Jackson, K., & Remillard, J. T. (2005) Rethinking parent involvement: African American mothers construct
       their roles in the mathematics education of their children. School and Community Journal, 15(1), 51-
       74.
Lave, J. & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning. Cambridge:  Cambridge University Press.
Lave, J. (1988). Cognition in practice: Mind, mathematics and culture in everyday life. Cambridge: Cambridge
       University Press.
Leichter, H. (1975). The family as educator. New York: teachers College Press.
Nasir, N. (2000). Points ain't everything: Emergent goals and average and percent understandings in the play of
       basketball among African-American students. Anthropology and Education Quarterly, 31(3): 283-305.
Neisser, U. (1976). Cognition and reality. San Francisco, CA: WH Freeman and Company.
Newell, A. (1981). Duncker on thinking; An inquiry into progress on cognition. In S. Koch & D. Leary (Eds.), A
       century of psychology as science: retrospections and assessments. NY: McGraw-Hill.
Nunes, T., Analúcia D. Schliemann, A.D. & Carraher, D.W. (1989). Street mathematics and school
       mathematics. Reston, VA.
Pea, R., & Martin, L. (2010). Values that occasion and guide mathematics in the family. In W. R. Penuel & K.
       O'Connor (Eds.), Learning research as a human science: National Society for the Study of Education
       Yearbook, 109(1).
Pea, R. (1993). Practices of distributed intelligence and designs for education. In G. Salomon (Ed.), Distributed
       cognition Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press. 47­87.
Polya, G. (1957). How to solve it: a new aspect of mathematical method (2nd ed.). New York: Doubleday.
Rogoff, B., Ellis, S., & Gardner, W. (1984). Adjustment of adult-child instruction according to child's age and
       task. Developmental Psychology, 20(2), 193-199.
Satwicz, T. & Stevens, R. (2008). Playing with representations: how do kids make use of quantitative
       representations in video games? International Journal of Computer Mathematics Learning, 13, 179­
       206.
Saxe, G., (1988). Candy selling and math learning. Educational Researcher, 17 (6).14-21.
Scribner, S. (1984). Studying working intelligence. In B. Rogoff & J. Lave (Eds.), Everyday cognition: Its
       development in social context (pp. 9-40). Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Simon, H.A. (1999). Karl Duncker and cognitive science. In From past to future, 1(2). The drama of Karl
       Duncker, pp. 1-11. Worcester, MA: Clark University Press.
Steen, L. A. (2004). Mathematics and democracy: the case for quantitative literacy. Washington, DC: National
       Council on Education and the Disciplines.
Stevens, R., Mertl, V., Levias, S., & McCarthy, L. (2006). Money matters: The social and material organization
       of consequential financial practices in families. In S. Barab, K. E., Hay, & D. T. Hickey (Eds.),
       Proceedings of the International Conference of the Learning Sciences 2006: Vol. 2. (pp. 1088­1093).
       Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Wertheimer, M. (1945). Productive thinking (1st edition). New York: Harper & Row.

Acknowledgments
We'd like to thank all of the families that participated. They enlightened us about both problem solving and
math. Ana Rios and Judit Moschkovich of the NSF CEMELA Center conducted a few of the interviews, as did
Ernesto Colin. The findings and opinions are those of the authors and do not represent the opinions of the NSF.

                                                 387  ·  © ISLS
