                                                   ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 2

                 Designing an online environment for all teachers:
                   Supporting teachers in learning to learn online
                    Rebecca Schneider, University of Toledo, Rebecca.Schneider@utoledo.edu

        Abstract: Online collaborative environments have the potential to transform how teachers are
        supported in their professional learning and work. Yet, many teachers fail to fully or productively
        participate in these opportunities. To address this challenge, A Learning Community of Teachers
        (ALCOT), an online professional collaboration environment, was designed to support mentors and
        leaders in providing guidance to novices as they learn to develop and share ideas online.

Introduction
Web-based communication tools can provide teachers the opportunity to share ideas and interact with experts in
ways otherwise not possible. To encourage professional growth, however, online environments need to encourage
thoughtful  collaborations  around     real issues in   science  and   mathematics    teaching    and learning. In   addition,
developing  professional   identity appears   to   be particularly   important   for  professional  growth.  We    have  some
evidence that online conversational tools can be helpful. For example, blogs have been shown to support teachers'
developing  identities as  professionals    (Luehmann,     2008).   But   not  all teachers  take  advantage    of these  new
opportunities for  support.  Only   15   percent   of   teachers  have   participated   in a professionally-oriented    online
community or social networking site and only 28 percent have read or written a blog about teaching (Berry, 2009).
To be effective online environments need to engage all teachers in opportunities to develop as professionals.
        A   Learning   Community    of  Teachers     (ALCOT)     is an   online environment   designed    to support  teacher
learning and community at each phase of the professional continuum. The idea is to explicitly support productive
and professional relationships for all teachers. Guided by ideas about how teachers learn to teach and become active
members of professional community, this web-based environment is centered on the individual, facilitates one-to-
one and  group  guidance,   and   encourages   continuing    participation.   ALCOT     is specifically designed   to support
mentors and leaders in providing guidance to novices as they learn to develop and share ideas online. The goal of
this study is to describe the challenges and leverage points for teachers new to online collaboration when they are
supported  by specific    communication     features  ­ such   as   electronic  journals,  blogs, or  public dialogue   ­ and
instructional guidance ­ such as individual mentoring, prompting, and feedback ­ as they learn to use web-based
communication to learn and participate in a professional community.

E-learning for teachers' professional learning and work
To be effective, online environments need to facilitate collaborations in ways that match teachers' needs for learning
and support.  Based  on   ideas about   how   expertise    develops,   I propose   that science   and mathematics    teachers'
learning and participation can be supported by learning the practices and discourse of reform-oriented teachers and
teacher educators. Participating    in the  discourse   of a community     can  help   teachers   develop their identity  as a
member   and  encourage   their continued    and increasingly    competent     participation (Beijaard, Meijer,    & Verloop,
2004). Identity in particular appears to be important in explaining how teachers engage students with content and
participate in guiding new teachers (Beijaard, et al., 2004). Teachers will, however, need guidance ­ including
guidance from within the community ­ to productively participate in these dialogues. Creating such active and
interactive environments will require rethinking how we support teachers' learning and community online.
        The community of inquiry model (Garrison & Anderson, 2003) proposes that in an e-learning environment,
educational experiences are at the intersection of cognitive, social, and teaching presences. Consistent with this
model, A Learning Community of Teachers (ALCOT), an online environment, is designed to encourage professional
conversations, projects, and identities that integrate cognitive, social, and guidance aspects for teachers. ALCOT
centers assets and conversations on individuals, facilitates one-to-one and group guidance from leaders and peers,
and has ongoing or durable assets and groups to encourage continued and increasing participation. Although other
researchers have  explored   strategies  for  supporting   teachers  online   (e.g., see:  Davis, Smithey,   &  Petish, 2004;
Farooq, Schank, Harris, Fusco, & Schlager, 2007; Fishman, et al., 2001; Moore, 2002; Schlager, Farooq, Fusco,
Schank,  &  Dwyer,     in press), and   have   illustrated   the  power   of   online  communities    and  teacher-to-teacher
interactions, these efforts struggle to encourage all teachers to participate in meaningful ways. Through ALCOT
design and research, I am exploring strategies to explicitly support teachers, including those who might be most
hesitant, in learning how to learn and teach in innovative online environments.

                                                        382  ·  © ISLS
                                                 ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 2

Methods
To begin putting the ALCOT model into practice, the tools to support conversations, projects, and identities were
piloted during the 2008-2009 academic year. These features were used by 20 experienced teachers (4-12 grade)
participating in a graduate course for new mentor teachers hosting a preservice candidate and by 18 initial licensure
teachers (4-12 grade) participating in a graduate course just prior to or during their first two year of teaching. In this
pilot, the mentor role  was  filled by  the faculty  instructor  of  the graduate courses. Thus, experienced  teachers
learning about mentoring were themselves mentored by the instructor. Participating online was a component of the
course grade but no set number, frequency, or timing of posts was required. This was to encourage authentic use and
explore the value of the supports. Feedback was collected through interviews and recording of verbal comments
throughout the semester. In addition, records of online conversations and identities were collected to determine how,
when, and for what purpose teachers used ALCOT features.

Outcomes
One leverage point for developing conversations was the one-to-one conversations supported by the mentor-mentee
journal. Here the course instructor/mentor provided direct questions for the teachers' response. In this way, teachers
were first encouraged to post online. Over the course of the semester, teachers first posted simple responses to direct
questions, then responses to follow-up questions (which they did not do initially), then began to post their questions,
then information such as thoughts on class activities. The questions that prompted the most descriptive answers for
experienced teachers were related to their classroom events. For initial licensure teachers, prompts regarding their
course paper resulted in more detail and many follow-up questions from the teachers. One request was for the ability
to post audio rather than text only so that the mentors or mentees could "talk" to each other. Both groups quickly
used comments to post ideas in response to the leader's blog.
         The leverage point for developing identity online was the group leader blog. In this blog, the group leader
modeled blogging and took a lead in sharing ideas. Teachers were quick to post comments to the blog entries
including thoughtful comments based on the ideas posed. Teachers reported and showed evidence in their posts of
reading these entries regularly. Personal blogs, on the other hand were more challenging. Teachers did not know
what a blog was and were unsure how or why to blog. Sometimes they posted random questions to their mentor on
the blog rather than using the journal. They also did not necessarily understand they could post a blog without it
being an instructor guided task. This challenge indicates that learning to blog, as a form of presenting yourself, will
take more time than other types of online posts.

References
Beijaard,  D., Meijer, P.  C., &  Verloop,  N.   (2004).  Reconsidering    research on teachers' professional identity.
         Teaching and Teacher Education, 20, 107-128.
Berry, B. (2009). The teachers of 2030: Creating a student-centered profession for the 21st century: Center for
         Teaching Quality.
Davis,  E. A., Smithey,  J., &  Petish, D.  (2004).  Designing   an  online learning environment  for new elementary
         science teachers. Paper presented at International Conference on the Learning Sciences, Santa Monica, CA.
Farooq,   U.,  Schank, P., Harris,  A., Fusco,   J., &    Schlager,  M.  (2007).  Sustaining a community  computing
         infrastructure for online teacher professional development: A case study of designing Tapped In.Journal of
         Computer Supported Cooperative Work, 16(4-5), 397-429.
Fishman, B., Marx, R., Bobrowsky, W., Warren, D., Marrill, W., & Best, S. (2001). Knowledge networks on the
         web: An on-line professional development resource to support the scaling up of curriculum enactment.
         Paper presented at the American Educational Research Association.
Garrison, G. D., & Anderson, T. (2003). E-learning in the 21st century. London: Routledge.
Luehmann, A. L. (2008). Using blogging in support of teacher professinal identity development. Journal of the
         Learning Sciences, 17, 287-337.
Moore, J. (2002). The inquiry learning forum: Online professional development with a community orientation. Paper
         presented at the Society for Information Technology and Teacher Education, Chesapeake, VA.
Schlager, M., Farooq, U., Fusco, J., Schank, P., & Dwyer, N. (in press). Analyzing online social networking in
         professional learning communities. Journal of Technology Education.

Acknowledgements
This work was funded in part by the U. S. Department of Education through the Teacher Quality Enhancement
Grants program, Title II of the Higher Education Amendments of 1998.

                                                      383  ·  © ISLS
