                                                ICLS 2010    Volume 2

       SURGE: Integrating Vygotsky's Spontaneous and Instructed
                                Concepts in a Digital Game?

      Douglas B. Clark1, Brian C. Nelson2, Cynthia A. D'Angelo2, Kent Slack2, & Mario Martinez-Garza1
                                Vanderbilt University1     Arizona State University2
          doug.clark@vanderbilt.edu, brian.nelson@asu.edu, cmdangel@asu.edu, kent.slack@asu.edu,
                                              kwarizmi@gmail.com

          In Thought and Language, Vygotsky discusses the potential for leveraging intuitive
          understandings from everyday experience ("spontaneous concepts") with "instructed"
          scientific concepts to build robust understandings. The question remains whether or not
          the intuitive spontaneous concepts players develop in through computer games can be
          successfully leveraged into robust instructed concepts in a manner that transfers to
          academic assessments and across domains recognized as central by the scientific
          disciplines themselves. This poster presents data from early studies with the SURGE
          video game, where students demonstrated significant learning across multiple items of a
          posttest based on the Force Concept Inventory, suggesting that the sequence and structure
          of the models and representations designed in the SURGE game are effective in changing
          how students think about the formal instructed concepts. However, care must be taken to
          ensure that the ideas that students take away from the game are the ones intended.

Research Goals and Theoretical Framework
School science, with its focus on explicit formalized knowledge structures, seldom connects with students' tacit
intuitive understandings. Interestingly, many commercial video games focus on physics, ecology, engineering,
and  other critical STEM    concepts   at their core. Furthermore,     commercial  video games    are exceptionally
successful at helping learners build accurate intuitive understandings of the concepts and processes embedded in
the games due to the situated and enacted nature of good game design (Gee, 2003, 2004, 2007). As SURGE
advisor   James  Gee  explains, good   game   design  is   inherently  about problem   solving. According   to Gee,
however, these games fall short because they do not help students articulate and connect their evolving tacit
intuitive understandings into larger explicit formalized structures allowing knowledge transfer and application
across broader   contexts. In Thought    and Language,     Vygotsky   (1986) discusses the potential  for leveraging
intuitive understandings from everyday experience ("spontaneous concepts") with instructed scientific concepts
to  build robust understandings.     The  question remains    whether  or not  the intuitive spontaneous   concepts
developed in games can actually be successfully leveraged into robust instructed concepts in the format and
terminology of academic assessment and across domains recognized as central by the scientific disciplines.

Game Context and Data
SURGE (Scaffolding Understanding by Redesigning Games for Understanding) investigates design principles
for connecting   students' intuitive "spontaneous   concepts"   about  kinematics  and  Newtonian    mechanics  into
formalized "instructed concepts." SURGE integrates research on conceptual change, cognitive processing-based
design, and socio-cognitive scripting with design principles and mechanics of popular commercial video games
such as Mario Galaxy, Switchball, Orbz, and Portal to support students' articulation and connection of their
evolving tacit intuitive understandings into larger explicit formalized structures allowing knowledge transfer
and application across broader contexts relevant to Newtonian mechanics. SURGE incorporates the game play
designs of these games in levels alternating between marble "travel" and marble "launching" in the context of a
space-based adventure. Each level involves specific challenges directly linked to physics concepts. To complete
these challenges, students need to learn and apply many principles related to mechanics (e.g., impulse, inertia,
vector addition, elastic collision, gravity, velocity, acceleration, free-fall, mass, force, projectile motion).Each
level highlights one or two topics, and levels allow students to connect the concepts together and to see the
relations that exist among the topics. For example, the initial levels do not include gravity or friction. However,
as the game progresses, gravity and then friction are gradually introduced. This approach allows students to gain
a firm grasp of a concept before new concepts are introduced.

Assessment Methods
Assessment in SURGE involves standard experimental design in terms of random assignment of participants
within classrooms across experimental groups. In addition, SURGE is conducting formative quantitative and
qualitative analyses of student learning during development/pilot-testing phases. Student learning in SURGE is
measured (a) in terms of intuitive understanding of "spontaneous concepts" through students' performance in

                                                    384     ISLS
                                                ICLS 2010    Volume 2

the actual game levels and (b) in terms of formal understanding of "instructed concepts" through items from the
Force Concept Inventory (FCI) (Hestenes, Wells, & Swackhamer, 1992; Jackson, 2007). In-game performance
is measured via data recorded as students employ concepts of velocity, force, and gravity to spheres of varying
mass through a series of obstacle courses. We are also utilizing visualization tools to map connections between
students' performance   and  choices   in the  game (intuitive  concepts)  with  the formal academic   assessments
(instructed concepts).

Data and Results
The first SURGE study took place in summer 2009. We analyzed 24 undergraduate and graduate students
playing SURGE. A paired-samples t-test was performed on the pre/post items and revealed a significant gain
from pre to post (p = .037). One of the largest gains on an individual item was the one about vector addition.
The second SURGE study involved 180 eighth grade students in Taiwan that showed significant gains in 3 test
items dealing with Newton's First Law. The gains observed are not dependent on gaming experience and apply
to both genders. The items in which gains were observed are those most closely aligned with the experience of
controlling the player-object in SURGE. These items deal with things in SURGE players do, rather than see.
The third  SURGE     study  focused on    the complexity   of formal   physics representations to optimize student
learning about the physics concepts and representations. The study involved 138 undergraduates enrolled in an
introductory calculus-based physics course at a large university. Students in "full" condition (components and
resultant velocity vector)  did better on  vector  addition   problems    (76.7% versus 69.5%),   and the post-test
(average gain of 11.0% versus 6.8%) than those in "simplified" condition (only resultant velocity vector).

Significance
The results of these first studies suggest that the sequence and structure of the models and representations
designed in the SURGE game are effective in changing how students think about the formal instructed concepts
in a manner that transfers to certain items from the Force Concept Inventory, but care must be taken to ensure
that the ideas that students take away from the game are the ones intended by the designers. In post-gameplay
interviews, students remark that the game helps them understand how to improve their answers on the posttest
even though they weren't consciously thinking about their learning while they were playing the game. Ongoing
work will  focus   on  the balance  of guidance   and   freedom    in the gameplay   mechanics, the structuring of
mechanics to focus students on key concepts, as well as on the nature of representations that best support
learning in a gaming context.

References
Gee, J. P. (2003). What video games have to teach us about learning and literacy. New York:
          Palgrave/Macmillan.
Gee, J. P. (2004). Situated language and learning: A critique of traditional schooling. London: Routledge.
Gee, J. P. (2007). Good video games and good learning: Collected essays on video games, learning, and
          literacy. New York: Peter Lang.
Hestenes, D. & Halloun, I. (1995). Interpreting the FCI. The Physics Teacher, 33, 502-506.
Hestenes, D., Wells, M., & Swackhamer, G. (1992) Force Concept Inventory. The Physics Teacher, 30, 141-
          158.
Jackson, J. (2007). Simplified Force Concept Inventory.
Vygotsky, L. S. (1986). Thought and language (Abridged from 1934; A. Kozulin, Trans.). Cambridge, MA:
          MIT Press.

                                                    385     ISLS
