                                                       ICLS 2010      Volume 2

 Developing and validating a web-based learning environment for helping
     6th grade students appreciate subjectivity and uncertainty in science
                    Georgia Michael1, Nicos Papadouris1, Eleni A. Kyza2, Constantinos P. Constantinou1
                                1University of Cyprus, P. O. Box 20537, Nicosia, 1678, Cyprus,
                         2 Cyprus University of Technology, P.O. Box 50329, 3603, Limassol, Cyprus
                georgia3m@gmail.com, npapa@ucy.ac.cy, Eleni.Kyza@cut.ac.cy, c.p.constantinou@ucy.ac.cy

                Abstract:   This study  reports on   the development       and  research validation of a  web-based
                learning environment   (LE)   for helping   students,    ages 12-14, to  appreciate uncertainty  and
                subjectivity in science. The environment was implemented once and the research results are
                used for revising it to better address the learning objectives. Results in relation to students'
                understanding of subjectivity and possible emerging modifications of the LE are discussed.

Aim of the Study
The tremendous progress witnessed in the fields of science and technology tends to bring about dilemmas on a range of socio-
scientific issues (SSI), such as global warming. Science education aims at preparing students to engage with such SSIs in an
informed manner. One of the resources underpinning this ability is awareness relating to the nature of science (NOS) (Sadler et
al., 2004). However, evidence suggests that students and lay adults do not possess informed ideas. Clearly, there is a need for
developing teaching innovations, especially for elementary grades (Lederman, 2007).
      This study draws on the paradigm of design-based research (Barab, 2006). It seeks to design a learning environment
(LE) dealing with   certain aspects of  NOS,  and    refine it  on   the basis  of the data collected  during  its implementation    in
classroom settings. In particular,  we have  developed    a LE     for  helping students  aged 12-14   appreciate  the   subjective and
uncertain nature of science and develop simple criteria for evaluating the validity and reliability of scientific claims. Empirical
data from the first enactment of the LE were collected and analysed so as to inform its refinement. Due to space limitations, we
only report data on students' understanding of subjectivity and present how these results are used for refining the LE.

Methodology
Participants
Thirty eight students from two 6th grade classrooms (19 students in each class) of a public school in Cyprus participated in this
study. Students were working in pairs or triads. The implementation lasted 10 weeks (24 40-minute sessions).

The learning environment
The LE was hosted on the STOCHASMOS web-based platform. The context of the investigation is a topical SSI, namely the
bovine tuberculosis problem in cattle in the UK. Each group of students assumed the role of scientists who represent relevant
organizations, as a means for illustrating that scientists' agendas may lead to different scientific claims on the same issue.
Students' goal was to study the data and construct scientific claims on how the problem could be best solved. The learning
sequence  provided  students  with  multiple  opportunities    to  construct   and evaluate scientific claims   and   it systematically
engaged them in explicit reflective discourse on relevant epistemological ideas such as the role of uncertainty and subjectivity.

Assessment task
A task for assessing understanding on subjectivity focused on the extent to which students are able to appreciate that scientists
studying the same phenomenon might subscribe to different interpretations and to identify possible reasons for this. Students
were presented  with simplified  versions  of the    man-made     and  natural  theory regarding the   global  warming    causes and  a
dialogue between  two  students  who   argued whether    scientists  can   disagree. Students  needed  to agree with     one of the two
positions stated in the dialogue and explain their reasoning. The task was administered prior to and after the implementation.
Thirteen students (34%) also participated in interviews (pre, post) for additional insights into their reasoning.

Results and consequences for the refinement of the learning environment
Students' responses were analyzed in order to identify qualitatively different categories of responses (Table 1). Only justified
responses are included in this table. Interestingly, fewer students justified their responses in post tests (Npre=27, 71%, Npost=19,
50%). Examining the responses without justification, both the number of students believing that scientists can disagree (Npre=8,
21% overall, Npost=12, 32% overall) and of those believing that they need to agree (Npre=0-0% overall, Npost=5-13% overall)
increases. Although there are no interview data from these students, the fact that more students believe scientists need to agree
has probably emerged   as   a byproduct of their  interaction   with   the LE:  Students  judged claims   that were   at variance   with
available data as invalid, as this was the validity criterion they were guided to develop. Incidentally, students ended up with
just one valid claim. This might reinforced the belief that scientists eventually agree on the same claim. This suggests the need
to modify the LE so as to increase the likelihood for multiple valid claims and, hence, facilitate discourse on subjectivity.
      Justified responses   suggest a  decrease   in the number      of  students who  discussed disagreements     in relation  to  how
productive they are (category 3, Npre=9, 34%, Npost=3, 16%) and in students attributing disagreements to scientists themselves
because, as human beings, they have the right to disagree (category 2, Npre=17-63%, Npost=7-37%). Interestingly, while no
students considered the role of data in relation to subjectivity (category 1), 9 students (47%) gave such post responses. This

                                                            386     ISLS
                                                     ICLS 2010    Volume 2

category is thought to be more informed than categories 2 and 3 because students take into account the role of data in science.
However, no students referred to the possibility of having different claims due to different interpretations. This fact may also
be connected to certain aspects of the LE: Even though students were scaffolded to appreciate the distinction between data and
their interpretation (by asking them to separately refer to these constructs when reporting scientific claims), they did not seem
to make this distinction to a satisfactory extent. It is possible that explicit discourse on this distinction and comparisons of
different interpretations could help them recognize the possibility of having various claims due to different interpretations.

Table 1: Students' pre & post justified responses in relation to subjectivity and typical student responses

     The    LE sought  to help  students appreciate that scientists'    objectives might influence  the     data collection and/or
interpretation as sources of subjectivity. This perspective addresses the role of both scientists (category 2) and data (category 1)
in constructing claims and, thus, this kind of responses were coded as mixed (category 4). There was only one such response in
the pre-tests but the student referred to the role of scientists and data separately. Even though there were not any written mixed
responses after the enactment, such responses were discerned in the interviews, as shown in the next quote [Student (D2)].

    "Each group of scientists will collect the data that relate to what they represent or think. Scientists who thought that
    temperature increased due to some gases, tried to find data to prove this. On the contrary, the others tried to find
    supporting evidence for their position. Each group might have studied the same data but focused on parts fitting their
    position. [...] this is sometimes unintentionally done depending on the goals and beliefs of the group you belong to."

However, not many such responses emerged and this also has implications for the revision. For example, more activities may
be added so as to facilitate students' adoption of their role. The LE could also be enriched with explicit discourse in relation to
existing interpretations of data of other topical SSIs so as to give more opportunities for discussing this learning objective.

Conclusions
This study contributes to existing knowledge on elementary students' initial ideas on uncertainty and subjectivity in science,
the difficulties they encounter when trying to understand about these aspects and the extent to which it is possible to impact
through the use of inquiry-based LEs. Although the results show that students can learn about NOS aspects with such LEs with
embedded explicit discourse in the context of SSIs, the LE has limits and weaknesses. For instance, we discerned difficulties
that were not anticipated during the design, while some learning objectives were not achieved to a satisfactory degree. These
suggest the need for refinement through  multiple cycles     of design-evaluation-revision until an effective    LE is established
(Andersson, 2004). The study also provides insights into how empirical results can be used for further refining the LE.

References
Andersson, B., & Bach, F. (2004). On designing and evaluating teaching sequences taking geometrical optics as an example.
    Science Education, 1-23.
Barab, S.A. (2006). Design-based research: A methodological toolkit for the learning scientist. In R.K. Sawyer (Ed.), The
    Cambridge Handbook of the Learning Sciences. Cambridge, New York: Cambridge University Press.
Lederman, N. G. (2007). Nature of science: Past, present, and future. In S. K. Abell & N. G. Lederman (Eds.), Handbook of
    Research on Science Education (pp. 831-879).
Sadler, T. D., Chambers, F. W., & Zeidler, D. L. (2004). Student conceptualizations of the nature of science in response to a
    socioscientific issue. International Journal of Science Education, 26(4), 387-409.

                                                         387     ISLS
