                                                   ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

                      Transformative professional development:
                         Cultivating concern with others' thinking
                                  as the root of teacher identity
           Rachel E. Scherr and Hunter G. Close, Seattle Pacific University, Seattle, Washington, 98119,
                                        rescherr@gmail.com, hclose@spu.edu

           Abstract:   At the university level, science education reform is limited by novice instructors
           who    do not   share  reformers'   educational    values.  The  current   challenge   is  to  provide
           professional   development   (PD)   that  will  be transformative:    rather   than  merely   exposing
           participants to reform instructional materials, it will change what future instructors believe is
           worthwhile in science education. Our view is that professional development is most effective
           when it enriches the intellectual life of teachers and builds teacher identity by cultivating
           concern with student thinking. In an example of an activity that originates in this perspective,
           participants interview peers about physics concepts and conduct structured reflections on the
           interviewing experience. The activity holds promise for improving participants' abilities to
           listen and  to  teach  effectively, increasing    their esteem   for the  intelligence  that  teaching
           requires, and increasing their interest in K-12 physical science teaching as a profession.

Major issues addressed
Physics  education    research   has  produced    a wide   variety  of  high-quality instructional   materials    for use  in
introductory university-level courses (Laws, 1999; McDermott & Redish, 1999; Sokoloff & Thornton, 2001;
Thornton & Sokoloff, 1997), including tutorials (McDermott, Shaffer, & PEG, 1998). The limiting reagent for
physics education reform at the university level is now implementation (Tobin & McRobbie, 1997).

At the university level, reform is limited by novice instructors who do not "buy in"
Experienced educators and developers are well aware that successful implementation of reform instructional
materials includes establishing appropriate norms for learning in the classroom (Henderson, Yerushalmi, Kuo,
Heller, & Heller, 2007). At the university level, for example, science education reform has often taken the form
of collaborative     worksheets  ("tutorials") used   in  recitation  sessions. In  these classrooms,    norms    include  an
emphasis on conceptual understanding (and a concurrent de-emphasis of algorithmic application of formulas);
an expectation that this understanding is best achieved through explaining one's own thinking, listening and
responding to others' ideas, and constructing arguments; and an acceptance of instructors as facilitators of this
process rather than sources of correct answers. The establishment of these norms is "among the most critical and
subtle features of implementing these reforms" (Finkelstein & Pollock, 2005).
           From the students' point of view, the graduate teaching assistants (TAs) and/or undergraduate learning
assistants (LAs) who lead each tutorial section are important arbiters of these norms and expectations. The
development    of    these norms  by   these novice   instructors  is  thus a   critical task of tutorial implementation.
Instructors who "buy into" tutorials are more likely to convey their respect for the material and the tutorial
process to the students, as well as learning more themselves. This development is nontrivial: although graduate
and advanced      undergraduate   students may    be presumed      to be more   sophisticated   learners than   introductory
students, they are in some cases more thoroughly embedded in traditional teaching practices. Prior research by
the authors on tutorial implementation has provided examples of how lack of buy-in by an individual TA can
undermine the effectiveness of tutorials (Goertzen, Scherr, & Elby, 2009).
           Lack of buy-in can have roots in impoverished beliefs about the intellectual life of teachers. In our
culture, the work of a science teacher is not regarded as that which requires the great power of a creative and
analytical intellect. Novices who believe that an instructor's job is merely to "check that students get it" may be
frustrated with    tutorials, in which  instructors   are  expected   to facilitate student   exploration  of   a  variety of
solution paths. The public perception of science teaching as minimally intellectual work diminishes the interest
the next generation of talented thinkers might have in doing the work:              talented, intelligent students want to
grow    up to  do    something   that they believe   requires   talent  and intelligence,   and  teaching    is not   usually
considered to be one of those things. Novice instructors' lack of appreciation for the intellectual rigor and
creative opportunities in teaching impedes science education reform.

Typical professional development rarely helps instructors value reform instruction
TAs  and    LAs    receive    various forms    of professional     development   (PD)     associated with    their  teaching
responsibilities. While these programs may provide novice instructors with necessary information and general
skills, few   help   them   recognize  the   worth  of   reform  instruction.   Some     novice  instructors participate   in

                                                       388  ·  © ISLS
                                               ICLS 2010    ·   Volume 1

workshops   and   seminars   focused  on  classroom    management,       grading,   facilitating discussion   or  learning
questioning skills (Gilreath & Slater, 1994; Hollar, Carlson, & Spencer, 2000). These types of PD are oriented
toward providing instructors with specific skills and information, and are not specific or sustained enough to
have much effect on their values. In a tutorial program, the most common form of professional development is a
weekly   session aimed   specifically at  preparing  instructors   for the  coming   week's  instruction.   The   primary
activity is usually to complete the tutorial worksheet as if theywere students. This specific preparation is surely
necessary to effective instruction. However, research indicates that it is not sufficient to help the participants
appreciate the power of tutorial teaching. In particular, the social and environmental context of the tutorials ­
including classroom, departmental, and institutional levels of implementation and support ­ has been shown to
strongly affect whether TAs buy into tutorials, and probably outweighs the influence of the typical preparation
activities that we prepare for them (Goertzen et al., 2009).
         Some    novice  instructors take courses   that  offer  instruction  in pedagogical     content knowledge    and
constructivist learning theories (Hammrich, 2001; Ishikawa, Potter, & Davis, 2001; Lawrenz, 1992; McGivney-
Burelle, DeFranco,   Vinsonhaler,    &  Santucci,   2001;   Otero, Finkelstein,   McCray,   &    Pollock,  2006). Where
pedagogy courses are offered, there is more potential to help instructors value reform teaching, because the
courses address models of teaching and learning directly for a sustained period of time. A pedagogy course is
particularly likely to be effective when there is good alignment between the learning theories presented in the
course and the practical teaching experiences that the instructors have:      if the instructors learn constructivism in
the pedagogy course, but are permitted or requested to teach by telling in the classrooms that they lead, they are
less likely to appreciate constructivist teaching methods. Assessment of professional development that includes
a pedagogy course should thus include systematic observations of the participants' classrooms, not only surveys
or interviews.

Potential significance of the work
The current challenge for university physics education reform is to provide professional development (PD) that
helps instructors to appropriately value reform instruction. Such PD will be transformative: rather than merely
exposing   participants  to reform   instructional  materials,  it will  change   what   future   instructors  believe is
worthwhile  in   science education.   We  take  the  perspective   that  this transformation     is  a philosophical  and
epistemic one, involving a change in what is thought to be worth knowing.

Transformative professional development enriches the intellectual life of teachers
In the transition from Plato's philosophy of the natural world to Aristotle's, phenomena of the natural world
were promoted in epistemic status. In Plato's philosophy, the actual world is not something that is worthy of
study in and of itself; it consists instead of a variety of imperfect copies or images of ideal principles. These
ideals are the   "real" things of concern,  and    the proper   subject  of  contemplation  and     analysis, while  their
shadows and distortions (of which the world we experience consists) are not. In contrast, Aristotle's philosophy
(which   followed shortly   thereafter) granted   a new     and higher   status  to  the world    of   phenomena,  as  we
experience it. This world is populated with all sorts of things that are themselves worthy of study, as they are.
On this, Aristotle says (Aristotle, c. 350 B.C.):
         It is the business of experience to give the principles that belong to each subject. I mean for example
         that astronomical experience supplies the principles of astronomical science; for once thephenomena
         were adequately apprehended, the demonstrations of astronomy were discovered. Similarly with any
         other art or science.
An Aristotelian might see the Platonist who does not care to pursue truth by first studying the instantiated world
as fixated on the world as it should be, rather than the world that is.
         A  similar dichotomy     of  perspective  exists   for novice   instructors learning    to  think about  student
thinking. Most of these instructors are very (and rightly) concerned with understanding physics as it should be
understood. This is not to suggest that there is only one way to think correctly about physics; surely, there is not.
But novices are usually very aware that they have ways of thinking that they may want to avoid, and ways of
thinking that they strive to use more consistently and reliably. They are right to recognize that they have not yet
mastered basic physics (though they probably also underestimate how long it takes most physics instructors to
do so). Thus, initially, novice instructors are generally fixated on correct understanding in physics ­ on their
own part, on the part of their peer instructors, and on the part of the students that they would teach. This is not to
say that their attention is so focused on correct understanding of physics that they always understand clearly for
some bit of instruction what the target understanding is; it means that correct understanding is their primary
concern during teaching. They are fixated to the point of failing to understand expressions of student thinking in
physics as phenomena worthy of study and explanation, as they are, and not only secondarily, as they fail to
match up with correct understanding in physics. In this way, beginning instructors are Platonists when it comes
to alternative ways students have of thinking and knowing. The most important thing to observe (according to
the beginning instructor) about student thinking when teaching is how that thinking is wrong, and since this is

                                                    389   ·  © ISLS
                                               ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

teaching, an activity in which the student (we assume) is supposed to be changed by the interaction, the most
important action is to fix the wrong thinking as soon as possible.
         The key Aristotelian insight, that observable things are worth studying as they are, may be applied in
extreme fashion to teaching. According to an excessively Aristotelian view of studying student thinking, we
physics instructors might be happy each day to ask our students questions, listen to their answers in detail, write
down some observations, and thank the students for their time before inviting them to come back tomorrow.
Later we would return to our notes and try to figure out what deeper truth was expressed in all those instances of
student expression. But at no point would we distract ourselves from our scientific task with thoughts of what
all that student thinking ought to have been. It is easy to see that such an extreme view is not appropriate for a
classroom, because it leaves no place for student learning. Thus, neither philosopher's approach to nature is
sufficient if it is applied to teaching, for in one, the reality of student thinking is neglected, and in the other,
there is no role for instruction. If attention to student thinking is necessary for effective instruction, then the
teacher is performing a complex, hybrid intellectual task of understanding clearly both where the students are,
and where the teacher wants them to be. To prepare physics instructors is to prepare them to perform all the
components of this hybrid task. We believe the greater task for those who prepare physics instructors lies in
helping the instructors to understand the Aristotelian component.
         Fortunately, however, establishing this Aristotelian component in the understanding of theinstructor is
not only a task of great effort, but also a great gift to the instructor. Through the recognition that teaching
includes the work of making observations about student thinking and making sense of those observations, the
instructor's vision opens into an entirely new realm of phenomena of infinite variety. And a scientist takes
pleasure in observing and thinking about wonderful new things, as they are.

A teacher solves puzzles of student thinking and learning
As if the news about a fascinating new class of phenomena weren't good enough, there is even more: the
instructor also has the pleasure of figuring out puzzles of transforming student thinking from state A to state B,
and then to state C, etc. Thus, teaching has a natural science component (understanding student thinking) and an
engineering component (shaping student thinking to become more functional). These puzzles are as numerous
as the  instructor wishes, and  include at  least the  number   of students  multiplied by the  number    of specific
learning goals set forth by the instructor. A template for such a multi-part puzzle might look like "How can I
better understand how [student name] thinks about [specific topic]?     Once I understand well enough, how can I
get [student name] to understand  [specific aspect of specific topic]?  How will I know if it worked?"
         Kuhn described how it was this sort of intellectual pleasure that keeps scientists wanting to come back
to work each day (Kuhn, 1962):
         The  challenge  of the puzzle  is  an important     part of what   drives [the scientist] on...  What  then
         challenges him is the conviction that, if only he is skillful enough, he will succeed in solving a puzzle
         that no one before has solved or solved so well.
Surely these words apply equally well to the science teacher, provided that the science teacher conceives of the
job as providing a steady stream (really, a fire hose) of this sort of puzzle material.       The main obstacle to
conceiving of the job in this way, we believe, is merely the fact that those talented and intelligent people who
might love to do such a job are not aware that the possibility exists. The lack of awareness is due in part to how
such an approach to teaching has been modeled for potential future instructors by so few, and the other part,
perhaps, is due to the lack of explicit instruction in professional development about how to approach teaching in
this way.

Theoretical perspective: Resources and framing
While   teachers are   making observations  about  student   thinking,  they are also making    sense  of  what they
observe: that is, they are inevitably (and probably implicitly) forming theories of what knowledge is and how
learning takes place. This epistemological change is at the heart of transformative professional development.
We assume that the cognitive processes underlying epistemological change are similar, in some respects, to the
cognitive processes underlying conceptual change.

Resources vs. (mis)conceptions
         We   take  a  resources-based  rather than    the more    common    conceptions-based  view   of  the  prior
knowledge students bring to bear in physical science (Hammer, 2000; Smith, diSessa, & Roschelle, 1993/1994).
In this view, learners   (whether they  are students   or  beginning   teachers) have   ideas that are activated by
particular situations. People use these  activated  resources  to  construct knowledge   and  guide  their behavior.
These ideas are not categorically wrong or right, but rather are appropriate or inappropriate for the particular
situation (Hammer, Elby, Scherr, & Redish, 2005; Russ, Scherr, Hammer, & Mikeska, 2008). Such a framework
provides an explanation for how novices become experts: they begin to use resources from other contexts,

                                                   390  ·  © ISLS
                                                 ICLS 2010    ·  Volume 1

adding new ones and building up a more coherent structure of ideas (Smith et al., 1993/1994). Smith et al.
characterized such a framework as one that "emphasizes knowledge refinement and reorganization, rather than
replacement, as primary metaphors for learning." (p. 116).
         To see how the distinction between a conceptions-based and a resources-based cognitive framework
plays out in interpreting learner epistemologies, consider a hypothetical introductory physics student named
Dan. Even when a tutorial tries to elicit his intuitive ideas, Dan answers in terms of remembered facts and
equations. Why?      According to the conceptions-based framework adopted by most epistemology researchers
(Hofer  &   Pintrich, 1997;   Schommer),     Dan's behavior     probably  stems  from  an   epistemological   belief that
physics knowledge     comes    from authority,  or that   physics knowledge   consists  largely of  facts and   formulas
(Hammer, 1994). In that case, changing Dan's behavior would likely involve an arduous attempt to confront and
replace his epistemological "misconceptions" with more productive beliefs.
         The resources-based framework provides an alternative interpretation and instructional strategy. In our
view, Dan's focus on facts and formulas probably arises not from a stable epistemological belief, but from the
context-sensitive activation of finer-grained epistemological resources. We see evidence of these resources,
including resources regarding the source of knowledge, even in small children. When asked how she knows
what's for dinner, a child might respond "Daddy told me," reflecting the activation of the resourceknowledge as
transmitted   stuff (Hammer    &  Elby, 2002).  The   same   child, when   asked how   she  knows   Mommy       got her a
present, might reply, "I figured it out, `cause it's my birthday and I saw her hiding something."           This answer
reflects the activation of the resource knowledge as fabricated stuff, corresponding to the view that knowledge is
built up from "raw materials" such as prior knowledge about birthdays and observations of sneaky parental
behavior. Along these same lines, we can interpret Dan's behavior as stemming from the inappropriate over-
activation of resources such as knowledge as transmitted stuff ­ resources that are useful when learning state
capitals, but not as useful when learning physics concepts.
         According    to this  framework,   we  can   change    Dan's approach  to tutorials without    introducing  new
epistemological beliefs "from scratch."     Instead, we   can help him activate epistemological resourceshe already
possesses and applies in other contexts. For instance, Dan may rely on his common-sense ideas when explaining
wave phenomena he sees at the beach, or when having a classroom discussion about psychological (rather than
physical) phenomena. As instructors, we would try to help Dan "find" those resources and activate them in
physics class (Hammer & Elby, 2003).

Epistemological framing
         A learning context such as a lecture or a tutorial can trigger a locally coherent set of epistemological
resources, a set that explicitly or implicitly answers the question, "What counts as knowledge and learning in
this context?"   We call such a set of resources an epistemological frame, acknowledging the sociolinguistics
literature that helped   us  formulate  this perspective   (MacLachlan     & Reid,  1994;   Tannen,    1993).   Examples
include  remembering     stuff  from authority   and  intuitive   sense-making.  When     Dan   frames   an activity  as
remembering stuff from authority, he "believes" ­ in that moment ­ that knowledge comes from authority and
that solving a problem is a matter of finding the right knowledge. But in another context, Dan could frame
problem-solving as intuitive sense-making and act as if he believes knowledge is constructed from everyday
ideas and experiences. In a resources framework, neither of those frames is Dan's "true belief," because he
doesn't have a single, universal belief about the nature of problem-solving.
         When we study (and try to affect) the epistemologies that novice instructors exhibit while learning and
teaching, the distinction between the conceptions/beliefs and resources models ­ and particularly, the notion of
frames ­ becomes especially important. Instead of assuming that instructors have stable epistemological beliefs
that they   apply    consistently and   universally,  we     assume   that  different contexts    can   trigger different
epistemological frames. For instance, when an undergraduate LA we'll call Lisa does her own advanced physics
homework, she may fall ­ consciously or unconsciously ­ into manipulating symbols without trying to make
sense of the underlying physics. When addressing "brainteaser" physics problems posed in her LA pedagogy
class, however, Lisa easily enters an intuitive sense-making frame; she tries to make sense of the qualitative
physics concepts and doesn't want to be told the answer, realizing that jumping to the answer is detrimental to
her learning process. In that context, Lisa "knows" that learning physics is largely a matter of making sense of it
for yourself, rather than just hearing a clear explanation or manipulating symbols. Nonetheless, when Lisa got
into an introductory physics classroom as an LA, she acted as if she thought her students' learning is mostly a
matter  of  hearing    clear   explanations  and   manipulating     symbols.  Our     point  here   is that   instructors'
epistemologies appear to display context dependencies best analyzed in terms of resources and frames rather
than beliefs.
         Fostering    epistemological   development,      in this  framework,    consists   largely of  helping     novice
instructors become more reflective about which frames they're using in which contexts (including when they
teach),  and    eventually   to  "crystallize"  their  productive    epistemological   frames   into   well-thought-out
epistemological beliefs about how people learn (Hammer et al., 2005). With Lisa, for example, we might try to

                                                      391  ·  © ISLS
                                               ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

create contexts in which she can observe students engaged in making sense of physics concepts, reflect on the
similarities to (some of) her own most satisfying learning experiences, and consider how she might foster such
learning experiences in the classrooms in which she is an instructor. This approach embeds our philosophical
perspective:   By posing  student  thinking   about physics  as   an  observable phenomenon,    we    support novice
teachers in  strengthening  the  Aristotelian  component    of  their understanding  of    teaching. Excitingly, we
sometimes find that "once the phenomena [of student thinking] are adequately apprehended," novice instructors
spontaneously draw valuable conclusions about cognition. Lisa, having thoughtfully observed students express a
variety of ideas about force and motion, might express a new conviction that people hold multiple, perhaps
contradictory ideas at the same time, or that people hold ideas that are neither right nor wrong but rather are
applicable in certain contexts.
         Our framework embeds a deep respect for novice instructors' existing beliefs and prior experiences,
seeing them as the essential material from which expert conceptions of teaching are constructed. The physics
education community has long taken this perspective regarding learners' physics ideas, with the benefit that we
can help students identify ideas that can be the basis for effective constructivist instruction (Hammer & Elby,
2003). Our theoretical framework extends this fruitful perspective to professional development. We also go one
step further by explicitly entrusting novices with the cognitive ability to figure things out: not only do they
possess the building blocks of cognition, but also, we believe, they are capable of doing the building. This is in
contrast to a view in which students need to be led step-by-step through a logical sequence prescribed by an
expert.

Methodology for facilitating and understanding transformative professional
development
Our view is that professional development is most effective when it enriches the intellectual life of teachers and
builds teacher identity by cultivating concern with student thinking. We are in the early stages of a project with
two mutually supporting purposes: (1) to provide novice instructors with professional development that shapes
what they value in science education, and (2) to better understand novice instructors' experiences of potentially
transformative professional development.

Design and implementation of transformative professional development
We have selected undergraduate Learning Assistants (LAs) as our initial target population because Learning
Assistant programs can be centerpieces of university science education reform. LAs are talented undergraduates
who work with faculty members to make large-enrollment courses more collaborative, student-centered, and
interactive. Research has  shown   that LA   programs    improve  undergraduate  performance    in   physics courses,
facilitate multi-disciplinary collaboration among faculty, involve more faculty in teacher preparation efforts, and
recruit talented science majors to teaching careers (Otero et al., 2006; Pollock & Finkelstein, 2008). That is, a
quality LA program is at once a mechanism for course transformation, for teacher recruitment, and for TA and
faculty professional development.
         LA programs integrate content, pedagogy, and practice and produce documented improvement in all
three areas (Otero et al., 2006; Pollock & Finkelstein, 2008). LA programs are effective partly because LAs take
a low-credit pedagogy course that instructs them in the nature of teaching and learning and introduces them to
interactive teaching techniques. (TAs are usually not required to take a pedagogy class, partly because their
typical course load is already very high.) Thus, in an LA program, university educators have the opportunity to
shape participants' perceptions of teaching. LAs whose pedagogy class helps them appreciate the worth of
reform instruction are a valuable resource for their institution and for science education reform generally.
         Our design and implementation work is focused on the most flexible and most potentially innovative
component of the LA program, which is the pedagogy session. The over-arching goal of these sessions is to
provide LAs with a sense of the intellectual depth that a physics teacher can experience and enjoy by thinking
deeply about student thinking. One promising activity that we have piloted is the Physics Interview Project
(PIP).  In this key example of an activity that originates in our theoretical perspective, participants interview
peers about physics concepts and conduct structured reflections on the interviewing experience. The activity
holds promise for improving participants' abilities to listen and to teach effectively, increasing their esteem for
the intelligence that teaching   requires, and dramatically   increasing their   interest in K-12  physical   science
teaching as a profession.
         In the PIP, each LA interviews a peer in order to study that person's thought process about some
physical system. LAs perform three interviews throughout the academic year; the protocol for the first one is
designed by the LA program director (HGC), and the later protocols are designed by individual LAs. After
conducting each interview, LAs transcribe part of it and perform it in class, explaining why they thought the
selection was interesting. They write a reflection paper that includes a characterization of the interviewee's
thinking and the LA's thoughts on the difficulty and value of the experience. The PIP puts LAs face to face

                                                   392  ·  © ISLS
                                                  ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

(literally) with the phenomena that are the subject of physics education research, and thus provides a particularly
compelling  entry  point   into that  research.  Importantly,   LAs    are  exposed   not only    to the refined  results of
physics education research (as they might be in other LA programs) but also to theraw data.

Research on participants' professional development experiences
The  research  arm  of   the  project documents       and  analyzes   individual instructors   as  they   work   together in
preparation  for  teaching,   as  they    teach, and    in  reflective  interviews,    with   the goal    of understanding
transformative experiences they may have and learning about the processes by which novice instructors develop
into intelligent and talented educators.

Data sources
         The   aim of    data collection  for    this project   is to  enable   rich representation    of individual    LAs'
experiences in the course of the program. To this end, we document novice instructors in all three environments
that directly relate to their teaching:   their pedagogy course (1.5 hours biweekly), their preparation course (1.5
hours weekly), and the classes in which they are instructors (2-4 hours weekly for each focal LA). Because the
nature of the activity that people perceive themselves to be engaged in affects how they interact (Bateson, 1972;
Goffman, 1986; Goodwin, 2000; MacLachlan & Reid, 1994; Tannen, 1993), we keep the recording subordinate
to normal   classroom    practices. The   approach    has  served   us well  in  other projects   (Goertzen   et  al., 2009;
Goertzen, Scherr, & Elby, accepted (2010)).
         In addition to the naturalistic videotaping, we conduct twice-yearly clinical interviews with a protocol
similar to the one described in Goertzen et al, 2009, in which the primary question is "How is [name of course]
going?"  Open-ended      prompts    such  as    this  have    been  shown    to  initiate conversations      that result  in
epistemologically rich responses; participants volunteer which aspects of the course they judge to be successful,
which aspects are lacking, what features they believe should get more emphasis, and otherwise reveal their
values and expectations for instruction and their views about how students learn(Hammer, 1994).

Analytic framework
The primary research activity of this project is to develop rich case studies of individual LAs' experiences in our
professional development program, with the goal of understanding transformative experiences they may have.
Case studies are particularly powerful for this project in that they get at themechanisms by which our program
may affect LAs. Fortunately, the increasing ease of video recording offers new opportunities to create richly
detailed records   of classroom     activities.  These    recordings   call for  research   methodologies     that  balance
generalizability with interpretive validity.
         Classroom    behavior   as   the primary     data  source.   When   developing     a case   study,  we   use  video
recordings of LAs' classes as the primary source of data. We watch video episodes of LAs teaching and/or
working together in the pedagogy and preparation courses and seek to provide plausible framings that might
explain  their classroom    behavior.   Transcriptions     of the  interviews   are  used  to  support   or  contradict   the
conclusions we develop while watching video episodes. This contrasts with many studies of TAs and teachers,
which attempt to first understand the instructor through interviews or surveys, and then (in some cases) compare
these assessments to actual behavior (Hammrich, 2001; Ishikawa et al., 2001; Lawrenz, 1992). We consider
interviews to be secondary data because we conduct them with the intent of understanding LAs' overall beliefs
and attitudes about tutorials, and thus they are unlikely to reference particular teaching situations(Goertzen et
al., 2009). Depending on such interviews to fully explain TAs' framing would be attributing more consistency
within an individual than we have argued is warranted.
         Insight-oriented analysis. The primary purpose of "insight-oriented" analysis is to identify and richly
describe the events in an episode as they unfold in the interaction among the participants. "Coding-oriented"
analysis, in contrast, aims to generate categories that will be used to document the frequency and distribution of
events of interest. (Of course, insight-oriented analysis may generate a coding scheme, and coding may lead to
deeper insights.) The backbone of video analysis as we conduct it is collaborative analysis of short episodes of
classroom activity. Having selected an episode, we play the video for a multidisciplinary analysis group, and
members of the group call to stop the playback whenever they see something they want to discuss. We often
benefit from replaying the video multiple times. In many cases, we do not approach the data with pre-conceived
categories of interest. Rather, the goal of the group work is to progressively deepen our understanding of the
participants' activities and to challenge the biases of individual analysts. There is a constant effort to ground
assertions in the evidence of the video episode, and to limit proposed hypotheses to those for which the video
episode (or others like it) could provide confirming or disconfirming evidence. The resulting discussion is often
a lively, multidimensional conversation reflecting the diverse interests of the participants as well as the focal
interest of the project.

                                                       393  ·  © ISLS
                                              ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

Observational methodology
The challenge presented by our theoretical perspective is to identify the ways that LAs frame their teaching and
learning. No meter measures framing; instead, we infer people's sense of the nature of their activity primarily
through their behavior, and secondarily through explicit statements in interviews.Participants' understanding of
the nature of the activity in which they are engaged -- i.e. their framing of the activity -- guides their selective
attention, provides  cognitive structure  for  interpreting     events, and    manifests   itself in their   observable
behavior.(Hammer et al., 2005)   To the extent that framing is an interpretation based on previous       experience, it
is informed by an individual's broad history and experience with related events and systems. In the moment,
though, participants  mutually construct  their sense    of shared   activity   by   means of  verbal    and nonverbal
interactions, including linguistic signals, prosodic features, and body language(Bateson, 1972).
        When we analyze LAs' teaching and learning behaviors, we use evidence such as how much they talk,
the types of questions they ask, the conversational pace, their body positioning, gestures, and register (word
choice, syntax, pitch, etc.), to infer how they are framing the situation. We look for additional support for these
analyses from the ways LAs reflect on their teaching and learning in interviews. While we use LAs' stated
beliefs to corroborate our ideas about how they frame, we are careful not to assume that these beliefs will
necessarily match their actions. We also do not attribute framing solely to the LA:        negotiations with students
either support or undermine the instructor's sense of what's going on, so that together they construct a shared
framing of the activity. (This is not to say that participants always have the same framing: mismatched framing
is common, and can lead to humor or conflict depending on whether the participants recognize that they are
framing in different ways (Goffman, 1986).)

Findings
The main    goal of  our present work  is to   illustrate   the fruitfulness   of our   theoretical  and philosophical
perspective  rather than to demonstrate  empirical    results.  That    said, preliminary  observations   of  the LAs'
experiences with our professional development program include:
 ·   LAs initially find it very difficult to ask questions to learn about another person's thinking. Their urge to
     guide them to a particular conclusion is so strong as to almost preclude thoughtful listening.
 ·   LAs grow to understand the superficiality of questioning about vocabulary and trusting in answers in
     which proper vocabulary conceals the quality of understanding.
 ·   LAs learn that people do not necessarily say what they really think, even if they are not trying to deceive.
 ·   LAs come to recognize that the complexity of a real person's thinking is much greater than is indicated in
     summaries of research about tendencies in student thought.
 ·   LAs learn that people who have no formal education in physics often have some surprisingly productive
     intuitions.
 ·   LAs find that people can make a surprising amount of intellectual progress simply byhaving the
     opportunity to reason things out.
 ·   LAs find the PIP valuable for relating to people in general, because of the practice with listening for
     understanding without imposing your own point of view.
        The PIP seems to us to be extremely promising for transformative professional development. We look
forward to learning more about the details of what happens in the interviews that the LAs conduct, and to better
understand how the experience is meaningful to the LAs.

References
Aristotle. (c. 350 B.C.). Prior Analytics. In R. Smith (Ed.). Indianapolis, IN: Hackett Publishing.
Bateson, G. (1972). A theory of play and fantasy. In G. Bateson (Ed.),Steps       to an ecology of mind:  Collected
        essays in anthropology, psychiatry, evolution, and epistemology (pp. 177-193). New York: Ballantine.
Finkelstein, N., & Pollock, S. (2005). Replicating and understanding successful innovations: Implementing
        tutorials in introductory physics. Physical Review - Special Topics:      Physics Education Research,
        1(010101), 1-13.
Gilreath, J., & Slater, T. (1994). Training graduate teaching assistants to be better undergraduate physics
        educators. Physics Education, 29, 200-203.
Goertzen, R. M., Scherr, R. E., & Elby, A. (2009). Accounting for tutorial teaching assistants' buy-in to reform
        instruction. Physical Review - Special  Topics:   Physics Education    Research,   5, 020109 020101-
        020120.
Goertzen, R. M., Scherr, R. E., & Elby, A. (accepted (2010)). Tutorial teaching assistants in the classroom:
        Similar teaching behaviors are supported by varied beliefs about teaching and learning. Physical
        Review - Special Topics:  Physics Education Research.

                                                  394  ·  © ISLS
                                              ICLS 2010  ·   Volume 1

Goffman, E. (1986). Frame analysis:   An essay on the organization of experience. Boston: Northeastern
        University Press.
Goodwin, C. (2000). Action and embodiment within situated human interaction. Journal of Pragmatics, 32,
        1489-1522.
Hammer, D. (1994). Epistemological beliefs in introductory physics. Cognition and Instruction, 12(2), 151-183.
Hammer, D. (2000). Student resources for learning introductory physics. American Journal of Physics, 68, S52-
        S59.
Hammer, D., & Elby, A. (2002). On the form of a personal epistemology. In B. K. Hofer & P. Pintrich (Eds.),
        Personal epistemology: The psychology of beliefs about knowledge and knowing (pp. 169-190).
        Mahwah: Erlbaum.
Hammer, D., & Elby, A. (2003). Tapping epistemological resources for learning physics.Journal of the
        Learning Sciences, 12(1), 53-90.
Hammer, D., Elby, A., Scherr, R. E., & Redish, E. F. (2005). Resources, framing, andtransfer. In J. Mestre
        (Ed.), Transfer of learning from a modern multidisciplinary perspective(pp. 89-120). Greenwich, CT:
        Information Age Publishing.
Hammrich, P. (2001). Preparing graduate teaching assistants to assist biology faculty.Journal of Science
        Teacher Education, 12(1), 67-82.
Henderson, C., Yerushalmi, E., Kuo, V. H., Heller, K., & Heller, P. (2007). Physics faculty beliefs and values
        about the teaching and learning of problem solving. II. Procedures for measurement and analysis.
        Physical Review Special Topics - Physics Education Research, 3(2), 020110.
Hofer, B. K., & Pintrich, P. R. (1997). The development of epistemological theories:    Beliefs about knowledge
        and knowing and their relation to learning. Review of Educational Research, 67(1), 88-140.
Hollar, K., Carlson, V., & Spencer, P. (2000). 1+ 1= 3: Unanticipated Benefits of a Co-Facilitation Model for
        Training Teaching Assistants. Journal of Graduate Teaching Assistant Development, 7(3), 173-181.
Ishikawa, C., Potter, W., & Davis, W. (2001). Beyond This Week. Journal of Graduate Teaching Assistant
        Development, 8(3), 133-138.
Kuhn, T. (1962). The Structure of Scientific Revolutions. London: University of Chicago Press.
Lawrenz, F. H., P; Keith, R; Heller, K. (1992). Training the teaching assistant. Journal of College Science
        Teaching, 22, 106-109.
Laws, P. W. (1999). New approaches to science and mathematics teaching at liberal arts colleges.Daedalus,
        128(1), 217-240.
MacLachlan, G. L., & Reid, I. (1994). Framing and interpretation. Victoria: Carlton.
McDermott, L. C., &   Redish, E. F. (1999). Resource  letter PER-1:   Physics education research. American
        Journal of Physics, 67(9), 755-767.
McDermott, L. C., Shaffer, P. S., & PEG. (1998). Tutorials in Introductory Physics. Upper Saddle River, NJ:
        Prentice-Hall.
McGivney-Burelle, J., DeFranco, T., Vinsonhaler, C., & Santucci, K. (2001). Building Bridges: Improving the
        Teaching Practices of TAs in the Mathematics Department. Journal of Graduate Teaching Assistant
        Development, 8(2), 55-63.
Otero, V., Finkelstein, N., McCray, R., & Pollock, S. (2006). Who Is Responsible for Preparing Science
        Teachers? Science and Education, 313(5786), 445-446.
Pollock, S. J., & Finkelstein, N. D. (2008). Sustaining educational reforms in introductory physics.Physical
        Review Special Topics - Physics Education Research, 4(1), 010110.
Russ, R. S., Scherr, R. E., Hammer, D., & Mikeska, J. (2008). Recognizing mechanistic reasoning in scientific
        inquiry: A   framework for discourse analysis   developed from philosophy of science. Science
        Education, 92(3), 499-525.
Schommer, M. (1998). The influence of age and education on epistemological beliefs.British Journal of
        Educational Psychology, 1998(68), 551-562.
Smith, J., diSessa, A., & Roschelle, J. (1993/1994). Misconceptions reconceived:  A constructivist analysis of
        knowledge in transition. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 3(2), 115-163.
Sokoloff, D. R., & Thornton, R. K. (2001). Interactive Lecture Demonstrations. New York: John Wiley & Sons.
Tannen, D. (1993). Framing in discourse. New York: Oxford University Press.
Thornton, R. K., & Sokoloff, D. R. (1997). Using Interactive Lecture Demonstrations to create an active
        learning environment. The Physics Teacher, 35(9), 340-347.
Tobin, K., & McRobbie, C. (1997). Beliefs about the nature of science and the enacted science curriculum.
        Science and Education, 6(4), 355-371.

                                                  395  ·  © ISLS
