                                                 ICLS 2010    Volume 2

                    Mapping topological relationships in context

         Jon Boxerman, Bruce Sherin, Northwestern University, 2120 Campus Dr., Evanston, IL 60640,
                              boxerman@northwestern.edu, bsherin@northwestern.edu

         Abstract: In order to better understand how people construct maps when they are located
         within  the   setting  they are  mapping,   we  compared    how   people    drew  maps   between     two
         contexts. Thirty subjects drew maps that included three topological features: the lagoon, the
         edge    of Lake    Michigan,   and  the land  between     these two  bodies    of water.  We    present
         preliminary data that suggests the accuracy and coherence of the maps generally improved
         with experience in both contexts.

Motivation
Using and building maps to see the big picture is a complex cognitive task, drawing upon direct perception and
requiring reasoning with multiple pieces of spatial information visualized from different perspectives (Uttal,
2000). Constructing a map view of a large-scale local landscape requires knowledge for building relationships
among   topological    features as well  as strategies for  thinking   about  space  as a  collection   of organized   and
systematic relations among features that fit into a coherent whole (Liben, 2006; NRC, 2006). In taking a situated
approach to thinking and learning (Greeno, 1998), our motivation with this exploratory study was to understand
how mapping a local landscape depends on the context in which the mapping is located. In particular, we were
interested in knowing how people construct maps when they are located within the setting they are mapping,
and how direct navigational experiences compare to mapping from digital photographs.

Procedure
Of the 30 adults recruited through flyers posted around campus, 23 were students, and seven were university
staff, neighbors,   or former   students. Subjects  were   randomly    assigned   to either the   indoor   or the outdoor
condition. Each subject was fitted with a digital audio and video camera that attached to the bill of a hat and
continuously recorded what was said and how the maps were drawn.
         In  the  outdoor   condition,  14  subjects  walked   around    a man-made     lagoon    while  being   clinically
interviewed   about    the lagoon   and  surrounding   "lakefill," stopping   periodically   to  complete     a variety of
interview tasks (see Figure 1).     In the other condition, 16 subjects were clinically interviewed as they viewed
photographs of the lakefill on a computer screen inside a building near the lagoon, These subjects were asked to
imagine they were on a walk around part of the lagoon and viewed eight high-resolution panoramic digital
photographs shot from strategic points on the lakefill. Each interview lasted approximately 45 minutes and
followed the same semi-structured protocol that included questions about the history and future of this part of
the campus and predictions about how the lagoon could change over various spans of time.
         Partway into the interview, the subjects were handed a clipboard, white typing paper, and a pen and
asked to draw a map that shows the entire lagoon, the edge of Lake Michigan, and the land beside the lake and
the  lagoon. Near   the  end   of each  interview, the subjects drew     a second  map     and were provided     the same
instructions to do so. After each mapping task, subjects described the map they drew, how they drew it, and they
indicated north, if they hadn't already done so. We measured the three principal topological relationships the
subjects mapped and compared them to the actual ratios.

Preliminary Findings
In both conditions, the mapping tasks started and ended at approximately the same time during the interview
(see Table 1). The indoor interviews lasted on average about 15% longer than the outdoor interviews mostly due
to additional time needed for image resizing and management and toggling between photographs. The mapping
tasks usually lasted around three minutes, with the exception of the second outdoor mapping task, which took
noticeably less time to complete.
         Initially, in  the outdoor   condition, subjects   tended  to   map  the lagoon   as  an elongated     oval shape
(NS/EWlagoon > 1) with a wide patch of land depicted between the lagoon and the Lake (EWlagoon/ EWLand. ! 1)
(see   Table 2). In  the   indoor condition, however,   the   lagoon was    typically represented   relatively   long,  but
without  much    space  for land   between  the  lagoon  and  the  Lake.   In both   conditions,  after having   seen  and
experienced more of the lakefill, or perhaps having had the experience mapping, subjects drew the relationships
among features closer to the actual values, portraying the lagoon more like a bulb or bean than like an oval and
depicting the land beside the Lake relatively more narrow (see Figure 2A). Interestingly, after walking around
the lagoon, more than twice as many subjects in the outdoor condition (n=8) than subjects who mapped from
photographs in the indoor condition (n=3) lengthened the lagoon by including the football field shaped feature
near its southern tip (see Figure 2B). This observation suggests that certain features of this landscape may be

                                                     388     ISLS
                                             ICLS 2010    Volume 2

easier to grasp by being in the actual location than by viewing representations of that place. We find that
constructing maps from digital photographs, just like being in the location being mapped, can be a productive
and meaningful context for representing a local landscape. Future work will investigate how learners construct
and use maps and other symbolic representations to learn science across contexts, in class and on field trips.

Figures and Tables
Table 1: Average interview length and durations of mapping tasks within and across contexts.

    Time (min:sec)                                            Outdoor                Indoor
    Average Interview Length                                  42:06                  49:48
    Average Start-Finish Times for First Mapping Task         11:24 - 14:50 (3:26)   14:09 - 17:28 (3:19)
    Average Start-Finish Times for Second Mapping Task        35:40 - 38:00 (2:20)   43:00 - 45:54 (2:54)

Table 2: Average ratios of distances between three topological features.

                                 First Mapping Task          Second Mapping Task         Actual Ratio
     Topological Relationship    Outdoor    Indoor           Outdoor       Indoor
     EWlagoon/ EWLand            1.3        2.0              2.0           2.5           3.0
     NS/EWLand                   3.6        5.7              5.5           4.2           3.8
     NS/EWlagoon                 2.2        1.5              1.6           1.5           1.3

     Figure 1. The route walked or viewed through photographic representations during each interview.

Figure 2. Two example drawings. A. At the widest part of the lagoon, note the shift in lagoon width relative to
             land width. B. This subject chose to include a rectangular tail toward the south.

References
Greeno, J. G. (1998). The situativity of knowing, learning, and research. American Psychologist, 53, 5-26.
Liben, L.S. (2006). Education for Spatial Thinking. In: Renninger, K.A., Sigel, I.E. (Eds.). Handbook of child
       psychology, sixth edition, vol. 4: Child psychology in practice (pp. 197-247). Hoboken: Wiley.
National Research Council. (2006). Learning to Think Spatially. Washington, D.C.: National Academies Press.
Utall, D. H. (2000). Seeing the big picture: Map use and the development of spatial cognition. Developmental
       Science. 3, 247-286.

Acknowledgments
Funded by the Center for Curriculum Materials in Science (National Science Foundation Grant # ESI-0227557).

                                                 389     ISLS
