                                             ICLS 2010    Volume 2

 Children Learning Science through Engineering: An Investigation
          of Four Engineering-Design-Based Curriculum Modules
    Kristen B. Wendell, Kathleen G. Connolly, Christopher G. Wright, Linda Jarvin, Chris Rogers, Tufts
                          University, Curtis Hall, 474 Boston Ave., Medford, MA
          Email: kristen.bethke@tufts.edu, lee.connolly@tufts.edu, christopher_g.wright@tufts.edu,
                                 linda.jarvin@tufts.edu, crogers@tufts.edu

       Abstract: This research investigates the use of engineering design challenges as the basis for
       primary   school  science  learning  environments.       We  used  pre-post   tests  to  compare
       engineering-based students' science content gains to those of students using their district's
       typical science  curriculum. Across   the domains    of  animal  adaptations, simple    machines,
       material properties, and sound, the engineering-based science students showed significant pre-
       post learning gains, and for all domains except sound, their gains were significantly higher
       than those of comparison students.

Introduction
Recent investigations of the use of technological design activities as contexts for secondary science instruction
have produced promising findings (e.g., Fortus, Dershimer, Krajcik, Marx, & Mamlok-Naaman, 2004). Primary
students may be even more receptive to design-based science instruction, since children of this age have been
found to exhibit less apprehension toward designerly endeavors than do adults or adolescents (Baynes, 1994).
When children engage in design activities that require specific scientific expertise, they may make progress
toward two important learning outcomes: knowledge of and skills in engineering design (Pearson & Young,
2002) and improved understanding of the science they use in the service of design completion (Layton, 1993).
     We have developed four new curriculum modules to investigate the impact of using engineering design
in primary-grade science learning environments. Our approach to incorporating engineering design problems
into primary-level science instruction draws upon the Learning by DesignTM approach to middle-school science
instruction (Kolodner, 2006). It also reflects the perspectives of situated cognition (Brown, Collins, & Duguid,
1989) and socio-constructivistism (Driver, Asoko, Leach, Mortimer, & Scott, 1994). We view science learning
as comprised of both social enculturation into practices and personal construction of ideas. Engineering design
is one social activity that requires the use of both science practices and science content knowledge.

Method
We are exploring the research question: what are the consequences of using engineering-design-based activities
as contexts for specific science content instruction in the upper primary grades? To investigate this question, we
have collaborated with local teachers to develop and implement four design-based science curriculum modules
for third- and fourth-grade classrooms. Each module poses an overarching engineering design challenge as a
motivator for  science investigations within a   particular   science  domain, uses   interlocking    (LEGO    TM)
construction elements and electronic sensors as tools for prototyping, and requires approximately 12 hours of
instructional time. The Design a Musical Instrument module centers on the science of sound, Design a Model
House focuses on the properties of materials and objects, Design an Animal Model emphasizes the structural
and behavioral adaptations of animals, and Design a People Mover focuses on the force-distance trade-offs of
simple machines. The module learning objectives are aligned with local and national science content standards.
     Fourteen third- and fourth-grade teachers from six urban public schools in the northeastern United States
volunteered to implement at least one of the four engineering design-based science modules. Before and after
module enactment, their students completed paper-and-pencil science content tests. These pre-post tests were
also administered in twelve comparison classrooms of the same grade levels and in the same geographical area.
We refer to these as comparison classrooms because their science curricula had been chosen by teachers and
district supervisors to meet local and national science learning standards on animal adaptations, simple
machines, material properties, or sound, but they did not use LEGO-engineering design activities. That is, the
comparison teachers used their typical science instruction methods to address the same learning objectives
addressed by the engineering-design-based modules. There was one science test form for each of the four
science domains. The material properties and sound tests each had four open-response and five multiple-choice
items. The animal adaptations and simple machines tests each had five open-response and five multiple-choice
items. Each item addressed one learning standard from the relevant science domain.

Results
The students' responses to the open-response items were scored by two raters according to a 2-point rubric.
Inter-rater reliability and percent exact match were above 0.8 for all questions. Multiple-choice responses were

                                                 390     ISLS
                                               ICLS 2010    Volume 2

scored either 0 or 1 point. Total test scores were computed by summing the item scores and dividing by the
maximum possible number of points. Thus, all tests scores are represented as percentages.
          Overall, paired t-tests revealed significant gains from individual pretests to posttests, across all four
domains and both treatment groups. However, there was a main effect of treatment on the magnitude of pre-post
gain score. On average, in three of the four science domains (material properties, simple machines, and animal
adaptations), the  engineering-design-based   science  students   improved   significantly  more  (p<.01)  than  the
comparison students, as shown in Figure 1. In the domain of sound, the engineering students' average gain was
higher than that of the comparison students, but this difference was not significant. However, as shown in
Figure 2, the engineering students earned equivalent sound posttest scores, despite having significantly lower
sound pretest scores than the comparison students. Thus, after the engineering-design-based curriculum module
on sound, students were able to achieve at levels equal to those of comparison students who had previously been
outperforming them. In fact, on the posttests, students in engineering-based science classrooms achieved at
statistically equal or higher levels in all domains but animal adaptations.

Figure 1. Average learning gains after engineering-       Figure 2. Average pretest and posttest scores in
design-based and comparison science instruction.          engineering-design-based and comparison classrooms.

Discussion
These results suggest that using engineering design as the basis for science learning environments may facilitate
children's learning  in the  domains  of sound, material    properties, simple machines,   and  animal   adaptations.
However, for young students, the impact of engineering-design-based science curricula appears to vary across
science domains.   In this  study, animal adaptations  was   the  only  domain  in  which  students in  engineering-
design-based classrooms performed significantly lower at posttest than did comparison students, despite having
shown significantly greater gains from pre- to posttest. We speculate that students in the comparison classrooms
outperformed   students in  the engineering-based  classrooms     on the animal    adaptations posttest because this
domain is within the discipline of life science, which primary grade teachers have traditionally favored. Though
the engineering-based   Design  an  Animal   Model  curriculum    was   effective, comparison   curricula were  also
effective because  primary   grade  teachers have  developed   strong   instructional programs  for life  science. In
contrast, in  the discipline of physical  science, which    includes   the sound,  material properties,   and simple
machines domains, there may be more room for design-based science to make an impact on children's learning.

References
Baynes, K. (1994). Designerly play. Loughborough, England: Loughborough University of Technology.
Brown, J.S., Collins, A., & Duguid, P. (1989). Situated cognition and the culture of learning. Educational
          Researcher, 18(1), 32-42.
Driver, R., Asoko, H., Leach, J., Mortimer, E., & Scott, P. (1994). Constructing scientific knowledge in the
          classroom. Educational Researcher, 23(5), 5-12.
Fortus, D., Dershimer, R. C., Krajcik, J. S., Marx, R. W., & Mamlok-Naaman, R. (2004). Design-based science
          and student learning. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 41(10), 1081-1110.
Kolodner, J. L. (2006). Case-Based Reasoning. In K. L. Sawyer (Ed.), The Cambridge handbook of the learning
          sciences (pp. 225-242). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Layton, D. (1993). Technology's challenge to science education: Cathedral, quarry or company store?Open
          University Press.
Pearson, G., & Young, T. A. (Eds.) (2002). Technically speaking: Why all Americans need to know more about
          technology. Washington, D.C.: National Academies Press.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the National Science Foundation under Grant 0633952. Any opinions, findings and
conclusions expressed here are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the NSF.

                                                   391     ISLS
