                                               ICLS 2010    Volume 2

Robot Diaries:           Encouraging and Enabling Technological Creativity
  Debra Bernstein, Learning Research and Development Center, University of Pittsburgh, 3939 O'Hara Street,
                                      Pittsburgh, PA 15260, dlb36@pitt.edu

         Abstract:  The  ubiquity of  new  technologies     has led     many educators    and researchers  to
         wonder about the best way to prepare students for participation in a digital world.     The Robot
         Diaries workshop provides an opportunity for adolescent girls to engage with technology in
         creative ways.  Preliminary analysis suggests the workshop enables three patterns of creative
         technology  engagement:      technical, integrative,   and     expressive.    These  findings have
         implications for understanding the range of fluency pathways available in such settings.

Research conducted on out-of-school technology use suggests that even school-aged children have frequent
access to technologies such as computers, game systems, and mobile phones (Sefton-Green, 2006).             But what
type of engagement do most children experience with technology?           A survey of British children between the
ages of 9 and 18 suggests that the most common computer activities in this population include writing and
searching the Internet,  while more   creative endeavors    such   as   making websites,   animations  or  films  were
reported less frequently (Kent  & Facer, 2004).    Were     we  to characterize the   technology engagement      of the
students interviewed by Kent and Facer, those that primarily engage with computers by using word processing
programs or searching the Internet might fall into the category of technology `consumer' (Resnick & Rusk,
1 996).  In other words, they are comfortable navigating and utilizing existing technologies but stop short of
creating or designing.  These consumers represent the mid-point on a continuum of technology engagement,
with non-users of technology on one extreme and fluent technologists on the other.        Existing research provides
rich descriptions of individuals at multiple points along the continuum (e.g., Barron, 2006; see also NRC, 1999).
         The question remains of how best to encourage movement along the fluency continuum.               The current
work explores this question by defining habits of mind associated with fluent technology engagement, and
examining the implementation of a learning environment designed to support them. Robot Diaries is an out-of-
school  workshop  that  promotes  the development    of   technological   fluency   through  participation in   creative
robotics (see Hamner et. al, 2008, for a description of earlier workshops).

Research Context
The Robot Diaries workshop is designed to support the development of three habits of mind consistent with
fluent technology engagement:
   Approaching technology both as a tool and as a creative medium, and understanding how to express one's
    own interests with, in, or through technology.
   Understanding how to engage in a design process.
   Seeing one's self as competent to engage in acts of technological creativity.
         In the workshop,  middle    school-aged  girls   (roughly  ages   10-13)   build expressive  communication
robots using a combination of crafts and robotic materials (e.g., motors, LED's, sensors).     Each girl designs and
builds her own programmable robot, which can use light, sound, and movement to tell stories, express emotions,
make statements, or otherwise engage in communication (see figure 1).          A networking site allows workshop
participants to share their robot programs with other members of the group.
         The data presented in this paper are drawn from a Robot Diaries workshop run as part of a homeschool
enrichment  program. Participants were  seven  homeschooled students (all      female) between the ages    of 9 and 14.
Two homeschooling    parents ran the workshop.   The instructors,  both female, were trained   on the curriculum and
technology prior to the start of the workshop.    Each instructor had a daughter in the workshop.          Researchers
observed the workshop, conducted interviews with participants, parents, and instructors, and collected workshop
related artifacts (e.g., design journals, video journals) for analysis.

     Figure 1. Technology built by a participant during a Robot Diaries workshop (front and back views).

                                                   392     ISLS
                                                   ICLS 2010    Volume 2

Research Questions
The primary research questions for Robot Diaries concern the workshop's ability to forward the habits of mind
identified above.  For each habit of mind, we can ask:          (1) Did participants move towards this understanding,
and (2) What aspects of the workshop facilitated their movement?              The current paper examines participants'
movement towards the first habit of mind, seeing technology as a creative medium.

Preliminary Findings
Amabile's (1996) definition of the term `creative' provides a useful framework for understanding technological
creativity: "a  product   or response   will be judged     as creative  to  the  extent that (a)  it is both a  novel and
appropriate, useful, correct or valuable response to the task at hand, and (b) the task is heuristic rather than
algorithmic" (p. 35).     This definition, which emphasizes the novelty (to the individual) and appropriateness or
value of    the response,   leaves  room  for  the  creation    of technologies    that respond   or  react  to situations,
circumstances, or events in functional or aesthetic ways.
         A   preliminary   analysis  of the  Robot    Diaries   workshop    data  suggests three  primary    categories of
creative response to the technology:    technical, integrative, and expressive.

Technical Creativity
Technically creative responses include those that required participants to adapt their technical knowledge to
achieve a particular   outcome.   For  example, the creator   of the robot pictured above wanted her robot to move      on
wheels, but was concerned that the two wheels would not properly coordinate if they needed to be programmed
separately.  Her solution was to plug the wires    for each wheel    into the same  port, so that they  were subject to the
same programming controls.

Integrative Creativity
Participants achieved `integrative creativity' by integrating the technology with a personal or fictional narrative.
Examples of integration with a personal narrative include one participant's spoof of a presidential campaign
commercial (in her commercial, the robot expresses its support for a candidate in the 2008 election), and another
participant's   `trick or treat' robot which  was   dressed   up   for Halloween    and  used its sensor  and   speaker to
request candy from passers-by.     Examples of a fictional narrative include creating a `persona' for the robot, such
as one participant's desire to build a robot whose actions suggest it is afraid of the dark.

Expressive Creativity
Participants  achieved    `expressive  creativity' by  developing     novel ways   of   communicating    emotion  in  their
robots. Examples include one participant's use of light patterns to       simulate moving feet on    her robot.

Conclusions
Preliminary analysis suggests that Robot Diaries participants displayed a variety of creative responses.              This
analysis helps us understand the range of fluency pathways that may exist inside such a community.                 Future
analysis will examine the prevalence of each pathway and consider the impact of workshop design.

References
Amabile, T. M. (1996). Creativity in context. Boulder, CO: Westview Press.
Barron,  B.   (2006).   Interest and   self-sustained  learning  as    catalyst of development:      A   learning ecology
         perspective. Human Development, 49, 193-224.
Hamner, E., Lauwers, T., Bernstein, D., Nourbakhsh, I., & DiSalvo, C. (2008). Robot diaries:                  Broadening
         participation in the computer science pipeline through social technical exploration. Proceedings of the
         AAAI Spring Symposium on Using AI to Motivate Greater Participation in Computer Science.
Kent, N., & Facer, K. . (2004). Different worlds?       A comparison of young people's home and school ICT use.
         Journal of Computer Assisted Learning, 20, 440-455.
National  Research     Council   (NRC).  (1999).    Being     fluent with  information   technology.    Washington,   DC:
         National Academy Press.
Resnick, M., & Rusk, N. (1996). The computer clubhouse:              Preparing for life in a digital world. IBM Systems
         Journal 35(3&4), 431-439.
Sefton-Green, J. (2006). Literature review in informal learning with technology outside school (Tech. Rep.).
         Bristol, UK: Futurelab.

Acknowledgments
Robot Diaries was developed by the CREATE Lab (Carnegie Mellon University) and UPCLOSE (University of
Pittsburgh), and funded by grants from the Heinz Endowments and the National Science Foundation.

                                                       393     ISLS
