                                                 ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 2

 Patterns of interaction and everyday knowledge sharing in Social
                                       Network Environments

                              Priya Sharma, Susan M. Land, Robert Jordan, Jeff Swain
                     Penn State University, 315 Keller Building, University Park, PA 16802
                                psharma@psu.edu, sland@psu.edu, raj152@psu.edu,
                  Brian K. Smith, RISD, 2 College St., Providence, RI, 02903, bsmith@risd.edu

         Abstract:  Our    research  explores online   social   networking    sites to describe   the  patterns of
         participation and knowledge sharing in these spaces. We examine how knowledge is shared and
         how    participation is potentially  shaped   by    social or  material resources   of   the space.  Our
         presentation will focus on data gathered from two different types of social networking sites.

Theoretical Background
Educational researchers have begun to explore how people learn in a range of informal contexts, where free-
choice learning is the dominant focus, and which involves participation within social networks of families,
hobbyists, or other communities (e.g. Bell et al., 2009; Dierking & Falk, 1994). A fundamental characteristic of
informal learning is that learners have some choice over what they want to learn, and is thus tightly connected to
individual interests or intentions (Bell et al).  Investigations of informal learning have been conducted within
contexts such as museums (Ellenbogen et al, 2004; Falk & Dierking, 2002), farming (Saxe, 1991), and game
playing (Nasir, 2002). Learning in informal settings can be framed within sociocultural perspectives, where
learning is viewed as individual participation within a community of practice (Ellenbogen et al, 2004) and
where cognitive shifts in individual reasoning are closely linked with the social processes that are part of the
sociocultural setting  (Nasir,  2005). Thus,  learning    can  be   considered  as  participation in  everyday,    situated
activities that arise from interaction with material and social resources (Barab & Roth, 2006).
         Online learning communities are often studied in classroom or professional development contexts.
Online communities can be either created by design or emerge in more self-organized ways because of their
function in   the world   (Barab,  2003; Barab      & Roth,    2006;   Hoadley,  in  press).  Our  goal  is  to  examine
participation in informal, online social networks. Broadly characterized as social network sites (identified by
Boyd & Ellison, 2007), these online spaces offer individuals the opportunity to establish an identity within a
bounded context and interact with others that share similar interests (Gunawardena et al, 2009). These activities
closely resemble Wenger et al's (2002) definition of a community of practice as a group of individuals who
share interests  about a  topic  and engage   with  one   another   to  deepen  knowledge.   The   communities     we are
exploring foster networks of weak relational ties solely online, differentiating them from notions of community
with sustained history or common heritage (Barab & Duffy, 2000). Network theory allows the study of some of
these aspects, by exploring the nature of ties between the community -- i.e., how are nodes (or actors in the
network)  connected    to other  nodes with   ties. For   example,   communication     ties show  who   talks   to whom,
workflow    ties   show    who    provides    and    receives   resources,     and   proximity    ties  show     who     is
spatially/electronically close to someone else in the network (Katz et al., 2004).
         Our research explores how everyday, online social worlds create opportunities for participation that are
quite different from those encountered in formal educational settings. Yet, these spaces nonetheless may serve
to mediate knowledgeable participation and accomplishment of goals in everyday life worlds (Barab & Roth,
2006) of  people.  Third   spaces (Moje  et  al., 2004),   which    is closely associated   with  hybridity  theory,  is a
theoretical construct that may provide a useful perspective for considering everyday learning in online social
network spaces.    Third spaces describe spaces      where new      forms   of participation are established    through  a
merging of a first space (e.g., everyday home contexts) and a second space (an institutional space like schools or
work, or formal technical or scientific discourse) (Bell et al., 2009; Moje et al.).     Bell et al. forward the notion
that virtual worlds, like chat rooms or game worlds, might be considered third spaces because they are neither
home nor work spaces, and provide a "unique potential for the development of identity where new resources and
constraints evolve in the social milieu  of the virtual space"   (p.   264). Bell et al (p. 264) further note: "Whereas
geographic, cultural, and technical boundaries have historically constrained cultural exchange among groups
and individuals,   virtual  environments   can    facilitate   transactions  across  these  barriers,  opening   up   new
intersections of people, tools, and traditions to support identity development."

Research Questions
The following questions guided our research:
What patterns of participation are visible in various social network communities?
    ·    How are patterns of participation related to membership within the community?
    ·    How do participants share knowledge within the group?

                                                      394  ·  © ISLS
                                                  ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 2

Research Context and Methodology
Our research examines existing social networking sites. We focus on data gathered from two different types of
social networking sites: (1) public hobby sites (e.g., ESPN Fantasy Sports-Basketball); and (2) self-directed
learning social network sites (e.g., language, health). . We use primarily a descriptive research design to observe
participant discourse without influencing it. Data were based on discussion posts within social network sites.
Social   Network  Analysis   (using UCI-Net)      and  content    analysis  were    conducted  for some     of the  sites.

Preliminary       Findings        and     Implications:          What       patterns     of   participation         are
visible in informal social networking communities?
To address questions about the relationship between patterns of participation and community membership, our
data analysis has thus far focused on examining social networks within the Fantasy Sports site. The site attracts
a large number of participants, approximately 1300 or more, who contribute between 50,000-80,000 messages
per year. We accessed data for two years from 2004-05 and 2005-06, totaling about 150,000 messages. Our
initial analyses of the networks in this site produced a dense, highly connected sociogram (leftmost image in
Fig. 1), which was difficult to parse. We subsequently focused attention on cliques with 30 or less actors to
identify highly connected individuals and patterns of participation within those cliques. By identifying these
cliques, we  hoped   to gain a better  understanding    of   actors  (participants) who  were  most    prominent   in  the
networks.   The  two right  most   sociograms     in Fig. 1   indicate  cliques from   04-05  and  05-06,   which  show
participation by some of the same actors, i.e., the nodes marked 8, 9, and 19. As is visible in the sociograms, we
see that the participant represented by node #9 has moved into a more central position in the clique in the
second year of participation, while the participant represented by node #8 has moved only a bit closer to the
center of the network. Participant #19 remains at a similar location of centrality in both years. We hypothesize
that this change in degree centrality (i.e.,the total number of ties that connect the participant -- both ingoing and
outgoing)   could be related   to  personal  connections     with other   actors in  the network   and  the    quality of
communication. Until this point, social network analysis has helped to focus our attention on specific groups of
interest within this overall community, as well as on specific individuals with greater prominence within each of
the cliques. Our next step is to qualitatively explore the ties between these participants to identify the nature of
participation, knowledge and resource sharing, and identity enactments.

   Figure 1: Sociogram for the whole fantasy sports network 2004-2005 and cliques from 04-05 and 05-06

To examine knowledge-sharing practices in social network spaces, we identified recurrent patterns of discourse
that emerged from several online community discussion boards.            Patterns included: (a) knowledge telling; (b)
seeking  advice/explanation;   (c)  experience    sharing;   (d)  public deliberation;   (e) mutual    goal setting   and
achievement; (f) data sharing to improve practice.

Potential Significance
The potential significance of this work lies in its contribution to the growing literature on lifelong, informal
learning (Bell et al., 2009). Our research studies online spaces where people voluntarily go to learn and to
participate in a  shared goal  or  activity. This    research  may   add to the  knowledge    base of  how  participants
exchange  knowledge     and practices, as    well as  extend   what  is known    about online  virtual spaces   as "third
spaces" for everyday learning (Moje et al., 2004).

Bibliography

                                                      395  ·  © ISLS
                                               ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 2

Barab, S.A. (2003). An    introduction to the special issue: Designing for virtual communities in the service of
    learning.  The Information Society, 19, 197-201.
Barab, S. A., & Duffy, T. (2000). From practice fields to communities of practice. In D. Jonassen and S. Land
    (Eds.), Theoretical foundations of learning environments. (pp. 25­56). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
    Associates.
Barab, S. A., & Roth, W.-M. (2006). Curriculum-Based Ecosystems: Supporting Knowing from an Ecological
Perspective. Educational Researcher, 35(5), 3-13.
Bell, P., Lewenstein, B., Shouse, A., & Feder, M. (Eds.). (2009).   Learning Science   in Informal Environments:
    People, Places, and Pursuits.  Washington, DC: National Academic Press.
Boyd, D. M., & Ellison, N. B. (2007). Social network sites: Definition, history, and scholarship. Journal of
    Computer Mediated Communication, 13(1), article 11.
Dierking, L. D., & Falk, J. H. (1994). Family behavior and learning in informal science settings: A
    review of the research. Science Education, 78(1), 57 ­ 72.
Ellenbogen, K. M., Luke, J. J., & Dierking, L. D. (2004). Family Learning Research in Museums: An Emerging
    Disciplinary Matrix? Science Education, 88(S1), S48-S58.
Falk, J. H., & Dierking, L. D. (2002). Lessons without limit : how free-choice learning is transforming
    education. Walnut Creek, CA: AltaMira Press.
Fields, D. A., & Kafai, Y. B. (2009). A Connective Ethnography of Peer Knowledge Sharing and Diffusion in a
    Tween Virtual World. International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 4(1), 47-68.
Garcia, A., Standlee, A., Bechkoff, J. & Cui, Y. (2009). Ethnographic approaches to the internet and computer-
    mediated communication. Journal of Contemporary Ethnography, 38 (1), 52-84.
Gunawardena, C. N., Hermans, M. B., Sanchez, D., Richmond, C., Bohley, M., & Tuttle, R. (2009). A
    Theoretical Framework for Building Online Communities of Practice with Social Networking Tools.
    Educational Media International, 46(1), 3-16.
Hoadley, C. (in press). Roles, design, and the nature of CSCL.    Computers in Human Behavior.
Katz, N., Lazer, D., Arrow, H., & Contractor, N. (2004). Network Theory and Small Groups. Small Group
    Research, 35(3), 307-332.
Leander, K., & McKim, K. (2003).   Tracing the Everyday     `Sitings' of Adolescents on  the Internet: a strategic
    adaptation of ethnography across online  and  offline   spaces. Education, Communication, &  Information 3
    (2), 211-240.
Miller, D., & Slater, D. (2000). The Internet: An ethnographic approach. New York, NY: Berg.
Moje, E. B., Ciechanowski, K. M., Kramer, K., Ellis, L., Carrillo, R., & Collazo, T. (2004). Working Toward
    Third Space in Content Area Literacy: An Examination of Everyday Funds of Knowledge and Discourse.
    Reading Research Quarterly, 39(1), 38-70.
Nasir, N. i. S. (2002). Identity, Goals, and Learning: Mathematics in Cultural Practice. Mathematical Thinking
    and Learning, 4(2-3), 213-247.
Nasir, N. i. S. (2005). Individual Cognitive Structuring and the Sociocultural Context: Strategy Shifts in the
    Game of Dominoes. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 14(1), 5-34.
Wenger, Etienne, McDermott, R., & Snyder, W. (2002) Cultivating communities of practice: a guide to
    managing knowledge. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard Business School Press.

                                                   396  ·  © ISLS
