                                                  ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

 Scaffolding Children's Understanding of the Fit Between Organisms
  and their Environment In the Context of the Practices of Science

                                          Kathleen E. Metz, UC Berkeley
                             Stephanie Sisk-Hilton, San Francisco State University
                                       Eric Berson, Uyen Ly, UC Berkeley

        Abstract: This research project applies the learning progression perspective to the teaching of the
        conceptual underpinnings of evolution for 2nd and 3rd graders. We frame the progression from the
        epistemic perspective that understanding a scientific idea encompasses using that idea, in
        prediction, interpretation and explanation of the natural world.    The progression foregrounds the
        question of the fit between  organisms and their environment.     This paper reports on the first step
        of the project, our teaching of the curriculum in an urban summer school and the analysis thereof.
        We analyze students' reasoning during prototype instructional activities and in comparison of pre-
        and post-interviews. We have    had success scaffolding   children's understanding of differential
        survival  advantage of different traits. While we have existence proofs of children coming to
        understand the impact of this differential on changing distributions across generations, this next
        step of understanding appears to be much more difficult.

        Evolution remains widely misunderstood at all ages.        Preschoolers and adults alike manifest teleological
reasoning in thinking about the biological, albeit with changing cues as to when it is applied (Keleman, 1999;
Lombrozo & Carey, 2006). Across this same wide age-span individuals manifest `biological essentialism", assuming
that a species is determined by a defining essence (Gelman, 2003; Medin & Atran, 2004), while ignoring the within-
species variation so crucial to understanding the mechanism of natural selection (Shtulman, 2005).           Indeed even
earlier biologists fell prey to these same misconceptions, as reflected in Ernst Mayr's (1988) tracking of teleological
reasoning across the history of biology and Stephen Jay Gould's (1996) attribution of early evolutionary theorists'
devaluing of within-species variability to their "essentialist tendencies".
        In this continuity of challenges to understanding evolution, we envision an intriguing potential of starting
instruction about the conceptual  underpinnings    of evolution   at the  second  and third grade  level.    While   these
findings indicate that these conceptual challenges are robust and difficult to transcend for students of all ages, this
continuity in the conceptual challenges leaves open the possibility that some form of early intervention might have
an advantageous impact.   We make no claim that these conceptual issues could be easily resolved if addressed much
earlier in the K-12 curriculum. Rather, in accordance with the idea of learning trajectory, we posit that strategically
taking up the conceptual underpinnings of evolution at this level could support a basic understanding of some facets
of the theory and enable a deeper understanding of evolution at subsequent grades.
        This research agenda accords with the new NRC report, Taking science to school: Learning and teaching
science in  grades  K-8  (Duschl,   Schweingruber,    &   Shouse,  2007).    This report emphasizes      the fundamental
importance of the interplay of instruction, experience, and maturation in the competence that children can achieve.
Its conclusion that "what children can do is in large part contingent on their prior opportunities to learn" points to
the key role of the learning trajectory in instructional design and analysis of children's capabilities. Finally in place
of the problematic dichotomy of content and process, it recommends framing K-8 science learning in terms of four
interrelated strands: a) Know, use and interpret scientific explanations of the natural world; b) Generate and evaluate
scientific evidence and explanations; c) Understand the nature and development of scientific knowledge; and d)
Participate productively in scientific practices and discourses. This research is grounded in this conceptualization of
science learning.
        This paper reports on our project, striving to scaffold young children's understanding of the fit between
organisms   and their environment.    We   present  the   instructional  approach through   description  of  the  learning
progression  and  design principles  that informed   the  construction   of the curriculum. We   analyze     the children's
understanding of the fit between organisms and their environment and how this changed over time, through: a)
comparison of pre- and post-test one-on-one interviews; and b) children's thinking wrestling with the targeted ideas
in the context of prototype lessons. The research is small scale, limited to two cycles of research within a summer
enrichment program (over which the team will have complete control of student placement and instruction) and two
years of the classes of three second and third grade teachers in a diverse, urban school (reflecting the complex

                                                      396  ·  © ISLS
                                                   ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

environment   to which   any   viable intervention must   adapt).  This   paper  reports  on  the  first cycle of  the  summer
enrichment program.

                            The Scaffolding of Children's Understanding

The Learning Progression
Above and beyond consideration of where children begin and the long-term end-point in the conceptualization of a
learning  progression,   we aimed   to  conceptualize  the  conceptual   terrain of   the progression    such  that it  supports
increasing explanatory power from the students' perspective.       Most elementary school science curricula violate this
criterion, with content that will only prove to have some explanatory power when linked to concepts reserved for
older grades ­ a curricular pattern that fails to reflect the power or purpose of science or the heart of its practices.
We aimed to construct the learning progression in evolution in such a way that the concepts within this grade-band
have explanatory    power   in and  of  themselves,   while  also strategically  grounding    more   powerful    and    complete
explanatory models to be taught in subsequent grade levels.
         The   learning  progression   is framed   in terms   of increasingly   powerful   explanations     of the  fit between
organisms and their environment. We focus on phenomenology and change at the time scale of microevolution. An
ecological perspective is limited to that needed to understand this relationship; e.g., the survival value of different
inheritable traits of  a population   within  a  particular environment.      The  cellular   level is   excluded,  as  well as
speciation and genetics above and beyond the idea of inheritance.
         Our   current version  of  the learning progression    consists  of seven  levels.   We assume that children will
come to school   with some understanding    of the two  most  basic levels:  the simplistic   idea that  organisms Live where
they belong (Level I) and the more adequate idea that organisms Live where they can get what they need in Level 2.
While children come to school with some ideas about what organisms need, the curriculum aims to develop these
understandings.    Variation in organisms' structures/ limiting factors embodies the idea that organisms are able to get
what they   need   in very  different  environments   ---  with  different   limiting factors  ---  due  to variation   in their
structures. At this level we can build on some understandings that children      have of structure/ function, but also need
to substantially elaborate the structure/ function idea and the scope of the context to which it is applied.            Survival
value of specie's trait (Level 4) conceptualizes fit between organisms and environment in terms of the survival value
of a particular trait (e.g.; the survival value of the Grey Whales' migration between Baja and the Arctic or the ridge
on the  male  crickets'  wing  that enable  them   to chirp).   Whereas   survival  value  or  cost-benefit    analysis may  be
intuitive at some level and some contexts (e.g.; is it worth trying to get my ball back now from the playground
bully), we doubt children have ever considered animal or plants' traits from this perspective.              Within-population
variation and  differential  survival   advantage  (Level   5)  takes  up  the idea   of  differential  survival advantage   of
different traits of the same characteristic within a given environment.      Natural selection (Level 6) is conceptualized
as the idea that, over many generations, inherited traits that help organisms' chances to survive and reproduce in that
environment become more common there.           Traits that hurt their chances become less common. The traits that hurt
its chances become less common.        The last level (Level 7) encompasses the outcome of the mechanism of natural
selection, namely Organisms well-adapted to where they live.          A secondary progression, supporting understanding
of life cycle, resemblance     of parent  and offspring,    and  inheritance   supports   the primary    progression    building
increasingly powerful explanations of the fit between organisms and their environment.

Pedagogical Design Principles
Given space constraints, we present the pedagogical design principles here in brief:
1)  Understanding a scientific concept entails using the concept in the practices of science, including interpretation
    of the natural world, making prediction, and developing explanations.
2)  Build children's conceptual understanding through a range of scientific knowledge-building practices, including
    thought experiments, field-based and laboratory-based empirical inquiry, and text-based research.
3)  Immerse children in exploration of a phenomenology and the puzzling patterns therein prior to introducing the
    corresponding explanatory abstraction.
4)  Leverage strategically selected in-depth cases of phenomenology and their interpretation as a basis to build
    generalizations and abstractions.
5)  Capitalize on fruitful preconceptions.
6)  Build from contexts that we anticipate will be less likely to evoke buggy reasoning before having students apply
    these new ideas to contexts that we anticipate will be vulnerable to buggy reasoning.

                                                       397  ·   © ISLS
                                                    ICLS 2010  ·   Volume 1

7)   Emphasize the metaconceptual and metacognitive knowledge that support children's understanding of the power
     of the targeted ideas in explaining the fit between organisms and their environment.

The Curriculum Modules
         We   have    developed   two   curriculum    modules,     to scaffold   children's advancement     on  the  learning
progression, in accordance with these design principles.       One of the modules develops these ideas in the children's
study of botany, the other in the realm of the children's study of the animals and their behavior.            Each module is
approximately 30 hours in length, about the length of a relatively long "replacement unit".

                                  Measures of Student Understanding

Pre- and Post-Interviews
We   developed   a   structured  interview  instrument   to  measure     student progress   on  the  learning trajectory.   In
accordance with our conceptualization of what understanding of a concept entails, items elicited children's using the
targeted ideas   in  predicting, interpreting  and  explaining    biological phenomena.     The instrument consisted of 7
extended items. One item was framed in terms of one of the particular organisms the class studied (Brassica rapa on
the part of  the botany   class  and  crickets for  those in   the animal    class).  All the  others were  transfer items, a
characteristic of the instrument that we realized made it extremely difficult.       The instrument included items without
any kind of scaffolding, as well as two items with dynamic scaffolding and two items with what we conceptualized
as empirical scaffolding, in the form of empirical feedback following the children's generation of a prediction and
the explanation thereof.    The instrument assessed the conceptual terrain through: a) two items involving children's
thinking about why particular organisms (otters and kelp) lived where they lived and consideration of where else
they   could or  could  not live; b)  four  cases  of  microevolution,    involving   predictions and   explanations about  a
population after an environment change, followed by explanation of what actually happened (e.g.; changes in the
coloration of male guppies, following arrival of predators); and c) explanation of change in a characteristic over time
(e.g.; the question,   drawn  from   this  research literature,   of  why  cheetahs   today  are  so  much  faster than   their
ancestors).

On-Line Student Negotiation of Curricular Activities
Above and beyond analysis of gains in understanding from before and after the instructional intervention, we are
also interested in understanding how the curriculum functioned to support conceptual development and how we
might   iteratively improve  it  for these purposes.     For  the  purpose   of  analyzing  the interplay  of instruction and
learning, we videotaped all instruction and developed a complete database of student written work and easel pad
record notations from class discussions (used in place of the white board to support the inclusion in the written
artifact data base.) We also designed embedded assessments into the curricular plan.

Analysis of Children's Understanding
We conducted structured one-on-one interviews with almost all of the 40 children in the summer program.                These
interviews   were videotaped to  enable close  analysis.  We are   currently formalizing the coding   process  to apply to the
full set of interviews. While we will report statistics about all 40 children and their changes from pre- to post at the
conference, the results we report      are  only  preliminary   and   formative,  and  based  on  the 13interviews   we   have
studied to date.    (These * are all the children from the animal behavior class who participated in all days of the
program, minus one child with Down's syndrome who did not participate in the post-test interview.

Advancements From Pre- to Post-Test and Enduring Conceptual Challenges
Even before the curriculum, the majority of the children we have analyzed (9 out of 13) had some understanding of
the differential survival   value of  some  traits, at least   in the relatively  straightforward   and familiar  instance  of
camouflage; i.e., organisms that stick out in an environment with a predator, as opposed to those that blend in, are
more likely to be eaten.    This in-coming level of understanding emerged in our framing of an item based on the
classic case of the shifts in peppered moth coloration following severe pollution due to industrialization, as well as
another  item  based   on Endler's   (1980) study   of microevolution     of male    guppy  coloration  as a  function of  the
presence of predator fish.   For example, in an item asking children to make predictions and explanations thereof of
the color of moths following heavy soot darkening their landing places, most of the children realized the survival
value of dark coloration.   For example: "They [the birds] can find the light ones because they're not camouflaged.
But the dark ones, they're camouflaged.     But they won't find the dark ones."

                                                       398   ·    © ISLS
                                                   ICLS 2010    ·  Volume 1

         In the single non-transfer item, 12 of 13 children reflected some degree of conceptual advancement from
pre to post-test. Thus, for example,  the animal curriculum cohort had      studied  a  case of microevolution of crickets on
Kauai (Tinghitella, 2008, 2009): the appearance in the island cricket population of a slightly different wing structure
such that cricket could not make a chirping sound, followed by arrival of maggots that lay their eggs in crickets that
they can locate through   their chirping. Post-instructional intervention,   92 % of the children in the animal      curriculum
cohort analyzed    to date  not only  appreciated    the differential   survival advantage      for the particular   population
currently living ( i.e; those crickets that chirped were more likely to be found by the maggots and thereafter soon die
from the development of the maggots in their body), but also            considered the impact of this differential survival
value -- combined with some rudimentary understanding of inheritance-- on the relative frequency of the trait in the
next generation.      For example,  Ellen    appropriately    predicts an  increase  in the  proportion  of  non-chirpers, but
qualifies her prediction with noting that chirping is both a risk and an advantage.             On the one hand, she views
chirping as a survival disadvantage, in her words,      "The fly will only go for the chirping cricket".     On the other hand,
she also notes the survival value of chirping, "They [indicating male crickets with changed wing structure] don't
chirp, so that mates won't be attracted to them."     As she explains her prediction of an increase in non-chirpers and
decrease in chirpers (as represented in iconic symbols for chirpers and non-chirpers in the next generation), "a lot of
the chirping crickets got eaten by the fly, the fly.    And then most of these guys [non-chirpers] gave some birth to
offspring."
         Analysis of the transfer items revealed that 69% of the children also considered the impact of the shifts in
survival value of traits to changes in the relative frequency of the traits in subsequent generations to contexts they
had not studied in class.   For example, consider Wally's post-test reasoning about the case of microevolution of
male guppy    coloration  post  arrival of   predator   fish.   He predicts    there will be   more   "black"  or  "grey ones"
(camouflaged) and fewer "yellow ones" (colorful), on the grounds that:

         The black guppies can blend in more than the golden guppies...              The yellow ones are
         getting eaten, because they can't blend in so good.         And the gray ones... most of them,
         they can survive and then they give babies.          There will be more and more gray ones...
         The yellow guppies, they'll get eaten so when they give babies, they won't have as much,
         and when they get eaten, there will be less and less.

         In short, these interviews documented second and third graders' wrestling with questions of microevolution.
The post-instruction interviews revealed conceptual advancements on the part of many students in a context they
had studied, success on transfer tasks on the part of some, as well as multiple enduring conceptual challenges.          In the
sections below, we consider the functioning of the curriculum vis à vis these challenges.

On-Line Student Negotiation of Curricular Activities and Embedded Assessments

Children's Thinking in the Context of the Botany Curriculum
The  botany  curriculum   included  an    instructional sequence   of   an empirical    investigation followed    by a thought
experiment  designed   to   support the   children's wrestling    with  several ideas   central to  the learning   progression,
including within-kind variation (LP5), differential survival advantage (LP5) and a change in the prevalence of traits
in subsequent generations (LP6).     These investigations engage students in applying these ideas in the context of
making predictions and developing explanations.         Students are also immersed in a phenomenology to establish the
basis from which to reason scientifically. The investigations build on prior investigations to develop these abstract
ideas in a phenomenology that is familiar to students.
         This instructional   sequence    begins with    the  students'   close analysis    of  a population   of  aster seeds,
identifying subtle differences between seeds.    Students noticed that some seeds were slightly bigger than others and
some had slightly bigger parachutes.      They made predictions about which of these differences might matter for the
distance that the  seeds  might  travel   in the wind.     Students    developed  an   experiment   to  test their predictions,
comparing the distance bigger seeds and smaller seeds traveled.
         To  extend   their empirical   exploration  of  traits that   support dispersal  potential,  we designed    a thought
experiment to scaffold students thinking around differential survival value and subsequent generations.            We adapted
the thought experiment from a case in the research literature of microevolution of the aster seed structure following
the arrival of the seeds on ocean islands (Cody & Overton, 1996).           As part of the thought experiment, we asked
students to make predictions about the survival advantage of different aster seeds on the island and the distribution

                                                        399   ·  © ISLS
                                                 ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

of size within the population of aster seeds in future generations.  In this limited space, we focus on the interplay of
instruction and evidence of students' thinking along the learning progression as reflected in the thought experiment.
        We framed the microevolution thought experiment in terms of a population of aster seeds (large and small)
that landed on an island.  In this thought experiment, students (a) made predictions about where the next generation
of seeds might land; (b) explained their predictions in terms of the survival advantage of the seeds that land on the
island; (c) made predictions about future generations of seeds on the island and their differences with respect to size;
and (d) compared their predictions to empirical data from the scientist.  The students worked together as a class on
each part of the thought experiment, but recorded their own predictions and explanations separately on written
templates functioning as independent, instructionally embedded assessment.        An analysis of the classroom video of
the thought  experiment   and written assessments   reveal  that  most  children   had some    understanding  of survival
advantage of the larger seeds and that the larger seeds would be more prevalent in the next generation (LP6).
        Consider the interplay of task and student thinking in the context of this thought experiment. Shown a
sample of seeds that landed on the island, the teacher challenged the class to make predictions about where the next
generation of seeds might   land (Figure   1).   As part of   the classroom discussion,    many  students  shared similar
predictions. For instance, "What I think will happen is that most of the heavy seeds will land on land and the light
seeds will likely land on water" and "What I think will happen is that the light seeds will be more likely to land in
the water because they fly farther." Based on analysis of student work, all of the students represented more heavy
than light seeds in their predictions of which seeds would land on the island in the next generation.

Figure 1. Sample of prediction of regarding where   seeds   with different traits will land.

        The teacher asked the students to explain their prediction in terms of survival advantage, using a written
template to scaffold their explanations.  Analyses of these assessments reveals that 12 of 17 students appropriated
the class discussion about the impact of seed size on distance traveled and used this as a rationale for explaining the
differential survival advantage of heavier seeds.   These   students explained    that the   heavier seeds had a survival
advantage relative to the lighter seeds.  They reasoned that the lighter seeds tended to travel too far and would land
in the water, whereas the heavier seeds didn't travel as far and would be more likely to land on the island, e.g.:

        [Written prompt: The heavy/light (circle one) seeds will have a survival advantage because...]
        ...[circled "heavy" above]... the big ones will travel on land and the light ones will travel too far
        so they might fall in the water.

Students subsequently made predictions about what the scientist saw when she went to study the seeds on the island,
many years after the seeds first arrived.  Many students noted that while there will likely be MOSTLY bigger seeds
on the island, there may still be some smaller seeds, for example:

        I predict that most of the...there won't be that much little ones that will be on the island. But      I
        think the heavy ones will be on the island, because they have the advantage because they are
        heavier and they don't go as far...

        In the final part of the thought experiment, the teacher presented the students with empirical data from the
scientist and asked the students to explain what the scientist saw, how that might have happened and how their

                                                     400  ·  © ISLS
                                                  ICLS 2010    ·  Volume 1

predictions matched what the scientist saw.    Consider, for example, how one student compared her prediction to the
empirical data (below).   After summarizing the scientist's observations, the student explains these observations by
reasoning that the lighter seeds were less plentiful because they had flown off of the island.     She then concludes that
her prediction fit with the scientists' observations based on a relative distribution of small to big seeds.

         What did the scientist see? A bunch of big seeds and a few little.
         Why do you think that happened? All the little seeds flew off the island.
         How does your prediction fit with what the scientist saw?       That my prediction fit in because I drew
         three small seed and a lot of big seeds.

Note she appropriately predicted a decrease in light seeds and an increase in big ones, she may not fully attend to the
generational nature of the mechanism over long periods of time.
         Analysis of students' work indicates that 12 of 17 students demonstrated an understanding of survival
advantage (LP5).    However,     generational thinking   was  still problematic   for many.   Nonetheless, by immersing
students in the seed phenomenology and by engaging in the practices of science under these instructional conditions,
students were able to reason about the differential survival value of traits and how the value can change with the
change   in the environment      (arriving on  the   island.)    The curriculum    subsequently    built on  this emerging
understanding to further develop student reasoning along the learning progression.           In subsequent investigations,
students continued to build on these ideas in a more independent context of partner work focused on using empirical
data from their plant populations growing in the classroom to make predictions about plant characteristics in future
generations following an environmental change.

Children's Thinking in the Context of the Animals and Their Behavior Curriculum
The idea  of  multiple  generations  also  proved  particularly   difficult for students  as they  reasoned  about  shifting
survival  advantage  of a  trait in  relationship to  an environmental      press in  the context  of the  animal  behavior
curriculum.   In the Kauai crickets thought experiment, the first point at which the curriculum scaffolded students to
work   through  the process  of  natural   selection  most  students   (88%   based   on  analysis of  individual  students'
worksheets)readily worked into their repertoire the idea that a particular trait could have survival value for an
individual (LP 4), and also that within a population, individuals with a certain trait could have a survival advantage
over those members of the population without the trait (LP 5).         Likewise the idea that offspring usually had traits
similar to the parents was non-problematic according to students' comments in the class discussion and as shown
universally on student workseets (although students over-attributed identical traits to offspring, since the curriculum
did not explore genetics). Some students were able to use these ideas to reason about the likelihood of a trait being
passed from one generation to a single subsequent generation.        For instance, at the beginning of the Kauai Crickets
thought experiment, Maria explained the ideas of her partner, Carlos, regarding which type of male crickets had a
survival advantage:  "the chirping ones because um, the chirping ones could find a mate, and then when they had
their babies they could also chirp."    However, almost all students encountered significant difficulty in reasoning
about the impact of an environmental press over many generations.            In their written records, 23%   predicted that
variation would simply cease to exist in the next generation (the trait with survival advantage would be present in all
individuals), 29%   predicted    an increase  in  the population    of   non-chirpers but  were   unable  to describe  their
reasoning,  and 23%   were  unable   to construct  a  response   at all.  Of  the 23%   who  predicted   an  increase in the
population of non-chirpers and gave a reason, all focused on the fate of an individual or a single generation, for
example, "the chirping crickets get caught by the fly."       Students had   difficulty creating a chain of reasoning that
moved beyond the second generation and considered the impact of differential survival value survival, reproduction,
and traits present in subsequent generations.
         In the animal behavior curriculum, a single external representation used multiple times throughout the
series of  investigations appeared   critical in  scaffolding    children's multi-generational  reasoning    (see figure 2).
Evidence suggests that this form, in the context of the curriculum's thought experiments, helped students develop
evidence-based predictions about the shifting distribution of a trait over many generations.       The representation was
first used in the Kauai crickets thought experiment, where it did not have an obvious impact (see above).         However,
in subsequent thought experiments, when students returned to the representation they were better able to make
generational predictions.  For instance, in students' final projects, in which student pairs predicted changes to a
population of an animal of their choosing in response to a real environmental press, the teacher observed only 2
pairs reasoning about a potential shift in trait distribution due to differential survival based on traits.  Upon bringing
back a version of the generational chart seen in figure 2, all pairs were able to construct such an explanation        (with
differing degrees of direct teacher intervention).    The generational representation scaffolded students' development

                                                       401  ·  © ISLS
                                                ICLS 2010  ·    Volume 1

of a multi-generational prediction regarding shift in the distribution of a traitin three key ways, discussed briefly
below in the context of the Kauai crickets example.
          First, the representation required students to represent the members of a population as individuals with or
without a key trait and on this basis make predictions about whether they were likely to survive and reproduce.
After students discussed the survival value of chirping for male crickets prior to the arrival of a predator, the teacher
presented a small sample population to represent the initial trait distribution, in this case 10 male crickets in which 7
were  chirpers and  3 were  non-chirpers.  The  teacher  then   described  the arrival  of  the predator fly, and  several
students co-constructed the idea that non-chirpers, previously at a disadvantage in attracting a mate, now had a
survival  advantage  because they  would  be less likely  to be  victims   of the fly.  However, the seemingly simple
question of "would there be more or fewer chirping crickets in the next generation" met with little response.         The
teacher then asked students to predict using actual numbers: out of the 10 crickets represented on their page, which
five would   survive  and  reproduce.  Underneath    the  first representation  were    5  boxes   in  which to place the
reproducers. They then filled in connected boxes to show the traits of their offspring.    Students repeated this process
for two subsequent generations before making predictions about the population 15 generations later.             Manually
"moving" representations of individuals from members of the population as a whole into a sub-group of those that
reproduced   allowed  students who   were unsure  of  the  question    when   initially asked   to develop   well-reasoned
responses.   For instance, Tyrone,   who  adamantly   insisted  that neither  chirpers  nor non-chirpers   had  a survival
advantage when the predator fly arrived, when forced to make a decision about which individuals to place in the
"reproducer" boxes, placed more non-chirpers than chirpers, and wrote [italics refer to provided prompt]: "Now I
think the non-chirping male crickets have a survival advantage because the fly would not eat them."               In class
conversation and on his representation sheet, he contended that 15 generations later, there would be no chirpers.
While this is not entirely accurate, his reasoning showed a move from not accounting for survival advantage to
predicting individual survival based on a trait to making predictions about trait distribution in the population as a
whole.

Figure 2. Sample of simplified visual representation  of shifting distribution of a  trait over generations.

          Second, this format provided a simplified representation of next generation as involving the offspring of
organisms present at the onset of the investigation.  The representation physically linked traits of offspring to traits
of parents.  Students then transferred only the offspring into a new box labeled "Generation 2."       Of course, this is a
simplification in many ways.   The representation limited offspring per parent, mandated number of reproducers in a
generation,  and assumed   offspring  always had  the same   trait as  the  represented   parent.  Most importantly, the
representation prompted students to reason about the fate of individuals, although the goal was to get them to reason
about the shifting distribution of a trait within a population.    However, for many students, as in the example of
Tyrone above, reasoning at the level of the individual appeared to be a necessary step to move from the claim that it
was impossible to predict future distribution toward reasoning that accounted for differential survival advantage
resulting in some   members    of a  population being   more    likely than   others to  survive   and reproduce  in each
generation (LP 6).
          Finally, the generational representation provided a simplified visual that scaffolded students' understanding
of the shifting relative concentration of a particular trait in a population across generations.        By looking at the

                                                    402  ·   © ISLS
                                                  ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

scattered icons representing the predicted population by trait in each generation, students easily discussed the shift in
prevalence  of a trait over multiple   subsequent  generations.     Some   students  described  the shift using   the actual
numbers of the greatly simplified population drawing, for example, "here there's seven that chirp, but now there's
just four  so there's more  that  don't."  Others were    able  to make    more  generalized statements   about how    traits
become more or less prevalent across generations, still referring to the simplified representation.          For instance,
Martin stated, "[in generation 15] there'll be mostly non-chirpers because if they had to mate... and if they had
babies, then they'd have to be non-chirpers."    Many students continued to need this representation to scaffold their
predictions and explanations for the remainder of the curriculum, even those who were able to construct more
generalized   explanations of  shifting trait distribution.   As   discussed  above,   7 of the 9  student pairs  used  the
representation in constructing an explanation for their final project in the curriculum.

Conclusions
The understanding of evolution poses challenges for high school and colleges students.        Our project aims to support
understanding   of this key    theoretical frame  by beginning      early:  with second   and   third graders.    We   have
conceptualized a learning progression in terms of steps of increasing power and complexity in explaining the fit
between    organisms   and  their environment.    Analysis      of structured   interviews,  classroom    discussions,  and
instructionally embedded assessments reveal children wresting with key aspects of natural selection in cases of
microevolution.  Predicting changes in relative frequency of a trait from one generation to the next appears to pose
less substantial challenge than extrapolating shifts in distributions across a broader scope of generations and time.
          We have three more rounds of the educational design experiment, including a second summer school with
many of the first summer's second grade participants as third graders in the other domain (switching from study of
botany to animals and their behavior or visa versa) and two semesters in regular school year classrooms.        This gives
us the opportunity to continue to rework the curriculum to more adequately scaffold the conceptual issues that prove
most difficult. Our goal is to iteratively refine the instruction, as we closely examine the power and limitations in
children's understandings   of evolution   that emerge under       these instructional conditions. This   process will  best
position us to try to differentiate robust limitations of children this age from limitations due to suboptimal learning
opportunities.

References
Cody, M. L. & Overton, J. McC. (1996). Short-term evolution of reduced dispersal in island plant populations. The
       The Journal of Ecology. 84 (1). 53-61.
Duschl, R., Schweingruber, H.A, & Shouse, A. (2007). Taking science to school: Learning and teaching in grades K-8.
          Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
Endler, J. (1980). Natural selection on color patterns of Poecilia reticulata. Evolution, 34, 76-91.
Evans, E. M. (2000). The emergence of beliefs about the origin of species in school-age children. Merrill-Palmer
     Quarterly. 46 (2), 221-254.
Fay, A. L. & Klahr, D. (1996). Knowing about guessing and guessing about knowing: Preschoolers' understanding
     in indeterminacy. Child Development. 67 (2), 689-716.
Gelman, S. A.   (2003). The essential child. Oxford UK: Oxford University Press.
Gould, S. J. (1996). Full house: The spread of excellence from Plato to Darwin. NY: Three Rivers Press.
Keleman, D. (1999). The scope     of teleological thinking in preschool children.   Cognition,  70, 241-272.
Lombrozo, T & Carey, S. (2006). Functional explanation and the function of explanation. Cognition. 99, 167-204.
Mayr, E. (1988). Toward a new philosophy of biology: Observations of a evolutionist. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Medin, D. & Atran, S. (2004). The native mind: Biological categorization and reasoning in development and across cultures.
     Psychological Review. 111 (4), 960-983.
Shtulman, A. (2005). Qualitative differences between naïve and scientific theories of evolution. Cognitive Psychology.
Tinghitella, R. M.  (2008). Rapid evolutionary change in a sexual signal: Genetic control of the mutation 'flatwing'
          that renders male crickets mute (Teleogryllus oceanicus) mute. Heredity. 100, 261-267.
Zuk, M., Rotenberry, J. T., & Tinghitella, R. M. (2006). Silent night: Adaptive disappearance of a sexual signal in a
          parasitized population of field crickets. Biology Letters. 2, 521-524.

Acknowledgements
This research was funded by the National Science Foundation Grant DRL-0814821.              The opinions expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect those of the NSF.

                                                      403   ·  © ISLS
