                                               ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 2

Small Groups, Big Mistakes: The Emergence of Faulty Rules During
                              a Collaborative Board Game
                 Matthew Berland, Univ. of Texas at San Antonio, matthew.berland@utsa.edu
       Victor Lee & Maneksha DuMont, Utah State University, {victor.lee, maneksha.dumont}@usu.edu

         Abstract:   Recent research   using games   as   learning  environments     has provided   us  with
         examples of situated learning processes (e.g., Gee, 2007). Board games, in particular, foster
         rich  think-aloud  cognition and  small  group   reasoning   (Smith,    2007).  This study  uses a
         collaborative board  game    as a site for understanding   sense-making     in  small  groups.  We
         investigate how   groups `reconstruct'  rules, and  unpack   how     and when   they coordinate  an
         understanding of goals. We suggest this is done with the aid of. handles: concrete signifiers,
         such as physical objects, words, or gestures that players use as substitutes for complex rules.

Introduction
         Recent research using games as learning environments has provided educational researchers with new
examples of situated learning processes (e.g., Gee, 2007). Many of the most recent studies have focused on
computationally based games, but we maintain the position that the affordances of game environments, both for
observing and orchestrating learning, are not restricted to the computational medium. Board games, a similarly
rule-based and  interactive game  environment,    constitute  an  especially   promising  class of  games  for study
because foster the kinds of think-aloud cognition and small group reasoning that is the target of empirical
research and educational reform efforts (Smith, 2007). In this study, we use a collaborative board game as a site
for understanding  sense-making   in  small  group  collaboration.    We     examine a  situation where  players     are
provided with all the materials packaged with a collaborative board game and unpack how and when they
coordinate an understanding of their individual and group goals. In our pursuit of this endeavor, we have noticed
a phenomenon across our samples thus far in which rule reconstruction goes awry. Essentially, players make up
their own rules without realizing they are creating something new that deviates from what is prescribed by the
rulebook. Upon iterative review, and as we will describe in this paper, these faulty rules are seeded by players
grasping at what we describe as a "bad handle".
         As will be illustrated by our case, handles serve in these social sense-making situations as material
anchors (Hutchins, 2005) around which players share and build knowledge. Handles are concrete signifiers,
such as physical objects, words, or gestures, which players repeatedly use or reference as stand-ins for more
complex concepts and rules. Problems arise when the group's understanding of a complex rule is shaped by a
handle that they have (perhaps unwittingly) chosen. The original referenced meaning is lost or converted into
something new.
         The interest of this work to the Learning Sciences community is two-fold. First, it is an expansion of
the recent interest in research related to learning that takes place in and around games and gaming practices
(e.g., Squire & Barab, 2004). The second point of interest in this work is in small group collaboration.
Collaborative discourse has long been an interest in the Learning Sciences (e.g., Barron, 2003; Engle & Conant,
2002). What we intend to do is carefully consider how the signifiers that we describe as "handles" are
instrumental to the sense-making and discourse that takes place.

Handles and Material Anchors
Our term handle is a targeted extension of Hutchins' (2005) definition of material anchor to this context.
Hutchins uses the term material anchor to describe how physical objects (or signifiers thereof) solidify group
understanding of a particular metaphor. An example he provides is that subjects will be more successful in
identifying the correct answer in statement 2 than statement 1:
    1. If x is true, then y is true. We know that y is not true. Is x true?
    2. If this is a garnet, then it is a semi-precious stone. We know that this isn't a semi-precious stone. Is it a
       garnet?
Statement 2 is easier to understand, because subjects can use outside information (D'Andrade, 1989).
         Groups do not have a facility for sharing the same understanding of the rules other than through
concrete signifiers in the world. Thus, material anchors are a necessary mediator of group understanding ­ they
form one of only a few anchors around which groups can share understandings of an abstract concept (Kripke,
1982). However, the outside information that individuals unconsciously use to understand these material
handles colors how they process the problem. Fauconnier & Turner (2002) describe this mix of unconscious
understanding and target content as involving conceptual blending. A bad handle can be understood as an
anchor that results in conceptual blending that, as it is taken up by the group, nudges groups away from correct
interpretations of shared information toward jointly agreed-upon misunderstandings.

                                                   397  ·  © ISLS
                                                  ICLS 2010  ·   Volume 2

Example: Role Handle
         For this work, we collected multiple video-recorded observations of four groups as they were provided
with a collaborative board game about disease spread, Pandemic, to learn and play. The participants gathered
for up to three two-hour game play sessions. Twelve of the sixteen participants were undergraduate students at a
large university in the American West. The other four were a group of adults from the same regional area.
Participants were told at the beginning of the game sessions that the researcher would not participate nor answer
any questions related to the game, and as much as possible, the players should act as if the researcher and
camera were not there. Transcripts were generated of the initial game sessions for all four groups.
         We present a short example to illustrate how a handle can be taken up and seed bad information. The
group from the excerpt below used a bad handle to misunderstand the word `role' in relation to the game. At the
beginning    of each game  of  Pandemic,     each  player   is randomly    assigned  a permanent    game    role through
distribution of `role cards'. Each role has unique capabilities that allow that player to take different "special"
actions throughout in the game. The error that the group made was to overlook an entire phase of the game
because of how they handled of the word `role'. Only when their game was entirely finished did they begin to
notice where the problem had been:
         Andi:     [reading from the instructions] Special event: the next player to play the infector phase can
                   skip their turn entirely.
         Jesse:    How come we haven't had any outbreaks [i.e., difficulty increases in the game]?
         ...
         Elena:    [in reference to Andi's reading] What's the infector phase? The infector example, lets see: [she
                   reads from  instructions]   "Brandon's     playing  the infector.   To finish his   turn the  infector
                   marker is on three to end the infector rate." Oh... whose, is anyone's role card the infector?
         Jesse:    This [an unused role card, face down, located to the side of the board] is the infector right
                   here.
Throughout the game, the group had conflated the existence of the "infector phase" with a role one must play
and, in turn, with the "role card." They substituted the "role card" concept in every situation in which the
"infector phase" should have been played the game. This substitution provided a convenient `handle' with
which to incorrectly interpret large chunks of the game.

Conclusions
         Small, self-directed groups can make big mistakes when building rules. Sometimes this can occur when
ideas are not heard or built upon (e.g., Barron, 2003). However, we have seen instances here where listening to
others and building up on ideas leads to errors. Individuals were all attempting to coordinate understandings
through physical and verbal externalizations their individual rules, and, as such, the group ultimately changed
the content of the rules for the game as a whole. Our work thus serves to add to our understanding of how
interacting with signifiers might change collaborative rule construction. Through this poster, we demonstrate
some of the potential for Learning Sciences games research can involve board games, and in particular how
some of the observable interactional phenomena can be traced to group interactions and handles. Although still
preliminary,    we conjecture from these     observations   that small  design   changes  to target bad handles    could
manifest in significant learning gains in the domain of a complex gaming activity. A future paper will outline
the effect of specific design implications for collaborative rule-building.

References
Barron, B. J. S. (2003). When smart groups fail. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 12(3), 307-359.
D'Andrade,   R.  G.  (1989).  Culturally based    reasoning.   In A.   Gellatly, D.  Rogers  &   J. A.  Sloboda   (Eds.),
         Cognition and social worlds. Oxford University Press.
Engle, R. A., & Conant, F. R. (2002). Guiding principles for fostering productive disciplinary engagement:
         Explaining an emergent argument in a community of learners classroom. Cognition & Instruction,
         20(4), 399-483.
Fauconnier,   G.,  &  Turner,  M.  (2002).   The   way   we    think : conceptual    blending and   the mind's    hidden
         complexities. New York: Basic Books.
Gee, J. P.   (2007). What  video  games      have to teach    us about    learning and literacy. New    York:    Palgrave
         Macmillan.
Hutchins, E. (2005). Material anchors for conceptual blends. Journal of Pragmatics, 37, 1555-1577.
Kripke, S. (1982). Wittgenstein on Rules and Private Language. Oxford: Blackwell.
Leacock, M. (Creator). (2007). Pandemic. Mahopac, NY: Z-Man Games.
Smith, H. (2007). The Social and Private Worlds of Speech: Speech for Inter- and Intramental Activity. Modern
         Language Journal, 91(3), 341-356.
Squire, K.   &   Barab,  S.A. (2004). Replaying      history.  Proceedings   of  the International   Conference   of the
         Learning Sciences (ICLS-04), Los Angeles, CA.

                                                     398  ·   © ISLS
