                                                  ICLS 2010   ·   Volume 2

          Title: Formative Feedback Handheld Tools for Teachers
         Abstract:   Formative    assessment     has been     found   to improve    teaching    and learning   but
         formative   feedback    tools are  often  left out   of  school   data  systems.  Via   a  Design-Based
         Research process we collaborated with 11 elementary school teachers, leaders, and staff to
         examine data collection practices and design handheld formative feedback tools for classroom
         practice. The iterative design process revealed surface-level differences but deep functional
         similarities across teachers and highlighted the tension between data and tool standardization
         and customization.

       A prior NSF-funded study that explored how leaders help their schools develop the capacity to act on
achievement data demonstrated the important role played by formative feedback systems (Halverson, Prichett,
Grigg, & Thomas, 2005; Halverson, Prichett, & Watson, 2007). "Formative feedback systems are systems of
structures, people,  and practices     that help  teachers    and  administrators   translate   testing data  into practical
information  for everyday   use"  (Halverson,     Prichett, &   Watson,    2007).   The   study revealed  that   school data
systems typically consist of two levels. One level is a technologically-complex, district-sponsored summative
system that meets external accountability requirements. The second level is a distributed, fragmented, teacher-
driven formative system located in the classroom. The research found that 1) information was rarely exchanged
formally across these levels largely because of the lack of attention paid to the teacher level, 2) tools that
provide teachers the kinds of formative information necessary for student learning are often left out of holistic
district-school-classroom data system designs, and 3) formative tools that exist are often low-tech paper-and-
pencil designs which result in data fragmentation between classroom-based data systems as well as the district
system. Therefore, we were interested in understanding specifically how teachers collect, track, make sense of,
and reflect  on  student classroom     data  and  instruction.   We   wanted    to  fully describe  the  classroom-centric
formative   feedback system   that  has  an  immediate,     direct impact    on  learning. Based    on  these  findings, we
intended to explore how a software tool could reveal, support, and stretch teacher formative feedback practices.
Because we are in an era of mobile technology, we can now think of education as "a conversation in context
enabled  by  continual  interaction    through  and  with   personal   and   mobile  technology"    (Sharples,   Taylor,  &
Vavoula,  2005).  In   addition, as Roschelle,    Penuel,   Yarnall,  &    Tatar (2004)   found,   teachers   need  ways  to
increase the quality of assessment information and need tools that "informate" rather than "automate" existing
assessments."   This poster  describes   the    preliminary   findings   from   our design   experiment    to  build digital
handheld formative feedback data tools with and for the highly mobile classroom teacher.

Method
         We selected a design-based research approach for our study as "design is central in efforts to foster
learning, create usable knowledge, and advance theories of learning and teaching in complex settings...and for
understanding   how,   when,  and   why     educational   innovations    work    in practice"    (Design-Based     Research
Collective, 2003). A design-based model for research surfaces the real constraints and affordances that shape
what  professionals  see as possible.   Such    a collaborative,   iterative model   identifies  the    moments  for which
formative feedback tools might be constructed and provides a real-world participatory opportunity for testing
and customizing the new tools in context.
         We   collaborated  throughout      the research  process   with   11   teachers,  leaders,  and   staff in  a  rural
intermediate school (grades 3-5). We selected the school because of its reputation for effective data use to
inform student learning and its established record of improving student test scores as discovered via the prior
Data-Driven Instructional Systems study (Halverson, Prichett, Grigg, & Thomas, 2005). We worked with the
principal and instructional coach and by purposive sampling, recruited experienced (had taught between 8-18
years) educators who were knowledgeable about both school-wide and classroom-centric data and assessment
programs and processes. The participants included two teachers from each of the three grade levels (who teach
core academic subjects) as well as the art teacher, instructional coach, literacy specialist, school principal and
the district technology coordinator.
         We collected 40 teacher-level student data collection and assessment documents. These documents
consisted of grade sheets, student-teacher conference tools, weekly quizzes and assessment tools from grade-
level subject-matter   third-party  curricula,    observation    checklists,  rubrics,  report   cards,  and  student   self-
evaluation  forms.  All  teacher-level  artifacts  were   paper-based    and  half  included    student  data that  was  de-
identified. Via content analysis we developed a detailed typology of assessment practices and codes to inform
the tool design  in  a way  that  would     both  support   and  stretch practice.  Parallel  to and    integrated with  the
document analysis, we observed the teachers during instruction in order to identify the junctures for which
digital formative feedback tools might be used in practice. We also engaged in focus group design meetings. At
these meetings we discussed and applied assessment practices to the designs, reviewed assessment software
tools and devices, examined interface sketches, and discussed tool feature and functionality needs and priorities.

                                                      401   ·  © ISLS
                                                 ICLS 2010   ·   Volume 2

Preliminary Findings
        During the design process, underlying assumptions on formative data practice and use surfaced while
the team  discussed  needs   and   practices and   identified  common     and  individual  tools, symbols,   and   symbol
meanings. Our classroom observations suggested that a tool for formative feedback would integrate best with
individual and small group activity in the classroom. Our document analysis revealed data collection practices
and idiosyncratic assessment symbol system consistencies and variances across teachers and disciplines (See
Table 1).

Table 1: Example teacher-centric formative assessment symbol systems

Subject                      Teacher 1                       Teacher 2                     Teacher 3
Math                         5, 4, 3, 2, 1, blank,           A, N, A/N, N/A                +, !, ­ , blank, abs,
                             absent                                   !, 2/3, "            LATE
Literacy ­ Reading           3, 2, 1                         4/ !, 3, 2, 1/ "              3, 2, 1, blank, abs, ­
Comprehension                                                                              !, "

Like  our  initial document    analysis,    the  design-based    research    process  highlighted   a   tension   between
standardization and customization; although we found patterns in how teachers collected and recorded data
within disciplines, we also found that teachers generally valued the ability to customize their data-collection
tools as well as the data types. Although teachers thought about data collection in terms of the curriculum and
assessments already in place in their school, they wanted data collection tools that could be customized to their
own needs. Teachers repositioned our initial plan to build a completely standardized tool and encouraged us to
enable as much customization as possible.

Conclusion
        We intend for this research to contribute to understanding of the formative aspects of school data
systems and inform designs for compatible tools that might alleviate the tension between standardization and
customization. We hope to stretch formative classroom practices and initiate dialogs about data to influence
learning and teaching in new, positive ways. Despite the differences between teachers' formative feedback tools
and  systems, we   believe  that we   are  able  to accommodate      for  deep structural  similarities across    teachers'
formative  feedback   practices  as   well  as  individual   differences.  Our   tool designs   could   therefore  enable
informate  conversations    across teachers  and    the district data system.   We    will demonstrate   KidGrid    Apple
iPhone/iPod Touch application we built during the poster session in conjunction with a poster of our design-
based research process and preliminary findings.

References
Design-Based   Research  Collective.     (2003). Design-based      research:  An emerging    paradigm    for   educational
        inquiry. Educational Researcher, 32(1), 5-8.
Halverson, R., Grigg,   J., Prichett, R.,  &   Thomas,    C. (2005,   September).  The  new   instructional    leadership:
        Creating data-driven instructional systems in schools (WCER Working Paper No. 2005-9). Madison:
        University of Wisconsin­Madison, Wisconsin Center for Education Research.
Halverson, R., Prichett, R., & Watson, J., (2007, May). Formative feedback systems and the new instructional
        leadership   (WCER       Working     Paper  No.   2007-7).    Madison:   University   of   Wisconsin­Madison,
        Wisconsin Center for Education Research.
Roschelle, J., Penuel, W. R., Yarnall, L., and Tatar, D. 2004. Handheld Tools that "Informate" Assessment of
        Student Learning in Science: A Requirements Analysis. In Proceedings of the 2nd IEEE international
        Workshop     on Wireless     and Mobile    Technologies    in Education  (Wmte'04)    (March    23   - 25,  2004).
        WMTE. IEEE Computer Society, Washington, DC, 149.
Sharples, M.,  Taylor,  J., Vavoula,     G.  (2005)  Towards     a theory   of mobile   learning.  To   be published   in
        Proceedings of mLearn 2005 Conference, Cape Town.

Acknowledgments
·   Richard Halverson, Associate Professor, Principal Investigator for this research, Educational Leadership
    and Policy Analysis/Curriculum and Instruction, University of Wisconsin - Madison
·   Wisconsin Center for Educational Research, University of Wisconsin ­ Madison

                                                      402  ·  © ISLS
