                                               ICLS 2010    Volume 2

       The Effect of Teachers' Beliefs and Curricular Enactments on
                      Student Learning in High School Science

                           Katherine L. McNeill, Diane Silva Pimentel, Eric G. Strauss,
                     Boston College, 140 Commonwealth Avenue, Chestnut Hill, MA 02467
                           Email: kmcneill@bc.edu, silvadi@bc.edu, strausse@bc.edu

          Abstract: This study focuses on a high school urban ecology curriculum that was enacted by
          twenty-two  teachers.  We  investigated how    teachers' beliefs about  science  instruction and
          enactment of the curriculum impacted student learning. Results from the hierarchical linear
          model suggest that teachers' use of lecture, incorporation of group work, level of adaptation of
          the curriculum and beliefs about argumentation all significantly impact student achievement.

Theoretical Framework
          Learning environments consist of a variety of different social and material supports that can interact
synergistically to support students in developing rich disciplinary knowledge (Tabak, 2004). Historically, the
role of the teacher has been overlooked when examining the impact of curriculum on student learning (Ball &
Cohen, 1996). Yet the teacher is essential in enacting curriculum materials in terms of the culture of inquiry that
is fostered in the classroom, which ultimately impacts students' development of rich conceptual understandings
(Puntambekar, Stylianou & Goldstein, 2007). Teachers' understanding of the curriculum as well as their beliefs
about teaching and learning influence their enactment of curriculum (Ball & Cohen, 1996).
          Recent research emphasizes the importance of moving away from a traditional model of instruction in
which the teacher's main role is that of transmission of information to a new model of a community of learners
in which students actively construct their own conceptual understandings (Sawyer, 2006).        Although there are
numerous qualitative studies investigating the role of such environments, large-scale quantitative studies still
need   to be conducted  to validate these  findings and   link  teaching practices  to student outcomes   (Thadani,
Stevens & Tao, 2009).     The large scale studies that have been conducted in science education provide mixed
results on   student achievement  with studies finding    that standards-based   inquiry teaching practices have a
positive effect (Kahle, Meece & Scantlebury, 2000), both positive and negative effects (Von Secker & Lissitz,
1999), and no significant positive or negative effects (Lee, Penfield, Maerten-Rivera, 2009) on student learning.
Furthermore, none of these studies investigate teacher beliefs in conjunction with their instructional practices.
Consequently, our research question is: How do teachers' beliefs about science instruction and their enactment
of an inquiry-oriented high school science curriculum impact students' learning in science?

Study Design
          This study took place in the context of a year-long high school urban ecology curriculum entitled
Urban EcoLab: How Can We Develop Healthy Cities?. The curriculum consists of eight modules covering
different topics including patterns of land use, climate change, hazardous waste, public health and biodiversity.
Each module consists of approximately 10 lessons that include different activity structures such as inquiry
investigations, development of models, role-play, computer simulations, field investigations of their city, and
environmental action plans.
          The participants in this study included 22 teachers from 21 different schools piloting the urban ecology
curriculum   and  366  students. The schools   were located    in three  regions of the  United  States: Northeast,
Midwest, and Southwest. Student demographics among schools varied within a spectrum with some schools
serving predominantly one race (Black, Hispanic or White) of student and others serving a more diverse group
of learners  with similar  representations of two  or  more    races.  Over 50% of the students in most schools
participated in a free or reduced lunch plan with only five schools falling below 20% participation. Teacher
experience ranged from 1-29 years with an average of 10 years for all teachers.
          We collected a variety of data sources to address our research question.       Teachers completed a pre-
survey, which asked questions about their beliefs about science content, scientific inquiry, and instructional
practices.  During the enactment, teachers completed module surveys that asked about the level of completion,
the level of adaptation, and the amount of time using different activity structures (e.g. lecture, discussion, group
work, etc.). The students  completed an identical two-day pre and posttest  that consisted of  twenty-one multiple-
choice items and four open ended questions. The open-ended responses were scored by one rater using a rubric.
Twenty percent of these open-ended test items were randomly sampled and scored by a second independent
rater.  Estimates of inter-rater reliability were calculated by percent agreement.     Interrater reliabilities for the
four questions were 94%, 88%, 96%, and 95% respectively.
          Determining the impact of teachers' beliefs and curricular enactment on student achievement is
complex because students in the same class are not independent. Multi-level modeling recognizes the

                                                                                                                 1
                                                   403     ISLS
                                              ICLS 2010     Volume 2

dependence and grouping  of data, which leads to a more correct estimation of effects and variance.     We used
Hierarchical Linear Modeling (HLM) in a two-level format to investigate the teachers' beliefs and enactments
on student learning (Raudenbush & Bryk, 2001). The creation of the model consisted of three steps.      First, we
created a fully unconditional model (FUM) to compute the intraclass correlation coefficient (ICC). Next we
created a level 1 or within-teacher model to examine the effect of student level variables (e.g. demographics and
pre-test) on student achievement. Finally, we developed a level 2 or between-teacher model to examine the
effect of teacher level variables (e.g. teacher beliefs and curricular enactments) on student achievement.

Results and Discussion
         The  fully unconditional   model (FUM)     suggests  that  there was a   significant difference in student
achievement   between teachers, !2  = 255.58   (df = 21),   p < .001.  The  reliability of  the FUM  is  high, 0.87,
suggesting that it is appropriate to use the adjusted ICC ("/(" + (#$2)).     The adjusted ICC is 0.426, which
suggests that 42.6% of the variance in student achievement exists between teachers.
         The within-teacher model explored the effects of students' gender and pretest scores.     The preliminary
results suggest that gender did not have a significant effect, while students' pretest scores did significantly
predict their achievement on the posttests, t = 6.746 (df = 363), p < .001. Adding students' pretest scores to the
model explained 12% of the variation at level 1.
         The  between teacher   model  investigated  the    impact of teacher beliefs   and enactments   on student
achievement. We first examined the effect of eight enactment variables and seven teacher belief variables on
student achievement separately.   Three enactment variables had a significant effect on student achievement: the
more group work students completed had a positive effect, the more a teacher lectured had a negative effect and
the more the teacher adapted the curriculum had a negative effect.        Only one of the teacher belief variables
significantly impacted student achievement: the more frequently a teacher reported the importance of having
students engage in argumentation and the sharing of ideas, the greater student achievement.      We then examined
each combination of two  variables. The only significant combination included both that 1) the more group      work
students completed had a positive effect on student achievement, t = 2.096 (df = 19), p < .05, and 2) the more
the teacher adapted the curriculum had a negative effect on student achievement, t = -2.248 (df = 19), p < .05.
Including these two teacher level variables in the model explained 48% of the variance at level 2.
         One limitation of this study is that it is dependent on teacher self-report. Self-report of teacher practices
can be limited in part because of a lack of shared language between teachers and researchers (Thadani, 2009).
Yet these findings suggest that teachers who report having classrooms that align more with a community of
learners perspective in which students actively construct their own knowledge (Sawyer, 2006), specifically
through argumentation, group work and less lecture, results in greater student learning.          Previous research
suggests that teacher instructional  practices in  inquiry    science instruction can   have  different impacts   on
students' conceptual understanding when measured by multiple-choice items competed to open-ended questions
(Puntambekar, et al., 2007).   For the final version of this poster, we will extend our analysis to include two
separate models for the multiple-choice and open-ended items to investigate whether the effect of teachers'
beliefs and enactments was different depending on the measure of students' disciplinary knowledge.

References
Ball, D. L., & Cohen, D. K. (1996). Reform by the book: What is--or might be--the role of curriculum
         materials in teacher learning and instructional reform? Educational Researcher, 25(9), 6-8, 14.
Kahle, J. B., Meece, J. & Scantlebury, K. (2000). Urban African-American middle school science students:
         Does standards-based teaching make a difference? Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 37(9),
         1019-1041.
Lee, O., Penfield, R., & Maerten-Rivera, J. (2009). Effects of fidelity of implementation on science achievement
         gains among English language learners. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 46(7), 836-859.
Puntambekar, S., Stylianou, A., & Goldstein, J. (2007). Comparing classroom enactments of an inquiry
         curriculum: Lessons learned from two teachers. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 16(1), 81-130.
Raudenbush, S. W., & Bryk, A. S. (2002). Hierarchical Linear Models: Applications and Data Analysis
         Methods, 2nd Edition. Newbury Park, CA: Sage Publications
Sawyer, R. K. (2006). Analyzing collaborative discourse. In R. K. Sawyer (Ed.), The Cambridge handbook of
         the learning sciences (pp. 187-204). New York, NY: Cambridge University Press.
Tabak, I. (2004). Synergy: A complement to emerging patterns in distributed scaffolding. The Journal of the
         Learning Sciences, 13(3), 305-335.
Thadani, V., Stevens, R. H., & Tao, A. (2009). Measuring complex features of science instruction: Developing
         tools to investigate the link between teaching and learning. The Journal of the Learning Sciences,
         18(2), 285-322.
Von Secker, C. E. & Lissitz, R. W. (1999). Estimating the impact of instructional practices on student
         achievement in science. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 36(10), 1110-1126.

                                                                                                                  2
                                                   404     ISLS
