                                                  ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

Learning physics as coherently packaging multiple sets of signs

            Kristine Lund, Karine Bécu-Robinault ICAR Research Lab, CNRS, University of Lyon
                            ENS-LSH, 15 parvis René Descartes, 69007 Lyon, France
                          Email: Kristine.Lund@univ-lyon2.fr, Karine.Robinault@inrp.fr

        Abstract: This paper studies the multimodal reformulations that teachers and students make
        when they talk about and do physics experiments in class. Using the framework of semiotic
        bundles,   we   show    that reformulating   aspects    having  to do   with physics   knowledge while
        moving between talk, gestures, drawings and manipulations is done differently by experts and
        novices. Analysis of video excerpts illustrate that teachers are able to coherently package
        multiple sets of signs throughout their discourse and actions in the classroom, but students
        who    are learning  physics    have    specific problems    that  this framework   makes   evident. In
        particular, successfully reformulating from one semiotic resource to another implies that the
        first resource be correctly constructed. In addition, specific tool affordances hinder students in
        their  attempt  to coherently      package  multiple    sets of  signs  while this is  not the case  for
        teachers. We conclude by suggesting ways in which teachers can ease students' difficulties in
        constructing semiotic bundles.

Introduction
Our research team has many years of experience in designing teaching sequences for upper secondary school in
physics and chemistry     (e.g. Buty,   et al., 2004).   These  groups    are based  on the  collaboration of practicing
teachers and researchers in which instrumental and theory-oriented approaches are combined (Brown, 1992).
One main hypothese stemming from research on the design of these teaching sequences is that the modeling
activities of students in relation to an epistemological point of view concerning physics' functioning must be
taken into account (Bécu-Robinault, 2002). In addition, other theoretical underpinnings are taken into account,
such as the role of social interactions in learning (e.g. Doisy & Mugny, 1984) and research results concerning
misconceptions (cf. Duit & Von Rhöneck, 1998 for a meta-review). Since 1997, we have developed a range of
teaching-learning sequences, concerning learners aged from 15 to 18 all of which have been implemented in
classrooms and evaluated from teaching and learning perspectives. Our results show that teachers are able to use
the teaching-learning   sequences    and   associated documents      and  they  also perceive  improvements   in student
learning. Despite this, evaluations also show that, unexpectedly, a variety of teachers devote a great deal of time
to the reformulation of the ideas in the elaborated documents (Lund & Bécu-Robinault, forthcoming). We know
teachers have a fixed duration to teach their class and do not purposefully waste time, so we hypothesize that
this phase is important for helping students grasp the knowledge to be taught. In this study we explore the
implicit reasons for which teachers may perform such a reformulation activity and this prompts us to look more
closely at the initial lessons of a particular physics teaching-learning sequence.
        In what follows we will present our theoretical framework, describe our empirical study, present our
analyses and results and conclude with perspectives for further work.

Theoretical framework
Physics learning in the classroom is a complex activity that is both cognitive and social where teachers and
students use talk, gestures, drawings and the manipulation of objects to co-construct physics concepts. It has
been shown that embodiment through gesture plays a role in learning new concepts (Goldin-Meadow, et al,
2009) and Roth & Pozzer-Ardenghi (2005) propose that for understanding communication in everyday settings,
one must take into account not only words and gestures but also all other semiotic resources co-participants
produce or  find   in the setting.   In this paper, we    choose  to  address   students' conceptual   difficulties in the
particular case of learning electricity through the study of multimodal reformulation as a tool to co-construct
discourse (De  Gaulmyn,     1987;    Apotheloz,    2001;  Lund,   2007),   thus  taking   into account all  the  semiotic
resources that co-participants   do.    We   will use the  notion    of semiotic  bundles  as  a method  for  explaining
students' difficulties (Arzarello, 2004) and illustrating teachers' expertise. In the sections that follow, we present
these notions and set the scene for showing how reformulating aspects of one particular semiotic resource into
another one is an expert activity for teachers but fraught with difficulties for students.

Multimodal reformulation
The term multimodal is often used to signify the medium in which a particular message can be expressed, for
example text or graphics (e.g. Pineda & Garza, 2000). The authors Kress & Van Leeuwen, (2001) distinguish
between modes and media: modes are the abstract, non­material resources of meaning-making whereas media
are the specific material forms in which modes are carried out. The mode of gesture is carried out in the media

                                                      404   ·  © ISLS
                                               ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

of  movements    of the body. Different   media  afford   different kinds   of meaning  (Dicks,  et al. 2006), e.g.
expressing an idea in writing or speech affects what is conveyed. Here, we use the term multimodal to describe
the addition of  non-verbal  human  face-to-face  interactive phenomena     such  as gesture, gaze, posture, object
manipulations, etc. to speech, studied extensively as a phenomenon in its own right by researchers such as
Kendon (2004), Cosnier, (2000), McNeal (1992) and Brassac, et al. (2008).
        Many interactive situations whose objective is learning presumes a dissymmetry of knowledge between
interlocutors. This dissymmetry calls for adjusting discourse so that interlocutors reach mutual comprehension
and  common    ground.  Teachers' discourse  does   not  escape from   these adjustments and   they often occur  as
reformulations; what learners say is put by the teacher into more conventional words (Chouinard & Clark,
2003). In this study, we borrow a different focus for the definition of reformulation, elaborated in the context of
collaborative writing (Apotheloz, 2001). This is an oralo-graphic situation that articulates two different modes,
speaking and writing. For Apotheloz, cooperation during such a task consists in "continuously exhibiting, that is
at each step, the manner in which what is formulated articulates with what has already been formulated" (p. 62,
our translation from French). We study this same phenomenon of reformulation, but in a situationwhere there is
a plurality of multimodal activity: teachers and students speak, write, gesture, draw and manipulate objects and
we see that the reformulations between modes that are carried out by teachers and those that are carried out by
students differ greatly in how such a reformulation provides for the construction of meaning.

Semiotic Bundles
We use Arzarello's (2004) semiotic bundle to interpret such multimodal reformulation, originally defined to
analyze interactions around mathematics learning. A semiotic bundle is a collection of semiotic sets and a set of
relationships between the sets of the bundle. A semiotic set is composed of three elements. The first component
is a set of signs that may be produced with different intentional actions (speaking, writing, drawing, gesturing,
handling an artifact). The second component is a set of modes for producing the signs and possibly transforming
them. The modes can be rules or algorithms, but can also be more flexible action or productions modes, such as
the modes referred to in the previous section, comparable to the intentional actions of Arzarello (speaking,
writing, drawing, gesturing, handling an artifact). The third and final component is a set of relationships among
the produced signs and their meanings embodied in an underlying meaning structure. A semiotic bundle is a
dynamic structure changing over time due to the semiotic activities of the participants who are constructing it.
        Our    research questions focus   on describing   how   expert teachers  and  novice  students  reformulate
aspects having to do with physics knowledge while moving between talk, gestures, drawings and manipulations
of physical objects. We hypothesize that experts and novices will reformulate differently and that the theoretical
concept of the semiotic bundle is useful for understanding students' difficulties in physics while illustrating how
teachers' expertise in multimodal reformulation can potentially be leveraged for helping students.

Empirical study
This study has been carried out in the context of a research-action group that designs teaching sequences for
physics (Bécu-Robinault,   2007;  Buty  et al, 2004).   All the teaching   sequences  have been  co-elaborated  by
researchers  and practicing  teachers, implemented    in  classrooms   and  evaluated from teaching  and  learning
perspectives. In this presentation, we focus on the electro kinetics sequence, lasting 3 months, for grade 7 in the
French school system. The teaching and learning of electricity has been the object of many investigations in
science education. From international research results, we know that students encounter deep-level conceptual
and reasoning difficulties in understanding introductory electricity. The main difficulty concerns notions of
current, electric current and energy that are not differentiated by students (Psillos et al., 1988). Many teachers
spontaneously use analogies, such as a water analogy, to teach electricity. Indeed, using analogies in teaching is
thought to provide learners with tools that facilitate science understanding and promote conceptual change. We
thus chose  to introduce  an analogy,  in  order to predict  and  interpret  phenomena  without  using  any  formal
concepts and to help students to develop an understanding of electricity and energy concepts (cf. Scott et al.,
2006). This analogy relates these concepts to familiar every day objects (loaves of bread represent energy,
delivery vans in motion represent the current, the bakery and the supermarket are respectively the analogues of
the battery and the light bulb). The analogy is intended to help students to differentiate the concepts of current
and energy. The lesson is set up so that questioning why a battery has a life span prompts thinking in terms of
energy while questioning how a bulb lights up prompts thinking in terms of current.

Short description of the lessons studied
In the French curriculum, electricity at grade 7 is taught through a phenomenological study of electrical circuits.
In this presentation, we will focus on the first two lessons dedicated to the study of the simple circuit (how to
light a bulb with a battery) and to the introduction of an analogy used for teaching (differentiation of current and
energy, although we will not focus on energy in our examples). The first lesson is a necessary preliminary, in
order that students understand how to handle electrical devices, identify the different terminals, and have no

                                                                                                                 2
                                                  405   ·  © ISLS
                                                ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

choice but to build a loop with the battery, wires and bulb. To understand how a simple circuit functions,
students are asked to draw their experiment before handling electrical devices. This lesson begins with the
presentation of a well-known object, a MagliteTM flashlight. Students usually question a battery's freshness and
this cannot be interpreted in terms of current so the second lesson addresses this concern. With the help of the
analogy, we suggest that the current implies thinking with a circuit perspective and that energy implies thinking
with a chain perspective. Students are thus asked to connect each term of the analogy and its corresponding
physical object in the world and use a variety of semiotic resources (modes producing signs).

Methodology
Video recordings and partial multimodal transcriptions of one pair of students and a teacher involved in the
research-action group were      made and  written   documents    distributed by the teacher were  collected.     The
transcriptions (cf. Atkinson & Heritage, 1984) were done according to the following conventions (cf. Table 1).

                                Table 1. Conventions for multimodal transcriptions

                Multimodal transcription conventions
                ^ : rising tone
                ` : falling tone
                [ : overlapping speech
                a : underlining words implies insistence
                : ou ::: : a sound is drawn out
                = : immediate chaining with next utterance
                (.) : micropause
                (3 s) : pause in seconds
                (...) : a cut in the recording
                (inaudible) : inaudible passage
                ** gestures are described and shown in relation to the discourse that was
                spoken when they were performed

       Verbal and non-verbal behavior of the teacher and students were analyzed in relation to the classroom
production. Written teaching-learning materials were used to define what type of resources students had at their
disposal to build semiotic sets and bundles.

Analyses and results
We present three short video extracts and their corresponding analyses. Before the third extract, we describe
three groups of students' drawings. The first extract corresponds to the presentation of the analogy: the teacher
defines each term and correspondence. In the second, the teacher constructs an experiment (lighting the bulb by
connecting two wires to a battery) that corresponds to a physical object, a drawing of that object and a drawing
of the experiment. In the third, the students attempt this same experiment.

A teacher's complex yet coherent semiotic bundle
The first extract (second lesson) concerns an integration of two semiotic sets into a coherent semiotic bundle.
The first semiotic set contains the model of the electrical circuit (Figure 1, left) and the second contains the
analogy of the electrical circuit, built around a bakery that delivers bread to supermarkets (Figure 1, right).

Model of the electrical circuit                              Analogy built around a baker delivering bread

                 Electrical
                  circuit

                   Figure 1. Two semiotic sets: the electrical circuit and the bakery analogy.

                                                                                                                   3
                                                    406  ·  © ISLS
                                                ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

The elements of the analogy are presented below; each numbered element corresponds to the circled number on
the figure at the right.

1.  Each bakery always loads the same number of loaves of bread at into each delivery truck.
2.  All delivery trucks move at the same speed. The speed of the delivery trucks is adapted to the demand of
    each supermarket.
3.  The delivery trucks arrive at the supermarket where the loaves of bread are delivered, transformed and then
    sold to clients. All of the delivery trucks delivery all of their loaves of bread.
4.  After delivery, each truck returns empty to the bakery in order to get a new load of loaves of bread.

        The relations allowing the coherence of the semiotic bundle are provided by teacher's talk and gestures
concerning each semiotic set and by written documents distributed at the beginning of the lesson (cf. Table 2
where T stands for teacher and S for student).

            Table 2. Teacher discourse and gestures during her presentation of the bakery analogy.

Time   Discourse                                           Gestures
7'33   T: the electric current can can circulate           traces a circle with her hand, then traces another
       Ok and this electric current what is it in the      rapidly traces a smaller circle with her hand
       delivery truck analogy^                             raises her right hand in order to indicate the change
                                                           from the domain of electricity to the analogy
       S: the delivery [trucks
       T: [why yes ^                                       points her finger at a student
       S: the lineup of delivery trucks=
7'43   T: =the lineup of delivery trucks very good         traces a circle with her hand
       it's the lineup of delivery trucks                  traces a circle with her hand, then traces another circle
       uhh it's the fact that                              traces a circle with her hand
       it's the circulation of the delivery trucks         traces a half circle, pauses at the bottom
       the trucks                                          finishes her circle
       are moving                                          traces a half circle with her hand, pauses between the
                                                           bottom and the top, finishes her circle
       so the electric current circulates                  traces a circle pauses between the bottom and the top
       ok it's all of the trucks that circulate very       traces a circle that is almost complete with her hand
7'52   good

        Our videotape shows that gestures are identical when the reference domain changes (from electrical
circuit to bakery analogy). The teacher makes a circular gesture to mimic both circulation of electricity (first
semiotic set) and traffic of delivery trucks (second semiotic set). This circular gesture is repeated eleven times
(cf. Figure 2), in association with the verbalization "circulation of delivery trucks" or "circulation of current".
The rhythmic gesturing emphasizes the continuous aspect of the electrical circuit (delivery trucks) and allows
the teacher to insist    upon the systemic point   of   view. Moreover,  she    makes  pauses  corresponding    to   the
positions of the supermarket (bulb) and of the bakery (battery). We argue that these similar gestures within two
separate semiotic sets help students to integrate the analogues in a single and coherent semiotic bundle.

 Figure 2. Teacher gesturing in order to make the link between circulation ofdelivery trucks and circulation of
                                                        current.

                                                                                                                     4
                                                    407  ·  © ISLS
                                                ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

          However, problems begin for students at a much earlier stage. This paper's aim is to show that building
complex semiotic bundles such as this one can be difficult for students unless each semiotic set they addto their
bundle under construction (indeed each semiotic resource that they add to their set) is done in a coherent way. In
order to illustrate this, we look at the bundle at an earlier stage, before the analogy has been introduced, when
the objective is to build a simple circuit. In this context, a first semiotic set will consist of a drawing, written
comments on that drawing, gestures about that drawing and a verbal description of that drawing, all done by the
students. A second semiotic set will consist of handling the experimental apparatus, talking about handling it,
performing gestures to show objects, all mostly done by the students alone. Having said that, semiotic sets and
bundles   can be co-constructed    between  teachers  and     students, adding to the complexity of our     analytical
viewpoint.

A teacher's initial coherent semiotic bundle
Figure 3 shows an example of how an expert teacher is able to construct a coherent semiotic bundle from a
variety of physical objects and functional representations of those objects (following her own instructions given
to the students during the first lesson, as stated below):
1.  Do a drawing that represents what happens inside the flashlight when it is turned on and is shining (a photo
    of this object is given ­ it's a familiar object for all students).
2.  Draw diverse experiments with the proposed objects that will permit you to verify what happens inside the
    flashlight when it is shining.
3.  After the teacher gives permission, ask for the necessary objects and perform the experiments.
4.  Is your drawing for question 1 correct? If it isn't, do another one that shows what is happening inside the
    flashlight when it is shining.
          Figure 3  shows  that it is easy  to link  each   part of the  drawings  with the  experimental apparatus,
because aspects and locations of objects (battery, bulb) are similar. These relations are also facilitated because
drawing and experimental apparatus are built on the basis of the electrical diagram the teacher has in mind (far
right of Figure 3). The teacher is thus able to move from one mode to another while maintaining coherency and
building meaning. We also notice that the teacher does not draw the clamps of the crocodile clips in her drawing
of the experiment, as they are not relevant to carrying out the experiment. As an expert, she is able to model the
physical objects in a way that is pertinent for the experiment she will be carrying out, only paying attention to
the characteristics that are relevant for that objective (see discussion on affordances in the next section).

 The object        The functional        The drawing of an            The experiment carried     Diagram that
 studied           drawing               experiment explaining        out                        models the
                                         functional aspects                                      function

    Figure 3. An a priori didactical analysis of multimodal and polysemiotic coherence for the simple circuit

Students' difficulties in constructing the initial semiotic bundle
We  first show   an analysis of    three different  student   groups'   drawings in order to illustrate the range of
difficulties students have when they propose experiments that fit to their representation of what happensinside
the flashlight when it is turned on and is shining (cf. Figure 4). One of the first difficulties students experience
while building the semiotic bundle is connecting the experimental apparatus to the initial `thought objects' that
represent the flashlight parts in their drawing. From an expert point of view, the real object (the flashlight), the
drawings and the experimental apparatus as well as discourse and gestures about these, form one semiotic set.
On the other hand, we see that students already have difficulty relating these elements to each other, within the
semiotic set itself, so adding another set to this one (e.g. the bakery analogy) to make a semiotic bundle seems,
at this stage, to be out of these students' reach.

Group#    The functional drawing                   The drawing of an         Comments
                                                   experiment
                                                   explaining functional
                                                   aspects

                                                                                                                   5
                                                     408  ·  © ISLS
                                              ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

1                                                                        There is no wire in the functional
                                                                         drawing. Names of batteries are
                                                                         different from one drawing to another
                                                                         although the battery is the same.
                                                                         However, the drawing of the
                                                                         experiment is correct.

2                                                                        Students use one wire to connect either
                                                                         the battery to the bulb or the battery to
                                                                         itself. They tell their teacher that there
                                                                         is a button they can press to initiate
                                                                         battery functioning.

3                                                                        The functional drawing reproduces the
                                                                         general look of the bulb.
                                                                         The drawing of the experiment takes
                                                                         into account the objects students have
                                                                         to use and the physical affordances of
                                                                         their experimental apparatus are
                                                                         evident in their drawing, even though
                                                                         this is not pertinent.

               Figure 4. Example of students' polysemiotic incoherencies for the simple circuit.

          The second extract (cf. Figure 5) concerns two students (Pierre and Jacques) who experience many
difficulties in attempting to perform the simple circuit experiment as described above. Firstly, the students'
drawing of the experiment is not correct. In order for the bulb to light up, one wire must be touching the very
end of the bulb and the other wire must be touching the middle part (cf. the teacher'sdrawing in Figure 3).
          So in this case, Pierre and Jacques are attempting to create coherency within an underlying meaning
structure between two modes while trying to respect a drawing that will not help them. Secondly, the physical
affordances of the crocodile clips (not shown in their drawing, but visible in the photo), entice the students to
clamp them onto something, but the bulb does not allow clamping. Instead, one must just maintain the clamps
stable (without trying to open them) so that they are touching the correct parts of the bulb and battery (cf. the
teacher's experiment, above). According to Suthers,     et al. (forthcoming), a given medium      offers particular
affordances (potentials for action in relation to the actor, following Gibson, 1977) of which salient affordances
are expected to be the most pertinent (Norman, 1999). In this case, the crocodile clips were salient, but their
function was not pertinent. Contrary to instructions, Pierre and Jacques do not redraw the experiment in an
attempt to focus on how the electrical connections must be made, although this could have helped them.

The object studied   The drawing of an experiment       The experiment carried out a first time
                     explaining functional aspects

     Figure 5. Analysis of two students' multimodal and polysemiotic incoherence for the simple circuit.

                                                                                                                 6
                                                 409  ·   © ISLS
                                                ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

        Later on, another student shows Pierre and Jacques how to light the bulb with one wire. On this basis,
they make several trials and suddenly, it works. Pierre says "it's magic!", but since he hadn't drawn any new
representation of the experiment, this event remains at the level of the magic trick for him, because it is not
integrated into the semiotic bundle. This interpretation is also illustrated by a final trial made with the teacher
that does not work either. Figure 6 and Table 3 with the associated discourse of the teacher shows that Pierre has
not yet understood how to hook the wires up to the battery. In fact, Pierre and Jacques followed their drawing,
but this did not result in a lighted bulb and so they were stuck.

                 Table 3. Teacher discourse when a student helps him to hold the experiment.

Time        Discourse                                  Gestures
32'44       T: no, not really here well we'll see      points to the wire on the bulb
            that later on but it should not be
            placed on the same area of the bulb,
            it should be on this area and on the       points to the lower side of the bulb and the bottom of the
            contact                                    bulb

                    Figure 6. Pierre is called upon to help the teacher hold the experiment.

Conclusions and further work
In this article, we have used the notions of multimodal reformulation and the semiotic bundle to describe how
meaning-making occurs when students and teachers speak, gesture, draw and manipulate objects. Choosing to
look at meaning-making through the construction of such semiotic bundles allows us to meet two goals. Firstly,
we render explicit teachers' expertise (i.e. their ability to seamlessly change modes, to select the appropriate
characteristics of experimental apparatus to model in relation to a known objective and finally to coherently
construct a complex semiotic bundle). Secondly we pinpoint where difficulties appear for students. In particular,
if students erroneously construct a particular semiotic resource (e.g. the drawing for the experiment), they won't
be able to build an underlying structure of meaning between it and the next semiotic resource they reformulate
into (e.g. experimental  apparatus). Secondly,    the  physical   affordances of experimental    materials (e.g.  the
crocodile clips) can hinder reformulation between a semiotic resource in one set and a semiotic resource in
another (e.g. between drawing and experimental manipulation). Finally, although we did not show the data in
this paper  because  of lack  of space, some     subsequent   student  interventions  indicate that the multimodal
reformulations produced by the teacher in order to broaden the semiotic bundle facilitate the understanding of
the electric circuit: students reproduce similar gestures to those of their teacher and they discuss new metaphors
based on the systemic point of view. We can conclude that it is useful to consider teaching sequences from the
viewpoint of the complexity of the semiotic bundle that is being built. Each new semiotic resource and set that is
added to the bundle must be constructed without error so that students are able to reformulate a given resource
into another mode. Physical objects to be manipulated must be carefully chosen so as to not mislead students by
material affordances that are not relevant to the task at hand. In sum, each step of the construction of each
semiotic set that makes up a semiotic bundle can be seen as a checkpoint for student understanding. Future work
will include the documentation of additional examples of representational mode changing and semiotic bundle
building, both by teachers and students. We will also further explore how students can appropriate teachers'
expert multimodal reformulation practices and the extent to which this affects their learning.

References
Apothéloz, D. (2001). Les formulations collaboratives du texte dans une rédaction conversationnelle : modes
        d'expansion syntaxique, techniques métalangagières, grandeurs discursives manipulées, etc. In M.-M.

                                                                                                                   7
                                                   410  ·   © ISLS
                                                  ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

         de Gaulmyn, R. Bouchard et A. Rabatel (dir.). Le processus rédactionnel. Ecrire à plusieurs voix (pp.
         49-66). Paris : L'Harmattan.
Arzarello, F. (2004). Semiosis as a Multimodal Process. Relime, Numero Especial, 267-299.
Atkinson J.M. & Heritage J. (1984). Structures of Social Action, Cambridge, CUP.
Bécu-Robinault, K. (2002). Modelling activities of students during a traditional labwork. In H. Niedderer et D.
         Psillos (dir.), Teaching     and  learning   in  the  science    laboratory (pp.     51-64). Dordrecht:    Kluwer
         Academic Publisher.
Bécu-Robinault,   K.    (2007).   Modélisation     et  investigation    autour   d'une    séquence    d'électrocinétique  :
         introduction    d'une  analogie     pour  expliquer.   In   L.   Morge   et   J.-M.Boilevin     (dir.). Séquences
         d'investigation en physique-chimie (pp. 117-129). CRDP Auvergne : Scéren,.
Brassac, C., Fixmer, P., Mondada, L., Vinck, D. (2008). Interweaving objects, gestures and talk in context.
         Mind, Culture, and Activity, 15(3), 208-223.
Buty C., Tiberghien A., Le Maréchal J.-F. (2004). Learning hypotheses and an associated tool to design and to
         analyse  teaching-learning    sequences.   In   M.  Méheut   et  D.    Psillos, (dir.). International   Journal  of
         Science Education, 26-5, 579-604.
Brown,   A. L. (1992).   Design   experiments:    Theoretical   and  methodological      challenges   in creating   complex
         interventions in classroom settings. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 2, 141-178. NJ: Erlbaum.
Chouinard, M.M. & Clark, E.V. (2003). Adult reformulations of child errors as negative evidence. Journal of
         Child Language, 30, 637-669.
Cosnier, J. (2000). V comme la Voix, les gestes, le corps.      Dans (ed. Bernard Cerquiglini, et al.)Tu parles!? : le
         français  dans   tous  ses   états. Illustrations   originales   de Lewis       Trondheim    Publication.  Paris :
         Flammarion p. 325-338.
Dicks, B., Soyinka, B. & Coffey, A. (2006). Multimodal ethnography.Qualitative Research, 6, 77-96.
De Gaulmyn, M.-M. (1987). Actes de reformulation et processus de reformulation in La dame de Caluire, pp.
         83-98 Berne : Peter Lang.
Doise, W., & Mugny, G. (1984). The social development of the intellect. Oxford, England: Pergamon.
Duit, R. &   Von Rhöneck, C. (1998). Learning and understanding key concepts of electricity, in Connecting
         research in physics education with teacher education (A. Tiberghien, E. L. Jossem, J. Barojas Eds),
         International Commission on Physics Education. Published electronically at http://www.physics.ohio-
         state.edu/~jossem/ICPE/C2.html.
Gibson, J. J. (1977). The theory of affordances. In R. Shaw & J. Bransford (Eds.), Perceiving, Acting, and
         Knowing. Hilsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Goldin-Meadow, S., Wagner Cook, S. & Mitchell, Z.A. (2009). Gesturing Gives Children New Ideas About
         Math. Psychological Science.
Kendon, A. (2004). Gesture : Visible action as utterance. Cambridge : Cambridge University Press.
Kress, G. and Van Leeuwen, T. (2001). Multi-modal Discourse. London : Arnold.
Lund, K.  (2007).  The   importance    of gaze and    gesture  in interactive   multimodal    explanation.    International
         Journal of Language Resources and Evaluation. 41-3/4, 289-303.
Lund, K. & Bécu-Robinault, K. (forthcoming). La reformulation multimodale et polysémiotique comme aide à
         la compréhension      de la     physique.    In  A.  Rabatel   (dir.). Analyse   sémiotique     et didactique   des
         reformulations. Presses universitaires de Franche-Comté.
McNeill, D. (1992) Hand and mind: What gestures reveal about thought. Chicago: Chicago University Press.
Norman, D. A. (1999, May-June). Affordance, Conventions, and Design. ACM Interactions, 6, 38-42.
Pineda, L. & Garza, G. (2000). A Model for Multimodal Reference Resolution. Computational Linguistics, 26
         (2), 139 ­ 193.
Psillos, D., Koumaras, P. & Tiberghien, A., 1988, « Voltage presented as a primary concept in an introductory
         teaching on D.C. circuits ». International Journal of Science Education. Vol.10 (1), p.29-43.
Roth, W.-M. & Pozzer-Ardenghi, L. (2005). Tracking Situated, Distributed, and Embodied Communication in
         Real  Time.  In  M.   A. Vanshevsky      (Ed.),  Focus   on Cognitive    Psychology     Research:   Nova   Science
         Publishers, Inc.
Scott, P., Leach, J., Hind, A. & Lewis, J., (2006). Designing research evidence-informed teaching sequences.             In
         R. Millar,  J.  Leach,   J. Osborne  et   M.  Ratcliffe  (dir.). Improving    Subject   Teaching:   Lessons  from
         Research in Science Education. London: Routledge Falmer.
Suthers, D.   &  Medina,   R.   (forthcoming).    Tracing    Interaction  in    Distributed   Collaborative   Learning.  In
         Puntambekar,    Erkens      and  Hmelo-Silver    (Eds.)   Analyzing    Collaborative     Interactions   in CSCL:
         Methods, Approaches and Issues. New York: Springer.

Acknowledgments
We would    like  to thank  the   students   and  teachers   who   were   filmed   for   this study   and   the  educational
administrators who accepted that such research be carried out in their school.

                                                                                                                          8
                                                      411  ·  © ISLS
