                                             ICLS 2010  ·   Volume 2

  Impasses to innovation in the development and design of new
                                       media curriculum
       Kimberly Richards, University of Illinois at Chicago, 1007 W. Harrison Ave. Chicago, IL 60607,
                                              kricha4@uic.edu
       Kimberley Gomez, Ph.D, University of Pittsburgh, 5105 Wesley W. Posvar Hall, Pittsburgh, PA,
                                             kgomez@pitt.edu

        Abstract: The purpose of this study is to examine discourse as a way to identify evidence of
        impasses to innovation in the development and design of new media curriculum within an in-
        school/ out of school digital arts program. Using data collected in a 3-year ethnographic study,
        we use qualitative coding and conversational analysis methods to provide examples of diverse
        discourses competing in the development of a new media curriculum.

Major Issues Addressed:
   ·    What happens when informal new media knowledge and experiences are brought into the schooling
        context through curriculum design and implementation in an in school and after school digital arts
        program?
   ·    How does the positioning of knowledge affect innovations to the curriculum?
Schooling contexts now must compete with new media contexts for youth engagement and learning (Ito et al,
2008). New media technologies and communications have created "new digital divides" between informal, out
of school learning, and formal, in-school learning. This post-industrial society requires that individuals are able
to communicate, make meaning and construct knowledge within diverse social situations and settings (Gee,
2008). However, if educational institutions are to adapt to emergent social / cultural demands of new     media
literacies that are inquiry, project-based, collaborative and production orientated, educational institutions must
provide spaces for students to learn to be literate with new media tools and within new media environments.
However, integrating new media education into the schools will require schools to undergo "a paradigm shift in
understanding how people learn and what people need to learn to be literate members of society(Buckingham,
2007, p.7)." However, this shift can be difficult to implement within institutionalized settings such as schools
that are built around very specific norms and practices that are not necessarily preparing youth for a post-
industrial age. Consequently, opportunities to learn and develop knowledge and practices related to the digital
arts and new media literacies have traditionally been implemented as informal, after school programs (Collins
and Halverson, 2009).

Potential Significance of the Work
The purpose of this study is to examine discourse as a way to identify evidence of impasses to innovation in the
development and design of new media curriculum within an in-school/ out of school digital arts program. In this
paper, we examine the discourses that emerge within one year of a professional development program that was
designed to teach seven digital artists pedagogical knowledge through the development of a new media
literacies curriculum and instructional framework. This program design was part of an out of school / in school
digital arts program where one facilitator, a former high school English teacher and literacy coach was in charge
of leading and directing the professional development meetings and one on one coaching sessions with seven
individual digital artist-mentors. The task was to develop a new media education curriculum and learn to apply
and adapt pedagogical practices to this emerging new media curriculum. The artist-mentors were positioned as
experts within their subject areas and the facilitator was positioned as expert in pedagogical practices.
   Using qualitative coding and discourse analysis methods, we will provide examples of diverse discourses
competing in the development of a new media curriculum. We will examine schooling, pedagogical discourses
and how these discourses created impasses to innovation and learning through the silencing of competing non-
schooling, artist discourses. We believe that understanding the nature of schooling discourses can offer ways of
using D/discourses as a tool to create safe and equitable conditions that promote innovations in new media
curriculum development.

Theoretical & Methodological Approaches:
Discourse analyses within K-12 schools in the United States reveal how schooling cultures, contexts and
systems are supported and reinforced through the discourse of schooling (Gee, 2004). Studies have shown       that
this schooling discourse tends to support monolingual, mono cultural and conflict avoidant ways of learning as a
way to "silence" other discourses (Smith, 2005). Thus, a monologic rather than dialogic stance when making
meaning and constructing knowledge can hinder innovation to take place (Gutierrez, 1999; Wells, 2006).
Further, this tendency of schooling Discourses to silence "other" discourses can be problematicas schools look

                                                 407  ·  © ISLS
                                              ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 2

to collaborate with experts from outside the school setting when building and designing new media curriculum.
   In order to understand the culture and practices of a professional development program, one researcher was
positioned as a participant observer within a larger ethnographic study of the digital arts program. The
participant observer attended the whole group meetings and occasionally participated when asked by the
facilitator. Twelve whole group meetings were documented. Each meetingwas audio recorded, field notes were
drafted and materials that were used in the meeting were collected.The field notes for the whole group meetings
were coded for content and themes that emerged within each meeting as they related to individual mentor and
facilitator talk about assessments (Ryan and Bernard, 2003). Descriptive field notes that were coded will later be
transcribed for a conversational analysis as a way to locate discourse.

Findings, Conclusions, and Implications:
       Using an inductive approach to guide the preliminary analysis of the data, emergent themes related to
talk about assessments has revealed that impasses to innovation within new media curriculum development
appeared to be more prevalent within the less verbal digital domains suchas music, graphic design and video
game design. This difficulty appears to be due to an inability of both the facilitator and mentors within these
domains to build understandings across content and pedagogy. When examining instances of talk about
assessments, the facilitator did not have enough content knowledge in music, graphic design and video game
design, and the mentors in these domains did not have enough pedagogical background and in some cases a
willingness to adopt particular schooling practices such as creating new media literacy standards across all
digital domains.
       Analysis has revealed that the facilitator's prior knowledge was based on a pedagogical knowledge
rooted in traditional reading and writing literacy. The traditional literacy practices were reproduced in the design
and implementation structures of the professional development meetings in several ways. 1) Readings that were
used to guide the professional development sessions and facilitate talk about assessment were based on
traditional reading and writing literacy. 2) Although the mentors had created rubrics for their respective digital
domain, the facilitator predominately used the digital storytelling rubric within professional development
settings. 3) Instructional strategies and assessment strategies that were introduced and expected to be adapted
into all digital domains required verbal interactions between mentor and students. In order for the mentors to
have access to the pedagogical knowledge presented within the rubric, readings and instructional strategies, the
mentors needed to be able to apply the more verbal, traditional literacy paradigm to their digital media domain.
Digital domains that do not emphasize verbal interactions within that domain's cultural practices can make
application of a verbal and written assessment tool an inauthentic and awkward instructional practice. The more
digitally technical and non-verbal digital domains such as music, graphic design and video game design did not
easily fit within the traditional literacy paradigm thus, making access to the pedagogical knowledge within these
domains more difficult for the facilitator and mentors to identify and incorporate into the new media curriculum.

References:
Buckingham, D. (2007). Media education goes digital: an introduction. Learning, Media   and Technology,
       32,(2):111­119
Collins and Halverson (2009). Rethinking education in the age of technology. New York, NY: Teacher's
       College Press.
Gee, J.P. (2004). Social linguistics and literacies: Ideology in discourses. New York, NY:
       Routledge
Gutierrez, K.D, Baquedano-Lopez, P., & Tejada, C. (2000). Rethinking Diversity: Hybridity and Hybrid
       Language Practices in the Third Space. Mind, Culture, and Acitivity. 6(4), pp. 286-303.
Ito, M., Horst, H.A., Bittanti, M., boyd, d., Herr-Stephenson, B., Lange, P.J., Pascoe, C.J., & Robinson, L.
       (2008). Living and Learning with New Media: Summary of            Findings from the Digital Youth Project.
       [White Paper]. Accessed on Nov. 23, 2008 from http://digitalyouth.ischool.berkeley.edu/report.
Ryan, G.W. & Bernard, R.H. (2003). Techniques to Identify Themes. Field Methods, 15
     (1), 85-109
Smith, E.R. (2005). Learning to Talk Like a Teacher: Participation and negotiation in co-planning
       discourse. Communication Education, 54 (1), 52-71.
Wells, G. (2006). Dialogue in the Classroom. The Journal of the Learning Sciences. 15(3), pp. 379-428.

Acknowledgments:
This work has been made possible by a grant from the John D. and Catherine T. Macarthur Foundation. The
authors would like to recognize our research colleagues at Stanford University, the University of Chicago and
the participants within this study as well as Susan Goldman and Josh Radinsky at the University of Illinois at
Chicago for the guidance and feedback.

                                                  408  ·  © ISLS
