                                                 ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 2

                  Math Anxiety in Middle School Math Teachers:
   Implications for Teacher Practice and Professional Development
                         Nicole Shechtman, SRI International, nicole.shechtman@sri.com

         Abstract: We examine math anxiety in a sample of 33 middle school mathematics teachers in
         a large  socioeconomically   disadvantaged     urban  district. Most  reported some   math  anxiety.
         Furthermore, findings suggest that math anxiety may adversely affect teachers' practices: the
         intensity negatively correlated with the emphasis they placed on instructional practices critical
         to students' development of both mathematical understanding and productive dispositions. We
         discuss the necessity to address math anxiety in research and practice in teacher professional
         development.

Introduction
Math anxiety is common in the classroom, in the workplace, and in many adults' everyday experience. It is
classically defined as a "feeling of tension and anxiety that interferes with the manipulation of numbers and the
solving of mathematical problems in a wide variety of ordinary life and academic situations" (Richardson &
Suinn, 1972). For students, it is strongly associated with disengagement from mathematical activities, failure to
enroll in advanced math courses, poor mathematics performance, and failure to graduate from high school.
         Our study focuses on math teachers, those most directly responsible for facilitating student learning
and shaping students' lifelong mathematical dispositions. Although research has documented the occurrence of
math anxiety among elementary school teachers (e.g., Hembree, 1990), little work has examined math anxiety
in the middle school teaching population and the impacts it might have on practice. The middle school years are
a  particularly  important and  vulnerable   transition  point in the   school  trajectory, as mathematical   concepts
become increasingly difficult and abstract, and many students begin to lose interest in mathematics, fall behind
in achievement, and consolidate their motivational attitudes toward mathematics. Ideally, teachers at this level
should be able to support students' development of conceptual understanding and create a learning environment
that facilitates students' development    of productive  dispositions    toward mathematics.   A teacher's own  math
anxiety could potentially undermine his or her capacity to engage with complex student thinking and model the
mindset that will support successful future studies in higher level mathematics.
         Within the context of a larger study examining the teaching practices, mathematical knowledge, and
attitudes and beliefs of veteran middle school math teachers, we will examine four research questions:
     1.  To what extent do these middle school math teachers exhibit math anxiety?
     2.  What is the relationship between teachers' math anxiety and their mathematical knowledge?
     3.  What is the relationship between teachers' math anxiety and their teaching practices, particularly those
         supportive of the development of student thinking and productive dispositions?
     4.  What do middle school math teachers do when they encounter mathematical content that is unfamiliar?

Research Design
The data was collected as part of a study that is exploring the construct of adaptive expertise in middle school
math teaching. We are investigating the tendency for teachers to approach the professional practice of teaching
as a lifelong   learning process. We  are   examining    the  relationships among   habits  of mind, pedagogical  and
content expertise, teaching practices, approach to professional development, and teaching effectiveness.
         Veteran middle school math teachers were recruited via mass mailing from a large urban district in
California serving   large    populations of primarily   economically    disadvantaged  students   (mean   of 69%  of
campus-level students qualifying for free or reduced-price lunch). The sample was composed of 33 teachers.
The mean years teaching was 14.1 (SD = 7.5) with a range of 5 to 33; 56% were female; the ethnic distribution
was 61% White, 13% African American, 13% Hispanic, and 9% Asian.
         Teachers did an in-depth phone interview, a written survey, and a written assessment of mathematical
knowledge for teaching (MKT) middle school mathematics. In this analysis, we focus on their responses to (1)
the Abbreviated Math Anxiety Rating Scale (AMAS; Hopko, Mahadevan, Bare, & Hunt, 2003), a 9-item scale
(alpha = .90) that measures anxiety in math-related situations, with an emphasis on learning new mathematics;
(2) an assessment MKT emphasizing the mathematics necessary to teach core NCTM Focal Points for seventh-
and eighth-grade mathematics; (3) a questionnaire about how much teachers emphasize various practices in their
mathematical     instruction; and (4) teachers'  interview     responses    to the questions   about their  formative
assessment practices and how they deal with unfamiliar mathematical content.

Preliminary Findings
Teachers exhibited a range of math anxiety. Scored as an average of items rated on a 5-point Likert scale, the

                                                     409  ·  © ISLS
                                                   ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 2

mean AMAS score was 2.1 (SD = 0.58), with a minimum of 1.2 and maximum of 3.5. Female teachers were
slightly higher in math anxiety (mean of 2.3 versus 1.9; t(32) = 2.1, p < .05). MKT did not differ significantly.
In a preliminary analysis of the interview data, we encountered a range of approaches that teachers took to
unfamiliar mathematical content, from highly motivated learning to complete avoidance. An example of the
latter was Abby in our pilot. She admitted that she still did not understand several mathematical concepts in her
sixth-grade curriculum. When asked what she does when she gets to these topics each year, she said she simply
skips over them because they are not important.
         As  shown    in  Table  1,  teachers'  math    anxiety   was  negatively   correlated     with their self-reported
emphasis on several important teaching practices. Their MKT negatively but not significantly correlated with
their math anxiety (r = -.18, n.s.) and was only significantly related to emphasis on one of the probed practices.
Table 1. Correlations between self-reported emphases on various teaching practices and the AMAS and MKT.
Teaching Practice                                                                             AMAS             MKT
Increasing students' interest in mathematics.                                                 -.501**          -.359*
Developing students' conceptual understanding.                                                -.019**          -.052*
Having students learn mathematical procedures and algorithms.                                 -.081**          -.096*
Having students learn to reason mathematically.                                               -.265**          -.033*
Helping students understand the logical structure of mathematics.                             -.571**          -.196*
Proof and justification/verification (e.g., using logical argument to demonstratecorrectness of mathematical relationship).-.217**-.069*
Problem solving (e.g., finding solutions that require more than merely applyingrules in a familiar situation).-.362**-.090*
Communicating (e.g., expressing mathematical ideas orally and in writing).                    -.415**          -.023*
Connections    (e.g., linking   one  mathematical      concept  with   another; applyingmath ideas in contexts outside of math).-.386**-.007*
Representations    (e.g.,  using   tables, graphs,   and   other   ways   of   illustratingmathematical relationships).-.324**-.201*
* p < .05; **p < .01

Discussion
The findings   suggest   that math  anxiety  is present    in the  middle-school  teacher   population,   and  that it  may
adversely impact practice in important ways. Most teachers reported at least some math anxiety. In examining
relationships with practice, math anxiety was negatively related to emphases on practices critical to student's
development    of conceptual   understanding    (e.g., understanding   the  logical  structure of   mathematics,  problem
solving, communicating, making connections) and productive dispositions (e.g., increasing students' interest in
mathematics). Math anxiety was not significantly related to MKT in this small sample; however, the negative
trend aligns with previous research that consistently shows negative relationships between math anxiety and
math knowledge (Hembree, 1990). MKT was related to an emphasis on increasing students' interest in math.
         In the poster, we will expand on these results with our qualitative analysis of teachers' responses to
questions about how they approach formatively assessing and responding to student thinking in the classroom.
We will also expand on the results of the analysis of how teachers approach unfamiliar content.
         These    findings   point  to  an   important    issue   in  research  and  practice  in     teacher  professional
development. Math anxiety may entail an experience of fear and risk for teachers, contributing to an avoidance
of practices that require their engagement with more difficult mathematics. It may also entail the transmission of
negative attitudes,   consciously   or unconsciously,   to   students. Although   the impacts      of math anxiety  can  be
deleterious, substantial  evidence     shows  that  there  are  effective strategies for    significantly reducing  it. For
example,  for  students,   a  number   of  psychological      approaches  such  as   anxiety  management       training and
cognitive restructuring have been shown to both reduce math anxiety and increase math achievement (Hembree,
1990). Adapting   such   strategies to  adult populations     and  incorporating  them into   pre-service   and  in-service
teacher training could substantially reduce teachers' math anxiety and enhance their capacity to support their
students' development of conceptual understanding and productive dispositions.

References
Hembree,    R.   (1990).  The  nature,    effects, and  relief  of   mathematics    anxiety.  Journal     for Research   in
         Mathematics Education, 21(1), 33­46.
Hopko,   D.  R.,  Mahadevan,    R., Bare,  R. L.,   &  Hunt,    M. K.  (2003).  The  Abbreviated      Math  Anxiety   Scale
         (AMAS): Construction, validity, and reliability. Assessment, 10(2), 178-182.
Richardson,  F.   C., &   Suinn, R.    M.  (1972).  The   mathematics     anxiety rating    scale. Journal  of Counseling
         Psychology, 16, 551­554.

                                                       410  ·  © ISLS
