                                                ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

Exploring how novice teachers learn to attend to students' thinking
     in analyzing case studies of classroom teaching and learning

 Daniel  M. Levin, American     University, 4400 Mass Ave., NW, Washington,        DC  20016, levin@american.edu
      Jennifer Richards, University of Maryland, College Park, College Park, MD          20742, jrich@umd.edu

         Abstract: In this paper, we explore how candidates in a science teacher preparation cohort
         attend to the substance of student thinking while watching classroom videos or reviewing
         students' written work.   Our findings suggest that the teacher candidates are able to attend to
         specific student ideas and reasoning from the beginning of their pre-service preparation, but
         their practices  of   attending   become   more   sophisticated   over time.    We    also  consider
         participation dynamics within the cohort, as participants assume different roles and begin to
         regulate their discussions.

Introduction
The National Research Council (NRC) (2007) characterizes students' science learning in terms of knowledge
and use of conceptual content, reasoning abilities, epistemological understandings, and participation in scientific
practices.  In line with the NRC's conceptualization of science education reform, it is suggested that "proximal
formative assessment" (Erickson, 2007), as it refers to teachers' ongoing, everyday attention to the substance of
students'  ideas, plays  an important   role in  shaping   teachers' instructional  moves   and  supporting  students'
science learning across these strands (Atkin & Coffey, 2003).        We believe that an important focus for science
teacher education is thus to help novice science teachers learn to attend to the substance of student thinking,
interpreting the meaning students are trying to convey.
         This paper is our effort to document what happens in our science pedagogy program, which takes as a
specific aim the development of teacher candidates' practices of attending to the substance of student thinking
while examining records of classroom practice.       We report results from the first two semesters in the science
pedagogy course sequence, focusing our inquiry on three questions:

         ·   What do our teacher candidates attend to when discussing records of classroom practice?
         ·   How do our candidates attend to student thinking?
         ·   How do practices of attending to student thinking develop over time within the cohort?

What teachers notice in records of classroom practice
We refer to practices of "attending" to student thinking, but our work is similar to a body of literature primarily
in mathematics    education that uses   the term  "noticing."  The   noticing literature is explicitly focused  on  the
substance of student thinking, responding to reform documents in both mathematics and science education
(NCTM, 2000; NRC, 2007) that call for teachers to "base their instruction on the lesson as it unfolds in the
classroom, paying particular attention to the ideas that their students raise" (van Es & Sherin, 2008, p. 244).
Several scholars (Hammer & Schifter, 2001; Jacobs, et al., 2007) argue that professional development and
teacher education   aimed   at focusing   teachers' attention  on  the  substance of  student  thinking  is crucial for
teacher learning; it is assumed that helping teachers notice students' ideas when exploring records of practice
like classroom videos (e.g., van Es & Sherin, 2008) and samples of student work (e.g. Kazemi & Franke, 2004)
will amplify   teachers' tendencies  to do  so in their own   classrooms.   For   the purposes  of  this paper, we  are
focusing on the teacher education setting, but we take up the issue of connections between teacher education
and teachers' classroom practices in our discussion.
         Little research has been conducted on pre-service teachers' practices of attending to student thinking,
but  Carter et al. (1988)   suggest  that  novice   teachers' abilities to notice  student  thinking are  poorer  than
experienced teachers' abilities.  Theoretically, lacking any experience in classrooms, new teachers have more
difficulty hearing and interpreting student ideas in the classroom than experienced teachers do.         However, in a
more recent study in a pre-service secondary mathematics teacher education course, Star and Strickland (2008)
found that teacher candidates generally did not enter the course with well-developed observation skills, but the
course led to significant increases in these skills, particularly novice teachers' abilities to notice features of the
classroom, mathematical content, and student thinking.        Sherin and van Es (2005) have also shown that pre-
service teachers  can learn  to attend  to  student thinking  fairly quickly.   Our   current study contributes  to the
noticing literature and literature on pre-service teacher education by exploring what happens in a pre-service
science teacher pedagogy course sequence focused on attending to the substance of student thinking.

                                                     41  ·  © ISLS
                                                ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

A framework for learning to attend to the substance of student thinking
Drawing on the noticing literature, and based on our iterative coding for this project (see the section on data
analysis below), we describe in this section what we take as evidence of attending to the substance of student
thinking. We also draw from other genres of literature, including physics education (diSessa, 1993; Hammer,
Elby, Scherr, & Redish, 2005), cognitive science (Minsky, 1985), sociolinguistics (Goffman, 1974; Tannen,
1993), and anthropology (Lave & Wenger, 1991) to understand what it means to learn to attend to the substance
of student thinking.

Attending to the substance of student thinking
Three aspects of attending to student thinking are prevalent in the noticing literature; we have identified these
aspects in this study as well, and we consider them to provide varying degrees of evidence of attending to
student thinking.     These three   aspects include  identifying     students'  ideas and  reasoning,   interpreting   the
meaning students are trying to convey, and evaluating the ideas and reasoning inferred from students.
          Goodwin (1994) describes "highlighting" or identifying ideas as an important part of what practitioners
in a field do. Identifying important ideas helps to "divide a domain of scrutiny in a figure and ground, so that
events relevant to the activity of the moment stand out" (Goodwin, p. 610).          We consider identifying important
ideas to be a necessary precursor to attending to the substance of those ideas.
          Once  teachers   identify  important  student    ideas, Crespo    (2000)    distinguishes  between    teachers'
comments   that   are evaluative  and focused    on correctness    and    those that  are interpretive and     focused on
understanding.    We believe that van Es and Sherin's (2008) definition of interpreting is closest to the meaning
that we   ascribe to  the term.   As  van   Es and  Sherin    state, "... we    want  to emphasize   the  importance   of
interpreting classroom events.     Thus,  how   individuals   reason  about what    they  notice is as important   as  the
particular events they notice" (p. 247).  We speak of attending to the substance of student thinking in this strict
sense ­ interpreting the meaning students are trying to convey, without simply evaluating the ideas.            Thus, we
take interpretive statements   to be  the best  evidence   that a  teacher  is  attending  to the substance    of student
thinking.  Furthermore,     we   believe  that interpretive   statements   are  the  most  productive    in professional
development contexts or teacher education courses ­ when teachers identify and interpret specific student ideas
in collaboration with others, they have the opportunity to argue about their interpretations of the ideas, which
leads to better-warranted evaluations and proposed instructional responses.
          It is important to note that we view these aspects of attending to student thinking as analytical tools that
help us make sense of how candidates are attending to students' ideas and reasoning.          We are not making claims
that these are separate cognitive processes within teachers' minds.       Our purpose in describing these components
is simply to examine those aspects of attending to student thinking that the candidates make explicit.

Learning to attend to the substance of student thinking
Our perspective for understanding how teachers learn to attend to the substance of student thinking draws from
research on learning in physics.     Hammer    (2000)   argues  that  students  do  not  draw on  nascent   fully formed
theories to reason in physics but rather that students employ small-grained, context-sensitive resources to do so.
Hammer's   framework      builds on diSessa's  (1993)   description   of  phenomenological    primitives  or   "p-prims,"
which are conceptual resources, based on learners' experiences with physical phenomena, which can be useful
for learning physics.  Hammer et al. (2005) have expanded the idea of resources to include fine-grained bits of
declarative and procedural knowledge, metacognition, epistemology, and understandings of social norms that
are derived from people's past experiences and activated in different situations.
          Hammer et al. (2005) also suggest that in any moment, locally coherent sets of resources or framings
are activated that are mutually consistent and reinforcing.       Framing stems from a diverse history in cognitive
science and sociolinguistics (Goffman, 1974; Minsky, 1985; Tannen, 1993).               Here, we define framing as an
individual or collective sense of "What is going on here?"        Thus, framing involves an interaction between the
contextual cues present in any given situation and the resources that various participants already have.
          In any practice, which Wenger (1998) refers to as sustained engagement in a joint enterprise with
shared tools, newcomers must learn relevant norms.         Lave and Wenger (1991) describe the process by which
newcomers   learn  these  norms   as "legitimate  peripheral    participants"   (p. 29),  which  we  take   to mean    that
newcomers learn the framing of a particular practice through engaging and participating in that practice.              We
will argue that our teacher candidates draw on resources that they already have in order to participate in the
practice of attending to student thinking.  Additionally, by engaging and participating in this practice in various
ways, the cohort establishes and reinforces a collective framing of attending to student thinking.
          The language of framing has been used to understand how physics students frame what is going on in a
particular context and how their framing is associated with their physics learning (Hammer et al., 2005); it has
only been recently applied to secondary science pre-service teacher learning.         Additionally, there has been little
focus on how a framing of attending to student thinking is established and reinforced in a community of pre-

                                                     42  ·  © ISLS
                                               ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

service teachers.  We return to our framework in our conclusion to articulate how pre-service secondary science
teaching candidates learn to attend to student thinking while watching video and looking at samples of student
work.

Research context and methods
Our data come from the first two courses of the three-course science pedagogy sequence in a one-year graduate-
level initial teaching certification program at the University of Maryland, College Park. The course sequence is
explicitly structured to draw teacher candidates' attention to the substance of student thinking, first by having
them collectively examine records of classroom practice (videos and samples of student work), and then by
having them collect and analyze such records from their own classrooms. During the first course (summer
session), the  teacher candidates  identify  frameworks      for understanding    students' science   learning   in the
literature, interview students about science topics, engage in their own scientific inquiry, examine curricula for
opportunities to draw out students' ideas and reasoning, and discuss samples of student thinking in classroom
video and student work.    The second pedagogy course (fall semester) continues these practices of examining
and discussing samples of student thinking but goes beyond the first course in helping candidates develop
instructional strategies consistent with science education reform and respond to student ideas as they arise
during instruction.  Candidates write lesson plans in which they anticipate what students might say or do and
how they (as teachers) might respond instructionally.      They then teach these lessons, collect student work or
recordings of the class, and analyze the student thinking in evidence.      The third course involves candidates in
collecting data from their own teaching and writing case studies of the student thinking in evidence. Here, we
report on data from the first two pedagogy courses ­ specifically on how the teacher candidates attended to the
substance of student thinking in records of classroom practice.

Subjects
The first course was comprised of eleven pre-service secondary science teacher candidates.            Seven of these
candidates were in a one-year program to earn a Masters degree and certification.           Three were post-doctoral
scientists pursuing certification only, and one was a former patent attorney who was pursuing certification only.
In  the   second   course,  three  additional  candidates     joined   who    were   participants  in   an   integrated
bachelors/Masters program for certification.   They had taken the initial pedagogy course the previous year as
undergraduates.   For the purposes of this paper, we primarily consider the candidates as a group.         We discuss
some   differences  among   candidates in  terms  of   their participation,   but an  in depth    discussion  of other
differences is beyond the scope of this paper.

Procedures
We shared eight cases of secondary science classroom work with the teacher candidates.        Six cases were videos
(20-45 minutes long) of secondary science classrooms with typed transcripts and/or captions.         One of the videos
was shown twice, as we discuss below.      Two cases were collections of samples of student work.        We selected
all of the cases from a collection developed as part of another project (Levin, 2008); these cases will be included
in  a book/DVD    package  of  teacher-authored  case  studies,   similar to  one  produced  for  elementary   teacher
education (Hammer & van Zee, 2006).
          As the instructor, Levin began the discussion of each case by describing the context in which the work
occurred or by having the group read the introduction to the teacher's written case study.        We then shared the
video  or student   work with  the group,  and  Levin   asked,   "What  do   you  notice in  the  students'  ideas  and
reasoning?"   Levin facilitated the discussion to draw specific attention to the substance of students' ideas and
reasoning.  For example, if candidates made a general statement such as, "It seems like the students get it,"
Levin  would   say, "Can   you point to   something    someone   said  or did  that makes   you   think they  get   it?"
Similarly, if candidates directed attention to the action of the teacher by suggesting what the teacher should do
or describing problems with the teacher's approach, Levin would ask what they saw in the students' reasoning
that led them to make that claim about the teacher.

Data collection
We videotaped the candidates' discussions of student thinking in each of the cases.      The discussions were each
approximately 30-45 minutes    in length. Due to the great variability  among the cases,  it was difficult to compare
the cases  in order to explore  how  the   cohort's practices    of attending to  the substance   of student  thinking
changed   over time by looking at the progression throughout the cases.    Thus,  we  showed  the case we had    shown
at the beginning of the summer session again at the end of the fall semester in order to look at differences in
how the candidates attended to the substance of student thinking at the beginning of the first course and at the
end of the second.

                                                    43  ·  © ISLS
                                               ICLS 2010    ·  Volume 1

Data analysis
To explore our first question ("What do our teacher candidates attend to when discussing records of classroom
practice?"), we drew on a coding scheme to categorize each speech turn, which was developed by inductive
coding   (Miles &  Huberman,    1994)   in a similar  project   with practicing  teachers (Levin, 2008).    We then
developed our codes further through an iterative process of coding a sample of the discussions, discussing our
codes, and expanding or collapsing codes as appropriate.        In doing so, we developed a scheme that organized
what candidates attended to into eight categories:   specific student thinking, general student thinking, the actions
of the teacher, the nature of the activity, the science content, student attributes, student engagement, and "other."
We provide a detailed description of how we defined each of the codes in another paper (Levin & Richards,
2009), but the most important categories for our purposes in this paper are specific student thinking and general
student thinking. We identify candidates' comments about specific student ideas or reasoning as attending to
specific student  thinking; for instance,  we would     code  a statement  like, "Maybe   he's saying  that they are
practice for hunting ­ the snakes are just practice" as attending to specific student thinking.     Alternately, we
identify candidates' comments about the general understanding or reasoning of students in the class as attending
to general student thinking (e.g. "I think most of them get it").     Levin coded all of the transcripts.   Richards
coded one third of the transcripts, and we compared our coding to arrive at an inter-rater reliability of 83%.   We
then discussed each disagreement until we reached consensus on the remaining codes.
          To explore our second question ("How do our candidates attend to student thinking?"), we conducted
another round of iterative coding, focusing only on the comments we had coded as attending to specific student
thinking. As we previously described, we saw that candidates made three kinds of comments that we coded as
attending to specific student thinking.  At times, candidates 1) simply identified students' ideas, which we took
as evidence that the candidates noticed the ideas, but we could not tell whether they attended to the meaning that
the students were trying to convey.     Candidates also 2) made evaluative statements in reference to students'
ideas, which again indicated that the candidates were attending to the ideas that were present and perhaps
making tacit interpretations of these ideas, but their interpretations (if present) were not made public.    Finally,
candidates sometimes    3)  attempted to   interpret what  students  were saying,  which  we   took as the  strongest
evidence that they were attending to the substance of students' ideas.    We did not take frequency counts of this
coding because many utterances included overlapping codes at this level of analysis; instead, we considered
how the three kinds of comments seemed to be related in candidates' statements.         We explore the occurrences
and relationships of these codes qualitatively in our data analysis.
          To explore our third question ("How do practices of attending to student thinking develop over time
within the cohort?"), we showed candidates the same case twice ­ once at the beginning of the summer session
and again at the end of the fall semester.   This case, hereafter referred to as the "Owls and Snakes," showed a
teacher and students discussing a strange relationship between a species of owl and a species of blind snake that
lives in the owls' nests undisturbed. We compared the initial coding of the first showing with the coding of the
second showing.   The discussions were slightly different in length, so we normalized the results by converting
them to   the frequency of  codes   uttered  per 30  minutes    of discussion.   Both of  us scored both  transcripts
completely, and we had 84% inter-rater agreement.        Again, we resolved differences in coding by meeting and
agreeing on the disputed codes.
          We also looked across all of the case study discussions for patterns in the nature of the conversations
and how participation in the norms and practices of attending to student thinking developed over time within the
cohort.  Specifically, we looked at who participated and how they did so over the course of the two semesters,
how candidates drew each other's attention to specific student ideas, and how the role of the facilitator changed.

Data and analysis
In this section, we present the results of our coding, followed by our analysis of the data and a discussion of the
cohort's practices over time.

Results and analysis of coding
We collected 995 coded passages over the course of nine discussions, including discussions of the eight cases
plus the repeat of the first case. We coded 43% of utterances as specific attention to student thinking, 6% as
general attention to student thinking, 18% as attention to teacher action, 9% as attention to the activity, 11% as
attention to science content, 3% as attention to student attributes, 1% as attention to student engagement, and
6% as "other."
          As we discussed above, it was difficult to make any claims about changes in what candidates attended
to because of differences in the content of the cases.   To look at changes, we led a discussion of the same case
study at the end of the second course that we had discussed at the beginning of the first course and compared the
changes in the frequencies of our coding.    We only saw notable changes in the relative frequencies of attending
to "specific" and "general" student thinking ­ the percentage of specific comments about student thinking (per

                                                     44  ·  © ISLS
                                                 ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

30 minutes) increased from 36% to 48%, while the percentage of general comments about student thinking
decreased from 7% to 2%.
         Thus, we can make two assertions related to our research questions at this point.          First, our secondary
science teacher candidates were able to attend to the substance of student thinking from the beginning of the
pedagogy course sequence.     Second, our candidates focused more on specific student ideas relative to general
student ideas over time.
         We saw that candidates consistently attended to the substance of student thinking from the beginning
of the first pedagogy course.     We  coded    almost  half of  all comments     throughout  the cases  as  "attending to
specific student  thinking," and   our coding    varied  little across  the cases  in  this respect.   In  terms of  how
candidates attended to student thinking, we saw that candidates routinely identified, interpreted, and evaluated
students' ideas.  At times, candidates made comments simply identifying a student's idea, and Levin followed
up  to  ask what  the   candidates thought     the student  meant    and  what   the  candidates  thought   of the  idea.
Frequently,  however,   candidates  specifically   interpreted   the student's   meaning    without  prompting.    These
specific interpretations frequently   led   to  sophisticated   evaluations   of students'  conceptual    understanding,
reasoning,  epistemological  stances,  and   participation   in  scientific practices.  Specific  interpretations   often
occurred during long stretches of conversation that were about students' ideas and reasoning.              For example,
during  an  early case  discussion in  which    candidates   were   discussing   whether   the students   understood the
relationships among force, mass, and acceleration when considering gravitational motion, Sarah, who was often
one of the quieter students, identified an idea on a student's worksheet that she did not understand:

         Sarah: "I was confused by what she meant about inertia canceling out, like for, on page 2,
         when    they talked about   how...    and  not  falling at  the  same   time  because   their inertia's
         different?"

         Jack: "Well again I think that just mass, or heavier mass is less acceleration because they were
         just going back to that and less mass is higher acceleration."

         Alex: "It's interesting because on question 3 she -- at first the student states the right answer,
         they've got the concept that they land at the same time, and she understands that things that
         fall land at the same time, but then has trouble explaining why... she has this idea of the
         inertias canceling each other out, which indicates that she doesn't really have an understanding
         of what inertia is or how it applies in the case of falling objects."

         Jack: "Well again I think that goes back to their thinking the forces are the same, because
         she's saying `the higher the mass the lower acceleration' versus `a lower mass and a faster
         acceleration,' they are going to equal the same thing, so that's what she means, `canceling out'
         -- they're gonna equal the same thing."

         Here, Alex offered an interpretation of the student's thinking that she "has this idea of the inertias
canceling each other out" and evaluated that she "doesn't really have an understanding of what inertia is or how
it applies in the case of falling objects." Jack interpreted the student's idea more specifically, suggesting why
the student  might   be  thinking  about  "canceling    out,"   which   had not  been  obvious   to  everyone.    As the
conversation continued, Mark suggested another possible interpretation for what the student was thinking, and
Elsa, Sarah, Ryan, and Alex debated Mark's interpretation, all drawing on the student's responses to other
problems to debate what she might mean by "canceling out."            This conversation about one specific student's
thinking was followed by a discussion about how to teach the F = ma formula more generally, including how to
help students recognize different situations (e.g. when acceleration is constant versus when force is constant).
         However, candidates often made general comments about student thinking early in the first semester.
In the first discussion of the "Owls and Snakes" case, for example, we heard many general claims about what
students understood   or how  they  were    reasoning.   Candidates     made  declarative   statements like "They   were
thinking out loud, and thinking logically;" "They're asking the right questions;" and "They're doing good stuff,
they're  reasoning, they're  connecting   their  prior   knowledge"     without  including  interpretations of students'
specific ideas to warrant their statements.
         Candidates also made general comments about student thinking after long discussions of particular
students' ideas.  For example, in the "Owls and Snakes" case, the teacher presents the students with some data,
which leads to an interesting argument about whether or not the data fits students' hypothesized relationship
between the owls and snakes.      During    the first viewing   of  the case, candidates   had a long  discussion  about
particular students' ideas during this segment (including a number of comments we coded as "specific" student
thinking), at the end of which Ryan made the following general claim:

                                                      45  ·  © ISLS
                                                ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

         "I can see the students are, uh, doing something that I agree with, which is not assuming that
         just because there's data that indicates something, that that means that [the owls and snakes
         are] getting something out of it."

       Here, we see an example of a general statement about student thinking, which is an evaluation that the
students are doing something with which Ryan agrees.          It differs from the other general statements above in
that, following a conversation about specific student ideas and reasoning, it is grounded in the interpretations
that candidates provided during the preceding conversation.       Ryan was therefore able to specify what he liked
about the students' argument ­ they did not assume that the data supported a particular answer.
       When we looked at candidates' general comments in the second discussion of the "Owls and Snakes"
case, we  found   that there were   fewer general  comments     relative to  specific  comments.     Also, the  general
comments were all of the kind that followed interpretations of specific student ideas and reasoning; none were
the blanket evaluations we had seen in the first discussion.     This kind of general claim about student thinking
draws  on   specific interpretations  of students'  ideas   and  reasoning   and   can   therefore provide    novel and
productive warrants for the evaluation of student thinking.

Developing practices of attending to student thinking
In addition to exploring the content of what candidates attended to, we looked at how their participation in the
conversations changed over time.     In the earliest discussions, four candidates spoke the most in the discussions:
Alex  (the patent attorney), Brian and Elsa (post-doctoral scientists), and Ryan (an engineer by     training). Alex in
particular seemed to understand that the central aspect of the practice of attending to student thinking was to
make claims about students' meaning by identifying specific things that students said.       As we discussed above,
Levin actively modeled this practice by asking candidates for specific examples.         In the exchange below from
the first "Owls and Snakes" discussion, we see Alex jumping in with an example even before Levin has finished
asking for it:

         Ryan: "I thought it was a really impressive class."

         Levin (instructor): "Say more about that, why?"

         Ryan: "Because, uh, they were thinking out loud, and thinking logically, and the teacher was
         doing a great job of getting them to use reasoning."

         Levin: "So let's see if we can find ­ " (overlapping with Alex)

         Alex: (overlapping) "I like that distinction of that there's the good, the good maid and the bad
         maid, because the students are told there's a distinction, right, some snakes are eaten and
         some snakes aren't, there's eighty-nine percent that are alive and eleven percent that are dead,
         although they're not really told that they're eaten. Only one seems to be half eaten. So they're
         trying to immediately come up with a reason about why there are these two groups, why some
         snakes are alive and some snakes are dead and the reason that they come up with, well some
         are good at burrowing and cleaning up the nest and some are bad at this job and so they're
         eaten by the owls. At least that's an interesting reaction to being told there's two groups and
         they  immediately    come   up  with  some   mechanism,   some   reason,   some   logical  reason to
         explain why there are two groups, why there are alive and dead snakes."

         Throughout the case study discussions, Alex continued to identify examples of student thinking himself
and to   provide interpretations of   others' examples   to   support evaluations.    In some   cases, he  asked  other
candidates to support their statements with references to the transcripts or student work, asking several times
"Where   is that?" or  "Where    do  you  see  that?"   Alex  appeared   particularly  comfortable   with  practices  of
interpreting students' meaning.   Both in and outside of the pedagogy classes, Alex explained that his work as a
lawyer helped him to focus on what people were saying.
         Although    Alex   and some    others dominated    the conversations    at the   beginning,   others began   to
participate within the first few case study discussions.   By the second viewing of the "Owls and Snakes" case in
the second pedagogy course, multiple candidates were participating in long conversations about student thinking
without prompting from Levin.       For  example,  Jack   brought  attention to a  situation in the  video in   which a
student, responding    to a  question from  the teacher,   said that  a particular  piece of data   could  be "used   to
evaluate" the students' hypotheses about the relationship between the owls and snakes.          Jack thought that the
student was just choosing one of the options the teacher had given him (can or cannot be used to evaluate the

                                                     46  ·  © ISLS
                                                 ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

hypotheses) without thinking about it.    Other candidates were not so sure.    When the teacher asked the student,
"What does it add that will help us answer the question?" the student replied:

          "Uh, it could enter the nest on its own.   The snakes are capable of climb, climbing up trees,
          and they can get to the nests on their own... and, if owls and snakes ever turn against each
          other, they could use that as an advantage for like, uhhh, battle and stuff."

          Kay: "He's saying that the snakes are making the choice to go there.     Like I..."

          Mark: "Right, that's what I read here."

          Kay: "Right, and then that's what's important about it to him..."

          Jack: "Right, so right.   I see where  that is   important  but I don't know  if  [he] understands
          that... he says, `Yeah, they can climb trees'... but then line 23 I don't understand what he was
          meaning there because [he's] like, `If they ever turn against each other they can use that to
          their advantage.'"

          Maria: "He probably means they could just climb back down to escape."

        Kay interpreted the importance the student was placing on choice, but Jack questioned whether the
student understood why it was an important idea.     Maria interpreted the student's idea about why climbing trees
was advantageous     to the  snake.   The point  of this   snippet is not  to definitively interpret and evaluate the
student's idea.   The    point is   that  the candidates   were    focused  on  trying to  understand    the student's
unconventional idea and truly attending to his meaning -- with little scaffolding from Levin nor the participation
of Alex and other participants who had dominated the earlier conversations about student thinking.

Conclusions and future study
This work contributes to a growing understanding of novice teachers' abilities to attend to the substance of
student thinking and provides insight into how their practices of doing so develop and change over time.          We
show evidence that novice teachers can identify, interpret, and evaluate the substance of student thinking when
they participate in pedagogy courses designed to draw attention to this topic.    Additionally, the candidates in our
pedagogy courses became more adept at drawing specific interpretations of student thinking and using these
interpretations to warrant general claims and evaluations of student understanding.
          However, a particularly important aspect of our data is that the cohort of teacher candidates attended to
student thinking from the very beginning of the pedagogy course sequence.          We believe that this finding has
important implications in terms of how to best conceptualize learning to attend to the substance of student
thinking. The predominant assumption in the noticing literature is that noticing is a "skill" (e.g. Jacobs et al.,
2007; van Es & Sherin, 2008).     We challenge the use of the term "skill," which typically implies something that
teachers do not know how to do until they have been taught.        Even if the use of the term "skill" in the noticing
literature is not intended in this manner, we argue that conversations about learning should always be explicitly
connected to a strong theoretical base, and we do not believe that the term "skill" accurately captures what is
learned or how learning occurs.
          Our data from this study support the presence of resources that teachers have to attend to the substance
of student thinking. To us, the existence of these resources is important because it suggests that teachers do not
learn a new skill in professional development or teacher education contexts, but that these contexts instead
activate resources that teachers already have. That is, focusing on the substance of student thinking is not
something developed de novo, but rather an activation of the resources that all people have for listening to the
meaning that another person is trying to convey.      Thus, an important task for teacher education is to help pre-
service candidates draw upon these resources to support a framing of teaching in terms of attending to student
thinking.
          We suggest that the framing of teaching in terms of attending to student thinking was not simply put in
place by Levin, the instructor, but was supported collectively through interaction among the participants in the
group. Alex and some other candidates, perhaps because of prior experiences in similar settings, entered into
the conversations very quickly and helped to support the framing that Levin was trying to establish.      Over time,
Levin's voice became less prominent as candidates pushed each other to articulate the specific evidence in
student thinking that warranted claims of students' reasoning and understanding.       The spirit of these exchanges
over case studies continued into the third semester of the program, where candidates presented case studies from
their own classrooms.

                                                     47  ·  © ISLS
                                                ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

         Our findings also suggest productive avenues for further research.     As we noted, there were differences
in the   ways  that individual  candidates  attended  to student   thinking.  Some,    like Alex, offered   substantive
interpretations of students' ideas from the very beginning.     Others had difficulty doing this at first and seemed
to become better at it as they engaged more with the group and saw the practices modeled by other candidates.
We are pursuing more in-depth case studies of particular candidates in order to address these distinctions.
         We are also examining candidates' practices of attending to the substance of student thinking while
they are teaching in their own classrooms, where they must listen to student ideas in real time while trying to
manage   other   facets of  the classroom   and the  curriculum.   We   have  followed   several  candidates  into  the
classroom, and we plan to continue following them through induction and the early years of their teaching
careers in order to better understand how and when teachers attend and respond to the substance of student
thinking while teaching science.

References
Atkin, J. and Coffey, J. E., Eds. (2003). Everyday assessment in the science classroom. Arlington, VA, NSTA
         Press.
Carter, K., Cushing, K., Sabers, D., Stein, P., and Berliner, D. (1988). Expert-novice differences in perceiving
         and processing visual classroom information. Journal of Teacher Education 39(3): 25-31.
Crespo   S.   (2000).   Seeing  more   than right and   wrong  answers:    Propspective  teachers'  interpretations of
         students' mathematical work.    Journal of Mathematics Teacher Education 3:         155-181
diSessa, A. A. (1993). Toward an epistemology of phyiscs. Cognition and Instruction 10(2/3): 105-225.
Erickson, F. (2007). Some thoughts on "proximal" formative assessment of student learning. Yearbook of the
         National Society for the Study of Education. G. D. Fenstermacher, National Society for the Study of
         Education. 186-216.
Goffman, E. (1974). Frame analysis:       An essay on the organization of experience. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
         University Press.
Goodwin, C. (1994). Professional vision.     American Anthropologist 96(3): 606-633.
Hammer, D. (2000). Student resources for learning introductory physics. American Journal of Physics, Physics
         Education Research Supplement, 68 (1), 52-59
Hammer, D., Elby, A., Scherr, R. E., & Redish, E. F. (2005). Resources, framing, and transfer. In J. Maestre
         (Ed.), Transfer of learning from a modern multidisciplinary perspective (pp. 89-120). Greenwich, CT:
         Information Age Publishing.
Hammer, D. and Schifter, D. (2001). Practices of inquiry in teaching and research. Cognition and Instruction
         19(4): 441-478.
Hammer, D. and van Zee, E. (2006). Seeing the science in children's thinking:          Case studies of student inquiry
         in physical science. Portsmouth, NH, Heinemann.
Jacobs, V. R., Clement, L. L., Philipp, R. A., Schappelle, B., & Burke, A. (2007). Professional noticing by
         elementary school teachers of mathematics, American Educational Research Association. Chicago,
         Illinois.
Kazemi,   E.  and   Franke, M.   L. (2004).  Teacher  learning  in mathematics:   Using     student work  to promote
         collective inquiry. Journal of Mathematics Teacher Education 7: 203-235.
Lave, J., & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning:       Legitimate peripheral participation. Cambridge: University
         of Cambridge Press.
Levin, D. M. (2008). What secondary science teachers pay attention to in the classroom:           Situating teaching in
         institutional and social systems. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of Maryland at College
         Park.
Levin, D. M., & Richards, J. (2009). Developing a professional vision for science education reform teaching,
         Paper presented at Annual Meeting of the Association for Science Teacher Education. Hartford, CT.
Miles, M. B., & Huberman, A. M. (1994). Qualitative data analysis. Thousand Oaks: Sage Publications.
Minsky, M. L. (1986). Society of mind. New York: Simon & Schuster.
NCTM (2000). Principles and standards for school mathematics. Reston, VA.
NRC    (2007). Taking    science to  school:  Learning     and teaching  science in    grades  K-8. Washington,    DC,
         Committee on Science Learning, Kindergarten through Eighth Grade.
Sherin,  M.   G. and    van Es,  E. A. (2005).  Using    video to  support   teachers' ability to interpret classroom
         interactions. American Educational Research Association. Montreal, Canada.
Star, J. R. and  Stickland,  S.  K. (2008).  Learing to  observe:  Using   video to    improve  mathematics  teachers'
         ability to notice.  Journal of Mathematics Teacher Education 11: 107-125.
Tannen, D. (1993). Framing in discourse. New York, Oxford University Press.
van Es, E. A. and Sherin, M. G. (2008). Mathematics teachers' "learning to notice" in the context of a video
         club. Teaching and Teacher Education 24: 244-276.

                                                     48  ·  © ISLS
