                                                ICLS 2010     Volume 2

   Incorporating Affect in an Engineering Student's Epistemological
                                                 Dynamics
                                  Brian A. Danielak, Ayush Gupta, Andrew Elby
                 Departments of Curriculum and Instruction and Physics, University of Maryland
                              briandk@umd.edu, ayush@umd.edu, elby@umd.edu

         Abstract:     Research   has linked a  student's  affect to her epistemology   (Boaler  & Greeno,
         2000),  but  those constructs  often   apply broadly   to a  discipline and/or classroom   culture.
         Independently, an emerging line of research shows that a student in a given classroom and
         discipline can shift between multiple locally coherent epistemological stances (Hammer, Elby,
         Scherr, & Redish, 2005). Our case study of Judy, an undergraduate engineering major, begins
         our long-term effort at uniting these two bodies of literature.

Introduction
In this poster,  we   incorporate an  affective node  into   a  fine-grained toy model  of   an engineering  major's
cognitive dynamics during a clinical interview. We seek to characterize Judy's annoyance toward a particular
kind of homework problem in her Circuits course, and its consequences. In our model, affect is not just an add-
on; we use it to account for aspects of her conceptual and epistemological thinking that epistemology-only
models can't and don't explain.
         This kind of affective modeling responds to a specific literature gap between emotion and cognition.
Many well-known studies link learners' affect and epistemology with large, often group-level constructs (Boaler
& Greeno, 2000; Duit & Treagust, 2003; Lee, Hansen, & Wilson, 2006; Pintrich, Marx, & Boyle, 1993). Those
constructs  provide   broad descriptive  power,  but  tell   us less about   contextualized, in-the-moment   student
behaviors. Conversely, sensitive accounts of students' conceptual and epistemological cognition are plentiful in
fine-grained details (diSessa, 1993, 2006; Hammer et al., 2005), but sparing in relating emotion to conceptions
and epistemologies.

Summary of Three Patterns of Judy's Thought and Behavior
In a one-hour clinical interview, we probed Judy's views about her Circuits course and her approaches toward
problem-solving. Working as a group we then identified four cognitive patterns in her responses to certain
prompts, seeking confirmatory or non-confirmatory evidence elsewhere in the data (Miles & Huberman, 1984).
         (1) Annoyance at conceptual problems: Like many students in her class, Judy distinguished between
two   types  of homework    and   exam   problems:    traditional  equation-based  problem-solving  vs. conceptual
problems asking for explanations of what's going on physically. Judy repeatedly emphasized that conceptual
problems were annoying in words ("they are kind of annoying"), gestures, and facial expressions (frowns and
facial distortions).
         (2) Conceptual reasoning as useless: Judy sees conceptual reasoning as useless for practical purposes
and considers equation-based problem-solving as "more helpful" and "more important."
         (3) Real/ideal gulf: In Judy's view, her course spends too much time discussing "ideal circuits and
theoretical methods," which "are not related to the actual circuit" or to "a professional engineer's job." This
unbridgeable gulf between ideal and real circuits, she says, is what makes the conceptual problems annoying;
those problems call for students to use concepts that apply only to ideal circuits.
         (4) Non-activation   of  (3) during   traditional problem-solving.   When   talking  about or engaging   in
equation-based problem solving, Judy displays positive affect, and we find no evidence that in these moments
she is ever thinking about the real/ideal gulf. Crucially, the equations she uses encode the same idealizing
assumptions she disparages elsewhere in the interview. Her epistemological view about the real/ideal gulf is
thus context-dependent: present when she discusses conceptual problems, but absent when she solves traditional
ones.

The Need for Affect in Toy Models of Judy's in-the-moment cognition
The four patterns discussed above are consistent with a context-dependent but affect-free toy model (Fig 1 (a))
in which Judy's epistemological view about the gulf between real and ideal circuits reinforces and is reinforced
by her sense that the conceptual problems are useless. But two other episodes from the interview show the
inadequacy of this model.
         Disconfirmatory episode A. Near the end of the interview, Judy builds momentum using conceptual
reasoning to (re)solve a homework problem from earlier in the course. She thinks in terms of "squeezing" the
area under a voltage vs. time curve to change the peak voltage without affecting the average voltage. In her
successful solving, she shows positive affect. Afterward, the interviewer asks about the squeezing: "Do you ever

                                                    411     ISLS
                                                ICLS 2010    Volume 2

...think about the mathematics that you use in that way?"     Judy laughs, says "no no no," and adds "No, I never
think of that before.... Yeah, I mean it's I feel like it's not very formal [smiles], but it's very useful." The toy
model in figure 1 (a) doesn't predict such a reversal of her epistemological stance towards conceptual reasoning.
         Disconfirmatory episode B. At one point, not discussed above, while Judy was still thinking about her
annoyance at the conceptual problems, the interviewer probes her views about both the real/ideal gulf and
conceptual reasoning: "So do you think if you're analyzing a real-world circuit, it's important to know about the
physical aspects of   the circuit?"  Judy responds, "Not   very important."   The two-node model in figure 1 (a)
didn't predict this.
         To explain these two episodes and the four patterns discussed above, we must modify our toy model to
include an affective state, Judy's annoyance at conceptual problems, as mediating the connection between her
epistemological stance and her view that conceptual problems are useless (Fig. 1(b)). Our proposed three-node
toy model explains how suppressing annoyance can cue Judy's epistemological reversal in Episode A. It also
explains explains    Episode  B,  because targeting Judy's   epistemology  (by focusing  on  real circuits)   without
addressing Judy's    affect fails to suppress Judy's    view  that conceptual  reasoning is "not  very important."
Ultimately, though limited to one student in one interview, our analysis shows the importance and feasibility of
incorporating affect into fine-grained models of cognitive dynamics.

  Real/Ideal Gulf                      ConceptualReasoning Useless            Annoyance      ConceptualReal/Ideal GulfReasoning Useless
                            a                                                     b

   Figure 1 - Toy cognitive model with (a) only epistemological nodes and (b) incorporating affect
 (annoyance) with epistemology. The model in (b) better explains the contextual dynamics of Judy's
                                            epistemological stances.

Acknowledgments
The authors wish to thank Eric Kuo and Michael M. Hull for their insights and analysis. Without them this
project would not have been possible. The authors also wish to thank Jennifer Richards and Laura Cathcart for
feats of prestidigitation and writing support. This work was partially supported by NSF-EEC grant # 0835880
and NSF-DRL grant # 0733613.

References
Boaler, J., & Greeno, J. G. (2000). Identity, agency, and knowing in mathematical worlds. In J. Boaler (Ed.),
         Multiple Perspectives on Mathematics Teaching and Learning, International perspectives on
         mathematics education (pp. 171-200). Westport, CT: Ablex Pub.
diSessa, A. A. (1993). Toward an Epistemology of Physics. Cognition and Instruction, 10(2/3), 105-225.
diSessa, A. A. (2006). A history of conceptual change research: Threads and fault lines. In R. K. Sawyer (Ed.),
         The Cambridge Handbook of the Learning Sciences (pp. 265-282). Cambridge: Cambridge University
         Press.
Duit, R., & Treagust, D. F. (2003). Conceptual change: a powerful framework for improving science teaching
         and learning. International Journal of Science Education, 25(6), 671-688. doi:Article
Hammer, D., Elby, A., Scherr, R. E., & Redish, E. F. (2005). Resources, Framing, and Transfer. In J. P. Mestre
         (Ed.), Transfer of Learning from a Modern Multidisciplinary Perspective, Current perspectives on
         cognition, learning, and instruction. Greenwich, CT: IAP.
Lee, L. A., Hansen, L. E., & Wilson, D. M. (2006). The impact of affective and relational factors on classroom
         experience and career outlook among first-year engineering undergraduates. Presented at the 36th
         ASEE/IEEE Frontiers in Education Conference. Retrieved from http://www.fie-
         conference.org/fie2006/papers/1796.pdf
Miles, M. B., & Huberman, A. M. (1984). Qualitative Data Analysis: A Sourcebook of New Methods. Beverly
         Hills: Sage Publications. Retrieved from http://lccn.loc.gov/84002140
Pintrich, P. R., Marx, R. W., & Boyle, R. A. (1993). Beyond Cold Conceptual Change: The Role of
         Motivational Beliefs and Classroom Contextual Factors in the Process of Conceptual Change. Review
         of Educational Research, 63(2), 167-199.

                                                    412     ISLS
