                                               ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

            Digital art-making as a representational process
     Erica Halverson, UW-Madison, 1086 Educational Sciences, 1025 W. Johnson, Madison, WI 53706,
                                     erhalverson@education.wisc.edu

        Abstract: In this paper, I take a distributed cognition framework to analyze the tasks of artistic
production in terms of the external representations produced. Using data collected through case studies with
four youth media arts organizations (YMAOs), I ask how the digital art-making process can be understood in
terms of the construction of external representations and what function these representations serve in art-
making. I analyze data on the process of making digital art in terms of the macro and micro tasks performed
(Spillane, Halverson, & Diamond, 2001) in order to highlight external representation construction across
organizations. Then I describe one micro task in depth to unpack the role the representations created serve in
sensemaking. I find that digital art-making as structured in YMAOs seems to provide a robust, authentic
environment for the construction of process-based external representations which has implications for content
domains that value representation as a learning goal.

Introduction
        I think that's what artists do. They struggle with their pieces, with what their pieces are about. They
        struggle with who they are and how they're going to show themselves (Street Level participant, 09.08).

Producing external representations that demonstrate mastery of a topic is often the desired outcome of
participation in a constructivist-oriented curriculum. Performance-based assessment is predicated on the idea
that the products of a learning process accurately represent what learners know and can do. While curriculum
and assessment designers often struggle to construct tasks that afford learners the opportunity to engage in
authentic production, art-making is fundamentally a representational task (Eisner, 2002; Langer, 1953). In
producing art, we always strive to represent an idea, a feeling, a story to an audience using the tools of artistic
media. In this paper, I describe how structured  artistic production experiences provide adolescents with the
opportunity to engage in a series of complex representational tasks. These representational tasks are consistent
with a broad framework demonstrating the importance of external representations in sensemaking (Cox, 1999;
Reisberg, 1987) as well as our understanding of the role of representation in creativity (Hasirici & Demirkan,
2007) and the artistic production process (Eisner, 2002).
        The use of external representations for sensemaking in the context of schooling has thus far been
situated in research on mathematics (e.g. Zhang & Norman, 1994) and science (e.g. Puntambekar & Goldstein,
2007). Philosophers of art (Langer, 1953) and scholars who describe the arts and cognition (Gardner, 1973;
Eisner, 2002) take engagement with complex external representations to be a core part of artistic production.
Despite a common emphasis on creating external representations as a method for students to demonstrate
mastery, there is virtually no connection across research on artistic production activities and core subject areas.
One reason for this may be the lack of common language for describing the value of representation for
sensemaking in classroom-based academic tasks and in artistic production. The ability to evaluate and construct
representations in physics, for example, is considered a high-level skill, and one that is essential for students to
master. The arts, on the other hand, are often considered "extra" activities that, despite their direct parallels with
scientific investigation (Gardner, 1973), do not warrant the same prestige. Understanding the role external
representations play in artistic production processes can demonstrate the ways learning art and learning science
are alike, breaking down the artificial separation between core and "extra" academic subject areas.
        In order to understand the role of external representations in artistic production, I take a distributed
cognition framework to analyze the tasks of the art-making process in terms of the external representations
produced. Using data collected through case studies with four youth media arts organizations (YMAOs), I ask
how the digital art-making process can be understood in terms of the construction of external representations
and what function these representations serve in art-making. I analyze data on the process of making digital art
in terms of the macro and micro tasks performed (Spillane, Halverson, & Diamond, 2001) in order to highlight
external representation construction and use across organizations. Then I describe one micro task in depth to
unpack the role the representations created serve in sensemaking. I conclude with reflections on the important
role digital art production can serve in student learning and development with implications for content domains
that value representation as a learning goal.

The Role of External Representation in Sensemaking
Understanding the role of external representation in sensemaking begins with a distributed cognition perspective
on thinking and learning (Hutchins, 1995; Salomon, 1993). Distributed cognition shifts the "locus of
knowledge" from inside the individual to within and among actor-tool-activity networks (Salomon, 1993).

                                                   412  ·  © ISLS
                                              ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

Understanding how people interpret and construct external representations using available tools over the course
of systemic activity is a core task of research on distributed cognition (Cox, 1999; Zhang & Norman, 1994).
Hutchins (1995) describes this research as, "the examination of the role of material media in which
representations are embodied and in the physical properties that propagate representations across media" (p.
266).
        In a distributed cognitive system, external representations function both as tools to think with (Norman,
1993; Zhang & Norman, 1994) and as tools for expressing complex ideas (Norman, 1983). Cox (1999)
distinguishes between external representations that are provided for learners to assist in their understanding
(presented or pre-fabricated) and the representations that learners construct to demonstrate their own
understanding or to assist their own learning (self-constructed). While much of the research on the role of
external representations in distributed cognitive systems has focused on learners' use of presented
representations, Cox (1999) argues that constructing representations are of vital importance to understanding
learning: "This activity represents more than a simple translation, for as Vygotsky observed, when signs
(language, diagrams, etc.) are included in an action, they do more than facilitate manoeuvres that are impossible
in the absence of the sign system. They fundamentally transform action" (p. 347). Reisberg (1987) described
external representations as both aides memoires ­ expressions of understanding that extend human cognition ­
and aides pensées ­ tools with which to develop new understanding. In both cases, "one can learn by turning
one's [internal] representations into stimuli ­ i.e. by externalizing them" (p. 288). How learners construct
external representations of complex ideas and the value of this activity in building robust understanding is of
great interest to educators and researchers who value a constructivist approach to learning.

External Representation and the Arts
Artistic production provides a rich context for understanding distributed cognition and the role of external
representation (Eisner, 2002; Gardner, 1973). Eisner (2002) describes artistic production as, "[the]
transformation of a material to a medium. Materials become media when they mediate...[and] to convert a
material into a medium is an achievement" (p. 80). Like any representational domain such as mathematics or
writing, "getting smart" in the context of producing art, "means coming to know the potential of the materials in
relation to the aims of a project or problem" (Eisner, 2002, p. 72). Art-making is fundamentally a creative
process, and creativity is intimately tied to the production of external representations (Csikszentmihalyi, 1996).
Hasirci and Demirkan (2007) describe mental images and external representations as "essential in investigations
of creativity" (p. 262). Hayes (1989) describes the capacity to build the right representation in the right situation
as a marker of creative expertise. There are strong parallels between the role external representations play in
creative acts in art and in science. In both domains, creativity requires convergent and divergent thinking; the
ability to construct representations that are both unique and recognizable is the marker of an accomplished artist
and scientist (Gardner, 1973).
        Artistic production is about the creation of representations. Creating art mindfully, that is learning how
to construct and critically evaluate these representations, requires scaffolded instruction. In youth arts
organizations, participants are engaged in authentic artistic production tasks, yet they are guided in these
authentic tasks by explicit pedagogical practices. Eisner (2002)  describes student artists in the context of formal
instruction as, "work[ing] meaningfully on the creation of images" (p. xii). Research on artistic production in
youth arts organizations has demonstrated that youth are highly invested in the meaningful construction of
images with explicit attention to how these products will be received by a public audience (Heath, 2000; Soep,
2006). In my research, I am interested in how youth learn to engage with and create external representations
over time. I follow this process in youth arts organizations because they offer youth explicit instruction (much
like schools) toward the goal of the public sharing of art (much like professional artists). It is in this context of
these organizations that I take up questions of external representations and artistic production.

Research Methods
Broadly, I am interested in the role self-constructed external representations play in learning, particularly in the
arts. While seminal research on arts-based learning has broadly considered the importance of representations in
art-making  (Eisner, 2002;  Gardner, 1989),  this   research  has  not  taken an  explicitly   distributed cognition
perspective on the   art-making process in order    to understand  how   representations are   constructed   and the
functions they serve. To initiate this research trajectory, I posed the following research questions: (a) What are
the representational tasks involved  in producing      autobiographical digital art? (b) What     function  do those
representational tasks serve emerging art-makers in youth media arts organizations as they create products to
share with a public audience?

Data Collection
To address these questions, my research team conducted four instrumental case studies (Stake, 2000) with
YMAOs across the United States. Youth arts organizations work in a variety of media including live theatre,

                                                   413  ·  © ISLS
                                              ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

radio, digital story, film, and spoken word poetry. While all of these media afford youth the opportunity to
engage in the representation of self through art, we chose YMAOs that work in the digital media arts, with a
focus on film. This allowed us to hold the representational medium constant as we explored how youth
constructed and used external representations. Table One briefly describes the four organizations.

Table 1: Four case study organizations.

                    Location             Production cycle     Type of       Time of data         # of youth
                                         length               program       collection           participants
Appalachian         Whitesburg, KY       3 months             Summer        Summer 2008          12
Media Institute                                               internship
In Progress         St. Paul, MN         Varied               Ongoing       Summer 2007          10
                    (headquarters)
Reel Works Teen     New York, NY         6 months             Semester      Fall 2007 ­          12
Filmmaking                                                                  Spring 2008
Street Level        Chicago, IL          3 months             Summer        Summer 2008          12
Youth Media                                                   internship

       At each organization, we traced one production cycle ­ from participants' initial entry into the
organization to the final presentation of their work. In identifying a production cycle as the frame for our cases,
we created further consistency in our data collection not by the amount of time we spent with each organization
but by the organizational structure provided for participants to produce their digital art (Table 1). In order to
capture the production cycle at every organization we collected a variety of qualitative data:
    !     Documentation of the process in action. Most of this documentation was in the form of ethnographic
          observation, though we also obtained video documentation at various points across the production
          cycle.
    !     Artifact collection. We collected all artifacts youth created around the digital production process
          including application essays, journals, group brainstorming sheets, worksheets, edited/unedited video
          footage, and blog entries. We also collected curricular materials used by organizational leaders and
          individual workshop facilitators.
    !     Interviews with participants, organizational leaders, facilitators, and mentors.

       Data collection was iterative; we employed a constant comparative method across our case studies
(Glaser & Strauss, 1967). We began with two open-ended case studies (Reel Works and In Progress) and then
returned to the field a year later to conduct two more directed case studies (AMI and Street Level) based on our
initial interpretations. In our open-ended case studies, we participated in as much of the production cycle as we
could, and collected all artifacts that seemed relevant. While we did not initially conduct a full analysis of all
representations produced, we did identify when and where opportunities for construction occurred to inform the
design of our second round of case studies. In this second round, we directed our efforts towards capturing
youths' representation construction ­ both the process of constructing and their use of these representations in
the context of the production cycle. We also asked organizational leaders more pointed questions about the
relationship between identity and representation in our second round of interviews.

Data Analysis
In a distributed cognitive system, the way actors make sense of their work can be analyzed in terms of the tasks
they must complete and the artifacts generated in the completion of these tasks. In this analysis, I employ
Spillane et al.'s (2001) analytic method for understanding distributed cognitive tasks, breaking down the digital
art-making process into macro and micro tasks.  In my previous work, I have documented autobiographical
artistic production as a "dramaturgical process" ­ the telling, adapting, and performing of narratives of personal
experience (Author, 2007, in press). Using an open-ended coding process (Corbin & Strauss, 2008) of
observational data, interviews and artifacts created during the production cycle across all four case studies, I
coded all the representational tasks we captured as one of three macro tasks: (a) Telling stories and/or figuring
out what story to tell; (b) Adapting stories into filmic representations or; (c) Presenting products to an outside
audience.
       Once I classified all data that concerned the building of an external representation into these three
categories, I conducted a second round of grounded coding where I assigned the data to a "micro task" within
one of these macro tasks. Since tasks demonstrate the distributed interrelationships among actors and artifacts in
sensemaking (Spillane et al., 2001), I considered an activity a micro task if participants had to create a unique
external representation as an integral part of the activity. Having identified these micro tasks, I explored them
further in analysis by identifying relevant properties and dimensions (Corbin & Strauss, 2008) of these micro

                                                  414  ·  © ISLS
                                                ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

tasks across organizations and by building theoretical conceptual matrices that highlighted analytic points of
interest across the data.

Findings: Representational micro tasks in digital art-making
Given the central role artifacts play in analyzing distributed cognitive tasks, my analysis affords opportunities to
see these cognitive processes as representational tasks and to understand the tasks at a level of depth previously
unexplored in cognitive analyses of artistic production. In this section, I first describe the representational tasks
youth engage in as they created digital art at the four YMAOs. Table 2 provides a summary of all the micro
tasks and their prevalence across organizations. In the narrative sections below, I reference the names of tasks
by an individual data citation (field note, interview, journal entry, worksheet) though multiple forms of data
demonstrated the prevalence of these tasks and their relevant artifacts. I then describe one representational task
in depth: the pitch. In doing so, I analyze the role this task and accompanying external representations serve in
sensemaking.

Table 2: Micro tasks in the process of digital art production.

Type of task                                 Format(s)                                    AMI      IP   RW     SL
Macro task: Telling stories
Application essay                            Written text                                 !             !      !
Application interview                        Oral conversation                                     !    !
Warm-up ideas                                Written text; Multimodal                     !        !    !      !
Pitch                                        Oral presentation                            !        !    !      !
                                             PowerPoint or other supplementary text
First treatment/shooting script/shot list    Written text                                 !        !    !      !
Macro task: Adapting stories
Prose script                                 Written text                                 !             !
Rough cut(s)                                 Multimodal                                   !        !    !      !
Macro task: Presenting final products
Final video                                  Multimodal                                   !        !    !      !
Artist statement                             Written text                                                      !
Public showing                               Multimodal; Oral conversation; Written       !        !    !      !
                                             text

Telling Stories
In the context of producing digital videos, "telling stories" as a macro task is accomplished when filmmakers
are ready to begin shooting footage for their films. Across all four organizations, there were five different micro
tasks that youth participated in.
         The  application   essay. In three  of the four   organizations youth were  required   to submit  a written
application. Applicants were given a series of guiding questions to respond to, including questions about what
stories they might like to tell with film, as well as reasons for wanting to join the program.
         The application interview. Two of the four organizations required youth to participate in one-on-one
interviews with the program's directors prior to beginning the process. At Reel Works, youth had also written
applications so the interviews were supplementary. At In Progress, interviews were the director's opportunity to
talk with youth prior to their beginning the process about their goals and film ideas.
         Warm-up ideas. While some youth came to the organizations having already decided what film they
want to make, many had not. Youth produced a variety of artifacts that were "warm-ups" for their final product
including short essays in response to questions such as, "Why do you like art and making stories? What are you
going to do this year" (IP FN 07.31.07) or writing prompts such as, "I really miss..." and "My greatest passion
in life [is]..." (RW   Journals Fall  2008). Participants  also produced  more  focused  representations   based on
guided worksheets. Alternately, youth produced mini-films in a short production cycle such as "community-
based interviews" (AMI FN 06.08) or "past assignments" (SL FN 07.01.08). The resulting artifacts were multi-
modal, video-based projects that were accomplished in a short period of time and are given feedback by the
adult facilitators.
         Pitch. Across organizations youth were required to "pitch" their ideas to a critical group, either within
their community     or to some    outside group. Youth     produced a  wide variety of  artifacts  during the pitch,
depending on the nature of the task as structured by the organization. The pitch is described in greater depth
below.
         First treatment. Before participants began shooting their films, they created a representation of their
plan ­ referred to as a "first treatment," (RW FN 07.20.07) "shot list," (SL Journals 07.08)       "essays," (IP FN

                                                    415  ·  © ISLS
                                              ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

08.01.07) and "proposals" that include who they will interview, shot list, b-roll footage, why they want to make
the film and its importance (AMI Interview 04.08).

Adapting Stories
To distinguish between the "telling stories" macro task and the "adapting stories" macro task, I divided the work
by representations that were created before and after footage for the final product was shot. In some cases youth
used footage they created in their "warm-ups" for their final product, blurring the line between the two macro
tasks. Additionally, films that were heavily interview-based had a clearer distinction between pre-/post-shooting
artifacts since none of the dialogue was crafted in advance. For films with narrative elements, some of the
adaptation work was accomplished in advance of shooting. Despite this messiness, there were two micro tasks
unique to the adaptation function.
         Prose script. Participants at Reel Works generated scripts for their films after they shot the majority of
their footage, giving them a roadmap for how to edit their films and a broad sense of how the final product
would look. AMI had their participants create "paper edits...where you write down what you think your video
will look like and what each part's going to be like. Like some people do it minute-by-minute or just in minute
chunks...like what scenes are going to look like and what each character's going to bring" (AMI Interview
07.16.08).
         Rough cut. Participants produced one or more "rough cuts" before they presented a final product.
Typically, these rough cuts were used in critique sessions with peers and/or mentors. Rough cuts are multimodal
since they represent the film to that point ­ they may be missing certain key modes (such as soundtrack) or they
may contain all modes in basic form.

Presenting Products
A core component of any performance-arts production process is the final presentation to an outside audience.
Since audience is a critical component of artistic production, all of the micro tasks in the presentation function
focused on creating a sharable product that can be communicated to outsiders. Three unique representational
tasks emerged.
         Final video. All participants produced a video, either alone or with a group. The final video is the
ultimate external representation ­ the permanent instantiation of how an individual or group of youth chose to
share their  story with an audience.  In other  work  I  describe how    these final products can be  analyzed  as
standalone multimodal representations (Halverson, in press).
         Artist statement. At Street Level youth created "artist statements", written text that accompanied their
videos describing who they are and what their piece is about.
         Public showing. In addition to completing a video as a standalone piece of work, youth participate in a
variety of  public events  where they  have an  opportunity   to  engage  in a  discussion about  their work  with
audience members, either in the form of a gallery opening (Street Level) or a screening with a post-show "talk
back" (other three organizations).

One Micro Task In-Depth: The Pitch
While the above description outlines the representational tasks involved in producing digital art, I am also
interested in the role these representations serve in helping youth to understand the art-making process. In order
to explore the role representations serve art-makers, I chose one task and its accompanying representations to
analyze in further depth. Table 3 provides a more detailed breakdown of "the pitch" at each organization.

Table 3: Pitch micro task across organizations.

                           Micro-task                    Artifacts produced                      People involved
AMI                Brainstorming session        Ideas on butcher block paper            Participants
                                                Oral presentation                       Instructors
                                                List of ideas to vote on                Mentors
                                                Vote tally for project ideas
In Progress        One-on-one meeting           Journal notes                           Participants
                                                                                        Director
Reel Works         Formal story pitch           Pitch worksheet                         Participants
                                                Oral presentation                       Instructors
                                                                                        Mentors
                                                                                        External experts
Street Level       Group presentation           PowerPoint                              Participants
                                                Oral presentation                       Instructors

                                                  416  ·  © ISLS
                                              ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

       The artifacts generated for these pitch sessions provide opportunities for youth to engage with their
film ideas by a) expressing textually and orally what story they want to tell and why and b) engaging with
experts and peers through reflective critique. The differences in task and artifacts created are isomorphic
representations that are implementations of the same abstract goal (Zhang & Norman, 1994).
       The Reel Works pitch process is the most traditional example of "pitching" movie ideas to sell to
outsiders. Youth participants traveled to Time-Warner studios in New York City to share their ideas with their
peers, mentors, and directors, and a panel of professional producers. Youth were instructed to treat this meeting
as if they were selling their movie ideas to producers, providing a context for their presentations. In addition,
they were given a worksheet to guide their thinking about the development of their ideas (Figure 1). Some youth
used the worksheet directly, filling in responses to worksheet questions and using these responses to give their
pitches. Others used the questions on the worksheet as guidelines for the construction of a narrative description
that they created in a journal. Youth used these artifacts to read from as their delivered their pitches, though they
also answered questions from the audience extemporaneously.
       The worksheet provided space to reflect the content of the story ­ e.g. "This film(story) is about: The
life of my grandfather; Through good times and bad. How I handled the ups and downs." It also provided space
to think about the representational medium of film ­ e.g. "In this film, I would be the narrator. I will also
interview my parents and other artists who appreciate the art of photography like I do. There will definitely be
music in the beginning of this film." Finally, participants reflected on the meaning of their film: "As the
Director, I want my audience to feel/think/understand...where I'm from, try and put theirselves [sic] in my
situation, be inspired at the end of my film. I want people to go out and change their situations, my film should
be influencial [sic]." The questions posed on the worksheets encourage youth to think about the content of their
film, their use of film as a medium, and why their film is important. This explicit attention to content, structure,
and impact resulted in external representations, in the form of written statements on their ideas, how they will be
carried out and the functions they may serve.

                              Figure 1. Reel Works pitch worksheet.

       The oral presentation afforded youth the opportunity to engage in reflective critique that pushes these
ideas further. These critique sessions focused on both practical issues of filmmaking and about the function of
film as a medium in communicating a complex idea. For example, in pitching Rupture, the film about absentee
fathers referenced in Figure 1, the filmmaker, instructor, mentor, and an external expert have an extended
exchange about how to construct this piece so that it shows certain universal themes yet maintains her individual
experience. As the instructor describes: "your story is one that many, many people have experienced but when

                                                 417  ·   © ISLS
                                             ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

you bring us through the story through your eyes, of walking through those doors, of what you were thinking
and then of what your mother was thinking as you came through those doors" (RW pitch meeting, 03.08).
       In contrast, at AMI, the focus of the pitch is for youth to sell their ideas to one another. Since films are
made in groups, the pitch session serves as an opportunity to select three ideas they will choose to make. Youth
engage in an extended brainstorm session where they generate their film ideas and try to draw connections
across ideas (Figure 2). Every person has a chance to contribute their ideas, to describe the idea they contributed
to the brainstorming session, and to indicate which of the ideas are their favorites. The butcher block paper is
used to generate ideas and to draw connections across stories.

                            Figure 2. Final project brainstorm at AMI.

       Once three ideas have been selected through a blind voting process, and youth are assigned to groups
based on their own interests and mentors' construction of productive teams, these new groups devise a
"proposal" for their film. The proposal consists of basic structural ideas, whom they will interview, a
preliminary shot list, and a description of the film, as well as an assessment of who the audience for the film will
be. Similar to Reel Works, AMI participants are given a series of questions to answer about their prospective
film; they use "sample proposals" as models to construct their own (AMI FN, 06.27.08).
       While the content of the pitches are constructed representations of participants' ideas, the structure for
the representations is created by the organizations. By prompting youth with questions to answer, models to
follow, and formats to fit ideas into, the organizations provide a structural scaffold within which participants can
craft representations of their ideas. The pitch happens relatively early in the process, usually about one third of
the way through the production cycle. At this point, youth are likely still struggling with core questions around
why their ideas matter and whom these ideas may reach. Structuring the representational task in this way
facilitates youth engagement with these questions and requires that they construct external representations, in
the form of text and oral presentations that describe their emerging understanding of the value of their ideas and
how these ideas can be communicated to outsiders. Across the pitch meetings, instructors and mentors used
participants' pitches to help youth think in depth about the generalizability of their individual narrative ideas.

Discussion: External representations in art-making and beyond
Analyzing the micro tasks embedded in the telling, adapting, and performing of narratives of personal
experience demonstrates that learning to make art in the context of YMAOs is fundamentally a distributed,
representational endeavor. YMAOs structure opportunities throughout the process for participants to create
artifacts - written, oral, and multimodal ­ that demonstrate youths' evolving understanding of the story they
want to tell and how the medium of film affords them the opportunity to represent this idea. Building these
representations provides opportunities for sensemaking and reflection both in the representations themselves
and in the discourse generated around these representations. Each microtask results in an external representation
that affords the opportunity to explore the relationship between the idea and how the medium of film can
express this core idea. The films themselves are multimodal representations of sophisticated ideas (Halverson,
in press); seeing the microtasks from initial conception to final product allows us to understand how the final
representation comes to be and whether and how youth are mindful of what their artistic representation conveys.
       This type of distributed, representational system is not limited to digital art-making. Artistic
production is a representational act, and learning to create art in an organizational context allows emerging
artists to understand how representation affords reflection on art and meaning. The representational tasks
scaffold the art-making process for youth to become reflective artists also look a lot like the representational
process we want our students of science and mathematics to engage in.

Educational Significance
Understanding artistic production in terms of external representational tasks is significant to researchers,
practitioners, and designers who are interested in constructivist, project-based learning environments, especially

                                                 418  ·  © ISLS
                                                ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

those that engage learners with 21st Century skills. A  decade ago, Cox (1999) described the growing importance
of representation construction in progressive learning environments: "As educational technology becomes more
and more integrated into the curriculum and as the variety and sophistication of data visualization and external
representation techniques proliferate, the issue of training students to use ERs effectively is likely to increase in
importance" (p. 360). Digital art-making as structured in YMAOs seems to provide a robust, authentic
environment for the construction of process-based external representations.
          Constructing external representations of process over time is a crucial component of YMAOs as
designed environments. Despite this, research on the design of learning spaces that promote the development of
complex external representations has been left to the sciences particularly physics, engineering, and the
biological sciences. My analysis confirms Eisner's assertion that we need to allow artistic production to enter
the conversation around external representations, complex cognition and the design of learning environments:
"the tasks that the arts put forward ­ such as noticing subtleties among qualitative relationships, conceiving of
imaginative possibilities, interpreting metaphorical meanings the work displays, exploiting unanticipated
opportunities in the course of one's work - require complex cognitive modes of thought" (Eisner, 2002, p. 35).
          Finally, narrative media such as digital art-making may be especially potent for adolescents and
emerging adults who are involved in a psychosocial identity development process. Identity development has
been described as the negotiation of a relationship between cultural and personal narratives (Hammack, 2008) ­
explicit engagement with these narratives through the dramaturgical process could facilitate positive
developmental outcomes for participants. Artistic production that focuses on autobiographical experiences
opens up opportunities for the representational process to engage youth in identity exploration. Future work will
focus on how constructing external representations over time is intricately connected to identity development.

References
Corbin, J. M. & Strauss, A. L. (2008). Basics of qualitative research: Techniques and procedures for developing
          grounded theory. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.
Cox, R. (1999). Representation construction, externalized cognition and individual differences. Learning and
          Instruction, 9, 343-363.
Csikszentmihalyi, M. (1996). Creativity. New York: Harper Collins.
Eisner, E. (2002). The arts and the creation of mind. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Gardner, H, (1973). The arts and human development. New York: Harper Collins.
Glaser, B. G. & Strauss, A. L. (1967). The discovery of grounded theory: Strategies for qualitative research.
          Chicago, IL: Aldine.
Halverson,  E.  R. (in  press). Film   as identity exploration:  A multimodal    analysis of  youth-produced    films.
          Teachers College Record, 112(9).
Hammack, P. (2008). Narrative and the cultural psychology of identity. Personality and Social Psychology
          Review, 12(3), 222-247.
Hasirci, D. & Demirkan, H. (2007). Understanding the effects of cognition in creative decision making: A
          creativity model for enhancing the design studio process. Creativity Research Journal, 19(2-3), 259-
          271.
Hayes, J. R. (1989). Cognitive processes in creativity. In J. A. Glover, R. R. Ronning, & C. R. Reynolds (Eds.),
          Handbook of creativity. New York: Plenum.
Heath, S. B. (2000). Seeing our way into learning. Cambridge Journal of Education, 30(1), 121-132.
Hutchins, E. (1995). Cognition in the wild. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Langer, S. (1953). Feeling and form. New York: Charles Scribner's Sons.
Norman,   D.   (1983). Some   observations  on   mental models.   In D.  Gentner   & A.   L. Stevens   (Eds.), Mental
          models. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Norman, D. (1993). Things that make us smart. New York: Double Day.
Puntambekar,   S., &   Goldstein,  J. (2007). Effect of   visual representation  of the conceptual   structure  of the
          domain   on  science  learning  and navigation   in a  hypertext  environment.     Journal of Educational
          Multimedia and Hypermedia, 16(4), 429-459.
Reisberg, D. (1987). External representations and the advantages of externalizing one's thoughts. The Ninth
          Annual Cognitive Science Society (pp. 281-293). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Salomon, G. (1993). Distributed cognitions. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Soep, E. (2006). Critique: Assessment and the production of learning. Teachers College Record, 108(4), 748-
          777.
Spillane, J.,  Halverson, R.,   &  Diamond,   J. (2001).   Investigating school  leadership  practice: A distributed
          perspective. Educational Researcher, 30(3), 23-28.
Stake, R.  (2000). Case   studies. In, N.  K. Denzin    &  Y. S.  Guba   (Eds.), Handbook    of qualitative research.
          Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.
Zhang, J. & Norman, D. (1994). Representations in distributed cognitive tasks. Cognitive Science, 18, 87-122.

                                                    419  ·  © ISLS
