                                         ICLS 2010     ·   Volume 2

            From Visualization to Logical Necessity, Through
                                     Argumentative Design
    Naomi Prusak1 [inlrap12@netvision.net.il],         Rina Hershkowitz2 [rina.hershkovitz@weizmann.ac.il],
                                Baruch B. Schwarz1 [ msschwar@mscc.huji.ac.il]
             1The Hebrew University, Jerusalem, Israel , 2The Weizmann Institute of Science, Israel

        Abstract: We show that a meticulous design can encourage students in dyads to shift
        from    informal    reasoning    (visual, inquiry-based)       to reasoning     moved     by  logical
        necessity   (abductive   and  deductive).    We    describe    a  case  study   in which  one   dyad
        solves a series activities purposely designed. We show that argumentation first relies on
        intuition,  and    then  intertwines   the     activities   of conjecturing      and   checking   the
        conjectures though the use of different gestures.

With the multiplicity of tools available in mathematics education, instructional design can do miracles: in
this study, we show that one can encourage students to shift from informal reasoning to reasoning moved
by logical necessity. We show how various kinds of reasoning processes (visual, inquiry-based, abductive
and deductive)    can  stem  from  interactive    argumentation.    The   activity   of  proving  which   was  always
difficult to trigger, can stem from argumentation. The use of special software helps to prop on intuitions,
and on visualization. In a proper environment, dyads use gestures that accompany verbal argumentation.
Productivity  of  collective argumentation     consisted     not  only    in  a shift   in reasoning    type  (towards
deductive considerations),   but   in co-construction      of knowledge       ­ in   the   progressive  emergence     of
geometrical  principles   combined    in arguments.      These   positive   outcomes     resulted from  collaborative
rather than adversarial interactions as the students tried to accommodate their divergent views.

The research design experiment
Leading researchers have recognized the importance of CSCL tools in learning mathematics (e.g., Stahl,
2009). Researchers     in mathematics    education     have   invested    a  special  effort in   designing   situations
incorporating computerized tools for learning (e.g., Hadas, Hershkowitz & Schwarz, 2001, 2002). In the
present study, (1) we design an activity in geometry as an inquiry-based activity that invites participants to
raise and check hypotheses and encourages them to engage in argumentation which is productive in the
sense that it leads to deductive reasoning;       (2) we identify and analyze the various kinds of reasoning
processes students adopt    (visual, inquiry-based, deductive) while they       are engaged in such an activity and
show how these ways of reasoning are interwoven in collective argumentation; (3) we trace dynamic
changes and development of individuals' and collective's argumentation processes of peers of students,
working on such a designed activity - from what is usually called: "informal" kinds of reasoning to more
"formal" ways. (Rasmussen et al, 2005).
Research subjects
The subjects  in  this research  are  pre-service    teachers   trained   to teach   mathematics   at   the elementary
school level. They     participate in a  course   about    "Geometry      and   Computerized    Environments",      in a
Teacher's college in Jerusalem. The pre-service teachers (called 'students' onward) generally worked in
dyads. They were familiar with Dynamic Geometry software tools.
Analysis of data
We  adopted   a  methodological    approach   used     by Rasmussen       and  Stephan   (2008),  who   used  Toulmin
model  of argumentation     for  tracing and  analyzing      the  argumentation    process.    We  analyzed   with    this
method the protocol of each dyad in each task. We identified the characteristics of the arguments the dyad
developed, including the resources and reasons (warrants and backings) invoked. We looked at the kinds
of interactions   that developed;   also  we  discerned      shifts in   the  argument     schemes   in the  collective
argumentation within or between tasks.
To  achieve   the research   goals,   we  had  first   (as   we   mentioned     before)  to  design   the   activity, its
environment!and conditions, in such a way as to encourage students to engage in argumentative processes
that would lead to the elaboration of logic deductive argumentation
The designed activity
Figure 1  shows   the   activity we   designed.   It   was designed      according   to  three design   principles:   (1)
creating a conflict situation (2) creating a collaborative situation (3) providing an environment for raising
and checking hypotheses. It is organized in three successive tasks. In each of the three tasks, students were
asked to go through similar phases: i) to find individually a solution for the shape that was drawn on the
worksheet. In this phase they could check their solution with a first hypothesis testing device, a ruler for
measurement   ii) to   work  in  dyads   and  to  reach    a  consensus     concerning   the   solution (collaboration

                                              415    ·  © ISLS
                                       ICLS 2010  ·                 Volume 2

principle) iii) to check their conjectured solution. At this phase, the hypothesis testing device was the
Dynamic Geometry software with which they could undertake manipulations (hypothesis testing/checking
principle). In case they made a wrong conjecture, they were asked to make a new conjecture and recheck
it with the DG tools.

   Task 1:
   A recreational park has a rectangular shape. At each vertex of the rectangular park there is an attraction. The manager
   of the park decided to locate the ticket booth at an equal distance from the four vertices of the rectangle.
   Find the point in the rectangle, which fits for the ticket booth
   Task 2:
   Another park has the shape of an equilateral triangle. At each vertex of this triangular park there is an attractive facility. The
   manager decided to locate the tickets booth at an equal distance from the three vertices of the triangle.
   Find the point in the triangle that would satisfy the requirements.
   Task 3:
   What if the recreational park has the shape of a scalene triangle?
   Find the point (if any) in this triangle that would satisfy the requirements.

                         Figure 1: The sequence of tasks (A shortened version)
The purpose of Task 1 is to get acquainted with the issue of finding a point which is equidistant from the
vertices of a given figure. In Task 2, the shape of the recreational park is an equilateral triangle. Our
assumption was that students would choose "special lines" ­ the three medians, the angle bisectors, or
altitudes, and would find the intersection point of the three special lines, as a solution for the task.
Our assumption was that the students would imagine that the methods they used in Task 2 would be
suitable for Task 3 as well, meaning that the solution would be the intersection point of the medians, or of
the angles' bisectors, or of the altitudes. None of the above is the right solution, so students enter a
conflict situation. Intuitions could certainly help in Task 1 and probably in Task 2, but naturally led to a
wrong conjecture in Task 3 (conflict principle). In cases that they faced conflict - their conjecture was
wrong; they were "pushed" to propose a new conjecture and to justify it.

Analysis and Implications
The activity we will analyze, invited the use of concrete methods and visualization in argumentation, but
at the same time offered opportunities that point out the limitations in adopting such methods. We will
present a case-study, in which students realize the importance of using Dynamic Geometry software for
checking their conjectures, and yet find themselves in a dead-end position (conflict situation) and face the
need to adopt logical-geometrical reasoning to find and justify the solution of their problem.
         All dyads that coped with the activity were led to believe that the methods they used in the
second task would be suitable for the third task as well, so the designed conflict situation was achieved.
On the  poster  we will focus   on the story of  one                dyad. We     will demonstrate   through        this  story  how
argumentation   developed  from    being based    on                intuition    and  visual considerations         to   deductive
considerations. The   apparatus in which  argumentation                 develops     ­  different tools      at  disposal   and the
presence of two collaborating students, affords shifts in argumentation, not only in the person leading it,
not only in its structure (focused on reasons instead of claims), but in the nature of arguments evoked, as
reasons (warrants, backing) progressively become deductive. In this transformation, multimodality plays a
central role. We will show that visual elements can serve as precursors of arguments, but sometime they
are not enough and deductive considerations are the only solution.                      We argue that beyond the general
lessons that we  will  present  concerning the   importance                of    design principles  for         learning in dyadic
interaction, the specific achievement of this study, is the fact that the outcome of the dyadic interaction
was deductive proving as an activity that convinces its actors.

Selected references
Andriessen, J. E. B. & Schwarz, B. B. (2009). Argumentative design. In N. Muller-Mirza and A. N.
     Perret-Clermont (Eds.), Argumentation and Education ­ Theoretical Foundations and Practices
     (pp. 145-174). Springer Verlag.
Hadas, N., Hershkowitz, R., & Schwarz, B. B. (2001). The role of surprise and uncertainty in promoting
     the need to prove in computerized environment. Educational Studies in Mathematics, 44(1&2),
     127-150.
Rasmussen, C. & Stephan, M. (2008). A methodology for documenting collective activity. In                                      A.E.
         Kelly, R. A. Lesh & J. Y. Baek (Eds.), Handbook of design research methods in education (pp.
         195-215).  New York and London: Routledge Publishers..
Stahl, G. (2009). Mathematical discourse as group cognition. In G. Stahl (Ed.), Studying Virtual Math
         Teams (ch. 3, pp. 31-40). New York, NY: Springer.

                                           416  ·  © ISLS
