                                               ICLS 2010   ·   Volume 2

    Improvising in music: A learning biography study to reveal skill
                                                 acquisition
     Iwan G. J. H. Wopereis, Open University of the Netherlands, NL-PO Box 2960, 6401 DL Heerlen, the
                                       Netherlands, iwan.wopereis@ou.nl,
  Jeroen J. G. van Merriënboer,Maastricht University, PO Box 616, 6200 MD Maastricht, The Netherlands,
                                      J.vanMerrienboer@EDUC.unimaas.nl
Paul A. Kirschner, Open University of the Netherlands, NL-PO Box 2960, 6401 DL Heerlen, the Netherlands,
                                              paul.kirschner@ou.nl,

         Abstract: This poster addresses a learning biography study which aims at analyzing learning
         histories of both expert and non-expert improvisers (five recognized expert improvisers and
         five renowned    musicians   lacking  improvisational     expertise).   It was  hypothesized  that   by
         choosing both experts and non-experts it is possible to distinguish successful and unsuccessful
         learning strategies and instructional methods. Results of within-case analyses and cross-case
         analyses are presented. Further, consequences for two subsequent experimental studies wilbl e
         discussed.

Introduction
It is frequently stated that creativity is an important quality for both the individual and societyat large, and that
educating  for   creativity should   be   conceived  a   key    mission  in    educational   practice (Sawyer,     2006).
Unfortunately, both education and psychology have not been able to deduce a universal set of instructional
guidelines for creativity enhancement (Sweller, 2009). For some, this is reason to believe that creativity is
inborn and not the result of training and practice. However, studies on expertise development contradict this
belief and point out that differences in early experiences, training, and practice are the real detreminants of
excellent  and creative   performance   (Howe,    Davidson,    &   Sloboda,   1998).   The  question  is    what exactly
comprises early experience, training, and practiceregarding creativity enhancement.
         For the present study the domain of musical improvisational expertise development has been selected
to answer this question. Musical improvisation can be described as the creation of musical noveltyin real time.
It is a performing activity that involves highly skilled responses to an unpredictable realit.yThis description fits
Johnson-Laird's (2002) NONCE definition of creativity which claims that the outcome of a creative process is
Novel for the person producing the result, Optionally novel for society at large, the result of a Nonderteministic
process that is guided by Criteria or constraints, and that is based on existing Elements.
         A  learning  biography   study is set   up  to explore  the    learning histories  of both  recognized   expert
improvisers   and  non-expert   improvisers.  Retrospective     interviews    are   used to  reveal   effective  learning
strategies, to generate effective instructionalmethods, and to determine whether improvisation can be learned.
The learning biography study is fundamental totwo subsequent experimental studies which are framed into the
paradigm of deliberate practice (Ericsson, Krampe, & Tesch-Römer 1993) and holistic instructional design
approaches to complex learning (Van Merriënboer & Kirschner, 2007).

Method
Participants. We invited ten musical experts to participate in this study. Five experts were renowned expert
improvisers in music; five experts were recognized musicians in the same musical domain but not regarded to
be expert improvisers. A group of peers, musical scholars, and critics selected the experts. Since it is often
stated that expert performance is not reachedwith less than ten years of intense practice (Ericsson et al, 1993),
the experts  selected for  this study completed   at least   a 10-year  period   of  deliberate   musical   improvisation
practice. Experts were below the age of forty (range between 25 and 40 years).
Data collection. A variant of the procedure for `autobiographical sel-fthematisation' (Kelchtermans, 1999)has
been used for collecting data from the experts. In this procedure respondentsare stimulated to reflect on their
career (auto-biographical) and narratively share their experiences and the meanings these hold for them.Data
collection started with  a  questionnaire for recording    (a) formal   and   non-formal    musical and     improvisation
learning  episodes  (see  Figure  1)  and (b) critical  environmental     influences    (critical incidents  and  critical
persons). The questionnaire was followed by a semi structuredinterview which consists of two parts: a narrative
biographical  part  where   the interviewee   is asked   to  describe   his/her  `road   tomusical  excellence',  and a
thematically structured part, directed at revealing improvisaiton learning on a detailed micro level. The narrative
biographical part focuses on the dynamic dimension of the conversation, where the thematically strutcured part
is more dialogic. The semi-structured interview can be regarded cued retrospective, since both parts of the
interview  build  on  results from   previous data   gathering   stages  (interview    part one   elaborates  on  anwsers
questionnaire  and   interview  part  two  elaborates   on   interview   part  one).   Due  to    practical reasons (eg..,

                                                    419  ·  © ISLS
                                              ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 2

preparedness and availabilityof experts) it was decided to conduct one face-to-face interview. Internal validity
is addressed by giving the subject the opportunity to reread and evaluate the (adapted) transcriptinos of the
interviews. The results of the interviews were finalized telephonically.

                          Figure 1. Example of input for semi-structured interview.

Data analysis. Interviews are tape-recorded and transcribed. Codes are both descriptive and interpretative (see
Miles & Huberman, 1994). In the first phase a vertical or within-case analysis has been conducted. The second
phase of the analysis included a horizontal or comparative analysis (cross-case analysis). During cross-case
analysis the focus is on a comparison between the expert and non-expert improvisers.

Results and Conclusion
A pilot study proved that the procedure forcollecting and analyzing data was feasible. Preliminary results of the
main study indicate that the amount of practice is probably a decisive determinant for successful improvisational
development. Based on the analysis of the some questionnaires and interviews non-expert improvisers seem to
spend  less time  on deliberate practice (i.e., individual   and  group  imitation tasks, completion tasks, and
conventional tasks) and goal-free practice (i.e., `messing about on the instrument') than expert improvisers (cf.
Ericsson et al., 1993). However, beside (guided) practice, also intelligence is mentioned as an important factor
for successful skill learning (cf. Ruthsatz et al., 2008). Further, personality is brought up as the key to creativity
with a `big C' (cf. Kaufman & Beghetto, 2009). At the ICLS Conference the final results of the learning
biography study will be presented.

References
Ericsson, K. A., Krampe, R. Th., & Tesch-Römer, C. (1993). The role of deliberate practice in the acquisition of
        expert performance. Psychological Review, 100, 363-406.
Howe, M. J. A., Davidson, J. W., Sloboda, J. A. (1998). Innate talents: Reality or myth?Behavioral and Brain
        Sciences, 21, 399-442.
Johnson-Laird, P. N. (2002). How jazz musicians improvise.Music Perception, 19, 415-442.
Kaufman, J. C., & Beghetto, R. A. (2009). Beyond big and little: The four C model of creativity.Review of
        General Psychology, 13, 1-12.
Kelchtermans,    G.  (1999).  Narrative-biographical       research  on   teachers'  professional  development:
        Exemplifying a methodological research procedure. Paper presented at the AERA meeting in Montreal
        (Canada) (ERIC-document ED 432 582).
Miles, M.   B., & Huberman,   A. M.  (1994). Qualitative    data  analyses: An expanded    sourcebook (2nd  ed.).
        Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Ruthsatz, J., Detterman, D., Griscom, W. S., & Cirullo, B. A. (2008). Becoming an expert in the musical
        domain: It takes more than just practice.Intelligence, 36, 330-338.
Sawyer, R. K. (2006). Educating for innovation.Thinking Skills and Creativity, 1, 41-48.
Sweller, J. (2009). Cognitive bases of human creativity.Educational Psychology Review, 21, 11-19.
Van Merriënboer, J. J. G, & Kirschner, P. A. (2007).Ten steps to complex learning. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence
        Erlbaum.

                                                  420  ·  © ISLS
