                                              ICLS 2010     Volume 1

Kindergarten and First-Grade Students' Representational Practices
      While Creating Storyboards of Honeybees Collecting Nectar
       Joshua A. Danish, David Phelps, Indiana University, 201 North Rose Ave, Bloomington IN, 47405
                             Email: jdanish@indiana.edu, davphelp@indiana.edu

         Abstract:   A productive   approach  to   studying    the role of representations    in supporting
         students' learning of science content is to examine their representational practices. The current
         study examines kindergarten and first-grade students' representational practices in a similar
         context--the creation of storyboards--both before and after a curricular intervention in order
         to highlight those aspects of their practices that changed while engaging in a superficially
         similar task. Analysis of the students' storyboards reveals considerable improvement after the
         intervention. Analysis of the students' practices as they changed over time is also presented by
         examining the students' interactions, with a focus on their discussions of the science content
         and the representations themselves.

There is no doubt that students' ability to create representations such as drawings and graphs is central to their
ability to learn science in school (DiSessa, 2004; DiSessa, Hammer, Sherin, & Kolpakowski, 1991; Lehrer &
Schauble,   2006). One  reason  for the  centrality of    representations  in  science    classrooms is that   specific
representational forms can help students more easily engage with and communicate complex ideas (Roth &
McGinn, 1998). For this reason, representations are also instrumental in the work of professional scientists
(Latour, 1988; Lynch, 1988), and thus many attempts to teach students how to engage in authentic science
necessarily include  helping   them  to  create  representations.    After    all, students   do not  always    create
representations that are immediately productive for learning and expressing science content.         Rather, students
need support in order to create productive and accurate representations regardless of whether they are being
asked to create canonical representations (i.e., graphs) or invented representations (i.e., drawings or diagrams
from observation). One method that has been used to examine the way that the students' context can support
their creation of representations is to study students' representational practices as they engage in creating and
refining representations in science class. The practice approach highlights the relationship between students'
representational actions, their knowledge of the content, and the features of the context that enable and constrain
those actions (Danish & Enyedy, 2007; Hall, 1996; Roth & McGinn, 1998).
         Prior examinations  of students'   representational   actions  from   a   practice perspective have   proven
effective in several accounts of how representational practices contribute to or explain student learning within
science and math (c.f., Cobb, Stephan, McClain, & Gravemeijer, 2001; Danish & Enyedy, 2007; Hall, 1996;
Hall & Rubin, 1998; Roth & McGinn, 1998). However, there are two key gaps in the current literature that this
paper aims to fill. First, examinations of students' representational practices typically focus on the way that
these practices change in different contexts. This is, in part, to examine how students' movement through a
range of representational activities supports them in learning new content. While this is a fruitful approach, it
does not allow for a systematic comparison of students' practices as they change over time with respect to a
single representational form. Second, this literature largely overlooks the representational practices of early
elementary school children (for some exceptions see Danish & Enyedy, 2007; Lehrer & Schauble, 2000). Rather
than neglecting the representational practices of young children, we argue that they are a crucial population to
study because the practices that students develop early in their school careers will be important in supporting
their later science and representational activities. Moreover, early elementary students spend a great deal of time
learning by drawing, sculpting, and enacting their ideas in science class, and so it behooves us as a field to better
understand these processes in order to inform research and teaching with representations.
         This  paper aims to begin  filling  these  gaps  in   the literature by   documenting   the representational
practices of 42 kindergarten and first-grade students in service of learning how honeybees collect nectar. The
students were asked to create storyboards at two points in time: before and after a curricular intervention where
they learned about honeybee content and were also encouraged to request and provide representational feedback
(for the larger study upon which this analysis draws see Danish, 2009a; Danish, 2009b). First, to ground our
discussion of the students' representational choices, we present a brief analysis of their representations (the
storyboards) to highlight the fact that these did in fact improve over the course of the study. Then, video of
students' interactions were analyzed to document the students' representational practices by identifying what
their discourse revealed  regarding  the  issues   that   they saw   relevant  in   their   representational practices.
Specifically, their talk was coded along multiple dimensions to identify the prevalence and circumstance of talk
about the science content and the representations themselves.

Representational Practices

                                                  420      ISLS
                                                  ICLS 2010      Volume 1

Simply put, practices refer to the patterned way of acting that people develop over time (Lave & Wenger, 1991).
More  specifically,  Hall  and  Rubin    (1998)  further  define   representational   practices  as "making,    using, and
reading  conventional   representational      forms,"    (p.   228).   Hall  and   Rubin  also   caution    us  that  these
representational  practices   are "less  stable and   more     detailed than   many textbooks   or  studies  of instruction
presume"    (ibid). The   present    study responds   to  this    concern    by  documenting    the  details of  students'
representational practices as well as examining the process through which these practices change.

Examining Representational Practice.
One hallmark of the practice approach to studying students' actions is that it recognizes the importance of
context in shaping those actions (c.f., Roth & McGinn, 1998). To this end, most accounts of students' practices
tend to  at least  implicitly recognize    that there are    features   of the practice that are relatively  stable  across
moments, and features that are highly dependent upon the moment being observed.
         Stable aspects of students' representational practices. There are two ways of explaining stability, or
observable patterns in students' representational practices. The first is to recognize that there are local social
patterns, or norms that are stable within a particular setting. The second is to assume that individual participants
"carry" the necessary knowledge across moments. Cobb et al. (2001) refer to the social aspect of this equation
as norms,   and  the individual   aspect   as a psychological     correlate,   and argue that the   two are  mutually   co-
constructed and cannot be separated. Simply put, each individual has certain beliefs and knowledge about the
practices and the content to which they refer, which include an understanding of the social norms surrounding it.
At the same time, the social norms have grown out of and account for individual knowledge of the local
participants. By definition norms are non-deterministic; students may or may not selectively follow them though
one can typically identify norms by the way that participants mark their violation (Cobb, et al., 2001; Danish &
Enyedy, 2007; Hall & Rubin, 1998).
         In related research, diSessa and his colleagues identified "meta-representational competencies" which
refers to students' understandings that apply across multiple representational forms, such as a belief in the need
for parsimony (DiSessa, 2004; DiSessa, et al., 1991). Furthermore, these competencies, they argue, develop
over time as students engage in representing in school (and other) contexts (Sherin, 2000). While these two
approaches to locating stability in students' representational practices--the one focused on the social norms, and
the other upon individual competencies--come from different theoretical perspectives, the result is the same;
they describe patterns in how students engage with representations and suggest that these patterns, which are
learned over time, have important implications for what students do with the representations that they encounter.
Thus, it is important to document the patterns in students' representational actions, regardless of whether or not
they appear to originate in social norms or individual preferences and competencies.
         The role of context in representational practice.       Of course, students' representational practices are also
defined by their context of use, which may be defined in terms of the nature of a specific representation, of the
task, or even of the other people present (DiSessa, et al., 1991; Hall & Rubin, 1998; Roth & McGinn, 1998). For
example, students may not assume that a representation needs to be self-explanatory when they know that their
teacher will allow them additional time to explain it further (Danish & Enyedy, 2007). There is, however, a
reciprocal relationship between practices and context; individuals are presumed to see the context differently as
a result of their changing practices. In fact, many of the studies described above rely on this to examine how
students developing practices, combined with new contexts, can lead to key content learning. Therefore, in order
to document students' representational practices, we attempt to identify those aspects that are relatively stable,
the representational context, and the interaction between the two.

Documenting Representational Practices
         Traditionally, examinations of representational practices have focused on how they change over time
along with shifting instructional activities. Researchers then identify students' practices by examining talk (and
actions) as  the  students  engage    in  creating, debating,    and   modifying   representations. Hypotheses    are  then
developed regarding what types of behavior are normative. These are vetted against the corpus of data to look
for seeming violations of those norms (for an in-depth description of one such approach see Cobb, et al., 2001).
This approach makes sense, given that the goal of these prior studies was to understand how specific practices,
when paired with specific instructional exercises, resulted in students learning about the content being studied.
Unfortunately,   a  side-effect   of this  approach   is that    these  studies provide  considerably   less   guidance to
researchers and teachers whose aim is to support more general representational activities across a range of
content domains. Furthermore, while patterns in the practice are described, it is difficult to distinguish patterns
from the context in which they are visible for the very reason that the researchers are shifting those contexts in
order to pursue specific instructional goals. For these reasons the present study aims to examine students'
representational practices in a relatively stable context--the creation of storyboards. Of course, as students'
practices shift students may be expected to relate in different ways to a superficially similar context. However,
by holding the task stable, we are able to gain a richer understanding of the inter-relationship between the

                                                      421       ISLS
                                               ICLS 2010    Volume 1

students' changing practices and the context of their use. Finally, by shifting our focus away from the process
through which students' representational practices support (or not) their learning of specific content topics, we
are able to more thoroughly document the entire range of their practices.

What do we know about young children's representational practices?
Well before entering kindergarten, students are able to produce representations and understand their symbolic
functioning (DeLoache & Burns, 1994). Studies have also shown that young children are aware of the context of
their representational choices, and can adjust their interpretation or creation of a representation in response to
their audience and the context (Callaghan, 1999). In fact, it was even demonstrated that kindergarten and first
grade   students  appeared   to  recognize  and  balance     between   multiple   competing    influences  on  their
representational choices including individual preferences, local norms, and the affordances of the immediate
context  (Danish  & Enyedy,    2007). Furthermore, it    has been demonstrated    that young   students are able to
develop a rich sense of the requirements of a model for scientific activity, and to adjust their models accordingly
as they engage with learning new content (Lehrer & Schauble, 2000). In short, there is reason to believe that
young children are capable of rich and elaborate representational practices, and that these practices influence the
role that representations play in supporting young students in learning about science content.

Methods
The data presented in this paper comes from part of a larger study known as the BeeSign study, a 10-week
curriculum intervention described   in detail elsewhere   (Danish,  2009a, 2009b).   However,    the prior analyses
examined student content learning based on pre- and post interviews and primarily focused on the classroom
intervention. The present study extends this work by examining the storyboard activity administered before and
after the larger study. The study as a whole, and the storyboard in particular, will be described below.

Participants
This study took place with two mixed-age kindergarten and first-grade classrooms (most of the students were
between 5 and 7 years old) in a progressive California elementary school. The school as a whole has a range of
family incomes from $35,000 or less per year to $250,000 or more per year with a demographic composition of
approximately 47% Caucasian, 27% Latino, 13% African American, and 13% Asian. There were 42 students
who consented to participate in the study (22 boys, 20 girls).

Procedures
The students in this study participated in the BeeSign curriculum as their science curriculum for over 10 weeks.
There were typically two one-hour-long sessions per week, for a total of 19 sessions. Over the study, the
students were taught  about   how  honeybees   collect   nectar through a  series of   inquiry and representational
activities. In the representational activities, the teachers encouraged the students to provide and solicit feedback
from their peers.
         The students began the study by engaging in a pre-test, followed by the storyboard activity to be
described below. They then engaged in the curriculum activities, followed by a final storyboard activity and
then a post-test interview. The interviews were scored in terms of students' understanding of honeybees in terms
of the structure, behavior, and function of the system based on the work of Hmelo-Silver and colleagues (2004)
who had documented that novices tended to focus on the superficial structures and behaviors of a system at the
expense of the functions. The students in the BeeSign study showed statistically significant gains from the pre-
to post-interview in terms of the structures, behaviors, and functions that they described (Danish, 2009a, 2009b).

The storyboard activity
The present analysis focuses on the storyboard activity that took place both before and after the curricular
intervention. During this activity the students were divided by the teachers into small groups of 3 to 6 students
who sat together at a table. One half of the groups remained stable from the pre- to post- test, and the other half
did not because one of the two teachers chose to allow the students to form their own groups in the post-activity.
At both time points the students were asked to draw a storyboard about "how bees get food" and were shown
how to use a storyboard to represent a series of steps in a process. The students were given a template that
included 4 boxes in which to draw the storyboard, with several lines beneath each box in which they could write
descriptions of the images. The students were allowed to talk and solicit feedback from their peers. However,
the teachers did not actively request this (as they had during the curriculum intervention) in order to capture
how frequently the students did this of their own accord. There were 6 groups videotaped at each time point, but
only 10 of the groups (5 in the pre condition, and 5 in the post) had audio and video that was of high enough
quality to analyze the students' work. On average, the students took 40 minutes to complete the task.
         Students' talk during the storyboard activity were transcribed and coded along several dimensions for a
total of 2361 unique utterances. An utterance was defined as one breath group, or roughly one sentence. The

                                                  422      ISLS
                                              ICLS 2010     Volume 1

science content codes identified honeybee structures, behaviors, and functions (Hmelo-Silver & Pfeffer, 2004).
The other coding categories (described below) were developed from student talk using a grounded approach.
Inter-coder reliability reached 85% agreement for 24% of all coded utterances.
       To analyze the actual storyboards that the students created, a list was made of structures and behaviors
based upon the pre- and post-interview-scoring rubric. We then amended this list by adding any additional
structures or behaviors that were consistently mentioned in the storyboard videos, such as the fact that bees have
6 legs. Credit was given either for clearly identifiable visual features, or for references in the writing that
students had included beneath the images. Two researchers coded each storyboard independently, and then
compared their codes. Differences were negotiated until resolved so that the storyboard scores represent 100%
agreement. These scores did not include a number of implicit features that were present in many of the post-
storyboards, such as a pattern of showing the bee flying to the flower and then back to the hive. While these
were technically accurate, it was difficult to attribute them to a deep understanding of the content. Also, we did
not deduct points for inaccuracies such as a bee being labeled as a King bee, which primarily happened during
the pre-test. Therefore, any reported gains are actually quite conservative.

Results

Storyboard Results
The mean score for a storyboard increased from 1.20 points to 5.55 points from the pre- to the post-activity
(N=34 due to student absences). This increase was statistically significant: t(34) = 11.115, p < .01, two tailed.
Some of the most common features that students were given credit for were the inclusion of 3 distinct body
parts, the inclusion of 6 legs, and the presence of the proboscis. Figure 1 depicts representative bee drawings
from the pre and post-test storyboards. The bee on the left would not have received any points while the bee on
the right would have received points for having three body parts, a stinger, six legs, a clearly identifiable
proboscis, a clear compound eye, and the pollen basket.     Combined with the interview results referenced earlier,
these findings suggest that not only did the students learn about how honeybees collect nectar over the course of
this study, they also demonstrated this learning in their storyboards. With this learning as a backdrop, we now
present the analysis of student talk while creating the storyboards.  In particular, we will focus on several of the
shifts in talk from the pre- to post-test condition as they coincided with these dramatic increases in what features
the students incorporated into their storyboards.

             Figure 1. An example of a bee from the pre-test (left) and from the post-test (right).

Representational Practice Results
The first analysis we performed was to determine how much of students' talk throughout this sequence of
activities related to the content being studied (either science talk, or the representations themselves). Each
utterance was then coded as belonging to one of four categories: Science and Representation, Instrumental and
Procedural, Spelling and Heading, and Off-topic (see Table 1 for descriptions and frequencies).

Table 1: Student utterances while creating their storyboards

                       Science and            Instrumental and           Spelling and         Off-topic
                       Representation         Procedural                 Heading
Description            Talk about the         Talk about the             Sounding out         Talk about
                       science content        procedure and              letters, or asking   lunch, clothes,
                       (honeybees) or the     materials such as          someone how to       parents, pop-
                       representation.        crayons, or the            spell words          culture, etc
                                              storyboard template
Utterances (N=2361)    869 (36.8%)            802 (33.9%)                211 (8.9%)           479 (20.2%)

While our analytic focus for the remainder of this paper will be on the 36.8% of the talk where the students
discussed the actual science content of the curriculum unit, or their ongoing representations, it is important that
we not dismiss the fact that there remains an additional 42.8% of talk which was on-topic, and central to the
students' work. This is important because we do not want to give the impression that the students were silent

                                                   423     ISLS
                                                 ICLS 2010    Volume 1

except when addressing the content. Nor should one consider a noisy classroom, in which many students are
discussing issues other than the content being covered, problematic. Rather, much of this talk may be central to
students' ability to engage with their ongoing work. Furthermore, we often noted that even when silent or
discussing off-topic issues, students were frequently seen drawing. In other words, despite being quite revealing
about students' understanding of content, on-topic talk is not the only predictor of how effectively the students
were creating their representations.

What aspects of the science content do students discuss as they create their storyboards?
In order to better understand the relationship between students' social practices while representing and the
content being studied, we examined the science content of their talk. We first coded the students' science talk in
terms of whether it referred to the structures, behaviors, or functions of how honeybees collect nectar. Our
hypothesis  was   that students   would talk   primarily  about  structures and  behaviors  as  this   mirrors previous
findings that describe students' performance when examining complex systems (Hmelo-Silver & Pfeffer, 2004).
Furthermore, we hypothesized that there would be a significant increase in student talk about these features
during the post-test as the students learned the content. Note that utterances were only coded if they represented
a unique idea within an episode. Episodes consisted of groups of utterances around a similar topic. In other
words, if a student mentioned the proboscis, and then discussed it for 5 utterances with their peer, this was only
coded once    in order to   avoid inflating our  results.  Some  utterances  were  also   coded simultaneously    for a
structure and a behavior, or for more than one structure. Finally, note that the percentages refer to percentages of
on-topic utterances in each condition, and so do not sum to 100 as there were also on-topic utterances related to
representations and other issues to be discussed below. Frequency counts and examples are presented in table 2.

Table 2a: Students' science talk across time.

                       Structure                 Behavior                          Function
Examples               Bee, hive, proboscis      Searching for flower, getting     Survive the winter, collect
                       (e.g. "This is a bee      nectar, performing a dance        nectar more quickly (e.g.
                       hive.")                   (e.g. "They're going to drink     "They do a dance to tell
                                                 nectar from the flower.")         others where the honey is.")
Pre (N = 367)          106 (28.8%)               86 (23.4%)                        11 (3.0)%
Post (N=502)           113 (22.5%)               34 (7.9%)                         2 (0.4%)

As can be seen in table 2a, the most common type of science talk related to structures, as hypothesized (28.8%
in the pre- and 22.5% in the post-condition). However, we were surprised at the fact that the percentage of on-
topic science talk decreased from the pre- to post-storyboard. This decrease was statistically significant for
unique counts of structure (!2(1, N = 869) = 4.56, p = .03), unique counts of behavior (!2(1, N = 841) = 40.90, p
< .001), and unique counts of function (!2(1, N = 869) = 9.71, p = .02). We will return to this point after first
presenting some follow-up analyses.
          To assess the quality of this science talk we applied three code modifiers, marking each science content
utterance  for whether   it was   scientifically inaccurate   or not, anatomically   detailed   or not,  and   topically
extraneous or not for the given science prompt: how do honeybees collect nectar.           Note that, as before, these
codes represent unique ideas within a given episode, and so these counts are somewhat conservative and again
do not add up to 100% (See Table 2b).

Table 2b: Quality of students' science talk across time.

                    Inaccurate                       Detailed                              Extraneous
Examples            Flowers     contain   honey,     Head,       thorax,       abdomen,    House, trash-can, jetpack,
                    there is a king bee              proboscis,  pollen    basket,  (e.g.  chairs (e.g. "This is how I
                    (e.g. "This is the king and      "The     pollen    basket's    right  make      a  person    in  a
                    queen bees.")                    there.")                              chair.")
Pre (N=367)         11 (3%)                          0 (0%)                                19 (5.2%)
Post (N=502)        1 (0.2%)                         24 (4.8%)                             8 (1.6%)
!2(1, N = 869)=     12.18, p < .001                  18.04, p < .001                       9.04, p = .003

Table 2b presents a somewhat different picture of students' science talk as it moves from the pre-test to the post-
test, and may begin to explain why students' discussion of structures decreased despite our prediction that they
would increase.   While   the  percentage   of talk featuring science   structures decreased  from   the pre-  to post-
activity, the  talk in the  post-activity   contained significantly   fewer  inaccuracies,  more   details, and   fewer

                                                     424     ISLS
                                               ICLS 2010     Volume 1

extraneous  features  than talk in  the  pre-activity (See   Table 2b). This may    also partially explain    why the
storyboard products in the pre-activity often contained inaccuracies, minimal details, and extraneous features,
whereas the storyboard products in the post-activity presented fewer inaccuracies and many more details. In
short, students' talk in the post-test was far more refined, focusing on accurate and relevant details.
       To further explore the role of science talk in the students' representational practices, we then addressed
the question, How do the patterns of student talk change with respect to audience? Despite a concerted effort to
limit teacher interaction with students during the storyboard activity, students often addressed the teachers or
responded to very high-level questions from teachers or other adults with very specific information.       The results
are summarized in table 3.

Table 3: Students' science talk across audiences.

Audience                         Structure         Behavior        Function
Peer (N = 503)                   99 (19.7%)        33 (6.5%)       5 (1.0%)
Adult (N = 293)                  87 (29.6%)        83 (28.3%)      8 (2.7%)
Self (N = 68)                    30 (44.1%)        9 (13.2%)       0 (0%)

Students were more likely to explicitly mention science structures in comments made out loud to their selves
(44.1%) or to adults (29.6%), than when speaking to their peers (19.7%). Similarly, students were more likely to
explicitly identify honeybee behaviors when talking out loud to their self (13.2%), or an adult (28.3%), than
when conversing with a peer (6.5%). Further, students were more likely to discuss functions relevant to nectar
collection when speaking with adults (2.7%), than with a peer (1.0%) or out loud to themselves (0%). This
highlights the importance of the teacher in soliciting content-rich discussion from the students given that these
predominated even when the teachers were intentionally limiting their discussion with the students.

What aspects of the representations do the students discuss?
To answer this question, students' representational talk was coded in two specific ways. First, it was coded in
terms of whether the students were discussing what to represent, how to represent it, or why it should be
represented in   that  way.  These   three  categories     were designed  to  capture    the nuances    of    students'
representational talk, and  whether   it engaged   students  in  simply  discussing  the features  of   their specific
representations, the method of implementing those features, or the underlying motivations and reasons behind
them (Danish, 2009a).
       Our    grounded     approach   generated  two    further  coding   categories: Unspecified     and   Progress.
Unspecified comments present an indiscriminate or vague subject (e.g. "Look at this" or "I'm doing something
cool") and Progress comments refer to the students' current state of completion (e.g. "I'm on my third one," or
"I'm almost done"). With respect to unspecified comments, note that while we could frequently determine the
feature that the students were addressing by looking at the video, it was unspecified whether they were referring
to the inclusion of the feature (the What code) or how it was represented (the How code).             Prior analyses
(Danish, 2009a) indicate that students focus on "what" was represented when drawing (as opposed to skits or
simulations where students are more likely to discuss the "how" or "why" of their representational choices). Our
hypothesis based on prior analyses is that students will primarily focus on the "what" features of representations
during the pre-activity, but will shift to discussing the "how" and "why" of their storyboards more often in the
post-activity. As predicted, the majority of students' talk in the pre-activity related to "what" was represented
(!2(1, N = 869) = 47.13, p < .001), whereas in the post-activity this talk shifted significantly to the "how" (!2(1,
N = 869) = 25.47, p < .001) and "why" (!2(1, N = 869) = 28.76, p < .001) of the representations (see Table 4).

Table 4: Students' representational talk across time.

                   What              How              Why              Unspecified    Progress     Other
Pre (N = 367)      232 (63.2%)       27 (7.3%)        13 (4.3)%        35 (9.5%)      6 (1.6%)     46 (12.5%)
Post (N=502)       199 (39.6%)       98 (19.5%)       73 (14.5%)       45 (9.0%)      36 (7.1%)    49 (9.7%)

       As with students' science discourse, our goal in this analysis was to move beyond simply documenting
the content of students' talk to capture the role that it played in their practices.  Therefore, we further coded
students' representational talk in terms of how it supported their interactions. Specifically, similar  to prior work
(Danish & Enyedy, 2007) we noticed that students typically engaged in assessing or critiquing each other's
work. Therefore, we coded students' utterances in terms of the various ways that assessments played a role in
shaping the students interactions: (a) Assessment-Seeking, (b) Assessment-Giving, (c) Assessment-Warranting,
and (d) Assessment-Responding (see Table 5 for descriptions, examples, and frequency counts).              Note that

                                                   425      ISLS
                                                  ICLS 2010     Volume 1

while we are reporting incidences of student talk in table 5, these comments often played a role in shaping
students' representations, causing them to add, remove, or change the features of their drawings in response to
the issues raised, even when the student making the change was not directly addressed (for similar examples see
Danish & Enyedy, 2007).
        Our   statistical analysis  reveals    that students  are  significantly more  likely  to engage   in assessment
related interactions during the post-activity than in the pre-activity for our first three coding categories: (a)
Assessment-Seeking (!2(1, N = 869) = 3.88, p = .048), (b) Assessment-Giving (!2(1, N = 869) = 18.41, p <
.001), and (c) Assessment-Warranting (!2(1, N = 869) = 6.58, p = .010). Assessment-Responding increased
marginally from pre- to post-activity (!2(1, N = 869) = 3.01, p < .082).

Table 5: Students' evaluative interactional moves over time.

                 Assessment-             Assessment-Giving         Assessment-Warranting       Assessment-
                 Seeking                                                                       Responding
Description      Directly  requests      Explicitly   appraises    Augments             their  Replies    to  the  given
                 evaluation       of     their  storyboard    or   appraisal with a reason     feedback
                 their storyboard        their peer's.             or example
Example          "What     do   you      "it   doesn't     have    "the stinger  is suppose    "I forgot to include it"
                 think of this?"         wings,"     or    "you    to be a straight line"      or "I'm waiting to draw
                                         forgot legs."                                         it"
Pre (N=367)      2 (0.5)                 6 (1.6%)                  2 (0.5%)                    4 (1.1%)
Post (N=502)     11 (2.2%)               42 (8.4%)                 15 (2.9%)                   14 (2.7%)

Discussion
This study aimed to document and describe the development of a group of kindergarten and first-grade students'
representational practices as they related to drawing storyboards about honeybees collecting nectar. To highlight
the change in students' practices, they were examined in a similar context (creating a storyboard) both before
and after having learned about the content (how honeybees collect nectar). Our goal in doing so was to examine
how the practices changed over time despite the fact that the task was, ostensibly, the same. We do not claim
that the participants experienced the practice as the same at both time points. In fact, our theoretical assumption
is that students' knowledge of the content and representing, and their shared practices for representing have
shifted, which in turn shifts the way that they engage in representing at these two time points. In other words,
the students learned new practices--which include an understanding of the content, how to represent it, and how
to assess representations of it--and those new practices influenced how the students responded to the stated task
of showing how bees get food using a storyboard.
        Our results reveal that students' representational practices include a great deal of time talking about the
task requirements (instrumental talk), some off-topic talk, as well as discussions of the content and how it
should be represented. Initially, we were surprised to find that the students' talk included a higher percentage of
unique ideas   regarding  science-related    structures  and  behavior  in  the  pre-activity than in the    post-activity.
However, further analyses revealed that those ideas were less accurate, less detailed, and were more likely to
include non-essential structures (e.g. ladybug, house) to the science being represented. Furthermore, students
were more likely to request and give assessments during the post-activity than during the pre-activity. These are
important changes in representational practices that cannot be derived simply from counting the amount of
structure and behavior talk.
        A practice-oriented, and heavily contextualized analysis of students' representational acts defies, by
definition, generalization of the specific findings. In other words, we would not expect to see this same pattern
of talk in every kindergarten and first-grade classroom. However, we believe that some aspects of this analysis
are, in fact, crucial to understanding and supporting other students and contexts. First, we have shown that there
may be some value in examining the set of students' representational practices as they change over time instead
of simply focusing on how they relate to the microgenesis of specific content knowledge as prior studies have.
Had we not taken such steps, we might have overlooked the fact that students actually talk less about the content
as they continue to master it--an important finding to consider when engaging in formative assessment of
students' ideas through representational activities. This kind of analysis is supported, in part, by examining tasks
that appear to be similar, rather than attempting to examine a shift in practices and context at the same time.
Second, we hope that by documenting the breadth of student talk as they created their representations, we have
helped practitioners and other researchers to recognize the fact that even students who have moved through a
curriculum  in a rather   successful   manner   do   not limit  themselves  to   discussing the   content accurately and
consistently. However,    one   shift in student    practices that appears  to   help correct for  student mistakes  and
persistent misconceptions    is the   increase  in  critiques and  other  forms   of  assessment   followed   by  students

                                                       426     ISLS
                                                ICLS 2010      Volume 1

adjusting their representations accordingly. Future work should look more closely at the role of such critiques in
supporting students as they create representations, and examine processes for encouraging more of them.
         In sum, we have attempted to provide a robust and realistic picture of the kinds of talk that students
engaged in as they created representations. Our hope is that this is a starting point for additional studies of
students' representational practices which aim to look beyond the microgenesis of specific content ideas to a full
description of the relationship between students' representing, the content, the context, and how these all shift
over time.

Endnotes
(1) Cobb et al., actually separate this discussion into several nested levels of analysis. However, for brevity, we compress
   them into the two components for our present discussion.

Acknowledgments
We would like to acknowledge the teachers and students who so kindly participated in this study. We would
also like to thank Noel Enyedy, William Sandoval, Frederick Ericson, Charles Goodwin, and Candy Goodwin
who provided feedback on early versions of this analysis. Portions of this work were supported by the Spencer
Foundation Dissertation Fellowship, and by a UC Regents Dissertation Fellowship.

References
Callaghan, T. C. (1999). Early Understanding and Production of Graphic Symbols. Child Development, 70(6),
         1314-1324.
Cobb,  P.,   Stephan, M.,  McClain,  K.,  &  Gravemeijer,      K. (2001).   Participating  in Classroom   Mathematical
         Practices. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 10, 113-163.
Danish,   J. A.   (2009a). BeeSign:    A  Computationally-Mediated          Intervention   to Examine    K-1   Students'
         Representational   Activities in  the  Context     of Teaching   Complex   Systems     Concepts.  Unpublished
         Dissertation, University of California at Los Angeles, Los Angeles.
Danish, J. A. (2009b). BeeSign: a Design Experiment to Teach Kindergarten and First Grade Students About
         Honeybees    From  a Complex     Systems   Perspective.      Paper presented   at  the  annual meeting  of  the
         American Educational Research Association.
Danish, J. A., & Enyedy, N. (2007). Negotiated Representational Mediators: How Young Children Decide What
         to Include in Their Science Representations. Science Education, 91(1), 1-35.
DeLoache,    J. S., & Burns,  N.  M.   (1994). Early   understanding     of the representational  function  of pictures.
         Cognition, 2(52), 83-110.
DiSessa, A. A. (2004). Meta-Representation: Native Competence and Targets for Instruction. Cognition and
         Instruction, 22(3), 293-331.
DiSessa,   A.   A.,   Hammer,  D.,   Sherin,   B.,  &   Kolpakowski,        T.  (1991).   Inventing    Graphing:  Meta-
         Representationsal Expertise in Children. Journal of Mathematical Behavior, 10, 117-160.
Hall, R. (1996). Representation as Shared Activity: Situated Cognition and Dewey's Cartography of Experience.
         Journal of the Learning Sciences, 5(3), 209-238.
Hall, R.,  &  Rubin,  A.  (1998). There's  five little notches    in  here:  Dilemmas    in   teaching and learning  the
         conventional   structure of rate.  In J.  G.  Greeno     &   S. V.  Goldman     (Eds.), Thinking  practices in
         mathematics and science learning (pp. 189-236). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Hmelo-Silver, C. E., & Pfeffer, M. G. (2004). Comparing expert and novice understanding of a complex system
         from the perspective of structures, behaviors, and functions. . Cognitive Science, 28(1), 127-138.
Latour, B. (1988). Drawing Things Together. In M. Lynch & S. Woolgar (Eds.), Representation in Scientific
         Practice (pp. 19-68). Cambridge MA: MIT Press.
Lave, J., & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated Learning: Legitimate Peripheral Participation. Cambridge: Cambridge
         University Press.
Lehrer, R., & Schauble, L. (2000). Developing Model-Based Reasoning in Mathematics and Science. Journal of
         Applied Developmental Psychology, 21(1), 39-48.
Lehrer, R., & Schauble, L. (2006). Scientific thinking and science literacy. In R. W. Damon, K. Lerner, A.
         Renninger & I. E. Sigel (Eds.), Handbook of child psychology, 6th edition, (vol. 4). Hoboken, NJ:
         Wiley.
Lynch, M. (1988). The Externalized Retina: Selection and Mathematization in the Visual Documentation of
         Objects in the Life Sciences. Human Studies, 11, 201-234.
Roth, W.-M., & McGinn, M. K. (1998). Inscriptions: Toward a Theory of Representing as Social Practice.
         Review of Educational Research, 68(1), 35-59.
Sherin, B. (2000). How students invent representations of motion a genetic account. Journal of Mathematical
         Behavior, 19, 399-441.

                                                   427         ISLS
