                                              ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 2

  Virtual Math Teams: An Online Tool for Collaborative Learning in
                                  the Mathematics Disciplines
                 Baba Kofi Weusijana, Jimmy Xiantong Ou, Gerry Stahl, & Stephen Weimar
                   Drexel University, 3141 Chestnut Street, Philadelphia, PA, USA 19104
  Email: baba@mathforum.org, xo32@mathforum.org, gerry.stahl@ischool.drexel.edu, steve@mathforum.org

        Abstract:  The    Virtual Math  Teams    (VMT)    service  provides  an integrated   Internet-based
        environment for small teams of people to discuss math and to work collaboratively on math
        problems or explore interesting mathematical micro-worlds together. We are presenting an
        overview  of  VMT's   traditional   features and  usage   in K-12  teaching  and  group  cognition
        research contexts, and the affordances of its new features, including the first collaborative
        Internet-based dynamic mathematics whiteboard.

The VMT Project
The Virtual Math Teams (VMT) Project has conducted research for the past seven years on how to support
small teams of  students  around  the world  to  collaborate  online  in discussions  of  stimulating mathematical
topics. The project has developed an extensive Internet-based environment and conducted about 400 sessions of
usage. Analysis of usage has resulted in over a hundred academic publications (Stahl, 2006, 2009; Çakir, Zemel
& Stahl, 2009; Sarmiento & Stahl, 2008). The Math Forum of Drexel University offers the VMT free of charge
to the world and also provides VMT professional development workshops to practitioners and school districts.
        Various features of VMT have traditionally enabled its ability to enhance collaborative learning and
teaching of mathematics:
!   A social networking Web portal called the VMT Lobby (http://vmt.mathforum.org/VMTLobby/).
!   A Java Web Start application that:
        o   Integrates  text chat  (much  like  chat  facilities found  in instant messaging  applications)  with a
            shared whiteboard tab for synchronous collaboration. The chat panel includes social awareness
            indicators, so collaborators can easily see who is typing and who is graphically making changes.
        o   Has an embedded Web browser linked to an asynchronous community wiki
        o   Has an embedded Web browser linked to topic-based pages.
        o   Includes referencing from chat to sections of Web pages in an embedded Web browser.
        o   Includes referencing from chat messages to previous chat messages.
        o   Includes referencing from chat to an area or an object in the whiteboard.
        o   Features   scrollable history of the chat   and  the  whiteboards,  allowing   learners, educators, and
            researchers to see at any time the history of a group's interaction.

Dynamic Math
We  wanted  to tailor the system   more  to the discipline  of   school mathematics  by   taking advantage  of  new
computer-based tools for dynamic math. We hypothesized that this would enhance mathematical exploration
and communication in VMT to foster more powerful and precise inquiry of mathematical disciplinary content.
Dynamic math tools (like Geometer's Sketchpad, Cabri, SimCalc, and GeoGebra) have been thought to have
"revolutionized" K-12 math learning. We wanted to include this power in VMT. We selected GeoGebra as the
most accessible (available in open source) and powerful (including algebra, geometry, spreadsheet, graphing
and calculus). However, GeoGebra--like all available dynamic math systems--was only available as a single-
user application and VMT is designed to support collaborative learning and group cognition.

A New Version of VMT
To improve inquiry of mathematical disciplinary content we implemented the first multi-user and synchronous
dynamic  mathematics   whiteboard   (see  Figure 1).  This   was   accomplished    using the open  source   dynamic
geometry/algebra/calculus  GeoGebra     system   (http://www.geogebra.org).     This  new    GeoGebra   whiteboard
includes all the history and chat referencing features of our traditional whiteboard. It also has all of the features
of GeoGebra, including the ability to support importing and exporting of GeoGebra dynamic worksheets. This
allows teachers and students to take advantage of available curricular materials. It also provides a multi-user
version of GeoGebra for the community of teachers and students currently using the single-user versions of
GeoGebra.

                                                  421   ·  © ISLS
                                               ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 2

                                    Figure 1. The GeoGebra Tab of VMT.

         Despite the reputation of dynamic math systems to potentially transform the way that mathematics is
taught and learned, there is relatively little research about the cognitive effects of these tools. In particular, there
is almost no   analysis of how these tools  can mediate     collaborative learning of the important discipline of
mathematics. We have found that VMT provides excellent data sets for the study of how students learn in a
collaborative, computer-supported   environment  by    engaging   in  mathematical  discourse. The  VMT   system
includes a Replayer tool that reproduces an entire student session, allowing a researcher to study the interaction
as closely as desired, progressing through the session like in a digital video and observing everything that the
students observed. Because mathematical thinking is made visible in a collaborative problem-solving session
(Stahl, 2006), it is possible to conduct a broad range of analyses (Stahl, 2009). For instance, one can describe in
detail how students coordinate their graphical, narrative and symbolic constructions (Cakir, et al, 2009) and how
they construct and reason about their joint problem space (Sarmiento & Stahl, 2008).
         The Math Forum plans to release the new system for worldwide usage, providing a convenient online
venue for students to engage in synchronous collaborative learning within a rich environment for mathematical
inquiry and knowledge-building interaction. We also plan to release VMT to the open source communities.

References
Çakir, M. P., Zemel, A., & Stahl, G. (2009). The joint organization of interaction within a multimodal CSCL
         medium.   International  Journal  of Computer-Supported        Collaborative  Learning,  4(2), 115-149.
         Available at http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s11412-009-9061-0.
Sarmiento, J., & Stahl, G. (2008). Extending the joint problem space: Time and sequence as essential features of
         knowledge building. Paper presented at the International Conference of the Learning Sciences (ICLS
         2008), Utrecht, Netherlands. Available at http://GerryStahl.net/pub/icls2008johann.pdf.
Stahl, G. (2006). Group Cognition: Computer Support for Building Collaborative Knowledge. Cambridge, MA:
         MIT Press. Available at http://GerryStahl.net/mit.
Stahl,  G.     (2009).   Studying  virtual  math       teams.   New     York,  NY:     Springer.   Available   at
         http://GerryStahl.net/vmt/book.

                                                   422  ·  © ISLS
