                                               ICLS 2010    Volume 2

            The Video Mosaic: Design and Preliminary Research

                  Cindy E. Hmelo-Silver, Carolyn A. Maher, Grace Agnew, Marjory Palius
                     Rutgers University, 10 Seminary Place New Brunswick, NJ 08901
        cindy.hmelo-silver@gse.rutgers.edu, carolyn.maher@gse.rutgers.edu, gagnew@rci.rutgers.edu
             Sharon J. Derry, University of Wisconsin, 1025 West Johnson St, Madison WI 53706
                                            derry@education.wisc.edu

        Abstract: The Video Mosaic is a collaboration portal that integrates the Davis Institute video
        collection capturing mathematics learning across a range of grades, schools and a span of 20+
        years. We present preliminary research using the VMC for teacher professional development.

A common approach to teacher professional development (TPD) in mathematics education focuses on teachers'
content knowledge   for teaching  by  engaging    them    in  tasks  that represent major conceptual   strands in
mathematics, and encouraging them to connect lessons learned from this problem solving to classroom practice
(Philip et al., 2007). Video allows learning to be studied in the complex contexts in which it naturally occurs
(e.g., Brown 1992). An important aspect of video data is that it enables one to study how learning actually
unfolds in context (Darling-Hammond, et al., 2005). Teachers do not ordinarily have the opportunity to study in
detail how students in their own classrooms learn.    This makes video especially useful for research on learning
and teaching as well as for TPD (e.g., Lampert & Ball, 1998). Collections of video provide a source of data for
careful analysis and reflection on practice. While large-scale projects often collect large amounts of video, often
only a small subset of the video is relevant for addressing particular research questions. This video can be
productively used beyond the projects for which they were collected with great investments of time, effort, and
money.  This  argument  echoes   recommendations    made     by   a recently-commissioned  NSF  report on video
research in education (Derry et al., 2007), which emphasizes the important role of cyber-enabled video tools in
achieving this goal. Video tools make it possible for teachers and researchers to observe students' learning of
mathematics and reflect on students' potential for doing mathematics (Powell, Francisco & Maher, 2003).

The Video Mosaic
The Video Mosaic (VMC; www.videomosaic.org) is a collaboration portal that integrates the Robert B. Davis
Institute for Learning Video Collection, which captures mathematics learning across a range of grades, schools
and a  time span of 20+  years,  with a    collaboration  platform  and tools designed to transform mathematics
teaching and learning research (Maher, 2005).   The VMC combines innovative research into the teaching and
learning process with videos and tools to enable teachers, teacher educators and researchers to analyze and use
the videos to make new discoveries in math education and the learning sciences (Agnew, Mills & Maher, 2010).

                                           Figure 1. VMC Analytic Tool
This project has involved development of the VMC repository and pilot studies of TPD.        The VMC has been
constructed to preserve  videos, catalog    resources  using  the   METS   (metadata  encoding and  transmission
standard) and develop a prototype analytic tool to enable individual and community use of videos (Agnew, et al,
2010).  Developing an analytic tool for a large, complex video collection that would support both individual and
collaborative analysis is a key challenge. Video analytics can range from simple coding to complex interpretive

                                                   425     ISLS
                                                ICLS 2010    Volume 2

texts that must be associated with the appropriate video it analyzes, and are thus metadata; but these analytics
are also creative works and need to be afforded the same treatment as the video that it analyzes.      Analytics are
thus information objects in the repository that can be associated not only with the video being analyzed but also
another analytic, as when an instructor creates an analytic to critique a student's analytic.

Preliminary Design Research
We are studying the VMC through a program of design research (Bielaczyc, 2006). We conducted pilot studies
using VMC in interventions that used video cases showing multiple forms of reasoning in a range of school
settings, math content, and grades. We developed instruments to measure beliefs about teaching and learning
mathematics, content knowledge, and a video assessment of ability to recognize forms of mathematical
reasoning.  These studies were conducted at three preservice sites   and one inservice site with elementary  and
middle school teachers.   In a typical intervention, teacher-learners collaboratively engaged in challenging
mathematical tasks with manipulatives available for building models from which they could reason and develop
solutions. They shared solutions, representations, and justifications.  Following their own problem solving,
teacher-learners studied children working on the same task.    Our analysis of teacher beliefs (Table  1) shows that
there are two factors: one related to beliefs about student learning and another about effects of teaching, and that
these beliefs are positively affected (shown by lower scores) by participating in VMC interventions.

Table 1, Teacher Beliefs
                                       Factor 1 Score                            Factor 2 Score
                                  Pre                 Post                  Pre                      Post
Mean                              1.95                1.58                  2.34                     1.94
Standard Deviation                0.63                0.55                  0.43                     0.56
T(69), all p <.001                        4.97                                       7.42

Conclusions
The VMC is demonstrating the use of cyber-enabled technologies to build and share adaptable interventions for
TPD that effectively make use of major video collections and have high promise of success at multiple sites.
The cyber infrastructure provided by the VMC and significantly extended through this project is supporting
development and documentation of furthers interventions for TPD using this video collection, as well as other
videos that might be added in the future by teacher educators or researchers, including those working in other
STEM domains. Future research will examine how interventions in different contexts over different iterations
affect teacher learning and try to better understand the characteristics of different interventions.

References
Agnew, G., Mills, C. M., Maher, C. A. (2010). VMCAnalytic: Developing a collaborative video analysis tools
     for education faculty and practicing educators. HICSS 2010 Proceedings.
Bielaczyc, K. (2006). Designing social infrastructure: Critical issues in creating learning environments with
     technology. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 15, 301-329.
Brown, A. L. (1992). Design experiments: Theoretical and methodological challenges in creating complex
     interventions in classroom settings. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 2, 141-178.
Darling-Hammond, L., Banks, J., Zumwalt, K., Gomez, L., Sherin, M. G., Griesdorn, J., & Finn, L-E. (2005).
     Educational goals and purposes: Developing a curricular vision for teaching.    In L. Darling-Hammond &
     J. Bransford (Eds.), Preparing teachers for a changing world: What teachers know Jossey-Bass.
Derry, S. J. (Ed.) (July, 2007). Guidelines for video research in education: Recommendations from an expert
     panel. http://drdc.uchicago.edu/what/video-research-guidelines.pdf
Maher, C. A. (2005). How students structure their investigations and learn mathematics: Insights from a
   longitudinal study. Journal of Mathematical Behavior, 24, 1-14.
Philipp, R., Ambrose, R., Lamb, L., Sowder, J., Schappelle, B, Sowder, L., Thanhesier, E., & Chauvot, J.
   (2007). Effects of early field experiences on the mathematical content knowledge and beliefs of prospective
   elementary school teachers: An experimental study. Journal for Research in Mathematics Education, 38,
   438-476.
Powell, A., Francisco, J. & Maher, C.   (2003). An analytical model for studying the development of learners'
   mathematical ideas and reasoning using videotape data. Journal of Mathematical Behavior, 22, 405-435.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by NSF grant # 0822204. Opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations
expressed in this material are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of NSF.

                                                    426     ISLS
