                                               ICLS 2010     Volume 2

                From Gettysburg to the Cuban Missile Crisis:
           Designing for Historical Reenactments with Twitter
                        Tom Caswell, Marion Jensen, Victor R. Lee, Brett E. Shelton
                        Utah State University, 2830 Old Main Hill, Logan, UT 84322
 Email: caswell.tom@gmail.com, marionjensen@gmail.com, victor.lee@usu.edu, brett.shelton@usu.edu

       Abstract: TwHistory is a project designed to organize and promote a variety of historical
       reenactments using Twitter as a tool for computer mediated communication of historical
       events. Thus far, volunteers and educators have organized reenactments of the Battle of
       Gettysburg and the Cuban Missile Crisis while other efforts are underway. This poster
       will    share an   iteration of  design  and   development     for historical reenactments   using
       Twitter and examine the initial feedback within the paradigm of design-based research.

Introduction
The issues surrounding historical thinking and reasoning have drawn a great deal of attention in recent
years; with special attention as to the role technology has played in this endeavor (Wineburg, 2001). Few
students have a deep understanding of the processes by which historical accounts are constructed or the
perspectives  that are brought  to   bear  on  the interpretation    of historical events. Questions  have   arisen
concerning the possible benefits of learning from original sources and resources. In other words, what
affects students' thinking when experiencing accounts from other people who have access to the original
sources? It is worth considering that future-oriented technologies may enable new means to improve how
one relates to the past. This idea has been illustrated, for example, by research centered on computer games
that show re-enactments of historical events, how they can promote student engagement, and how they can
help to initiate reflection related to historical events (Squire, 2003). This poster presents the preliminary
results of the design, development, and implementation a project involving historical re-enactments through
the use of the Twitter Microblogging system.

Project History: Twitter and Microblogging
Twitter is a relatively well-known microblogging technology and used by those who comprise the "digital
youth" generation (Ito et al., 2008). Twitter messages, or tweets, are sent and received from these profiles
through varying protocols, mostly obtained through computers and hand-held devices. The 140 character
constraint of  tweets  had been     set as part of    an effort to   ensure compatibility  with   Simple  Message
Syndication (SMS) texting systems, and has remained even though texting technologies have advanced
such that that limit is no longer necessary. As with other types of microblogs, tweets are often of a personal
nature, involving commentary or description of one's activities and one's opinions about some current state
of affairs (Nardi, Schiano, Gumbrecht, & Swartz, 2004). Increasingly, Twitter is being used for marketing
purposes and in the political arena (Comm, 2009). Thus far, research regarding the potential of texting
systems within education has yet to be fully explored.
       Simulations,    and  in particular,   participatory    simulations   have   shown  tremendous  promise  in
supporting learning (Colella, 2000). With that in mind, the TwHistory project began in early 2009 with a
participatory  reenactment  of the   Battle  of Gettysburg      that took  place   over a  period of two  months.
TwHistory   is based   on the idea   that  historical reenactments    can take place    online and have  the same
positive effects for volunteer participants and virtual onlookers. Twitter provides many of the necessary
elements for a recreating a historical event: actors, communication, and relationships. Followers of Twitter
reenactments receive tweets in real-time as the characters of a particular historical event communicate
report from their perspective what is happening. In the original Gettysburg reenactment, generals, citizens,
soldiers, and even Abraham Lincoln had profiles from which tweets reporting the events of the battle were
sent out. A sample set of tweets is shown in Figure 1a.

                                                   427      ISLS
                                               ICLS 2010    Volume 2

 Figure 1. Screenshots of Twitter feeds from (a) Gettyburg reenactment and (b) the Cuban Missile Crisis
              reenactment, as they appear in reverse-chronological order from within Twitter.

         The initial instance of Gettysburg, once public, drew a diverse set of followers who subscribed to
the Twitter feeds. One of the Gettysburg followers was a high school teacher in the American Midwest.
With assistance, she adapted the Gettysburg model as part of her Cold War History course. Students played
the role of President Kennedy, Nikita Kruschev, Robert MacNamara, and others in a reenactment of the
Cuban Missile crisis (Figure 1b). While this reenactment took place prior to any planned research studies, it
is motivating new work to research the learning gains for K-12 students who perform the reenactments as
part of formal history instruction.

Data Sources and Implications
Data sources to inform design decisions include usage data obtained through the Twitter service, feedback
messages from followers, and firsthand reports from volunteers who participated directly as actors in the
historical reenactments.   These sources    are used   to  report on  the geographic spread  of  TwHistory  and
provide accounts regarding the use of primary sources and subsequent learning gains of reenactment actors.
Data from a new reenactment the Pioneer Trek of 1848 comprises one case analyzed from beginning to end
presented  in the  poster. While    still largely an   exploratory   report, researchers are observing that  for
volunteer actors, the synthesis of historical documents and accounts is leading to knowledge gains reflected
in lesson plan goals. For example, in volunteer message boards, a reenactment author asks about references
to markers that were used every ten miles along the trail and mentions the use of an odometer. Another
author adds that it was Appleton Harmon who created a type of wagon wheel odometer during the pioneer
trek. Currently,  the researchers    are   preparing   for  classroom-based    reenactments  from   which  more
systematic data collection and analysis allows for deeper examination of how students and teachers use
primary  sources  as  part of their  research.    Findings   report  what  changes occur,  both  in individuals'
knowledge and affective stances toward history, through use of TwHistory.

References
Colella, V. (2000). Participatory Simulations: Building Collaborative Understanding through Immersive
         Dynamic Modeling. The Journal of the Learning Sciences; 9(4), 471-500.
Comm, J. (2009). Twitter power: How to dominate your market one tweet at a time. Hoboken, New Jersey:
         Wiley.
Ito, M. et al. (2008). Living and Learning with New Media: Summary of Findings from the Digital Youth
         Project.  Chicago,    IL:    MacArthur      Foundation.      Retrieved  November     2,    2009,  from
         http://digitallearning.macfound.org/site/c.enJLKQNlFiG/b.2029199/.
Nardi, B., Schiano, D., Gumbrecht, M., & Swartz, L. (2004). Why we blog. Communications of the ACM;
         47(12), 41-46.
Squire, K. (2003). Replaying history: Learning world history through playing Civilization III. Unpublished
         Doctoral Dissertation. Indiana University. Bloomington, IN.
Wineburg, S. (2001). Historical Thinking. Philadelphia, PA: Temple University Press.

                                                   428     ISLS
