                                                ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

                         When Students Speak, Who Listens?
           Constructing Audience in Classroom Argumentation
 Leema K. Berland, University of Texas, 1 Univ. Station, Austin, TX 78712, leema.berland@mail.utexas.edu
      Andrea Forte, Drexel University,3141 Chestnut St, Philadelphia, PA 19104, andrea.forte@drexel.edu

Abstract: Does a speaker craft an argument carefully if no one will hear it? Does an engineer design structures
without reflecting on the individuals for whom her creations will have meaning and utility? Learning sciences
research often explores such creative activities as meaningful opportunities for learning--inherent in these acts
of creation is the concept of audience. In this paper, we draw on the philosophical and science studies literature
to further unpack the role of audience in argumentation and examine three different ways that educators have
addressed  the problem    of creating   an audience   for   student work.  We   discuss   how   these  approaches    can
challenge existing classroom structures and present evidence from empirical studies that demonstrate some of
the outcomes.

Audience: What and Who is It?
          ...the gathering of those whom the speaker wants to influence by his or her arguments.
                                                                  (Perelman, 1982, p. 14), emphasis is his.
          The word   "audience"  often   conjures  images   of a crowded     theater or lecture hall--the  "gathering"
referred to in Perelman's above quote. In reality, audience might be dispersed across continents and across
centuries or may only exist in the mind of a speaker, writer, or artist. Walter Ong stated that, for writers,
audience itself is a fiction, invoked by the arguer in order to organize and contextualize her communication
(Ong, 1975). In addition, he suggests that the audience itself responds to a text by adopting an expected role--
for example, the role of reviewer or the role of student--and participates in constructing meaning rather than
simply   receiving it. Whether  real  or imagined,   listening or   reading, live or  in  absentia, audience  plays  an
important role in defining the context in which argumentation takes place.
          Audience is complex. Understanding the nature and impact of audience plays a central role in the vast
literature on rhetoric and argumentation. Whether written or oral, arguments are situated in a rhetorical space
that is constructed by both the audience and the speaker or writer. Tindale described how audience plays an
active role in determining the nature of an argument:
          The rhetorical audience is not a passive consumer of arguments, as some logicians seem to
          think; it plays an active role in the argumentation. The nature of the audience sets the terms of
          the premises, which are formulated in light of theses accepted by those to be addressed. The
          audience contributes assumptions to the reasoning... And the audience can interact with the
          argumentation in the mind of the arguer or in dialogue with the arguer... (Tindale, 1999, pp.
          85-86)
Argumentation, then, is not simply a matter of constructing a logically coherent series of statements, it is a
socially  situated event  designed    by   the arguer    to satisfy  the demands     of  a  particular context.  Thus,
understanding audience in the classroom is critical for understanding how constructing arguments can be an
effective learning activity and how to best design such experiences for students.
          In this paper, we explore the role of audience when fostering scientific argumentation in classrooms.
To support our analysis of audience in the classroom, we draw not only on the science studies and rhetoric
literature, but on four years of empirical classroom studies that examine argumentation in both spoken (Berland,
2008,  submitted;  Kuhn,   Kenyon,    &  Reiser,   2006)  and  written  forms (Forte    &  Bruckman,   2006;  Forte   &
Bruckman, 2007; Forte & Bruckman, under review). These different contexts for argumentation give rise to
different understandings   of   audience   in  the classroom.   We   begin   by exploring   the  role  of audience    in
argumentative discourse, we then move to examine the implications for classrooms.

Argumentation and Learning: Audience Influences the Goals of the Argument
The first order of business between an arguer and her audience is agreeing on a goal. Is the audience to be
persuaded? Is a compromise sought? Are the parties mutually engaged in solving a problem? The goal of the
interaction must be established. Even when the audience is present, this is typically done implicitly; in the case
of written communication, the arguer may invoke an audience based on her knowledge of communicative norms
for a particular genre of writing. Determining the goal is an important first step because different goals result in
different argument   styles. In fact, philosophers   have   identified multiple   forms  of arguments.    For example,
Walton   (1998), drawing   from  work    such  as  Aristotle  (1955) and  Locke   (1961    [1690]), has   identified six
possible argumentative dialogues each of which is "a goal-directed conventional framework in which two [or

                                                     428  ·  © ISLS
                                                ICLS 2010    ·  Volume 1

more] speech partners reason together in an orderly way....Each type of dialogue has distinctive goals as well as
methods that are used by the participants to achieve these goals together" (p. 3). Work such as this suggests that
argumentative discussions vary broadly based on the participants' goals. Table 1 both summarizes Walton's
dialogue types (as he describes them) and identifies the instructional goals emphasized by each dialogue type.

Table 1: Walton's dialogue types and implied instructional goals (Walton, 1998)

Dialogue type         End result                            Implied Instructional Goals
Critical              Individuals are persuaded of a        Criticizing counter-arguments
                      single claim
Inquiry               Claims are proven to be true or       Collaborating to draw conclusions from premises/data
                      false
Negotiation           A "good deal" is reached              Bargaining and compromising
Information-          An individual gains information       Asking questions and collecting information
seeking
Deliberation          A practical problem is solved         Debating possible courses of outcomes by predicting
                                                            their outcome
Eristic               Opponents are defeated                Quarreling through aggressive tactics (including insults,
                                                            emotional attacks etc.)

         As seen in Table 1, each of these dialogue types has a different end result and suggests different kinds
of pedagogic goals. For example, the critical dialogue is used to persuade people and involves the goals of
understanding and refuting counter-arguments, whereas the inquiry dialogue is a way to construct a single claim
that is irrefutably supported by evidence and entails collaborating to use data in order to draw conclusions.
         The first author has examined argumentation in science classrooms (Berland, submitted a) in which
students engaged in whole class arguments in a way that aligned with the critical dialogue of Walton's scheme
(1998).  Each  of these    is characterized by  the   various  discourse  moves    receiving different emphases.  For
example,  in the  critical  dialogue, students  were  likely   to negatively   evaluate one  another  while  mustering
evidence to disprove counter claims, while in the information-seeking dialogue the students questioned one
another  but   rarely compared    across  their  contrary    claims  in  order  to  acknowledge    or  reconcile their
disagreements. In addition, the first author witnessed students engaging in a form of argumentative discourse
that did not align with Walton's scheme. In particular, the students engaged in "information sharing" in which
they presented  previously    constructed arguments    without    attending to the arguments    of others or receiving
feedback on their own. Jimenez-Aleixandre, Rodriguez, & Duschl (2000) describe these interactions by saying
the students are "doing school" rather than "doing science." They are characterized by a focus on procedures,
the  teacher's expectations     and  school   culture (i.e.,   expecting the   answer   include  one  concept  that is
predetermined). In these dialogues, the often-implicit goal is to quickly get an answer to the question at hand. In
other words, the goal is to construct an acceptable claim.
         This information sharing dialogue generally does not align with expectations for argumentation--that
is probably why it is not accounted for by Walton's scheme. However, we include it here because it reveals the
importance of having an authentic audience: In these interactions the implied audience is invariably the teacher
as students attempt to meet the requirements of the assignment. An audience of classmates or an external body
might help move these students from the their focus on teacher expectations to the strength of their arguments.
         Features of these dialogue types also surface when students invoke an audience for written work. The
second author has examined students' writing practices in high school science classes when they are asked to
publish a real science resource on a wiki. Students who wrote on the wiki also adopted the dialogic style of
"information sharing." At first glance, it seems unlikely that one would find other forms of dialog in a written
performance--if one is writing about science rather than discussing it, then it seems natural to present finished
arguments.   Yet, social   media  like wikis   support  discursive   forms   of written  interaction  as  collaborators
deliberate over the content they wish to present as well as the form of their argument. Although inquiry and
negotiation dialogues such as these are common on other wikis, like Wikipedia, this kind of dialogue was rarely
observed among students and was not encouraged by teachers (Forte & Bruckman, 2007).
         These studies also revealed that, even when writing in an online public venue, students frequently
adopted  traditional  standards  for  written school  genres.   These   standards  assume   that the student's written
performance is ultimately intended to be assessed by the teacher, not to persuade or inform others and not as a
starting point for collaborative inquiry. Performative standards motivate student engagement in information-
sharing rather than more critical or inquiry dialogues. Moreover, in this case, the students saw information-
sharing as being in competition with other more argumentative dialogue types: students frequently reported

                                                    429   ·  © ISLS
                                                ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

invoking   an  inexpert audience   to  help them  organize   their  arguments,  and   several  students  explained  in
interviews that the teacher as audience competed with their potential readership online (Forte and Bruckman, in
press). Ultimately, they attended to both audiences as they constructed their texts.
         What do people want to know about [this disorder]? That's kind of like what I was thinking
         about. Like what would I be interested in if I was trying to look at one of these sites? And I
         wouldn't say I'd be really interested in the biochemistry but since it has to be included, it shall
         be included. ­ Sara
         Combining our empirical studies with the philosophical and science studies literature emphasizes the
importance of argumentative goals--and the role of the audience in determining these goals. In particular, we
see in the work of both authors that the teacher-audience often worked to disrupt the students' focus on goals
that align  more   directly  with  argumentation   and   sensemaking.   This  suggests    that one  challenge  facing
classroom communities as they work to engage students in argumentative discourse is the creation of contexts
in which students are able to engage in argumentative dialogues and the goals implied by them.

Audience Influences How the Goals are Achieved
Beyond   influencing the  dialogue    type--or argumentative     goal--the   audience influences  the content  of  the
interaction by impacting the criteria by which the argument will be judged. As stated by Tindale, "....depending
on the circumstances, their [arguers'] arguments will seek different results and will use methods appropriate to
the purpose of the discourse as well as to the audience to be influenced" (Tindale, 1999). In other words, arguers
must change the content of their argument to meet the expectations of their audience. If this alignment does not
occur, the argument will fail because the audience will judge it on different criteria then the author used.
         In terms of scientific argumentation that occurs in classrooms, we have seen the students' criteria for
evaluating arguments range from superficial (i.e., evaluating the appearance of the graphs; assessing arguments
based on assumed expertise of the authors) to more content-based (i.e., aligning the claim to an answer in a text
book) to scientific (i.e., examining the alignment between the claims and the evidence presented in defense of
those claims). If the criteria that audience members use influence the content of the argument, then we would
expect these different criteria to result in different arguments. For example, if the audience is focusing on
superficial criteria, the arguers have little reason to articulate the evidence that supports their claims. Similarly,
if the audience is focused on whether the claim makes sense or aligns with a textbook answer, the arguers have
little reason to do more than identify outside sources that validate their claims.
         The relationship between the expectations of the audience and the content of the argument is made
most obvious in discussions in which the arguer's approach to supporting a claim differs from the expectations
of the audience. For example, in an earlier study (Kuhn, et al., 2006) the first author observed a group of
students arguing about their explanations regarding why the majority of Galapagos Finches died in the mid
1970s. One pair in this group (correctly) thought that a drought killed the finches' food (plant seeds) while the
other pair believed it was torrential rains. The torrential rain pair defended their claim using logic and personal
experience with drowning plants while the pair that believed it was a drought relied on evidence of the rainfall
decreasing.  After being  unable   to meet  their demands    for empirical   evidence, the  group   that believed  that
torrential rains killed the plants revised their claim to align with the available evidence: a drought killed the
birds' food. In interactions such as this, you see the substance of the argument changing to account for the
audience's expectations. In this case, the claim changed because the arguers could not meet their audience
members' demand for empirical evidence that supported the original claim.
         The second author found that, when writing, audience awareness was a constant feature of students'
process for constructing a text that would be acceptable to both their teacher and to a broader readership. In
general, students adapted their writing to fulfill the perceived expectations of their Internet audience (Forte &
Bruckman, in press). Some commented on the sense of responsibility they felt toward their readership: "It's like
`oh my gosh, I have a huge responsibility now' even if nobody actually uses this. It's still there, somebody
could use it so everything has to be exactly right." Comments like this demonstrate the student authors attending
to a non-teacher audience. Moreover, these different audiences for the students' work demand different kinds of
information   and  different forms  of presentation.  In  fact, as  students reconstructed  their writing  process  in
interviews throughout the school year, they described different strategies for constructing texts and citing their
sources depending on whether they were attending to their Internet or in-school audience (See Table 3).
         Many students explained that, in order to present scientific information to a broad audience, they had to
simplify the complex vocabulary they found in scientific journals so that their readers would understand their
assertions. In order to  do   so, students  reported that  they  needed  to  engage   deeply   with content  and  they
frequently  looked up   additional explanations   and   definitions to get things  right. One   student  described his
process for researching his topic as 40% "collecting information. 60% was actually trying to understand what on
earth are we talking about." Another noted that:

                                                    430  ·  © ISLS
                                                   ICLS 2010  ·   Volume 1

         I had to take words and I mean, I wanted to make it readable for people too, because I knew
         other people were going to look at this, so I was not going to use, like, huge words, just kind
         of make it simple. - Lina
This same student also described consciously choosing to follow her teacher's suggestions even when they
conflicted with her sense of the Internet audience's needs:
         Well, `causes.' I was like, well, if someone was to look at this, it would be like `causes of the
         disease'... and then Dr. Baker was like, `Well, you are supposed to find the etiology of the
         disease.' I was like, `Okay, I am going to use the word `etiology'. - Lina
         In this example, Lina ended up mirroring her teacher in order to perform for assessment purposes. The
extra work that students   had  to     do to  develop  their  ideas for   a less knowledgeable   audience  supports   and
explains Gunel, Hand, & McDermott's finding that writing science for the teacher is associated with lower post-
test scores than writing for peers and younger students (2009). They similarly found that students tended to use
"big words" to impress their teacher on the assumption that the teacher would already understand them.

Table 3: Student Strategies for Constructing a Science Text on a Wiki (Forte & Bruckman, in press)

                     Teacher as Audience                                  Broad Internet Audience
                     Goal: Meet Assessment Criteria                       Goal: Provide Credible Science Resource

                                                                            · Simplify scientific language
 Crafting                                                                   · Invoke an inexpert reader
 Content             ·  Follow directions                                   · Use existing sources as a model
                     ·  Look at others' work                                · Reflect on own experiences as a reader
                     ·  Apply conventions from other classes
                     ·  Seek feedbackSourcingContent                        · Same strategies, different rationale:o Ensure credibilityo Defer responsibility

         Beyond the clarity of their explanations, these students placed a different emphasis on citation as a
criterion for successful arguments when thinking about their external audience. In fact, as these students wrote
online for a broad audience, some explained that citation was an important part of presenting their work in
public, because of the responsibility to their audience:
         All the information I put up had sources, had everything, had a credible background to it. So I
         think if it's going to be so open for other people to use, your work should be credible. ­ Jerry
         The  work   of the   first and   second   authors   demonstrates   that the students' sense  of their audience
influences the content and justification of their arguments. Moreover, the second author's work revealing that
the students' shifted   their criteria    as their attention  shifted  from   a  teacher-based audience  to an  external
readership demonstrates the impact of the teacher on their argumentation. In particular, we see that, as with their
argumentative  goal,  the criteria   that students   apply   to their  arguments  differ  when they  work  to  satisfy an
authentic audience who might be persuaded by their argument rather than a teacher who seeks to assess whether
they achieved the desired answer.

Implications for Designing Learning Experiences
The intertwined relationship between audience and student engagement with the science content suggests that a
primary challenge when engaging in argumentative discourse in science classrooms is to create situations in
which students have an authentic audience for their arguments. Moreover, the corollary to the philosophical
focus on how the audience can shape the form and content of an argument is that the audience has a role in the
argumentative discourse. That is, although a fictional audience might be invoked, an audience that is present
should be providing feedback and engaging actively in the construction of the argument. From the perspective
of the audience, this suggests that the listeners and readers have a key role in the argument process. Thus, the
audience members   must   learn     to play   that role: They   need   to ask  questions, evaluate arguments   and   offer
alternatives. Whether in the classroom or in mediated online environments, these practices may need to be
actively introduced and cultivated.
         In order to serve as an authentic audience in argumentative discourse, students must see one another's
ideas as worth responding to and must value the feedback provided by their peers in addition to that provided by
their teacher. In an examination of power in a middle school science classroom, Cornelius and Herrenkohl

                                                       431  ·   © ISLS
                                                ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

(2004) found that the typical "evaluation" phase of the triadic-dialog (Lemke, 1990) or IRE (Mehan, 1979)
exchange can limit student ownership of ideas. Similarly, Tabak and Baumgartner (2004) found that triadic
dialogues limit students' need and motivation to substantively engage with their classmates' understandings.
Analyses such as these indicate that the prominence of teacher feedback in class discussions can limit students'
ability to engage with one another's ideas because it removes their authority and motivation to evaluate and
question them. In order for students to be audience members for one another's arguments, classroom norms
must change to enable such interaction.
         In addition, if students are to act as an audience for one another, they must reach agreement about the
goal of their interaction. As described in the first section, this agreement is often achieved implicitly and is
restricted by the context and content of an argument; however, traditional school norms may conflict with goals
of specific forms   of discourse  such  as scientific argumentation.     In  an  analysis  of  classroom  communities'
adaptations of scientific argumentation, the first author and colleagues (Berland, submitted a) found that each
classroom   adapted the   discourse practice  differently.  Moreover,    the students   in that study  never   explicitly
discussed their goals with one another--instead the goal was made clear in the students' interactions. Their
apparent agreement     in argumentative  goal   could be   attributed to their   existing  classroom  culture  (Berland,
submitted b). That is, the goals with which they argued were similar to the goals of their non-argumentative,
more typical class discussions. For example, in the class that argued as a form of critical dialogue, the goal was
to critique counter arguments in order to prove that they knew the right answer. During non-argumentative class
discussions, these students also seemed focused on demonstrating that they knew the right answer. Similarly,
the class that focused on information seeking during the class argument was frequently engaged in similar
interactions with their teacher when not arguing. This work demonstrates that the goals that typically govern
classroom practices influence how students engage in argumentation. Thus, creating an environment in which it
is sensible for students to engage with their audience to negotiate goals and criteria for meeting those goals
involves a transformation of social norms in the classroom.

Transforming the Classroom Norms
Learning   sciences research   has  a strong  tradition  of   exploring  transformative    social arrangements   in  the
classroom   that cast  students  as responsible,   generative  participants   in  their educational   experiences.   For
example, the literature on knowledge building communities suggests that students can function much like a
community of scientists by proposing, debating and building on one another's ideas to further the knowledge of
the class as a whole (Scardamalia & Bereiter, 1991). To support this goal, the software Knowledge Forum helps
students identify possible discourse moves in a knowledge building exchange. Developing such a community
requires a fundamental cultural shift in schools from what Scardamalia and Bereiter call a first-order learning
environment, in which there is a static set of knowledge to be learned, to a second-order learning environment in
which the state of knowledge is always changing and participants must continuously adapt to the ideas and
suggestions of their peers.
         Brown and Campione (1996) addressed this challenge by explicitly transforming the goals and criteria
of the classroom activities. They did this by making students responsible for learning the ideas under study and
then creating situations in which students were accountable to one another for those understandings. These
expectations helped    create  a "community     of  learners,"  in  which    the students  had    authentic reason   and
opportunity to engage with one another's ideas through scientific discourse practices. However, these solutions
required changing the entire community. This transformation is difficult, and possibly unrealistic in traditional
classroom settings.
         The first author built on this work with a focus on scientific argumentation: she designed activities in
which the explicit goal was for students to convince one another of their ideas such that they had to attend and
respond to one another's ideas rather than the teacher's. However, engagement in the goal of persuasion seemed
to limit student motivation or willingness to engage in sensemaking (Berland, submitted a). This is an example
of how changing a portion of the classroom norms--in this case, the interaction patterns--without changing the
other expectations--such    as  the goals--resulted   in  an  incomplete    adoption of    the scientific practice. This
reinforces  the  systemic  requirements  put  forth by   the  Brown   and   Campione    (1996)    and Scardamalia    and
Bereiter (1996) studies, but returns us to the question of how we can foster these sorts of interactions in more
traditional classrooms.
         Looking across the literature, we have identified three approaches to addressing this challenge.
         1.  Introducing an outside audience
         2.  Recasting student roles
         3.  Creating a fake audience
Each  of these   approaches  has implicitly  or explicitly  created   situations in which   students  had   an authentic
audience with whom they could negotiate the goals and criteria for their discussions. In the following sections,
we will draw on the literature and our own empirical work to exemplify each of the three approaches.

                                                    432  ·   © ISLS
                                               ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

Approach 1: Introducing an Outside Audience
Science fairs, band concerts, and student journals are all examples of traditional ways that educators have
sought to "break down" the barriers between the classroom and outside communities in order to introduce an
external audience for student work. Recently social media and "Web 2.0" have brought about new opportunities
for student interactions with outsiders (Ellison & Wu, 2008: Wheeler, Yeomans, & Wheeler, 2008). In addition,
learning sciences researchers have a relatively long tradition of exploring the potential for students to interact
with distant peers, mentors, and subject matter experts via the Internet. Kids as Global Scientists (KGS)/Biokids
(Songer,  1996),  CoVis    Mentor  Database (O'Neill   &  Gomez,    1998), and  Bos  and Krajcik's   online writing
research (1998) are all examples of early learning sciences projects that created opportunities for students to
engage with and present ideas to distant audiences through networked technology.
          Because these interactions are mediated through educational software, the goals of discourse and the
criteria for achieving   these goals  may   be influenced   by  the design  of  the communication      environments
themselves. For example, in an implementation of KGS, students used an interface that structured activities by
allowing them to see weather data, ask questions of remote peers, and answer questions from remote peers and
local graduate   student   mentors (Songer, 1996).  This    configuration  supported an  "inquiry"   style dialogue
(Walton, 1998) by encouraging specific kinds of interactions such as reviewing data and asking questions. In
other cases, such as in the work of the second author, who studied students writing a science resource on a wiki,
the communication tools themselves are relatively versatile and lend little structure to the interaction. In such
cases, it is critical to structure learning activities in such a way that students have a model of how they are
expected to engage in with their readership in order to develop the goal and criteria for those interactions (Forte
& Bruckman, in press). This may be done by explicitly structuring assignments, or, in exceptional cases such as
the Math Forum project, it may be done through the development of an online community with cultural norms
and expectations for social interactions among members (Renninger, Shumar, Barab, Kling, & Gray, 2004).
This  ideal  can be difficult  to achieve when   both  students and   teachers can   easily fall  back on  "default"
classroom interaction styles that place the teacher back in the position of primary audience.
          As discussed above, if expected to join in a particular mode of discourse, audience members also need
to understand their role in the interaction. This can be a particularly challenging aspect of introducing an outside
audience--engaging in specific forms of argumentation and providing useful feedback is not always easy. Even
when the interactive environment helps structure classroom interactions, it can be difficult for outsiders to know
what is expected and how to take on the role of audience productively. Songer (1996) provides an example of
effective mentoring in which a KGS mentor "seeds ideas" among students; they note that mentors were not
always so effective and were coached to engage with students in specific ways. O'Neill and Gomez (1998)
developed the CoVis Mentor Database based on their research with science teachers who orchestrated online
mentoring experiences for their students and likewise note that both mentors and students "needed substantial
guidance concerning the kind of help they should provide and expect" (p. 327).

Approach 2: Recasting Student Roles
In the previous section, we discussed the use of an external audience to help transform classroom interactions.
Another approach to changing the experience of audience is to recast students as audiences for one another. This
can be done in more structured ways, such as assigning explicit roles, or less structured ways that encourage
student engagement with one another's ideas in a more or less spontaneous fashion. Herrenkohl and Guerra
(1998) took a highly structured approach in a study of participant structures in argumentation among elementary
school science students. They identified three distinct intellectual roles in argumentative discourse: predicting
and theorizing, summarizing results, and relating evidence and results to theory and prediction. They assigned
students to these roles and, in a comparison group, also assigned audience roles to students. They found that
when audience roles were specified, the class engaged in more whole-class inquiry activities and students took
more leading roles.
          Other researchers have had success assigning students less explicit roles. For example, in a study with
undergraduate    students, Forte  and Bruckman   (2006)   found that  assigning students    to be reviewers of one
another's work created a situation in which students tailored arguments to convince their peers. After reviewing
their peers' arguments, students revised position papers to be more convincing to an audience that might not
share their point of view. Still another form of audience role assignment that can implicitly encourage specific
discourse practices is asking students to role-play with one another. For example, Pitts and Edelson (2004) ask
students to adopt the role of scientists and interact with one another as such to solve environmental science
problems. Although discourse roles themselves are not made explicit, students draw on their understandings of
what scientists are like and what they do to organize their interactions with one another. Finally, a still less-
structured approach is to give students a common goal to encourage knowledge-building interactions, such as
Peters and Slotta's (2009) studies of students who construct a science resource for one another online.
          When discourse roles are assigned, interactions can be far more structured than in the first approach
and the problem of agreeing on argumentative goals and criteria is less difficult to resolve. The assigned roles

                                                   433  ·  © ISLS
                                                ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

should support students in meeting argumentative goals, which are often made explicit upon assignment. In the
first example above, Herrenkohl and Guerra (1998) made highly specified role assignments based on scientific
discourse practices. In this case, the activity was sufficiently structured to circumvent confusion about the goal
of discourse  and  the means   of  achieving  this goal.   In  the case of  Pitts and Edelson's    (2004) role-playing
scientists, or Peters and Slotta's (2009) wiki writers, discourse is less highly structured and students must draw
on their understandings of scientific practices to come to an agreement on the best ways to pursue their goals.

Approach 3: Creating a Fake Audience
When it comes to scientific reasoning and argumentation, encouraging students to role play and engage with a
fake audience (and even to believe such an audience exists) has been used to motivate and organize learning
activities and to connect science learning with students' experiences outside of school. Elaborate cover stories
are used in problem-based and project based learning projects such as Blueprint for Success, which places
students in the position of designing a playground for an imaginary architecture firm (Barron, et al., 1998). In
the Mission to Mars project, students designed model rockets to learn about physical science (Petrosino, 1998).
After observing   that students   did  not engage   in  inquiry    learning while  building  their rockets,  Petrosino
introduced the idea that an audience would evaluate their designs and found that the introduction of a critical
audience helped students organize their own activities in a goal-directed fashion cited in (Petrosino, 1998 cited
in Barron et. al., 1998).
          Once again, advances in educational technology have brought about opportunities for innovative ways
to connect students with audiences--in this case, imaginary audiences. Goal-Based Scenarios (GBS) are a form
of problem-based learning that engages students in an imaginary problem scenario (Schank, Fano, Bell, & Jona,
1994). The educational software Sickle Cell Counselor and Broadcast News are GBS's that encourage learners
to develop arguments based on a dataset and present them to fictitious audiences who provide feedback and
questions to direct further inquiry. These audiences are not real audiences that can be affected and persuaded by
learners, they are computational agents that provide "canned" responses designed to elicit reflection. Because
the audience does not exist, agreeing on an argumentative goal and on the criteria for successfully reaching that
goal is a matter of coaxing students into the "right" frame of mind.

Discussion
Comparing various educational reform efforts reveals that learning scientists and science educators have long
been  working  to  create   situations in  which   students   work  to  engage    audiences in  an authentic  fashion.
Examining each of these designs in light of the philosophical and social sciences work on argumentation and
audience  suggests that   a key challenge    connecting   these studies  lies  in the students'  interpretation of  the
audience: are they constructing arguments or designing artifacts for their teacher to assess for accuracy or for an
audience that they can hope to influence? Each of the studies discussed above has created ways to make the
experience more authentic by creating a sense of audience that was external from the teacher.
          This analysis has also revealed the importance of attending to whether and how the students negotiate
their goals for their interactions and their criteria for success with their audience. Is this something that comes
from the teacher or as a natural outcome of their interactions? The second author's work suggests that having a
teacher-imposed goal and criteria may be in competition with the natural goals and criteria that emerge through
the interactions. However, the teacher needs a way to influence these interactions in order to help students stay
focused on activities and discussions that will help them move towards the learning goals. Our work suggests
that creating this balance    should   be  a focus  of  future  work    in  supporting  students   as they   engage in
argumentation as a learning activity.

References
Aristotle (1955). On sophistical refutations (E. S. Forster, Trans. Loeb classical library edition ed.). Cambridge,
          MA: Harvard University Press.
Barron, B. J. S., Schwartz, D. L., Vye, N. J., Moore, A., Petrosino, A., Zech, L., et al. (1998). Doing with
          understanding: Lessons from research on problem- and project-based learning. Journal of the Learning
          Sciences, 7(3), 271-310.
Berland, L. K. (2008). Understanding the composite practice that forms when classrooms take up the practice
          of scientific argumentation. Northwestern University, Evanston, IL.
Berland,  L.  K.  (submitted   a). How     classroom    communities     make   sense  of the   practice   of scientific
          argumentation.
Berland, L.K. (submitted b). Explaining variation in how classroom communities adapt the practice of scientific
          argumentation.
Bos,  N., &   Krajcik, J.  (1998). Students'  awareness     of audience    in web-published    science writing.  Paper
          presented at the Annual Meeting of the American Educational Research Association.

                                                    434  ·  © ISLS
                                              ICLS 2010  ·    Volume 1

Brown,  A.   L., &   Campione,  J.  C.  (1996). Psychological      theory   and the  design of   innovative learning
         environments: On procedures, principles, and systems. In L. Schauble & R. Glaser (Eds.), Innovations
         in learning: New   environments  for education    (pp. pp.   289-325).  Mahwah,    NJ:    Lawrence Erlbaum
         Associates.
Cornelius, L. L., & Herrenkohl, L. R. (2004). Power in the classroom: How the classroom environment shapes
         students' relationships with each other and with concepts. Cognition and Instruction, 22(4), 467-498.
Ellison, N., & Wu, Y. (2008). Blogging in the classroom: a preliminary exploration of student attitudes and
         impact on comprehension. Journal of Educational Multimedia and Hypermedia., 17(1), 99-122.
Forte, A.,  & Bruckman,    A.  (2006). From   Wikipedia    to  the Classroom:    Exploring  online   publication and
         learning. Proceedings of the Int'l Conference of the Learning Sciences, Bloomington, IN, 182-188.
Forte, A.,  &   Bruckman,   A.  (2007).  Constructing    text: wiki   as  a  toolkit for (collaborative?)   learning.
         Proceedings of the International Symposium on Wikis (WikiSym), Montreal, Canada, 31-42.
Forte, A., & Bruckman, A. (In Press). Citing, writing and participatory media: wikis as learning environments in
         the high school classroom. International Journal of Learning and Media.
Gunel, M., Hand, B., & McDermott, M. A. (2009). Writing for different audiences: Effects on high-school
         students' conceptual understanding of biology. Learning and Instruction, 19(4), 354-367.
Jimenez-Aleixandre, M. P., Rodriguez, B. A., & Duschl, R. A. (2000). "Doing the lesson" or "Doing science":
         Argument in high school genetics. Science Education, 84, 757-792.
Kuhn, L., Kenyon, L., & Reiser, B. J. (2006). Fostering scientific argumentation by creating a need for students
         to attend to each  other's claims  and  evidence.    Proceedings   of  the  International Conference of  the
         Learning Sciences, Bloomington, IN, 370-375.
Lemke, J. L. (1990). Talking science: Language, learning, and values. Norwood, NJ: Ablex Publishing.
Locke, J. (1961 [1690]). An essay concerning human understanding. In J. Yolton, W. (Ed.). London: Dent.
Mehan,   H.  (1979).  Learning  lessons:  Social  organization     in  the  classroom.   Cambridge,    MA:  Harvard
         University Press.
O'Neill, D. K., & Gomez, L. M. (1998). Sustaining mentoring relationships on-line. Proceedings of the CSCW
         98:  ACM conference on computer-supported cooperative work, 325 - 334.
Ong, W. (1975). The writer's audience is always a fiction. PMLA, 90(1), 9-21.
Perelman, C. (1982). The Realm of Rhetoric. London: University of Notre Dame Press.
Peters, V. L., & Slotta, J. D. (2009). Scaffolding knowledge communities in the classroom: New opportunities
         in the Web 2.0 era. In M. J. Jacobson & P. Reimann (Eds.), Designs for Learning Environments of the
         Future: Springer-Verlag.
Petrosino, A. (1998). The use of reflection and revision in hands-on experimental activities by at-risk children.
         Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN.
Pitts, V. M., & Edelson, D. C. (2004). Role, goal, and activity: A framework for characterizing participation
         and  engagement   in  project-based  learning   environments.    . Proceedings  of  the   ICLS 2004:  Sixth
         International Conference of the Learning Sciences,
Renninger, K. A., Shumar, W., Barab, S., Kling, R., & Gray, J. (2004). The centrality of culture and community
         to participant learning at and with The Math Forum. In S. Barab, R. Kling & J. Gray (Eds.), Designing
         for Virtual Communities in the Service of Learning (pp. 181-209): Cambridge University Press.
Scardamalia, M., & Bereiter, C. (1991). Higher Levels of Agency for Children in Knowledge Building: A
         challenge for the design of new knowledge media. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 1(1), 37-68.
Scardamalia,  M.,  &  Bereiter, C.  (1996).  Computer    Support   for   Knowledge-Building    Communities.   In  T.
         Koschmann (Ed.), CSCL: Theory and Practice of an Emerging Paradigm (pp. 249-268). Mahwah, NJ:
         Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Schank, R., Fano, A., Bell, B., & Jona, M. (1994). The design of goal-based scenarios. Journal of the Learning
         Sciences, 3(4), 305-345.
Songer, N. (1996). Exploring learning opportunities in network-enhanced classrooms: A case of kids as global
         scientists. Journal of the Learning Scieces, 5(4), 297-327.
Tabak, I., & Baumgartner, E. (2004). The teacher as partner: Exploring participant structures, symmetry, and
         identity work in scaffolding. Cognition and Instruction, 22(4), 393-429.
Tindale, C. W. (1999). Acts of arguing: a rhetorical model of argument. New York: State University of New
         York Press.
Walton, D. (1998). The New Dialectic: Conversational Contexts of Argument. Toronto: University of Toronto
         Press.
Wheeler, S., Yeomans, P., & Wheeler, D. (2008). The good, the bad and the wiki: Evaluating student-generated
         content for collaborative learning. British Journal of Educational Technology, 39(6), 987-995.

                                                  435  ·  © ISLS
