                                              ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 2

        The CORDTRA Analysis Tool in Action: Experiences and
                                             Suggestions

  Andri Ioannou-Nicolaou, University of Connecticut, 249 Glenbrook Road Unit-2064, Storrs, Connecticut
                               06269-2064, USA, andri.ioannou@uconn.edu
   Agni Stylianou-Georgiou, University of Nicosia, 46 Makedonitissas Ave. P.O.Box 24005, Nicosia 1700,
                                       Cyprus, stylianou.a@unic.ac.cy

         Abstract: This short paper presents the authors' experiences and reflections from using an
         existing tool (CORDTRA) for analyzing collaborative learning interactions evident in wiki
         and threaded discussion technologies. The paper aims to discuss the strengths and limitations
         of the tool, in terms of existing research, and provide thoughtful recommendations for its
         improvement.

A Brief Review of the Study
CORDTRA (Chronologically-Oriented Representations of Discourse and Tool-related Activity) provides "an
innovative representation for analyzing the evolution of discourse and tool-related activity across time" (Hmelo-
Silver, Chernobilsky, &  Nagarajan, 2009,    p. 3).  This  short  paper presents a formative  evaluation of    the
CORDTRA tool. We adapted the CORDTRA tool to investigate the collaborative learning (CL) interactions
evident in wiki and threaded discussion technologies as students worked in groups to analyze a case. This work
was part of a larger-scale study which examined the affordances of these two Web 2.0 technologies to promote
or constrain successful computer-supported (CS)CL in online settings. We very briefly discuss the context of
this work below, however the complete study is reported elsewhere (Ioannou & Brown, 2010).
         We collected data from 34 graduate students enrolled in two sections of an online, learning theories
course at a large public University in the Northeast USA. Additionally we collected data from 10 students
enrolled in a blended e-learning learning, educational psychology course at a private University in Cyprus.
During the 4-week investigation, students (in groups of 3-4) collaborated on case study analysis, online. Groups
discussed two different case scenarios and produced a consensus plan suggesting a solution to the problem
embedded   in each case. Groups in  the USA     used  WebCT's    threaded  discussion board and a wiki   built in
MediaWiki (the open-source platform originally written for Wikipedia) to support their collaboration. Similarly
groups in Cyprus used Moodle's threaded discussion board and MediaWiki. Data included: (a) logs of groups'
online discourse archived in MediaWiki discussion pages and threaded discussion board (i.e., day/time stamp,
collaborator's name, collaborator's contribution), and (b) groups' consensus plans developed in wiki article-
pages and Word documents attached back and forth on the threaded discussion board.
         The online discourse of each group was analyzed using a coding-and-counting approach to Computer-
Mediated Discourse Analysis (CMDA; Herring, 2004). Subsequently, the CORDTRA tool (a CORDTRA for
each group) allowed the investigators to beyond coding-and-counting to carefully examine the relationships
between the collaborators, the discourse they engaged in, the mediating tools they used, and the construction of
their consensus plan  (Hmelo-Silver et  al., 2009).   Each  time-point  on a CORDTRA      diagram  represents   a
collaborator, one or more discourse/construction categories, and the corresponding technology feature that the
collaborator is using. The coding scheme and sample CORDTRAs will appear in the poster presentation.

Reflections on the Use of the CORDTRA Analysis Tool
CORDTRA seems to be an appropriate analysis tool for the study of CL using Web 2.0 technologies, such as
wikis and threaded discussion. The diagrams are effective in revealing patterns in context in CSCL settings.
Also, as a history flow visualization technique, CORDTRA may have advantages over more popular analytical
techniques, such as social network analysis. Social network analysis graphically represents the patterning of
people's interaction (i.e., who interacted with whom). Although this is useful information, it discards the content
and nature of knowledge construction that take place in the interactions (Stahl, 2006). Instead, the CORDTRA
diagram, in relation to the corresponding discourse, seems to support deeper understanding of CSCL. At the
very least, this tool brings the investigator closer to what is happening between the students, the discourse they
engage in while collaborating, and the mediating tools they use.
         However, this tool does not come without its limitations. Firstly, generating the diagrams using Excel
scatterplots is a quite labor intensive process. If CORDTRA is to be used extensively by the CSCL community,
an automated process for generating these diagrams should be developed. In the literature, there are a few
attempts to develop analytical and visualizing tools that automate the study of CSCL. Yet, there is a need for a
toolset that supports, (a) data from different platforms (e.g., MediaWiki and WebCT discussion forum), and (b)
different forms of data analysis (see Law, Yuen, Huang, Li, & Pan, 2007). With regards to integrating data from
different platforms, Klamma and Haasler (2008) implemented a system for generating and visualizing wiki

                                                  429  ·  © ISLS
                                               ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 2

networks for wikis built on MediaWiki. Their goal was to study the evolution and dynamics of wikis, within a
social network analysis framework. Additionally, Viégas, Wattenberg, & Dave (2004) developed a history flow
user interface, again for MediaWiki, in order to study the evolution of Wikipedia. Using this interface the
investigators were able to see the contributions on a wiki page, the authors who contributed, and a visualization
of the history    flow. Recently,   Giguet  and Lucas      (2009)  developed  the "Calico     Website"-- a tool   that
incorporates analytical and visualization features for the study of threaded discussion forums from different e-
learning platforms, such as WebCT and Moodle. Nevertheless, none of those tools allows the development of
chronological diagrams from data generated in both wiki and threaded discussion tools. Moreover, with regards
to analyzing data in different forms, Law et al. (2007) argued that lots of time is wasted in transforming data
into different formats for different analyses, because the tools for different kinds of analysis in CSCL are not yet
integrated. The investigators experienced this difficulty during the study. Specifically, a significant portion of
CMDA (Herring, 2004) was initially conducted in NVivo -- a specialized coding tool. Later, the investigators
realized that all codes had to be re-entered in an Excel sheet in order to generate the CORDTRA diagrams.
          A second limitation of the CORDTRA methodology involves the interpretation of the diagram, which
requires significant additional time commitment on top of generating it. A CORDTRA makes sense only in
relation to the corresponding discourse; patterns of collaboration are not clear from the diagram, unless one
carefully considers   the discourse  and  the diagram   together.  As    Hmelo-Silver et  al.  (2009) explained,  the
investigator  needs to  zoom  in  on  the areas of  the diagram    where  interesting patterns  exist to explore  the
phenomenon deeper, going back and forth between the CORDTRA and the coded discourse. A potentially
useful functionality for the CORDTRA analysis tool would be the ability to select a particular instance on the
scatterplot to see the corresponding lines of discourse. This would make the concurrent exploration of discourse
and scatterplot more efficient. A similar functionality was implemented in the "Calico Website" for the study of
threaded discussion forums (see Giguet & Lucas, 2009). Additionally, it would be practical to have a "zoon in"
functionality for  CORDTRAs      to  spread out the scatter   plot around   a particular  time point. When  there  is
significant activity, collaborators' discourse and actions overlap extensively on the diagram; this, not only
makes it difficult to observe any patterns, but also underestimates the amount of activity taking place at that
time. Such "zoom in" functionalities are currently implemented in video and audio editing software.
          Our poster    presentation will  provide  thoughtful    recommendations     for the  improvement    of  the
CORDTRA analysis tool. The presentation should be of interest to the scientific community using instruments
of this nature for the study of CSCL.

References
Giguet, E., & Lucas, N. (2009). Share and explore discussion forum objects on the Calico website. Poster
          presented at the annual meeting of the computer supported collaborative learning, Rhodes, Greece.
Herring, S. C. (2004). Computer-mediated discourse analysis: An approach to researching online communities.
          In S. A. Barab, R. Kling, & J. H. Gray (Eds.), Designing for virtual communities in the service of
          learning (pp. 338-376). Cambridge & New York: Cambridge University Press.
Hmelo-Silver, C. E., Chernobilsky, E., & Nagarajan, A. (2009). Two sides of the coin: Multiple perspectives on
          collaborative knowledge construction in online problem-based learning. In K. Kumpulainen, C. E.,
          Hmelo-Silver, & M. Cesar (Eds.). Investigating Classroom interaction: Methodologies in action. Sense
          Publishers.
Ioannou, A., & Brown, S.W. (2010, April). Wiki and threaded discussion for collaborative case-study analysis:
          Do  students  use the technologies  differently?   Paper  to be presented   at  the annual  meeting  of the
          American Educational Research Association, Denver, Colorado.
Klamma, R., & Haasler, C. (2008). Wikis as social networks: Evolution and dynamics. Paper presented at the
          2nd SNA-KDD Workshop on Social Network Mining and Analysis. Retrieved August 20 2009, from
          KNOW_Ralf_Klamma_Wiki_as_Social_Network.pdf
Law, N., Yuen, J., Huang, R., Li, Y., & Pan, N. (2007). A learnable content and participation analysis toolkit for
          assessing CSCL    learning outcomes   and processes.     In C. A. Chinn,  G.   Erkens, &   S.  Puntambekar
          (Eds.), Proceedings    of  the  Computer  Supported      Collaborative  Learning     (pp.  411-420).  New
          Brunswick, New Jersey.
Stahl, G. (2006). Group cognition: Computer support for building collaborative knowledge. Cambridge, MA:
          MIT Press.
Viégas, F., Wattenberg, M., & Dave, K. (2004, April). Studying cooperation and conflict between authors with
          history flow visualizations. Proceedings of Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (pp.
          575 ­ 582).

Acknowledgments
This study was supported by the Cyprus Research Promotion Foundation's grant (!"#"$/"#%&'/0308/53) and
the European Regional Development Fund (ERDF).

                                                    430  ·  © ISLS
