                                                ICLS 2010     Volume 2

      Leveraging Multiple Representations to Support Knowledge
                            Integration in Plate Tectonics
       A bstract: This poster explores how students make connections between multiple representations
       to integrate their ideas about plate tectonics. An existing plate tectonics project was redesigned to
       incorporate interactive dynamic visualizations and activities in order to support students in making
       connections between representations and       constructing   a more   coherent understanding  of  plate
       tectonics. Preliminary analysis of an observational study suggests that plate tectonics is a rich
       domain for investigating how multiple representations can support knowledge integration.

Introduction
This study examines how generating and interacting with multiple representations of plate tectonics helps students
develop an integrated understanding of plate tectonics. Students study a six-day technology-enhanced curriculum
project developed using the Web-Based Inquiry Science Environment (WISE, Linn, Davis, & Bell, 2004). Plate
tectonics is a causal theoretical framework for past, current, and future geographical phenomena (Bencloski & Heyl,
1985). It is currently taught as an earth science unit in sixth grade in the state of California. It has traditionally been
a difficult concept for middle school students, requiring students to learn about abstract processes and phenomena
that lie outside of their direct experience and to integrate spatial, causal and dynamic information (Gobert, 2000).
Prior studies have demonstrated that students often have difficulty integrating information from different
representations and need support in making connections among them (Ainsworth, 2006). Yet the complexity of
phenomena and necessity of integrating information across multiple levels make it advantageous for students to use
powerful representations to learn plate tectonics.

The WISE Plate Tectonics Project
Building on a tested plate tectonics module, we revised the project based on prior results and a commitment to
connect to the core scientific idea of energy (Varma et al, 2008). Guided by the integration framework (Linn, Eylon,
& Davis, 2004), the revisions involved incorporating new dynamic visualizations and activities requiring students to
make connections between representations as        well as  generate  their own  representations. The project  elicited
!"#$%&"!'()$%*!(*+,#"(-.*"%( "%/",&)/!()&("0%(/,&"%1"(,2(%1-.,3)&4(4%,.,4)/*.(-*""%3&!()&("0%(5&)"%$(6"*"%!(7)*( 8*-!9(
then guided them to link visible geological patterns on maps to sub-surface processes involving energy in plate
tectonics. These included dynamic visualizations of convection in the mantle at the macroscopic level (involving
heat flow) as well as at the molecular level. The project also asked students to generate explanations about the
visualizations, as well as their own representations of the processes involved in plate tectonics, in ways that required
them to synthesize information from the representations and integrate their ideas about plate tectonics.

                            (a)                                                    (b)
  Figure 1. The Plate Tectonics project. (a) A dynamic visualization of subduction. (b) The MySystem generation
                                                        activity.

Methods
Nine teachers teaching 6th grade earth science classes (N:;<<) implemented the newly redesigned plate tectonics
project. Pre- and Post-tests were completed by individual students; project activities and embedded assessments

                                                     433     ISLS
                                                   ICLS 2010    Volume 2

were completed in pairs.      Embedded assessments included short-response explanation prompts, reflection notes,
visual models of energy transfer and transformation called MySystem diagrams (see Figure 1b), and longer narrative
explanation prompts called Energy Stories (see Figure 2).        Classroom observations and teacher interviews helped
clarify the impact of the project.

Assessments were scored using rubrics based on the knowledge integration framework (Linn, Lee, Tinker, Husic, &
Chiu, 2006). The rubric rewards coherence of ideas as represented by the number and complexity of connections
students make between their ideas. We analyzed how the project helps students link ideas and representations about
the plate tectonics.

                            (a)                                                       (b)
                Figure 2. Sample student responses. (a) A MySystem diagram. (b) An Energy Story.

Results
Implementation  of   the  Plate Tectonics    project was   successful. Students  gained understanding    of  the topic as
measured by pretest/posttest improvements. In interviews, teachers attributed !"#$%&"!' progress in understanding
convection to their prior experience with conduction and to the revisions of the Plate Tectonics project. Comparison
of performance    on    Energy  Stories and    MySystem      diagrams  demonstrated    that these  representations  elicit
complementary   aspects   of  understanding.   MySystem    elicits connections  without  requiring students  to  generate
correct terminology.    Energy  Stories elicit  specific,  nuanced    ideas and can  reveal  confusions  about   geologic
terminology  such    as mantel. Embedded     assessments   showed   that  students make valid  connections   between   the
various representations.   For instance, students explain that the molecules in the mantle become less dense due to
thermal energy transfer from the core, based on a molecular simulation showing the relationship between heat and
density in water. They link their understanding of the results of convection to geologic features and events on the
surface such as mountains and volcanic eruptions. Thus, different representations may have different affordances for
assessing student understanding.    These initial findings suggest that plate tectonics is a rich domain for exploring
student learning with multiple representations that are both self-generated and imposed upon the learner.

References
Ainsworth, S. (2006). DeFT: A Conceptual Framework for Considering Learning with Multiple Representations.
         Learning and Instruction, 16(3), 183-198.
Bencloski, J.W., & Heyl, R.J. (1985). Teaching plate tectonics with the aid of a model of seafloor dynamics. Journal
         of Geological Education, 33, 274-276.
Clark, D. B., Varma, K., McElhaney, K., & Chiu, J. (2008). Structure and design rationale within TELS projects to
         support knowledge integration. In D. Robinson and G. Schraw (Eds.), Recent Innovations in Educational
         Technology      that   F acilitate  Student   Learning:      Perspectives   on     Cognition,  Learning,    and
         Instruction.   Information Age Publishing; Charlotte, NC.
Gobert,  J. D. (2000).    A   Typology  of   Causal  Models   for  Plate  Tectonics: Inferential Power   and Barriers  to
         Understanding. International Journal of Science Education, 22(9), 937-977.
Linn, M. C., Eylon, B. =S., & Davis, E. A. (2004). The knowledge integration perspective on learning. In M. C.
         Linn, E. A. Davis, & P. Bell (Eds.), Internet environments for science education (pp. 29-46). Mahwah, NJ:
         Erlbaum.
Linn, M. C., Lee, H.=S., Tinker, R., Husic, F., & Chiu, J. L. (2006). Teaching and assessing knowledge integration.
         Science, 313, 1049-1050.

                                                       434     ISLS
