                                                   ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 2

   Investigating the Nature of Evidence 6th Grade Students Use When
               Constructing Scientific Explanations in Biodiversity

       Hayat Hokayem, Amelia Gotwals, Michigan State University, Erickson Hall, East Lansing, 48824, MI,
                                     Email: alhokaye@msu.edu, gotwals@msu.edu

         Abstract: This paper investigates the nature of evidence that six grade students use when constructing
         scientific explanations in biodiversity situations. We employ a coding scheme that specifically targets the
         coherence of students' arguments and the way students use inscriptions when completing tasks. We found
         out that students use inscriptions differently depending on the nature of the inscription and that oftentimes,
         students' explanations have logical coherent reasoning regardless of scientifically accepted answers.

Introduction
         Toulmin (1958) characterizes scientific arguments by a claim that is backed up by data that warrants the
claim, and reasoning that explains how data or evidence supports the claim. This pattern has been widely used in the
literature as a way to teach students how to construct scientific explanations. In their recent article, Songer and
Gotwals (2009) describe a learning progression of ideas in classification, ecology and biodiversity and how those
ideas can progress over three grades ­ 4th, 5th and 6th. Parallel with this content progression is the progression in
inquiry skills, which is manifested with a four level progression describing increasingly sophisticated explanations,
with each level also containing elements of scaffolding to guide students in their development. Moreover, Gotwals
&  Songer  (in press)   discuss  the trajectories  students   follow  in order  to reason   about biodiversity  issues  and
categorize several kinds of reasoning that they call "middle knowledges" which are elicited by using assessment
items based on writing scientific explanations. They found that even when students are scaffolded in formulating
scientific explanations, there still existed "messy middle" knowledge, where students may understand content in
certain types of situations, but not others. Also, even when students understood the science content in the tasks,
constructing sound scientific explanations was often still difficult. Sandoval (2003) found that when learning about
natural selection, students   often failed to cite sufficient   evidence   to support their claim  because  they  failed to
recognize the importance of being explicit with evidence. He also found out that sometimes students' explanations
were "coherent"; that is logical, even though they were not the "correct" scientific answer. Moreover, in later work,
Sandoval  and  Millwood   (2005)    recognized that  students   often  treated inscriptions in  different ways  when   they
considered them as evidence. For example, some students would consider the mere presence of a representation
enough to consider it as evidence, and many times failed to explicitly explain how a certain representation provided
evidence  for the  claim. This   work  investigates  the   difficulty that students have  when    they structure  scientific
explanations in ecology, and investigates the kinds of evidence that students use to back up their claim, specifically
looking for coherence in the explanation.     The work can also help to inform the literature about the pathways that
students take  as  they learn to formulate  more   sophisticated  scientific   explanations in  ecology.   We   address  the
following research questions:
    a-   How coherent are the students' claims in relation to evidence regardless of scientific correctness?
    b-   How do students use inscriptions as data or evidence to support their claims?

Method and Data Analysis
         This work examines 6th grade students' written responses to assessment items who have participated in an
inquiry-based biodiversity curriculum. The curriculum and assessment items were administered in six sections of 6th
grade classrooms for a total of 170 students. The test contained 9 items which included questions about biodiversity
with some multiple choice and food web questions in addition to complex scientific questions that required students
to provide claim,  evidence   and   reasoning  for their answers.  Originally,  we  coded   the items  using  a rubric  that
focused mainly on scientific correctness, with codes from 0 to 4, with 4 being the highest code for correct scientific
claim  backed  up  by   correct evidence   and reasoning.    For our   current  purpose, we  recoded   all of the selected
questions based on whether there was a logical explanation with a claim backed by a logical evidence and/or logical
reasoning. For example, even if the student did not give the scientifically correct answer, we still look at the logic of
the explanation. Therefore in response to a question about destiny of large fish if all small fish in a pond, the student
who answered: "All of the large fish in the pond will have to adapt to something else or they will die" has a logical
claim even if this claim is not what the "correct" answer is. In order to further probe how students use inscriptions,
we choose to examine item 9 that has two bar graphs of organisms in different habitats where students need to

                                                       435  ·  © ISLS
                                                  ICLS 2010  ·   Volume 2

interpret the graphs in order to make a claim about which habitat likely has more food and shelter. Our new rubric
distinguishes between   the different ways   students use   the  graph as  evidence: those who  don't  use the  graph  as
evidence, those who just mention that the evidence is in the graph, those who observe the higher bars in one graph
and mention that their evidence is the graph with higher bars, and finally those who are able to interpret the bar
graphs and mention how that supports their original claim.

Findings and Implications
         The results indicate that even when students don't have the "right" answer, many are still reasoning
logically about the questions and could either provide a logical claim or a logical claim backed up by logical
reasoning and/or logical evidence. Due     to space limitations we illustrate our point with examples from two
questions. In item 2, which asks what happens to algae in a pond if fertilizers were added; the majority of answers
which were scientifically incorrect had logical reasoning. A representative answer for this category is:
         The algae would decrease because the river would dry up. By things you put in river it would affect the
         soil and soil will increase and dry up the river (DTF08550111)
Note that the logic of the student above is based on an idea that the fertilizer affects the soil and the reasoning and
evidence are based on common sense logic. It is probably safe to say that the student does not understand what a
fertilizer does to the soil, but even with that, the student was able to make logical guesses that if it made the soil
increase, then that is harmful for the algae thinking that it might take over the algae and make it decrease.
         With regard to how students used inscriptions in item 9 with bar graphs comparing organisms found in two
habitats, we found that the majority of students' responses somehow referenced the graph as evidence; however,
many students were not explicit in comparing the numbers of different organisms between habitats. For example a
common answer is represented by:
         Habitat  B,  because  you    just look at  it, if   you look  at  the charts  one  is higher  than   the   others
         (DTF08550303)
         The answer above is probably a necessary step in reasoning about the graph but it is insufficient to explain
why one had more shelter than the other; that is, it does not explicitly specify what those bars are and how that is
related to food and shelter. Moreover, we found out that while many students used some type of evidence from the
graphs to answer the question, no student included scientific reasoning linking the evidence to the claim; they often
just reiterated the evidence from graphs for the reasoning. An interesting dichotomy in our results was how very few
students were   able to mention correct    evidence for   item   2  (what would  happen  to algae with    the addition of
fertilizer) while many students referenced some evidence in item 9 (comparing organisms across habitats), but very
few students were able to mention correct reasoning. One possible explanation for this result is that the evidence for
question 2 did not originate from the representation; rather, the student had to know that fertilizers make algae grow.
In contrast, in item  9 almost all students   used  the graph    as evidence   (even when  they did   not use  that graph
correctly), but were not able to mention correct reasoning because it somehow required relating it to the concept of
biodiversity, something that was not explicitly evident in the question.
         The different types of evidence used in the assessment items originated either from inscriptions (like bar
graphs, or biological diagrams), individual experiences, knowledge of scientific phenomena, or what students learnt
in the classroom. Many of students' responses were logically plausible even if they were not scientifically accurate.
These findings compliment and add to the types of "messy middles" that Gotwals & Songer (in press) mention.
Better understanding what types of messy middles students have helps to inform how educators can support students
in moving from where they are to more sophisticated scientific reasoning, both in terms in content and reasoning.

References
Gotwals, A., & Songer, N. (in press). Reasoning up and down a food chain: Using and assessment framework to
         investigate students' middle knowledge.    Science Education.
Sandoval, W.    (2003). Conceptual    and  Epistemic  aspects    of students conceptual Explanations.   The   Journal  of
      Learning Sciences, 12(1), 5-51.
Sandoval, W., & Millwood, K. (2005). The quality of students' use of evidence in written scientific explanations.
      Cognition and Instruction, 23(1), 23-55.
Songer, N., Kelcey, B., & Gotwals, A. (2009). How and when does complex reasoning occur? Empirically driven
         development of a learning progressing focused on complex reasoning and biodiversity. Journal of Research
         in Science Teaching 46, 610-631.
Toulmin, S. (1958). The Uses of Argument. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.

                                                      436  ·  © ISLS
