                                                 ICLS 2010    ·  Volume 1

            "Ideas First" in Collaborative Second Language (L2)Writing:
                                          An Exploratory Study

                                        Yun Wen, Wenli Chen, Chee-Kit Looi
         Learning Sciences Lab, National Institute of Educaiton, 1, Nanyang Walk, Singapore 637616
                 Email: yun.wen@nie.edu.sg,wenli.chen@nie.edu.sg, cheekit.looi@nie.edu.sg,

        Abstract:       Drawing    from   sociocultural    perspectives,   this    paper argues  for  the   necessity   of
        distinguishing the activity of "brainstorming idea"s from the activity of "generating words/phrases"ni
        collaborative L2 process writing. We designed a seires of Chinese writing lessons based on the online
        collaborative    learning    software     GroupScribbles     (GS) to     explore   students'  participation    and
        performance     with   "ideas   first" versus   "words/phrasse    first"   activity  designs.   Quantitative   data
        collected   from  an   analytical   tool  reveal   that students engaged    more   actively  in the  "ideas    first"
        collaborative L2 writing than in the "words/phrasesfirst" approach.          Our research findings suggest that
        "ideas   first" supported    by the affordances      of the  GS  tools a viable  approach   for collaborative   L2
        writing.

Introduction
Collaborative  learning   has  been  considered    to  be  one  of  the  effective instructional strategies  in language
learning. It "has a `social constructivist' philosophical base, which views learning as construction of knowledge
within a social context and which therefore encourages acculturation of individuals into a learning community"
(Oxford, 1997, p 443). As an approach based on thisnotion, collaborative second language (L2) writingis a
recursive, bottom-up process that requires participants to collaboratively contribute words/phrases orideas, and
eventually compose their compositions in individuasl or groups. Although brainstorming as the fundamental
pre-writing activity has been emphasized in variousmodels of the writing process, almost all the modles are
established based on work in first language (L1) wirting. Brainstorming is considered as an idea-genearting
technique which is an enabler for creative thinkin.g When models incorporating brainstorming are utilzied to
guide L2 writing, there is a salient contradictionbetween L2 writers' ideas expressions and their limited target
language proficiency. Some researchers propose themodel for collaborative writing process with vocabulary
first at the initial step (e.g., Wong, et. al., 2009). In practical collaborative L2 writing activitise, the teacher
typically encourages the students to write down asmuch as they are able to without foregrounding idesa or
words/phases contributions. In fact, for L2 writer,s their low proficiency of the target language oftne requires
them to focus primarily on vocabulary and grammara,nd hence hampers ideas generation and expression S(cott,
1996; Stapa & Majid, 2009).
        Ideas could take the form of arguments or evidences for an argumentation; they could be inspirationsor
original thoughts for a narration as well. We use hte term "Ideas first" to refer to a particular desgin of the
writing activity which foregrounds the content of di eas rather than their expressions or representations in some
language. Students are encouraged to express own ideas related to a general topic in multimodal ways.For
Chinese  language    learners, not   only Chinese     characetrs,  but  Hanyu    Pinyin  (Chinese   phonetics)  and    even
drawings can be accepted. Figure 1 (left) shows examples of artifacts manifesting "ideas" in this typeof activity
for the topic of: "Adolescent smoking is an increaisng serious problem; discuss reasons for that". Figure 1 (right)
shows   the  artifacts manifesting   in "words/phrases" for      the  same topic.   The   "words/phrases    first" actiivty
foregrounds and requires knowledge of the target language, thus emphasizing more on rhetorical structrues and
grammar. Students are encouraged to contribute Chinese idioms or proverbs related to the topic, or proper nouns
or terms or vocabulary which can be used in the gievn context, or various adjectives or verb phrases helpful for
composing more precise and vivid expressions. For astudent with higher target language proficiency, hse or he
may more automatically think of words related to the topic or the context. On the contrary, low profiicency
students have a high propensity for weak or no paritcipation. Therefore, it seems that the "ideas firts" pedagogy
should be distinguished from the "words/phrases fisrt" pedagogy, to enable active participation at thebeginning
stage of the L2 collaborative writing process.
        We    propose   that "ideas  first" is  a more    effective approach   to  engage   L2 learners  in collaborative
writing activities. Our  study  sets  out to   investigtae students'   participation in  the "ideas  first" acitvities and
"words/phrases first" activities respectively. It nivolves four L2 writing lessons with two differentpedagogical
designs: two writing lessons involve "ideas first"activities and another two lessons involve "vocabualry first"
activities.  All the   collaborative activities   are neabled   on a software    platform named   GroupScribbles (GS),
which can facilitate peer online communication andideas/vocabularies brainstorming and sharing.

                                                      436  ·   © ISLS
                                               ICLS 2010  ·   Volume 1

              Figure 1. Examples of artifacts from "ideas first" vs. "worsd/phrases first" activities

The Viability and Importance of "Ideas First"
Many psycholinguists or neuropsychologists hold theview that a person's knowledge of vocabulary is sotred in
his  or her mental    lexicon (Harley, 2008),   whereas   di eas may  be  stored as  concepts   and images     not yet
formulated in words, and can be represented in anyform of language. From this theoretical perspectiv,eit seems
that the capacity   for ideas generation could   be  separate from   language  proficiency. When    describing   their
classical model for cognitive process writing, Flower and Hayes (1981) argue that the process of convreting
ideas into words on paper is analogous to translatnig, demanding writers to put abstract thoughts through the
technical aspects of writing such as grammatical srtuctures. When cognitive load is not expended on vocabulary
and  language  structure, the  enthusiasm    and capacity of  L2   writers to engage   in writing   and   group work
participation could be enhanced. Hence, when "ideasfirst" approach is adopted, there can be more opportunities
to exploit participants' creative potential.
         Traditionally, writing is regarded as a ``non-linaer, exploratory and generative process whereby wrietrs
discover and reformulate their ideas as they attempt to approximate meaning'' (Zamel, 1983, p. 165), nad ideas
come from stored knowledge and experiences directlyrelated to the writing topic. However, this tradiitonal
cognitive approach is too narrow in its understandni g of social, historical and political contexts ofwriting (Prior,
2006). Today, with the sociocultural theory being more pervasive in the field of second language learinng, there
are more concerns over the role of social interactoin in students' cognitive development and languagelearning.
A central hypothesis underpins the sociocultural theory of human development whereby higher-order functions
develop out of the social interaction of an individual with the external social world (Tharp & Gallimore, 1988)
that includes people, objects, and events in the environment. In this view, language as one of the mots crucial
human    artifacts is thought  to be socially   construcetd rather  than  internally intrinsic (Thorne,   2000). The
participation metaphor    of  learning has   been  widely accepted,    which  refers  to  learning  as  a process   of
participation in   shared learning   activities  and social  process   of  knowledge   construction    (Sfard,  1998.)
Accordingly, rather than interpreted as internal mental processes solely by the individuals, languagelearning is
viewed as a semiotic process attributable to partiicpation in social activities (Block, 2003; Lantolf,2000; Lantolf
& Thorne, 2006). Therefore "ideas" that can be experssed and shared do play a bigger role and is critcial to the
creativeness of a learning community. The productino and continual improvement of ideas that have value to a
community is based on the premise that what the community accomplishes will be greater than the sum of
individual contributions and part of broader cultuarl efforts (Scardamalia & Bereiter, 2003).
         Collaborative writing should be seen beyond beingjust a mere instructional strategy with the obvious
advantage that "two heads are better than one". Thecollaborative writing process could be regarded asa process
of meaning-making in which language learning and cognitive development occur in the sociocultural actviities
of participants' community. This is aligned with the emphasis of Scardamalia and Bereiter's (1987) process
writing model that makes the transition from knowldege telling to knowledge transforming.

An Intervention Study

Participants
The study described here is part of a 3-year project to introduce rapid knowledge building practices ot primary
and secondary schools in Singapore (Looi, Chen & Ng, 2009). We co-designed and implemented GS-based
collaborative lesson activities with school teachesr for students' Science, Mathematics and Chinese language
learning. In our work, we investigated useful pedagogies and teaching strategies that tap on the affodr ances of
GS. This paper focuses on the collaborative L2 writng lessons with two types of pedagogical designs by using
GS in secondary 3 (grade 9, 15-year old) normal Chniese language learning. In Singapore schools, Englsih as

                                                   437  ·   © ISLS
                                               ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

the first language (L1) is the main teaching language in schools, whereas Chinese is taught as a second language
(L2) for the Chinese ethnic students. In this stud,y the Chinese language class consists of 29 studenst. The
students were organized into 7 groups (each group has 4 students, except a group with 5 students) in order to
participate in the GS activities. Before the GS-baesd writing lessons, this class had been involved inour project
for more than half a year (one GS lesson per week),and so they would have been enculturated with theGS
environment and collaborative practices enabled byit (Looi, Chen, & Patton, submitted).

GS interface and affordances
The lower pane is the user's personal work area, or"private board", with a virtual pad of fresh "scrbible sheets"
on which the user can draw or type (see Figure 2.) Scribble sheets are the digital equivalent of smal sticky notes
that enable a lightweight scribbling to be made onthe note. The essential feature of the GS is the combination of
the private board where students can work individulaly and group boards or "public boards" where studnets can
post the work and position relative to others', view others' work, and take items back to the privateboard for
further elaboration. Students can choose any mode htey feel comfortable to express their ideas throughtyping,
writing by stylus or even drawing on the pad, andhten post the pad onto the group or public board toshare with
others. A student can select any group board by clciking the board number on the right-top, and browseall other
groups' postings posted on the public board. GS hecne promotes and facilitates intra- and inter-groupsharing of
ideas/information.

                        Figure 2. The user interface of GS with a two-paned window

         GS is designed for students' collaborative generation, collection and aggregation of ideas through a
shared  space based upon individual     effort and social sharing of  notes. Our research work seeks to tapthe
potential of GS for supporting L2 learning. In language learning, the task posed for collaborative acitvities does
not focus on problem-solving, but it may be targetde towards enriching students' vocabulary and profiicency in
language expression, developing their thoughts andwriting through cogitating with new words, vocabulray and
sentence construction (Looi, Chen & Wen, 2009). Whne exploring the affordances of GS for Chinese language
learning, we find that the affordance of "lightweight participation" fits L2 learners very well. For L2 learners, it
is not only difficult for them to express themselves in complicate long sentences, but also difficultfor them to
extract main points from long paragraphs in a shortperiod of time. By `lightweight' we mean each student's
contribution or post can be composed (written, skecthed, or typed) quickly in a small size of scribblesheet.
Both fragments of ideas and diversified words/phraess can be represented in scribble sheets. They canbe shared
democratically, organized conveniently and improvedcontinuously.

Lesson design
This study examines the differences of "idea first"pedagogy and the "words/phrases first" pedagogy instudents
L2 collaborative writing. Four GS-based Chinese wrtiing lessons (each of 70 minutes) were co-designedby the
teacher and researchers. The topic for the lessons1 and 2 was "why do Singaporeans feel discontented?", and
the task for lessons 3 and 4 was to make a story bsaed on the context that "when you see your classmaets
Xiaowei and Xiaoli whispering at the school gate, what will you think of?" The topics are designed tobe
relevant to the students' daily life.
         In lesson 1, students were required to start collaborative L2 writing by first brainstorming ideas onthe
GS platform. In lesson 2, students first organizedtheir ideas and then selected a few good ones to befurther
developed  into paragraphs through      GS. In the "ideasfirst" activity, they were reminded  that any modeof
expressing ideas is acceptable. Every student couldhave an equal opportunity to participate in collaborative
writing, including not only generating and sharingideas, but also improving these ideas by negotiating with
others.

                                                   438  ·  © ISLS
                                              ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

          One week later in lesson 3, the students were asked to start collaborative L2 writing by generating
words/phrases related to a new topic to explore story plots. In lesson 4, they wrote the main paragrahps with the
collected words/phrases in lesson 3. In the "wordsp/ hrases" activity, students were encouraged to conrtibute
suitable Chinese words/phrases that could be adoptde directly in the final writing. In the process ofinteracting
with others, students could enlarge their vocabulaires and equip themselves with better understandingof the
collected words/phrases.
          In lessons 1 and 3, students were given examples about ideas on the story and words/phrases related ot
the topic respectively before the GS activities. Frolesson 1, students might be able to come up withmore ideas
as they were not bogged down by the confusion betwen linguistic information and ideas on the topic (Scott,
1996). During each lesson, a short duration of time(around 20 minutes) was allocated for the studentsto do a
"virtual gallery walk" via scanning the boards of toher groups in GS. Each student could proffer comments or
"borrow" or build on good ideas/words from other gorups. After lessons 2 and 4, the teacher printed out each
group's final products (GS screen capture) for thestudents who were then required to individually wrtie the
composition.

Data Analysis
The analysis of this study includes two parts. In hte first part, the GS analytic tool is deployed toprobe the
students'  engagement   levels  within a   lesson. This   naalytic tool is  a program   developed   by   us to   extratc
quantitative information which serves as a proxy for the participation levels of each student in the GS activities.
The second part focuses on examining group performnace differences under the two pedagogical approaches.
          Figure 3 and 4 show the students' participation inGS activities in lesson 1 ("ideas first" activity)and
lesson 3 ("words first" activity) respectively. Thehorizontal axis represents the time of the class period using an
interval of 6 minutes. The  vertical axis is the aggregate count of  all students' actions (including yt ping, drawing,
moving postings etc) on the GS boards. When examinnig the students' GS actions in the first 6 minutes,we
found that students had more participation in the GS based collaborative L2 writing in the "ideas firts" activity
than in the "words first" activity.  There were aottal of 10030 actions in lesson 1 and 9851 actionsin lesson 3.
The data perhaps does not mean that the class students posted a larger number of scribble sheets in the ideas first
activity, but  it implies that  there were   more  studnets' participations   or   interactions via GS.  They    mgiht
contribute more actively, or click on other postings and modify the postings of their peers more frequently.

              Figure 3. Count of whole class's actions on GS board in lesosn 1 "ideas first" activity

              Figure 4. Count of whole class's actions on GS boards in leson 3 "words first" activity

          We  further  analyzed the   data from    two groups,     namley, group 1  and group    6  (See table   1), to
investigate different Chinese language proficiencygroups' performances in the same activity. Both gruops had a
homogenous team composition with 4 students, and the team members were chosen based on their Chinese
subject exam results before using GS (class averagescore was 57).       The students' Chinese language proficiency
in group 1 (with an average score of 51) is much lwo er than the students from group 6 (with an averagescore of
62).
          Both groups reported good intra-group collaboratoi n. In their post-lesson reflections, students from
group 1 wrote that "my group can collaborate well nad complete a task together...can communicate well...

                                                   439  ·  © ISLS
                                               ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

correct each other  mistakes     and  try to improve   each other's   Chinese".  Likewise,   students  from   group 6
considered their group   as   "a good  one"   and  "a  quiteefficient group".   Students' comments    on  their group
collaboration are consistent with the judgment of ht e researchers based on the classroom observation.

Table 1. The information of two target groups

Target                               Group Configuration                            Group    culture  of
Group       Division          Group members             Proficiency in Chinese      collaboration
Group 1     homogenous        4 (2 girls and 2 boys)    Low                          Good
Group 6     homogenous        4 (3 girls and 1 boys)    High                         Godo

         Figure  5 compares      the participation levels   of two    groups in the  "ideas  first"  activity and the
"words/phrases   first" activity. We   note   that the  dfiference in  language   proficiencies   has impact   on the
participation levels of two groups. Group 1 studenst (an average of 20 actions per 6 minutes) seems tobe more
active in the "ideas first" activity than group 6 tsudents (an average of 17 actions per 6 minutes) though group
1's members have lower language proficiencies thanthat of group 6. The difference in participation levels
between the 2 groups in the "words/phrases first" activity was not prominent (both on the average 18 actions per
6 minutes).  It seems    that compared     with  students form  high  language   proficiency  group,   low    language
proficiency group students were more active in "idaes first" activity. A plausible explanation is thatthey were
less limited by language proficiency in "ideas firts" activity since they were allowed to use drawingsor their
first language to express their ideas.

        Lesson 1 Group 1's Participation Level                     Lesson 1 Group 6's Participation Level

        Lesson 3 Group 1's Participation Level                     Lesson 3 Group 6's Participation Level

             Figure 5. Group participation in "ideas first" activityvs "words/phrases first" activity

         As shared by the teacher, the weaker ability groupstypically had very low motivation to participate ni
Chinese writing activities. However, after the impelmentation of the "ideas first" activity, she said"I did not
expect the weaker ability groups could complete thetask well". The final GS artifacts of group 1 (Fiugre 6)
were better than the artifacts from other higher ability groups in the "ideas first" activity in termsof richness of
ideas and the logic of the ideas. The upper sectionof the screen shows three arguments for the topic"why do
Singaporeans feel discontented?" (circled in dottedlines). The lower section shows three solutions toexplain the
issue at hand (highlighted by dotted rectangles). Other scattered postings were the comments given byother
groups  when they   were   visiting  group   1's board.  Onthe  whole,   after  the activity of idea  generation  adn
modification in lesson 1, the final GS product of rgoup 1 was well-organized, although some sentenceswere
expressed in an awkward style.
         The group selected specific individual ideas and developed them further through idea refinement and
group negotiations into arguments why Singaporeansfeel not contented.         For example, the contributionof "!"
#$too high tax rate%", referring to the sales tax, was first mooted bygroup 1 but was never been mentioned
by other groups before the gallery work. In the acitvity of brainstorming ideas, a girl in the groupifrst generated
it in English, and then a boy translated it into Chinese. Later with the help of teacher, they posted""&!'(

                                                   440  ·  © ISLS
                                            ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

$too much taxes to pay%". Finally in lesson 2, they generated the argumentwhich we highlighted by the
dotted ellipse at the right-top of the Figure 6, namely, that "Singaporeans always worry about the high tax rate
as high taxes made it less affordable to eke out aliving." When challenged by other groups to explainwhy
reducing the sales tax would make people feel contneted, they clarified that "if the government reducse the tax,
it becomes more affordable for the people to make purchases".

                      Figure 6. GS screenshot from Group 1 after the "ideas first"activity

         In the "words/phrases first" activity, the weaknessin language proficiency of group 1 became evident
when they were generating words in lesson 1. Figure7 displays the products of the two groups at the end of the
words/phrases contribution phase. The left side ofthe figure shows the words and phrases generated bygroup 1,
and the right side shows those from the higher abiilty group. For the benefit of the reader, we circled and
translated some simple words posted by two groups,and highlighted comparatively complicated words and
idioms within rectangles. Words and phrases from    gorup 1 were much simpler than those   from group 6. From a
scan of the notes' colours (different students posetd in different colours), we found that for both gor ups, the
activity of posting  words and phrases  were dominatde    by   one group member    who     had higher language
proficiency in the group. In this type of activity,it was difficult to achieve democratic participatoin within the
group collaboration  as some students were restrainde  by  their individual language proficiency.  In lesosn 4,
during the process of extending words and phrases nito paragraphs, little creativity could be identifeid from the
students' work. This was despite the fact that teacher had constantly reminded the students: "I wouldlike to see
more creative stories... do not give me the same stoires." Six groups of students wrote similar love stories which
were rather cliché.

                                                441  ·  © ISLS
                                               ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

                  Figure 7. The GS screenshot of two groups in the "words/phrases first" activity

Discussion & Conclusion
The collaborative L2 writing is a complex process which can be affected by various factors. This paperfocuses
research  effort on  the role  of ideas generation  in collaborative    L2  writing. Two   GS-based   Chinese wriitng
lessons, with the "ideas first" and "words/phrasesfirst" activity designs, are compared. The findingssuggest that
the "ideas first" activity is a viable approach forcollaborative L2 writing. Students especially thoes who do not
have good language proficiency more actively partiicpated in the collaborative L2 writing "ideas firs"t activity.
GS artifacts arising from the two different learning activities also provide evidences that the "ideasfirst" activity
encouraged more symmetric participation from students, and engendered more creativity in their writing.
          The affordances of GS, "multimodal expression" provides the students more modalities to engage in
the "ideas first" activities, whereas in the "word/sphrases first" the opportunity of participation is"reduced" to
words,  and   which   may   generally   result less class    atcions on  the  GS    board. In  addition, "lightweight
participation", plays an important role in student's collaborative L2 writing. Due to the size limit of scribble
sheet, students  have   to use brief and  recapitulative   phrases   or sentences   to express their ideas in the GS
environment. It does not matter if the ideas are nto mature. The smallness of scribble sheet encourages every
individual to think and share actively, by emphasizing "ideas" rather than language proficiency. Furthermore,
the students do not need to worry about the organiaztions of the ideas at the beginning. In a mature elarning
community, diversified forms of expression could betransformed and organized at the later stage of the learning
activity. During this process, new ideas are genertaed, refined and improved continuously. As the GS cativity
supports inter-group interactions, ideas could be ps read throughout the whole class. A number of studei s (e.g.,
Lockhart & Ng, 1995; Nelson & Carson, 1998) have shown that when students are involved in L2 collabortaive
writing, they tend to edit the vocabulary or grammatical errors of their peers. Thus, initial representations of
ideas  do have   the opportunities   of being  continuoulsy  polished,    and  that  enables students to  write beter
individual compositions eventually. On the contrary, in the "words/phrases first" activity, the students have to
rely  much    on  their language   proficiency.  Even    thouhg L2    learners  can  participate in  the group    work
anonymously, they may not be able to generate wordp/hrases effectively due to their low language profciiency.
Thus students' symmetric participation in the learning activities may still be hindered when the writnig activity
starts from the words/phrases contribution.
          This study is exploratory in nature. Our school-baesd research is still ongoing and we plan to explore
further how the ideas or words spread and are improved upon within and across different student groupsin the
collaborative L2 writing activities.

References
Block, D. (2003). The social turn in second language acquisition. Washington, DC: Georgetown University
          Press.
Flower,   L., &   Hayes,   J. R.  (1981).  A   cognitive   process   theory  of writing. College   Composition    and
          Communication. 32 (4). 365-387.

                                                   442   ·  © ISLS
                                              ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

Harley, T. A. (2008).The psychology of language.USA, New York: Psychology Press.
Lantolf,   J.  (2000). Introducing sociocultural  theory. In J.  Lantolf (Ed.), Sociocultural Theory   and  Second
         Language Acquisition, Chapter 1 (pp. 1-26). Oxford: Oxford University
Lantolf, J. P., & Thorne, S. L. (2006).Sociocultural Theory and the Genesis of Second Lanugage Development.
         Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Lockhart, C. and Ng, P. (1995). Analyzing talk in ESL peer response groups: Stances, functions and content,
         Language learning 45 (4), pp. 605­655.
Looi, C.K.,    Chen, W.,  &  Ng,   F. K. (2009).  Collabortaive  activities enabled by  GroupScribbles   (GS): An
         exploratory      study    of    learning     effectiveness.    Computers      &     Education     (2009),
         doi:10.1016/j.compedu.2009.07.003.
Looi, C.K., Chen, W., & Wen, Y. (2009). Exploring erpresentational practices interactional moves in aCSCL
         Environment for Chinese Language Learning,Proceedings of CSCL 2009, ISLS.
Looi, C.K., Chen, W., & Patton, C. (submitted) Rapdi collaborative knowledge building. Paper submittedto
         Educational Technology.
Nelson, G. L., & Carson, J. G. (1998). ESL student's perceptions of effectiveness in peer response gruops,
         Journal of Second Language Writing 7(2), pp. 113­131.
Oxford,  R.   L. (1997).  Cooperative  learning,  collaborative  learning,  and interaction: Three communicatvi e
         strands in the language classroom. The Modern Language Journal, 81(iv), 443-458.
Prior, P. (2006). A sociocultural theory of writing. In C. A. MacArthur, S. Graham, & J. Fitzgerald (Eds.),
         Handbook of Writing Research(pp. 54­66). New York: The Guilford Press.
Scott, V.M. (1996).Rethinking Foreign Language Writing. Boston: Heinle & Heinle.
Scardamalia, M., & Bereiter, C. (2003). Knowledge Building. In In Encyclopedia of Education, Second Edition
         (pp. 1370-1373). USA: New York: Macmillan Reference.
Scardamalia, M. & Bereiter, C. (1987) Knowledge teling and knowledge transforming in written composiiton.
         In S. Rosenberg (Ed.) Advances in Applied Psycholinguistics, Vol. 2. pp. 142-175
Sfard, A. (1998). On two metaphors for learning onthe danger of choosing just one.Educational Research, 27
         (2), 4-13.
Stapa, S. H., & Majid, A. H. A. (2009). The use offirst language in developing ideas in second language writing.
         European Journal of Social Sciences, 7(4), 41-48.
Tharp, R. G., & Gallimore, R. (1988).Rousing Minds to Life: Teaching, Learning, and Schooling in Social
         Context. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Thorne, S. L. (2000). Second language acquisition hteory and the truth(s) about relativity In J. Lantlof (Ed.),
         Sociocultural Theory and Second Language Learning(pp. 219-243): Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Wong,   L. H.,   Chin, C. K., Chen,   W., &  Gao,  P.   (2009). V.S.P.O.W.:   An  innovative  collaborative writing
         approach to improve Chinese as L2 pupils' linguistci skills. Proceedings of CSCL 2009, Rhodes Island,
         Greece.
Zuengler,  J., &  Miller, E.  R. (2006).  Cognitive   and sociocultural  perspectives: Two   parallel SLA   worlsd?
         TESOL Quarterly, 40 (1). 35-59.

Acknowledgements
This material is based on the work supported by theNational Science Foundation (United States) underGrants
0427783 and 0713711 and by the National Research Foundation (Singapore) under Grant NRF2007-IDM003-
MOE-001. The GS software is available as a free download by SRI International and the National Institute of
Education (Singapore). We are also grateful to Whiltey Secondary School (Singapore) for collaboratingwith us
on this research.

                                                  443  ·   © ISLS
