                                           ICLS 2010    Volume 2

The Function of Mathematical Terminology: The Case of `Slope'
                         Darrell Earnest, UC Berkeley, dearnest@berkeley.edu

      Abstract:   This  poster presents a case study     of one   Grade 6 student  to illustrate and
       consider the role of introducing key mathematical terminology as a semiotic means to
       objectify mathematical ideas at hand  (Radford, 2003). The poster describes how in two
       classrooms mathematical terminology provided a context for discussing graphs of linear
       functions, whereas  everyday  language      used  for  the  same   mathematics   resulted   in
       ambiguous or unproductive discussion.       As a component of an eight-day unit, students
       (n=50) were introduced to the word form slope to describe and compare linear functions.
       The case reported here presents a student before and after the introduction of the word
       slope.  Interviews  provide reason   to consider     the   productive role  of mathematical
       terminology in the development of mathematical understandings.

       In this poster, I provide an example of a mathematical term, slope, functioning as a semiotic
means of objectifying (Radford, 2003) the mathematical properties of slope. The case described here gives
examples of one student providing responses that are mathematically normative when using technical
terms, yet ambiguous or incorrect when using everyday terms to describe the same mathematics. While to
many having an appropriate word to describe an applicable phenomenon may seem obvious or
straightforward, there is a complex phenomenon in mathematics education.     Symbol systems and other
semiotic forms, including terminology, may be difficult to teach to students who have not yet grasped the
concepts that the symbols or terms represent; nevertheless, the concepts may be difficult to teach to
students who have not yet mastered the symbols or terms (Uttal, Scudder &    DeLoache, 1997).    One task of
mathematics educators is to address this tension and determine instructional techniques to overcome this
paradox. The poster presents a case study in which a Grade 6 student, Carolyn, uses mathematical and
everyday terminology to describe linear functions on a graph. In particular, the word form slope provided a
way to talk about the rate of change of each function in a way that everyday terms--such as words like
faster or steeper that proliferated throughout this instructional sequence--left unclear. The case illustrates
the semiotic role of specific mathematical terminology in mathematics meaning making and conversely the
ambiguity everyday language can bring to bear on the same mathematics.
       For the purposes of this study, slope was defined as the ratio, of one variable to another.
Instruction often fails to connect the value of slope to qualitative descriptions of linear functions. Slope is
often taught in a strictly procedural way, the result of which is a reduction of the concept of slope to a
formula without any foundation in patterns of change.   Caddle and Earnest (2009) reported on Grade 7 and
8 students reciting various formula for slope who then failed to connect these ideas to a ratio of change in a
particular story context, displaying some of the pitfalls of having learned slope only as a procedure without
conceptual grounding. Likewise, Moschkovich (1996) described Algebra 1 students successfully refining
everyday terminology involving the ideas of slope without the technical term; at the same time, she
acknowledged that everyday terms, such as steeper or less steep, "that may be sufficiently precise for
everyday purposes proved to be ambiguous for describing lines in the context of a mathematical
discussion" (273). Yet unanswered is the question of when the introduction of such terminology may
behoove students in their inquiry into graphing. The introduction of the word form slope to the classroom
discourse served as a semiotic means of objectifying (Radford, 2003) the rate of change of a function, with
student interviews serving as data points to determine how students might have appropriated such a term.
       Since slope is a core idea to the study of linear functions, I focus on this concept and the possible
semiotic means that can be used by students to objectify their emerging understandings of this concept. The
research question guiding the design and subsequent analysis of this study included:  How might the
technical term slope serve as a semiotic means to objectify mathematical ideas of slope?
Theoretical Framing
       Given the underlying focus on semiotics, the analysis demands a framework that allows for
detailed exploration of meaning ascribed to particular representational features. For this reason, I use
Saxe's form-function framework (Saxe, 2004; Saxe & Esmonde, 2005), a cultural development framework
that provides an analytic foothold on various semiotic means of objectification as they emerge and shift in
activity. The framework provides a way to describe how the same ostensible form may have varied

                                               437     ISLS
                                              ICLS 2010    Volume 2

meanings across individuals at a point in time, while at the same time, one particular function, such as
comparing trends in two linear functions, may be satisfied by various forms across individuals.
        Forms are the various artifacts that can be found and used in a particular setting; in a mathematics
classroom, forms can  be various symbols or artifacts.   They may range from components of written
representations, such as a tickmark on a number line or an axis on a graph, to a specific word form, for
example, even or odd, or in this case study, slope, faster, or steepness. These forms have meanings that are
negotiated in social activity. Function refers to the use of a form in activity.  The functions of such forms
may vary across individuals.   At the same time, there may    be a culturally normative function associated
with a given  form in the context of a particular activity. The analysis makes use of this framework by
considering word forms and the various functions the forms may be serving to the focal student.
Methods and Materials
        The case study was drawn from a larger data corpus, a study that involved a sample of 50 Grade 6
students in two classrooms in Northern California with a predominantly Latino and African American
population.  One teacher provided instruction in both classrooms. Individual cognitive interviews were
given to 10 students, including the focal student presented here, to further understand student approaches to
solving these particular tasks and reveal learning hurdles.   These interviews drew upon ideas that came up
during classroom observations, and materials included particular problems from written assessments about
which the interviewer asked the student to reflect.   These interviews sought to probe more deeply students'
written and oral responses and test the stability or fragility of such responses. Data Sources included
videotapes of 8 classroom lessons and cognitive interviews, as well as copies of written student artifacts.
Videos were transcribed and written responses were coded for response frequencies and the functions of
representational forms.
Preliminary Findings, Conclusions and Implications
        I chose Carolyn as a case study because the pattern of her responses well-reflected overall trends
in student responses over the unit, making her a typical case.   She was also one  of ten students that
participated in a cognitive interview, providing further insight into her reasoning. This analysis treated
technical terminology a semiotic means to both enable and constrain the focus of individuals' meaning
making.
        The poster will present Carolyn's interviews regarding the same problems given before and after
the classroom intervention.    Results show that Carolyn interpreted two interview questions designed to
address the same content in different ways.  For prompts using the word slope, Carolyn drew upon the
graph as a resource to talk about the slopes of two different linear functions. However, for prompts that
made use of everyday language such as faster, Carolyn provided different answers that communicated a
less sophisticated understanding of the mathematics at play.     The use of particular words in the given
prompt resulted in Carolyn interpreting the graph in different ways.
        The case study seeks to demonstrate the complexity of language, both everyday and mathematical,
with which students grapple as they engage in mathematics.       While the larger study was exploratory in
nature, Carolyn's interview gives reason to consider technical terminology as a key mechanism by which
instruction may focus on particular mathematical concepts.     In this case, such concepts seemed to remain
ambiguous absent of that terminology. Findings have potential implications for curriculum development
and instruction, in addition to considering in future research what various semiotic means, such as technical
vocabulary, bring to bear on student understanding.
References
Caddle, M.C., & Earnest, D. (2009). Slope as a procedure: The impact of axis scale. In M. Tzekaki, M.
   Kaldrimidou, & H. Sakonidis (Eds.), Proceedings of the 33rd Conference of the International Group
   for the Psychology of Mathematics Education. Vol. 2, pp 233-240. Thessaloniki, Greece: PME
Moschkovich, J.N (1996). Moving up and getting steeper: Negotiating shared descriptions of linear graphs.
   The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 5(3), 239-277.
Radford, L.   (2003). Gestures,   Speech,  and the    Sprouting   of Signs: A Semiotic-Cultural Approach      to
   Students' Types of Generalizations. Mathematics Thinking and Learning, 5(1), 37-70.
Saxe, G.B. (2004). Practices of quantification from a sociocultural perspective.   In K.A. Demetriou & A.
   Raftopoulos (Eds.), Developmental Change: Theories, Models and Measurement. NY: Cambridge
   University Presss: 241-263.
Uttal, D.H., Scudder, K., & DeLoache, J.S. (1997).Manipulatives as symbols: A new perspective on the use
   of concrete objects to teach mathematics.Journal of Applied Developmental Psychology, 18(1), 37-54.

                                                  438     ISLS
