                                                 ICLS 2010  ·   Volume 2

                An Investigation into Students' Interpretations of
                               Submicroscopic Representations

                                          Shawn Y. Stevens & Namsoo Shin
                       University of Michigan, 610 E. University Ave., Ann Arbor, MI 48109
                                 Email: sstevens@umich.edu, namsoo@umich.edu

           Abstract: Applying a particulate model of matter requires learners to translate among several
           levels of representations­macroscopic, microscopic and symbolic. Successful instruction and
           assessment require that students properly interpret representations. As part of the development
           of validated assessments to place students along a learning progression, this study explores
           how students' interpretations of representations change and affect their responses to items as
           they progress  through   the science  curriculum.  We    find that different  representations may
           enhance different alternative conceptions.

A particulate model of matter provides a basis for understanding the structure and behavior of matter, and
enables learners to explain a vast number of phenomena. Applying a particulate model requires learners to
translate  between  the  macroscopic    representations of  the phenomena     that  they can experience  in their daily
lives, and  submicroscopic     representations  (e.g., molecules,   atoms)    that explain  what  is  happening  at the
molecular level, as well as representations such as chemical symbols, formulas, and equations (Harrison &
Treagust, 2002). The abstract nature of submicroscopic representations and symbolic representations make it
difficult for students to connect them with macroscopic phenomena (Griffiths & Preston, 1992). When students
first begin developing a particulate model of matter, they tend to focus on phenomena involving molecules (e.g.,
water in different phases; how smells travel). The terms particle and molecule are often used interchangeably to
describe molecules, while individual spheres, multiple spheres or multi-lobed figures, may be used to represent
them. As students progress, they are expected to be able to transfer between more types of submicroscopic
representations (e.g., Lewis structures, space-filling models, ball-and-stick figures).
           The larger goal of our project is to develop assessments that place students along a learning progression
(LP)   for the  nature of matter,   which focuses   on  the structure, properties   and  behavior of  matter (Stevens,
Delgado, & Krajcik, in press). In order to create validated assessments, it is critical that students understand the
item,  which    includes  correctly interpreting the   meaning  of  the  question,   the answers  and   any  associated
representations. Extensive learning research has focused on how students use and translate between the three
types of representations required to explain phenomena using a particulate model (e.g., Keig & Rubba; Kozma
& Russell,     1997).  We  extend   this  work   by  investigating  students'  ability   to translate among   different
submicroscopic    representations   and  how  those  interpretations   affect their thinking.  This   work will inform
assessment and curriculum materials development linked to students developing a particulate model of matter.

Methods
We developed assessment items to measure how well students apply ideas within and across topics to explain
phenomena involving transformations of matter following the Construct-Centered Design process (Stevens et
al., in press). The items were validated through rounds of internal and external review, followed by collection of
student data. To ensure that students interpret the questions and representations as intended, the items were each
accompanied by a set of questions (e.g., Was the question clear? Were there any words that were confusing?
What does the picture represent? DeBoer, et al., 2008). Each item will be piloted with students of grades 6-14.
Semi-structured interviews with a subset of students supplemented this data. We will also investigate the range
of representations students connect with atoms and molecules over grades 6­14 using a written survey.

Results and Discussion
Tests  and  textbooks    often use  multiple submicroscopic     representations    for atoms  and molecules,    and we
questioned whether students can readily shift between them. To this end, we created four versions of an item
designed to measure students' submicroscopic models of the solid, liquid and gas states of water. The four
versions contain the same four answer choices that are represented differently (version 1­molecules as spheres
and ice represented as a close-packed lattice [CPL]; version 2­molecules as spheres, and ice represented as a
hexagonal patterned lattice [HPL]; version 3­molecules as three-lobed structures and ice as a CPL; version 4­
molecules as three-lobed structures and ice as a HPL). The HPL is a more scientifically accurate representation
for the structure of ice than the CPL; distinguishing between the two models will help separate students at the
higher levels of the LP. In addition, the set of models associated with response A is consistent with amorphous
solids (e.g., wax) in which the molecules do not arrange in a regular pattern, potentially providing another way
of measuring students' understanding of the structure of matter in the upper levels of the progression.

                                                     439  ·  © ISLS
                                               ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 2

         Middle school students appeared to favor the traditional representation of a solid (CPL) with either
form for the water molecules (versions 1 and 3; see Figure 1), as only slightly over 11-12% of students did not
provide a response to the item. Not unexpectedly, the middle school students struggled with the hexagonal
representations of solid water. Approximately 25% of the students did not provide an answer to either version 2
or 4. Ten percent of students answering version 2 considered response A and response D to be equivalent,
perhaps not recognizing the hexagonal pattern or its meaning in the representation of ice.
         The different versions of the item seem to draw out different alternate conceptions from the students.
Slightly over 50% of the middle school students responded correctly to version 1. Approximately twice the
number of students with versions 1 and 3 chose response B (no water molecules in the gas phase, much more
space between molecules in liquid as compared to solid form­two common alternative conceptions; Harrison &
Treagust, 2002) relative to the other incorrect answers. This result suggests that the alternate idea that `the space
between    molecules in liquid form  is significantly  greater  than  that in the  solid form'   dominates   students'
reasoning leading to the observed preference for choice of response B. The hexagonal arrangement of water
molecules in the solid form elicited a different proportion of responses. Students with version 2 exhibited a very
strong preference for response B (2-3-fold greater than for response A or C). In contrast, very few students with
version 4 chose response B (2-3-fold less than for response A or C), while the other incorrect answers were
chosen with fairly even distribution. Thus, the relative amount of space between the molecules in the solid and
liquid form  do not  seem  to  dominate  students' thinking    with  the version  4 set  of representations.  Further
investigation through interviews will help explain the observed change in students' responses. These results also
suggest that using different representations of a solid in assessments will help assign students' location on a LP
for the nature of  matter. Piloting the four  versions  of  the items with    more  advanced  students   will provide
information  on the  effectiveness  of  this strategy. While    we  only   focused  on   results related to  students'
interpretation of models of water molecules and their arrangement in representations of different phases here, in
the final poster, we will discuss students' interpretation of representations in multiple contexts for students
throughout the LP (grades 6-14).

       Figure 1. Item requiring students to choose appropriate models to represent water in various states.

References
Stevens, S.Y., Delgado, C., & Krajcik, J. S. (in press). Journal of Research in Science Teaching.
DeBoer, G.E., Abell, C.H., Gogos, A., Michield, A., Regan, T., & Wilson, P., (2008) J. Coffey, R. Douglas, &
         C.  Stearns (Eds)  Assessing   Science  Learning:   Perspectives   from   research  and   practice.  National
         Science Teachers Association, Arlington, VA.
Griffiths, A.  K., &    Preston, K.  R. (1992).  Grade-12     students'  misconceptions     relating to  fundamental
         characteristics of atoms and molecules. Journal of Research in Science Teaching. 29(6), 611-628.
Harrison, A. G., & Treagust, D. F. (2002). The particulate nature of matter: Challenges in understanding the
         submicroscopoic world. In Gilbert, J. K., Jong, O. D., Justi, R., Treagust, D. F. & Van Driel, J. H.
         (Eds.), Chemical Education: Towards Research-Based Practice (pp. 189-212). Dordrecht, Netherlands:
         Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Keig, P. F. & Rubba, P. A. (1993). Translation of representations of the structure of matter and its relationship
         to reasoning, gender, spatial reasoning, and specific prior knowledge. Journal of Research in Science
         Teaching. 30(8), 883-903.
Kozma, R. B. & Russell, J. (1997). Multimedia and understanding: expert and novice responses to different
         representations of chemical phenomena. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 34(9), 949-968.

Acknowledgments
This research is funded by the National Science Foundation, grant number 0822038 and 0426328. Any opinions
expressed in this work are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent those of the funding agency.

                                                   440  ·  © ISLS
