                                                ICLS 2010    Volume 2

  The "Other" curriculum: Constructing success and failure in a
                             game-based learning environment
                                       Asmalina Saleh, Indiana University,
                              107 S. Indiana Avenue, Bloomington, IN 47405-7000,
                                             asmsaleh@indiana.edu
                                Steven John Zuiker, National Institute of Education,
                                       1 Nanyang Walk, Singapore 637616
                                            steven.zuiker@nie.edu.sg

       Abstract: We examined after-school classroom practices to understand how a game based
       curriculum based on American standards is taken up in Singapore schools. The Singapore
       educational system privileges a certain model of success and failure, which led students and
       teachers to     adopt roles and  practices which    ran counter  to the  intended outcomes   of the
       curriculum.     Despite  this, emergent student-oriented     activities presented opportunities for
       successful implementations of the curriculum.

Introduction
       Video   games    are  immersive   environments   that  engage   learners in experiences that have   personal,
epistemological, cultural connections and potentially transformative. (Shaffer, Squire, Halverson & Gee, 2005)
Unsurprisingly, schools have forayed into video games in order to promote learning among students. While
game-based curriculum has its advantages, the impact of a multi-disciplinary curriculum within a classroom
framework and what it means to learn in an informal school environment is less apparent. In the water quality
unit in Quest Atlantis (QA), a learning environment, students adopt the role of a field investigator to explore
why fishes were dying in Taiga national park (Barab, Sadler, Heiselt, Hickey & Zuiker, 2006).          We examine
how the unit normalized by both students and teachers in order to ensure its relevance to school. Additionally,
we focus on how the models of success and failure can be re-constituted through student oriented activities.

Theoretical Framework
       The classroom is a site of competing discourses; certain actions legitimize dominant discourse while
silencing other forms (Delpit, 1988).   It is a site where the techniques of surveillance and self-discipline occurs
and where power is not acted upon the individual but is exercised through relationships and actions of free
individuals who can either accept or resist (Foucault, 1982). Luke (1995) argued that classrooms are sites in
which teachers and     students construct what    success  and  failure means,   thereby  producing "`versions' of
successful and failing students" (p.12). Based on the notion that power is central to an analysis of competing
discourses in the classroom, we identified identity and world building situations (Gee & Green, 1998) that
helped us analyze how students and teachers constructed the various models of success and failure.

Context and environment
       The Singapore educational system consists of primary, secondary, college, polytechnic and tertiary
level education. Secondary education is targeted for 13 to 16 year olds and students are placed in three academic
tracks, Special, Normal and Express. Students placed in the Special and Express track complete their secondary
education in 4 years whereas the Normal track students complete theirs in 5. These students are placed in these
academic tracks based on the Primary School Leaving Examination (PSLE), a major examination undertaken by
all students to progress to secondary education. Due to the perceived differences in student abilities, Express
track students are believed to be better students, both in terms of academics and behavior, thus shaping student
and teacher attitudes.

Design and methodology
       Students from two Express and Normal classes participated in an after-school program using QA for
four weeks. Two teachers were in charge of each class and given guides which gave suggestions on how to
structure classroom activities. Participation in the Express class was constant; at least 40 students were engaged
in Taiga every week. In contrast, participation in the Normal class averaged 10 students or less per week.
       Two pairs of same sex dyads from each class were selected and videotaped for the duration of each
two-hour session. These pairs were present during most of the implementations, which meant that we could
observe their participation and trajectory. Whole classroom and group discussions were also videotaped and
teachers were interviewed after the implementation. Dyad, group and whole classroom interactions were then
transcribed and through emergent coding, we initially identified episodes of acceptance or resistance, in which
students and teachers would accept, challenge or impose assumptions on the game-based curriculum and other
individuals. Building on these set of initial codes, we framed these episodes as identity and world building

                                                    441     ISLS
                                               ICLS 2010    Volume 2

episodes (Gee & Green, 1998). The former refers to situations in which students and teachers projected their
identity to others while the latter included how they constructed success and failure in the classroom.

Findings
        The Taiga curriculum was positioned as a Geography subject, although the unit included Science,
Geography and English Language topics. As a result of this alignment, teachers in this implementation did not
engage  formal  concepts  unrelated   to Geography,   treating unfamiliar  concepts  such  as eutrophiction  as  an
"Other". The lack of take up was possibly due to time constraints and lack of expertise. For instance, when
students in the Express class expressed confusion over concepts such as phosphate and nitrates, Wendy, the
teacher, chose not to explicate further.  In that same discussion, Wendy also summarized students' impressions
on the relevance and amount of learning gleaned by going through the Taiga curriculum. She concluded that
"you (the students) have not learnt as much things as compared to class". As a person of authority, she noted the
lack of relevance of the curriculum therefore positioning it as a less useful learning environment for students.
        Despite the lack of curricular connection, Wendy characterized Taiga as "serious work". Since students
were engaged in Taiga as an extra-curricular involvement, the curriculum needed features of schooling, such as
outcomes that encourage analytical skills and criticality in assessing information. Being a good learner from the
teacher's perspective meant that students had to take notes in their log book, being able to "look through all the
answers before you (the students) come to a conclusion" and knowing the "proper etiquette" of how to interact
with others in the chat space. Teachers in both tracks adopted a surveillance stance, walking around to make
sure students were on task and not "playing". Students had to ensure that they were successful in features of
Taiga that featured testing and assessment, such as taking a non-player character's test to gain power cells. Nic,
an Express student, voiced concern over the possibility of failing the test and panicked when he thought he had
missed an opportunity to get a power cell. Tanya and Joy, from the Normal track, on the other hand, ensured
that they were prepared mentally and in terms of copious note-taking before attempting a different test. To
students, passing tests was representative being successful in class.
        The two teachers from the Normal track mainly ensured that students remained on task (procedural and
behavior) and/or understood the vocabulary in the curriculum. However, the Normal track students resisted the
notion of unsuccessful    learners  and   were able   to  articulate  and synthesize   information gathered    from
interviewing characters just as well as their Express peers. In a student produced video, one of the students,
Pingying, adopted the role of a teacher and facilitated the interview process with her peers.   She pushed other
students to critically assess information that was presented to them, rather than reading from their notes. This
student's negotiation of her role as a knowledgeable person however, remained unnoticed by teachers. Activities
that reflected the abilities of the Normal   students  were  mostly   invisible; while the curriculum   encouraged
students to take up legitimate roles that empower them; their public identities remain that of mediocre learners.

Discussion and implications
        Since the Taiga curriculum content was not taken up by the teachers, students were unable to see the
relevance of their activities. As the curriculum was implemented as an after school activity, the informal setting
was immediately framed by discourses surrounding what success and failure meant in schools. Thus, both
students and teachers were engaged in performing what they thought the classroom should look like, instead of
enlisting the opportunities that the Taiga curriculum offered. However, student oriented activities such as
making group videos, provide opportunities for students to reconstitute a narrative of their own, based on the
experiences afforded by the game based curriculum and through peer interactions. Teachers expressed the need
for units aligned to Singapore's standards so that the content can be better leveraged. However, this does not
address the invisibility of certain students, although in other implementations, activity structures have
demonstrated that it is possible to empower such students.

References
Barab, S. A.,   Sadler, T.,  Heiselt, C., Hickey, D.,     & Zuiker,   S. (2007).  Relating narrative, inquiry,   and
        inscriptions: A framework for socio-scientific inquiry. Journal of Science Education and Technology,
        16(1), 59-82.
Delpit, L. (2001). The silenced dialogue: Power and pedagogy in educating other people's children. Landmark
        Essays on Basic Writing, 83-101.
Foucault, M. (1982). The subject and power. Critical inquiry 8(4), 777-795.
Gee, J., & Green, J. (1998). Discourse analysis, learning, and social practice: A methodological study. Review of
        research in education, 23(1), 119-163.
Luke, A. (1995). Text and discourse in education: An introduction to critical discourse analysis. Review of
        research in education, 21, 3-48.
Shaffer, D., Squire, K., Halverson, R., & Gee, J. (2005). Video games and the future of learning. Phi Delta
        Kappan 87(2), 104-111.

                                                   442     ISLS
