                                                ICLS 2010     Volume 2

               Learning inter-related concepts in mathematics
                                           from videogames
                   Hee Seung Lee, Belinda J. Thompson, Keith J. Holyoak, James W. Stigler
                                        University of California, Los Angeles
                                           Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA
       Email: heeseung@ucla.edu, thompsonbel@ucla.edu, hoyl oak@lifesci.ucla.edu, stigler@ucla.edu

          Abstract:  If students    learn multiple    inter-definable   relational  concepts,  their resulting
          knowledge  will    be more  stable,   flexible, and   likely to  be applied    on transfer tasks.  A
          videogame has been developed to teach fractions. Based on analysis of Asian curricula in
          mathematics, the favored instructional sequence andrelative emphasis on various topics have
          been incorporated into the game design. Through thegame, students interact with different
          numbers and operations. Their performance on pre- and post-test are compared.

Objective
Learning  mathematics    involves   recognizing  relationhs ips between    different pieces   of information   including
mathematical  facts, ideas,   and   procedures, constructing   new    relationships between    previously disconnected
information or reorganizing already connected infomr ation, and finally building a network of represenattions
(Brownell,  1935;  Hiebert   &  Carpenter,  1992).    To  achieve  this goal, most   attempts   to use games   to teach
mathematics have focused on practicing procedures.Some games have focused on teaching understanding of
specific concepts (e.g., why the denominators cannot be added when adding fractions). Our approach isto use
games to teach an inter-related set of concepts byhelping students recognize relationships between dfiferent
number    systems and   different   operations. Our   hypothesis   is that if students   learn a number   of  relational
concepts, their resulting knowledge will be more satble, more flexible, and more likely to be appliedon transfer
tasks. Skemp (1976) distinguishes relational understanding from instrumental understanding in mathemaitcs
learning, and argues    that relational understanding is    more   adaptable  to   new tasks   and easier to remember
because learners can remember inter-related concepst as parts of a connected whole, rather than as disconnected
pieces of information.

Method
We have analyzed curricula of Asian countries thathave shown high achievement levels in mathematics J(apan,
Singapore, and South Korea), and defined what kinds of experiences enable students to acquire conceptual
understanding of fractions. Based on our analysis,we provided game designers with the instructional sequence
and relative emphasis on various topics related tooperations with fractions.

Instructional game design and content goals
A videogame has been developed to teach fractions ni tending to be played by students who already havesome
prior experience with fractions (i.e., not a substtiute for an introductory course). In this project,three major
connections have been emphasized and incorporated ni to the game design process. First, students shouldbe able
to see relationships between     concrete  representations    they manipulate    and conceptual    representation to be
taught. Many teachers use concrete examples (e.g.,visual diagrams, physical manipulatives) to help sut dents
understand abstract mathematical concepts and symbolic notations. Use of concrete materials, however,does
not guarantee their effectiveness. Concrete materials seem to be useful in teaching only if learners recognize
"the correspondence between the structure of the materials and the structure of the concept" (BoultonL- ewis,
1992, p. 10). Also, for an analogy between a concrtee representation and a conceptual representation ot be
effective, the relations found in one representation should be clearly mapped to the relations presentin the other
representation (English & Halford, 1995). To achieve this goal, two distinct workspaces have been developed to
teach fractions in the game: a realistic problem space which includes a concrete visual representation, and a
symbolic  number   representation   space. Players  are   allowed  to  manipulate   simple  visual forms  of quantiites
using operator tools in the realistic problem spaceto test their hypotheses.
          A potential issue with physical representations ofquantities is that students may attend to superficial
features of the representation rather than to the concept embodied by the representation. To address ht is issue,
we have incorporated a design element into the gamein which the intermediate visual representation fades out
as players encounter "night-time" gameplay.      Playesr learn early on in the game that night-time looms,and thus
they must  pay attention  to    the quantities  being represented   as  well  as to  the visual  representations  of the
quantities. Also, in a later phase of the game, theaid from the visual representation space fades outaltogether so

                                                    445      ISLS
                                              ICLS 2010      Volume 2

that students must work directly on the symbolic number representation. By having each manipulation tool in
the visual representation space clearly correspondto one of the mathematical operations, students should be able
to map unambiguously between different representatoins.
         Second,  students should  be able   to see relationships   between   different  operations. Students  should
understand the way in which different operations aer related, and how each operation works to change aquantity
from one state to another. For example, students should understand that multiplication and division have an
inverse relation to one another. Students will usethe inverse relationship in two ways. One way is toreverse or
undo an action and the other way is to use divisionto find an unknown scalar operator. By ensuring that
students are exposed to problems that have the samestructure but a different goal, inverse relationscan be
understood.
         Third, students should be able to see relationshipsbetween different number systems. In most U.S.
classrooms,  operations  with  different types  of numbers    are taught separately.    For example,  after mastering
operations with whole numbers, students move on tooperations with decimal numbers or fractions. However,
connections between different types of numbers, andsubsequently operations with these different types, are not
emphasized. When these number systems and operations with them are taught as distinct concepts, students may
construct separate mental models for each of diffeernt number systems. This hypothesis is supported bythe
finding that students often treat the same word problems differently depending on the type of the numbers
(Sowder, 1995). To prevent students from developingseparate mental models, in this game, a common visual
representation is used across different types of numbers. The main concepts common across different number
systems  include  units, decomposing     and recomposing numbers,      and    different operations and  their  inverse
relations. For example, any number can be understood as a collection of units: whole numbers as a colelction of
1's, fractions as a collection of 1/n's,  and  decimlas   as a  collection of 0.1's. Besides    emphasizing  common
mental models across different types of numbers, por blem situations with different number systems wereinter-
mixed in the game sequence. Rather than mastering one number system with all kinds of operations and moving
on to another number system, students have to operate with several different types of numbers togetherfrom a
very early phase of the game.
         In each level of the game, players are challenged ot solve a problem involving lengths. This challenge
makes students reflect on their own knowledge and tsrategies, and focuses their effort on constructionof rich
relationships among different representations and mathematical concepts. Students are not encouraged ot simply
memorize demonstrated rules or principles.

Results
To test the effectiveness of the video game for teaching fractions, the game is played by a group of isxth-
through ninth-grade students. Students' performances on a pre-test and on a post-test of fraction opeartions are
compared. Players are tested in terms of both conceptual understanding and procedural fluency with maetrials
learned directly from the videogame, and with transfer tasks. Additional data are collected during game play,
allowing evaluation of students' mistakes and theirhypothesis testing throughout game play. The findnigs will
be discussed in terms of advantages of teaching inetr-related concepts, and the possibility of constructing a
videogame-playing experience that results in increased relational understanding of mathematics.

References
Boulton-Lewis, G. (1992). The processing loads of young children's and teachers' representations of pal ce value
         and implications for teaching.Mathematics Education Research Journal, 4,1-23.
Brownell, W.   A. (1935).  Psychological   considerations    in the learning  and teaching   of arithmetic. In W. D.
         Reeve  (Ed.), The  teaching  of  arithmetic:  Tenth    yearbook   of the National   Council of Teachers  of
         Mathematics (pp. 1-31). New York: Teachers College, Columbia University.
English, L., & Halford, G. (1995).Mathematics education: Models and processes. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Hiebert, J., &  Carpenter, T.  P. (1992).  Learning    and teaching  with  understanding.    In D. A. Grouws    (Ed).,
         Handbook of research on mathematics teaching and learning (pp. 65-97). New York: Macmillan.
Skemp, R. R. (1976). Relational understanding and ni strumental understanding.Arithmetic Teacher, 26, 9-15.
Sowder, L. (1995). Addressing the story-problem problem. In J. T. Sowder & B. P. Schapelle (Eds.),Providing
         a foundation for teaching mathematics in the middlegrades (pp. 121-142). Albany: SUNY Press.

Acknowledgments
This research is done under the auspices of the UCLA Center for Advanced Technology in Schools, fundedby
grant R305C080015 from the U.S. Department of Education, Institute for Education Sciences.

                                                   446     ISLS
