                                                  ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 2

                                 Rhythm Games and Learning
                           Matthew Gaydos, University of Wisconsin ­ Madison, Gaydos@wisc.edu

         Abstract: This paper extends studies of music cognition to the genre of video games known as
         "rhythm games" ­ a popular, understudied video game genre. In this study, eight Guitar Hero II
         songs were analyzed and six participants were asked to perform a listening and tapping task.
         Results suggest that players do not exhibit knowledge of underlying metrical structure.

Introduction
Contemporary research on video games and education argues that the social, authentic and engaging activities that
games encourage provide players with learning environments that outstrip traditional schooling (e.g. Gee, 2004).
While this perspective has produced compelling evidence in support of the theory that games encourage exemplary
educational activities, difficult questions have begun to arise from pragmatic issues of implementation and from
structural issues of formal educational settings (Van Eck, 2006), not to mention the inherent (and non-trivial) issue
of figuring out how one goes about designing an educational game that engages a player and promotes learning
specific content (Gaydos & Squire, in press). Specifically, new methods still need to be explored to investigate and
interpret the complex player behaviors and measurable changes that result from play.
         The purpose of this investigation was to specifically investigate the nature of meter learning in the popular
music game Guitar Hero 2. It re-appropriates methods used in the study of music cognition to the genre of rhythm
video games ­ a genre of video games that has only in the past ten years or so, achieved market prominence and
widespread popularity.
         This paper presents preliminary results of a study that examined the rhythm game Guitar Hero for the way
that it conveys meter, and explored whether Guitar Hero players were leveraging musical resources similar to those
of trained musicians.   Discussion   of the  potential  for    the design   of   rhythmic   interactive  environments      and
performance-based assessment is provided.

Guitar Hero, Meter, and Music Cognition
         Recently, rhythm/music games have exploded in popularity. For example, the Guitar Hero franchise, for
example, has become the third franchise ever to break the billion-dollar mark (Carless, 2009). Despite this success,
rhythm games have received relatively little attention from researchers.     In a recent study by Miller (2009), a survey
and interviews suggests    that Guitar  Hero   is like lip-syncing,    in that   it is a hybrid  of    traditional music   and
performance. Miller   describes  the satisfaction  that   results  from   Guitar    Hero as arising    from the    players re-
assembling of the recorded music that the game designers took apart. Miller argues that, rather than evaluating
Guitar Hero as a bastardized form of music performance, a tension often found within game communities, the game
should be considered for its own merits and for the experiences it provides players. Nevertheless, investigating the
nature (musical or not) of Guitar Hero play is interesting from the perspective of music cognition, where a robust
corpus of research has been developed to explain musical mechanisms such as timing, tone, and rhythm.
         According to Lerdahl and Jackendoff's Generative theory of tonal music (Lerdahl & Jackendoff, 1996)
meter is comprised of beats, or zero-duration points in time, and is structured hierarchically, with lower equivalence
classes comprising higher equivalence classes. The beat is said to be strong where coordination is high amongst
these classes and weak where coordination is low amongst these classes. Meter is thus defined as the hierarchically
organized  structure of beats.  Within  Guitar Hero,   players    are forced to     synchronize  their actions in   time with
musical, structured stimuli.
         Over the course of game play, players may be learning the structure, or meter, of the stimuli, and that this
learning might result   in behavioral   differences  between    expert    guitar hero    players and   guitar  hero  novices.

Methods
This study is comprised of two components, an analysis of Guitar Hero II (GHII) songs and an experiment on
players. One song from each of the eight song sets within the game Guitar Hero II was randomly selected and,
similar to Palmer & Krumhansl (1990), the frequency of notes with respect to their location in the "measure" were
recorded for the first twenty measures of each song on all four difficulties (easy, medium, hard, and expert), starting
with the first measure that contained notes.

                                                      451  ·  © ISLS
                                                ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 2

         In the experimental portion of the study, three expert GHII players (age 21 ­ 37, all male) and three non-
GHII players (age 25 ­ 33, 1 male) who did not regularly play music were recruited from the local university
community. GHII expertise was verified at the end of each study session by asking participants to play a song on
progressively harder difficulties. All GHII experts could complete at least two songs on the hardest difficulty level.
No non-GHII players could complete a song on either the hard or expert level. Participants performed a listening
task in which they provided goodness of fit ratings on a 7-point likert scale for the timing of tones within a 4/4
meter. Participants also performed a tapping task in which they synchronized taps in time with a metronome, which
sounded at inter-stimuli-intervals (ISIs) of 250, 500, 750, and 1000 ms. They continued tapping once the metronome
was removed. Results for the tapping task were analyzed in light of the Wing Kristofferson model (1973), which
posits that for ISIs greater than 250 ms, time-keeper variance can be thought of as originating from a stochastic wait
process in which an internal time keeper and motor control processes account for tap variances.

Results
The GHII song  analysis suggests that increasingly metrical as difficulty increased from easy to expert.     Results from
the listening task were unclear. A 4 (ISI Times) x 2 (Synchronization/Continuation) x 2 (Level) ANOVA was
conducted on the inter-response intervals and a significant 3-way interaction effect (F = 3.32, p = .019) was found
for Player Level*Times*Synchronization/Continuation, results that align with previous findings in the literature. A
significant effect for player level was found at the shortest inter-stimulus interval (F = 10.087, p < .01).

Discussion and Conclusion
Though rhythm games may appeal specifically to the already musically inclined as Miller's (2009) survey suggests,
it is interesting to note that, even in spite of GHII's distinctly non-traditional musical form, this study does not
support the theory that players are improving their sensitivity to meter, rather suggests expertise entails improved
performance at the fastest levels of perception and action. It is important to consider that the primary purpose of the
game is   entertainment and  the primary  goal  of the  company    is revenue; the  game  is not designed      for music
education. In some ways, these results are unsurprising considering the difficulty in associating language learning
with merely exposure frequency. The results suggest that frequent structured actions may not be sufficient for
adopting specific mental representations.
         The line demarcating where perception stops and cognition begins is not easily determined and theories that
highlight the active nature  of  "seeing" (e.g. Noe, 2005)    suggest  a connection between   perception,     action  and
thought.  Reconsidering  the role of perception    may  be   important for theories that emphasize   the      meaningful
experiences that games can provide for education (e.g. Squire, 2005) as experiences that change how we see the
world may lay the groundwork for future learning (diSessa, 2000).

References
Carless, S. (2009). Kotick: Guitar Hero Now $2 Billion Franchise. Gamasutra. Retreived 10/09 from
     <http://www.gamasutra.com/php-bin/news_index.php?story=23537>
diSessa, A. (2000). Changing Minds. The MIT Press: Boston.
Gaydos M.J. & Squire, K (in press). Citizen Science: Designing a game for the 21st century. In Interdisciplinary
     Models and Tools for Serious Games: Emerging Concepts and Future Directions, Richard Van Eck, Editor.
     Hershey, PA: IGI Global.
Gee, J.P., (2004). Situated Language and Learning. Routledge: UK
Honing, H., & Ladinig, O. (2007). Exposure influences expressive timing judgments in music. JEP:HPP.
Lerdahl, F., & Jackendoff, R. (1983). A Generative Theory of Tonal Music. The MIT Press: Boston.
Miller, Kiri. (2009). Schizophonic Performance: Guitar Hero, Rock Band, and Virtual Virtuosity. Journal of the
     Society for American Music. 3(4):395-429.
Noe, A. (2005). Perception in Action. The MIT Press: Boston.
Palmer, C. & Krumhansl C. (1990). Mental Representations for Musical Meter. JEP:HPP 16(4) 728-741.
Squire, K.D., (2006). From content to context: Video games as designed experiences. Education Researcher. 35(8):
     19-29.
Van Eck, R. (2006). Digital game based learning. Educause. 41(2). 16-30.
Wing A., & Kristofferson, A., (1973). The timing if interresponse intervals. Perception & Psychophysics. 13(3),
     455-460.
Yee, Wm., Holleran, S. & Jones, M. (1994). Sensitivity to event timing in regular and irregular sequences:
     Influences of musical skill. Perception & Psychophysics, 56 , 461 - 471.

                                                    452  ·  © ISLS
