                                            ICLS 2010  ·   Volume 2

 Building Creativity: Collaborative Learning and Creativity in a
                             Virtual Gaming Environment
       Kylie Peppler, Maria Solomou, Indiana University, 201 N. Rose Ave, Bloomington, IN 47405
                         Email: kpeppler@indiana.edu, msolomou@indiana.edu

       Abstract: Using a systems-based approach to creativity and situated approach to learning, this
       study is a pilot exploration into how creative ideas emerge within a community and are spread
       amongst its members. This study takes place within the Multi-User Virtual Environment, Quest
       Atlantis, and uses chat data, screenshots, and offline conversation to explore creativity and
       collaborative learning in the context of virtual 3D architectural building.

21st century Internet culture has produced a growing number of public forums in the digital realm geared
toward the sharing of creative ideas. Blogs, wikis and chatrooms are all spaces where millions of dispersed
members   create  community  around   new  or shared   ideas from   within simulated   environments.  A  more
elaborate form of social interaction in online spaces is the Multi-User Virtual Environment (MUVE), where
players contribute to virtual communities by putting forth original ideas, actions or physical objects that, in
turn, shape the aesthetic/philosophical landscape of the community. If other community members engage
and value these   contributions, the contributions  then   become   recognized as  meaningful  expressions of
creativity. A creative idea, object, or action is thus in part a socially-determined process, consistent with
Csikszentmihalyi's (1996) systems model of creativity. In this model, a system is composed of individuals,
knowledge domains, and the related social contexts that form a field. An individual builds on culturally
valued meanings,   practices and   designs to produce    new   variations  of the  domain, which,  if deemed
valuable by   the community   (field) become   part  of  what  constitutes the  evolving   domain. This   field
component implies that colleagues and domain norms are essential to the realization of individual creativity
(Schneiderman, 2000). Such a view removes the aura of mystery around creativity and, instead, emphasizes
the importance of sustained discussion with peers and the need for appreciation of the constraints that one
is augmenting or violating while producing a creative contribution.
       Central to this model is the relation of creativity to a system, with the idea that how one's social
group takes up the work ultimately defines its value as a creative act. Our study takes place within the
MUVE, Quest Atlantis (QA), an educational virtual world that engages players with educational content
while  supporting  dynamic   interaction between   a  live community    of players   (Barab, Thomas,  Dodge,
Carteaux, & Tuzun, 2005). The reflexive relationship between users and the environment makes this an
ideal setting to study how creative ideas emerge within a community and are spread amongst its members.
For these purposes,  we  created   an architectural  world   within  QA   based   on Ayn   Rand's  novel, The
Fountainhead, to explore how communities take up the themes of creativity and constraint within their 3D
virtual building. Our questions for this study are: Using a systems-based approach to creativity, what ideas
are seen as creative and taken up by the field? Further, how do learners collaboratively engage in the
learning process to enable the spread of such ideas?

Methods
Quest Atlantis is a 3D MUVE that immerses players in educational tasks, combining commercial gaming
elements and educational lessons. Players engage in socially and academically meaningful activities, being
part of stories, interacting, and developing social and academic skills. 124 elementary- and middle-school
students from several countries around the world participated in this study, engaging in the architecture
mission in schools, afterschool centers or at home. Our architecture mission, following the themes of the
Rand   novel, has  players join   an  architecture  firm   where  they  must   chose  whether  to  align  with
individualistic head Architect, Howard Roark, which guarantees members complete freedom over their 3D
building in the virtual world, or align with the more capitalistic architect, Peter Keating, which guarantees
the member lots of city contracts but under the condition that they adhere to strict building restrictions.
Regardless of their choice, players have the opportunity to rent real estate and practice their creative ideas.
       Data was collected from multiple sources throughout the architecture trajectory, including submitted
review reports throughout the gaming missions, screenshots from Questers' buildings, chat and messages,
as well as online interviews from the researchers' online interactions with several players. We extracted

                                                453  ·  © ISLS
                                             ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 2

Questers' architectural review reports, the chat logs in all the relevant worlds, as well as the chat logs for
specific Questers whose creations were of special interest. Using a qualitative approach to data analysis, we
used a top-down approach to coding derived from our theoretical frame to code and analyze chat data, log
files, artifacts and player responses. Coded events were then further analyzed to better understand how
players learn about such "spreadable" ideas and collaborate with one another to learn about how to build
their own architectural structures.

Findings
Using a systems-based approach to creativity, we identified architectural ideas that were seen as creative by
the  larger field of Questers.  In  other  words,   creative  ideas   were  those  that new  builders  wanted  to
appropriate and the field of participant observers (those without a building license spent time discussing
and highly valued for one reason or another). After the thematic analysis of our categories, we have focused
on the following "creative" ideas within the community: fire textures, mushroom shaped houses, glass,
bright colors/aesthetics, and animated objects. Further analyses of each of these ideas are presented below
as well as insights are shared about how a community learns to adopt creative innovations through shared
collaborative learning. Further analysis of how Questers learned to take up these ideas is presented in our
poster. One of the creative ideas is presented below in further detail.

Playing with Fire
A number    of Questers   found changing    the specific   texture of  objects challenging  but a key   space for
creativity in their buildings. At the start of August 2008, several buildings began to have fire textures on
their walls  and  on some  of  the  objects. Questers    seemed    to like the particular texture because  of its
animated fire image. They also seemed to associate it with the feelings they had viewing the buildings and
some Questers also link the fire texture to their real life experiences. Jath554mse observed a house and
reported: "It makes me feel cool and very warm inside. It is this way because of its fiery color and the way
the color moves.... I like what it looks like on the inside when you are in it because it looks like you are in a
fire." However, learning to change the textures was difficult. As a result, several of the Questers built
tutorials for others to follow and a flurry of chat activity (both an and offline) resulted around this activity.
Chat records, screenshots, and interviews were further analyzed to better understand how creative ideas
evolved over time within the community and how knowledge of these practices were spread within the
community.

Discussion
Implications for creativity and collaborative learning are discussed. While the use of video games as an
educational medium continues to entail issues of deep concern, we are seeing more and more games that
are gender-neutral, have pro-social narratives at their core, and that support collaborative inquiry and deep
learning. Moreover, the utility or even indispensability of creativity in meeting this need is evident but even
less  well  understood, and   this  poster brings   together  two   domains    to harness  and  foster children's
creativity: Spreadable ideas and collaborative learning. Indeed, the social dimension involves not simply
the  presentation of  the building  artifacts,  but the  critical  reception and   discussion  around  the work,
contributing to the legitimacy and caliber of the work and, in turn, to the community and their engagement
in practices relating to computer programming and interactive narrative composition.

References
Barab, S. A., Dodge, T., Thomas, M., Jackson, C., & Tuzun, H. (2007). Our designs and the social agendas
       they carry. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 16(2), 263­305.
Csikszentmihalyi, M. (1996). Creativity: Flow and the psychology of discovery and invention. New York:
       HarperCollins.
Schneiderman,     B.  (2000).  Creating    creativity:   User  interfaces   for   supporting  innovation.  ACM
       Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction, 7(1), pp. 114­138.

                                                  454  ·  © ISLS
