                                                ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 2

        Predicting Social Influence and Project Influence in Online
                                     Communities of Creators
                              Elisabeth A. Sylvan, TERC, 2067 Massachusetts Avenue
                              Cambridge, Massachusetts 02140, USA, sylvan@terc.edu

        Abstract: This paper introduces Online Communities of Creators, the subset of social networking
        sites in which the focus is sharing, developing and understanding personal creations. It proposes
        that two kinds    of influence are   important in   these communities:   social influence  and project
        influence. Using multiple linear regressions the factors that predict each type of influence were
        identified for one Online Community of Creators called the Scratch Community web site.

Introduction
As more of our time is spent online, more opportunities for learning and creating are available in virtual spaces. The
sites that offer the richest communities engage participants in a range of ways. These sites may support establishing
an online identity, making small talk that leads to common ground, developing a dialogue about personal creations,
and presenting, trying-out and critiquing projects.
     In this paper I define a subset of SNS called Online Communities of Creators (OCOCs). OCOCs are the online
communities in which the core activity is sharing personal creations. In these communities, a network of people is
brought together by the projects they create and share. These sites provide features that emphasize:
·    the sharing their own original creations (such as photographs, music, writing, or computer programs);
·    the discussion of one another's work;
·    the association of particular contributions with the people who make them.
     When members post projects, they reveal themselves and create a public self for others to reflect upon. Thus,
they are conscious of what they share, the attention it might garner, and how they hope others will react. To be
accepted by their community, they develop relevant skills and perspectives that stimulate the community. Through
their public persona and supported by their creations, they build online relationships with other members.
        Online communities     of creators must  find  a balance    between supporting  the social system  and  project
sharing. If the design and use of the community focuses too much on the social system and not enough on projects, it
risks losing its core mission. If the community focuses upon the projects without allowing for personal recognition
and social interaction, it can seem a dry, undesirable place. In a community in which people are making different
kinds of contributions, understanding the factors that bring these contributions recognition is also important.
        One  way  to approach    understanding  influence   in OCOCs    is to  examine  their most important    features,
specifically, the social system and the original creations. I propose that in OCOC two kinds of influence are key
(Sylvan, 2007). The first, social influence, is how much a member is a social bridge between otherwise unconnected
members. Social influence can be measured by betweenness centrality. Betweenness centrality is defined as how
much a particular member is part of the shortest path between two other members in a given community (Brandes,
2001). The second, project influence, is a measure of the degree to which the community recognizes members'
work. Members who exhibit this trait are influential because of the work they create. Project influence can be
defined as how much a particular member's work is cited by other members.

The Current Investigation
This paper   investigates an  Online   Community    of Creators    called  the Scratch  Online  Community   (Monroy-
Hernandez  &  Resnick,    2008).  Scratch is a visual  programming      environment  that lets users create their  own
animations, games, and interactive art (Maloney et al, 2008). To program in Scratch, users run the software locally
on their machines. Once their project is ready, they can upload it to the Scratch Online Community.
        This data was gathered from February to June 2007. During this time Scratch had over 16,000 users who
created over 10,000 projects. Members' mean age was 25.61 and fifty-two percent report they were 21 or younger.
Twenty-nine percent of users described themselves as female. Forty-six percent of were from the United States. (For
greater description of methods and sample, see Sylvan, 2010).

Results

Social Influence
In the Scratch Online Community members can request to be listed as each other's friends on their profile pages. In
the current multiple linear regression social influence was measured by members' betweenness centrality in this

                                                     455  ·  © ISLS
                                                 ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 2

friendship network. This means that people who commonly are the shortest path between other members in the
network would have higher social influence than those who rarely acted as bridges.
         Betweenness   centrality values in the  friendship    network  were  regressed   on four  factors: number   of
comments made, number of galleries the user participated in, number of "love-its" received, and number of tags
added to people's projects. These four predictors accounted for over one-third of the variance in the betweenness
values (R2 = .37), which was highly significant, F(5050) = 755.01, p<.0001. All of the relationships were positive
ones, except for tagging, which was a negative relationship. All measures demonstrated significant effects on the
betweenness centrality of the friendship network. Two factors had the most sizable impacts participating in galleries
(T=26.65) and writing comments (T=29.42) while the other effects were smaller.

Project Influence
In the Scratch Online Community people can run other people's projects in the browser, but to see how they are
built, they must download the source code. When someone downloads another person's work in this community,
they are likely to be interested in the inner workings of the project. As a result, the number of times someone's work
is downloaded is used to measure of project influence in this community.
         Project download counts were regressed on eight factors: number of friends, number of comments, number
of times a user's project was featured, days since first project, days since last project, number of projects, date the
user joined, and date of last login. These eight predictors accounted for a little more than half of the variance in the
project influence values (R2 = .53), which was significant, F(2781) = 392.73, p<.0001. All measures demonstrated
significant effects on project download counts. By far the biggest predictor of having one's project downloaded was
being featured by administrators (T=38.30).

Discussion
When the variables that were predictive of project influence were added to the social influence regression, none,
except number    of  comments, was  found to   predict social  influence. Additionally  when  the  variables that   were
predictive of social influence were added to the project influence regression, none, except number of comments, was
found to be predictive. This evidence suggests that these two types of influence may be distinct constructs. On the
site comments are used for both social and project-related reasons. Future work will discriminate between different
kinds of comments.

Conclusions
This paper introduces Online Communities of Creators, the subset of social networking sites in which the focus is
sharing, developing and understanding personal creations. It proposes that two kinds of influence are important in
these communities: social influence and project influence.    In the Scratch Community web site social influence was
predicted in a multiple linear regression by number of comments made, number of galleries the user participated in,
number of "love-its" received, and number of tags added to people's projects. Project influence was predicted in a
multiple linear  regression by number  of  friends, number     of comments,   number   of times  a user's   project was
featured, days since first project, days since last project, number of projects, date the user joined, and date of last
login. Other than number of comments, the factors that predicted these two kinds of influence were distinct from one
another. Thus, in this community, these two concepts seem to be distinct constructs. The current work provides
concepts and measures that, with further study, may be applicable, and valuable, to understanding and designing
other communities.

References
Brandes, U. (2001). Faster Algorithm for Betweenness Centrality. J Math Sociol., 25, 2, 163-177.
Maloney,  J., et al. (2008). Programming    by Choice:   Urban    Youth   Learning  Programming    with Scratch.  Proc.
         SIGCSE 2008 (pp 367-371), AMC Press.
Monroy-Hernández,     A. and  Resnick, M.   (2008). Empowering       kids to create and   share programmable    media.
         Interactions 15, 50-53.
Sylvan, E. (2007). The sharing of wonderful ideas: Influence and interaction in online communities of creators.
         Doctoral dissertation, (2007), MIT Cambridge, MA. http://hdl.handle.net/1721.1/42404
Sylvan, E. (2010). Predicting Influence in an Online Community of Creators. To be included in the Proc. of CHI
         2010, ACM Press.

Acknowledgments

                                                     456  ·  © ISLS
                                               ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 2

The author thanks the Lifelong Kindergarten Group at the MIT Media Lab who develop Scratch and its community.

                                                    457  ·  © ISLS
