                                                  ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 2

Neighborhood Investigations and Game Design Using Mobile Media
                            James Mathews, Mark Wagler, University of Wisconsin, USA
                                Email: jmmathew@wisc.edu, markwagler@gmail.com

        Abstract:   This   poster presents  a design-based     research  study aimed   at exploring   the use  of
        commercial mobile devices to support guided, yet open-ended and emergent explorations of place.
        As part of our study we explore the potential of a design studio model to support students' ability
        to investigate, analyze and report on contested issues and places in and around their school and
        guide their design of place-based Augmented Reality simulations and games.

Introduction
Mobile devices allow for new forms of learning that challenge the traditional culture of schools. While some schools
have chosen to focus on the potentially negative consequences of these devices, others have begun to more seriously
consider the growing disconnect between school policies and practices and the way that learning takes place outside
of school (Squire, 2009; Norris & Soloway, 2009). The study presented here seeks to address this disconnect by
exploring the potential of commercial mobile devices (particularly iPhones and similar smart phones) and "off-the-
shelf" software to support guided, yet open-ended investigations of place. As such, it builds on previous research
highlighting the  potential of  mobile media    to  support    inquiry-based  and  constructivist learning  environments
(Rogers & Price, 2009; Sharples, Taylor, & Vavoula, 2005), as well as research related to critical, place-based
learning (Gruenewald, 2003; Hull & James, 2007).

Study Design and Methods
Neighborhood Investigations and Game Design is a studio-based design curriculum piloted with two groups (N=10
and N=12) of 11th and 12th-grade students over a period of twenty days. Both of the implementations took place in a
suburban high school and included a place-based inquiry workshop, where students used mobile devices to identify
and investigate contested issues in their city and a mobile game design workshop, where students collaboratively
designed place-based Augmented Reality games using mobile devices. We utilized a design studio model during
both of these workshops as a way to simultaneously scaffold the students' designs and teach them about the design
process (Cox, Harrison & Hoadley, 2009). A normal class period (90-minute block) included the following: (1)
Large-group check-in at the start of class. This usually occurred at the school, but on occasion took place at a
location outside of the school (e.g., we used a local coffee shop and the city hall as meeting locations). This time
was used for full-group presentations, critiques and discussions related to the concepts we were studying (e.g., game
design, contested places) and as an avenue for checking in on individual and group progress; (2) Community-based
independent  and   small group  research   and investigation.   During   this time students left  the school  building to
conduct   field work  that  was   relevant to their  design(s)  (e.g.,  conducting   interviews,  taking  photos, making
observations, testing prototypes). During these field excursions, students either selected from pre-scripted design
quests or developed their own design tasks to guide their investigation. In addition, they used mobile devices (both
their own and ones supplied by the researchers) to receive additional quests, collaborate, gather data and share their
progress; and (3) Large-group debrief sessions where students reported on their field and design experiences, shared
works in progress and participated in formal critiques. During the AR game design workshop the students also used
studio time to play several pre-designed Augmented Reality games, design and prototype "micro-AR games", and
collaboratively design their own Augmented Reality simulation aimed at teaching other students and staff at the
school about a controversial issue in their local community.
   Because we were interested in exploring the curriculum and the overall learning environment as an integrated
system we employed a design-based research methodology. As such, a major goal was to iteratively redesign the
curriculum and intervention strategies in situ in order to ground our questions, findings and re-designs in both the
existing theory surrounding mobile and place-based learning and the issues, challenges and questions that emerged
from our  unique   context  (Cobb, diSessa,   Lehrer & Schauble,     2003).  The  data we  analyzed   to  make (re)design
decisions included:  observations,  students'  design journals,  small   group   and individual   interviews  and student
generated artifacts. Because of space constraints we chose to limit our discussion of the data/data analysis in this
short paper, however, as part of our presentation we will share photographic evidence, excerpts from interviews and
design journals, and student generated artifacts (e.g., design documents, media assets and final games) that both,
exemplify the key components of the intervention, and support our findings.

                                                      458  ·  © ISLS
                                                     ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 2

Findings
Our preliminary findings suggest that framing the students' investigation around the concept of contested issues and
places served as a conduit for developing their understanding of the multiple perspectives surrounding contentious
issues in their   community.    Not   surprisingly, students'   positionality shaped   the  way they initially  perceived  and
discussed the issues, people and places they chose to study. However, each student's understanding of the issues
became   more   complex    as   their investigations  advanced    and  they   developed   a greater  capacity   for empathetic
thinking. Studying issues within their local community increased students' engagement and challenged them to think
more complexly about these issues, while also providing opportunities for them to perform and explore a range of
identities (e.g., game designer, researcher, community activist). Similarly, the AR design experience also provided a
space for students to share their own perspectives on the places where they live their daily lives. For many students
a highlight    of the design    experience   was    seeing  their voices   and  perspectives   represented   in  the final AR
design/simulation.
    The   studio   model,   in  conjunction    with  the   use  of  mobile    devices,  helped   cultivate a  hybrid-learning
environment where students fluidly moved between the classroom and the broader community in order to complete
investigatory and design tasks. The mobile devices allowed us to maintain contact with students as they explored the
broader community, while providing them space to semi-autonomously and flexibly manage their own research,
social interactions, and progress. We maintained contact with the students as they worked in the community via
mobile-to-mobile (text messaging, emails, phone calls) and face-to-face conversations. It was common practice for
us to setup in a central location, where we were in close proximity to the students as they worked in the field. If a
question came up or we wanted to check-in with a student or a group, we would communicate with them via cell
phones  and/or    arrange a meeting     place. These  "in   the field"  meetings   provided    opportunities to  connect   with
individuals or small groups to offer feedback or just in time instruction. Despite our emphasis on the use of mobile
devices, a central design space (e.g., a shared work space and physical design board where students posted and
collectively organized    their work)   and  consistent  design   rituals or  practices (e.g., journaling, group    discussion,
critiques) also proved critical to the studio/learning experience. The physical design space provided opportunities for
students to share their work informally and often became the site of emergent design conversations. Similarly, the
design journals   provided   an  opportunity   to   gauge  students'  conceptual   understanding    and general     reactions to
particular activities and/or the overall design process.
    Finally, consistent with previous research around the use of a studio model for designing and learning about
design, our study found that: (1) Developing AR games recruited students' digital media skills, tools, and Web-
based communities that were not ordinarily used in school to complete tasks; (2) Creating games for an authentic
audience  deepened    the design  experience   and   increased  engagement;    (3) The    complex,  distributed  nature of    the
design task led to the development of particular areas of expertise (related to both content, design and technology
use) within the groups and allowed students to select design tasks that met their interests and skill levels. Overall
these  factors provided   an    avenue  for differentiating  the  learning    experience,  which  in turn,   led to   increased
engagement, more autonomous learning behaviors, and increased feelings of self-efficacy.

References
Cobb, P., diSessa, A., Lehrer, R., Schauble, L. (2003). Design experiments in educational research. Educational
          Researcher, 32(1), 9­13.
Cox, Harrison & Hoadley (2009). Applying the "studio model" to learning technology design. In C. DiGano, S.
          Goldman, M. Chorost (Eds.), Educating learning technology designers (pp. 145-164). New York:
          Routledge.
Gruenewald, D. (2003). The best of both worlds: a critical pedagogy of place. Educational Researcher, 32(4), 3-12.
Hull, G. and James, M. (2007). Geographies of hope: A study of urban landscapes, digital media and children's
          representations of place. In P. O'Neill (Ed.), Blurring Boundaries: Developing Writers, Researchers and
          Teachers (pp. 255­89). Cresskill, NJ: Hampton Press.
Norris, C. & Soloway, E. (2009). A disruption is coming: A primer for educators on the mobile technology
          revolution. In A. Durin (Ed.), Mobile technology for children: Designing for interaction and learning (pp.
          83-98). Burlington, MA: Morgan Kaufman.
Rogers, Y. & Price, S. (2009). How mobile technologies are changing the way children learn. In A. Durin (Ed.),
          Mobile technology for children: Designing for interaction and learning (3-22). Burlington, MA: Morgan
          Kaufman.
Sharples, M., Taylor, J., and Vavoula, G. (2005). Towards a theory of mobile learning. Paper presented at mLearn
          2005. Cape Town, South Africa.
Squire, K. (2009). Mobile media learning: multiplicities of place. On The Horizon, 17(1), 70-80.

                                                         459  ·  © ISLS
