                                               ICLS 2010  ·   Volume 1

                         Known Knowns and Unknown Knowns:
       Multiple Memory Routes to Improved Numerical Estimation
        Dav Clark, Psychology Department, University of California, Berkeley, davclark@berkeley.edu
Michael Andrew Ranney, Graduate School of Education, University of California, Berkeley, ranney@berkeley.edu

         Abstract:   Conceptual  change   represents  a  crucial, challenging,    learning component.  This
         study  hypothesized  and  observed  evidence     for two   parallel forms  of   learning within  the
         Numerically-Driven Inferencing (NDI) paradigm's rather minimalist intervention of providing
         direct feedback   regarding  a numerical  estimate­­feedback        that yields remarkably    robust
         cognitive alterations. The present experiment probed the nature of learning apropos recall or
         estimation  improvements    observed  after  participants  (a) provided    estimates, (b)  received
         feedback, and (c) re-estimated after waiting for one day. The results show that improved
         estimation/recall was predicted by two independent elements­­surprise at feedback and an
         explicit sense of episodic recall upon testing. This suggests at least two learning processes: (1)
         an explicit (though perhaps approximate) recollection of a quantity's magnitude and (2) a non-
         episodic semantic restructuring that correlates with surprise. Thus, even for concise, factual
         information, we educators might consider students' "unknown knowns"­­ knowledge that
         learners gain without any explicit understanding that they have done so.

Introduction
Various streams of cognitive research suggest that significant conceptual change is difficult to effect (Chi, 2005;
diSessa  & Sherin,   1998; Lord,  Ross, &  Lepper,   1979).   Numerically-Driven     Inferencing   (NDI)  procedures,
however, have yielded notable and encouragingly long-lasting levels of conceptual change with quite minimalist
interventions (e.g., by providing estimators with a single, critical, highly germane, feedback statistic; cf. Rinne,
Ranney & Lurie, 2006). The EPIC procedure represents one such intervention that is relatively compact and
well specified (EPIC and NDI were introduced by Ranney, Cheng, Garcia de Osuna, & Nelson, 2001). Notably,
EPIC has been shown to induce long-lasting conceptual change (e.g., Ranney et al., 2008), as evidenced by
increased accuracy on estimations up to 12 weeks after the procedure (Munnich, Ranney & Bachman, 2005). If
one can determine the cognitive factors that drive the efficacy of this particular curricular intervention, one
might then be able to target these factors in developing and refining other pedagogical strategies.
         In the EPIC procedure, participants engage with real-world numerical facts that bear on a societal
issue, such as abortion, criminal justice, the environment, etc. (e.g., Garcia de Osuna, Ranney, & Nelson, 2004;
Munnich, Ranney, Nelson, Garcia de Osuna, & Brazil, 2003). An example item/quantity is "the ratio of murders
committed to prisoners executed in the U.S." People often poorly estimate these quantities, and thus the true
values are surprising to many individuals. For the example above, individuals estimated anywhere from two to a
million murders per execution (Munnich et al., 2003). (This broad range of innumeracy might be compared to
order-of-magnitude errors made in reasoning about physics problems, although crime and physics likely diverge
in terms of the complexity of, and one's familiarity with, their respective causalities.) Such starkly diverging
estimators might have quite different beliefs regarding the effectiveness of capital punishment as a deterrent to
murder (given that deterrence is commonly used in reasoning by both pro- and anti-execution participants).
         Successful classroom curricula have been developed for improving students' estimation abilities as part
of our  laboratory's research  on NDI­­both    in  the  contexts  of   high  school mathematics    and elite  graduate
journalism classrooms (Munnich, Ranney, & Appel, 2004; Ranney et al., 2008). The EPIC procedure is one
component of these curricula in which participants (1) provide an Estimate for each policy-relevant item, (2)
state what they would Prefer each quantity to be, (3) receive actual quantities as feedback to Incorporate (as
new  "Information"),     and (4) indicate  whether their  preferences   have   Changed     upon   receiving  feedback.
Regarding change, our laboratory found that, after learning that about 250 murders occur per executed U.S.
prisoner, participants significantly changed their preferences about the ratio (Munnich et al., 2003).
         A fundamental question in cognition concerns the nature of what is learned. Some well-established
psychological   learning and  memory    models (Nadel     &   Moscovitch,    1997)  would   predict  that changes   in
estimation accuracy must ultimately be mediated by episodic memory (which could give rise to abstracted
semantic memories via a process of consolidation). In this case, we would expect participants' explicit memory
for feedback (the "I" in EPIC) to correlate well with improvements in estimation accuracy at subsequent testing.
Recent evidence suggests, however, that the re-modeling of existing conceptual structures may not depend on
episodic memory    formation  (Tse et al., 2007).  Indeed,    there is broad  evidence   that learning may    often be
subserved by multiple memory systems, perhaps acting in parallel (Clark & Ivry, in press). In this case, we
might expect increases in estimation accuracy even when participants report no memory whatsoever for the
quantity provided as feedback­­particularly if participants had pre-existing knowledge to support such learning.

                                                  460   ·  © ISLS
                                                 ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

        Surprise    upon   receiving  feedback   provides  evidence   for   pre-existing   knowledge--specifically   an
incorrect prior expectation regarding the true value. Thus, surprise may correlate with the kind of non-episodic
re-modeling  described     above.  However, surprise   may    also reflect  the emotional   impact    of the information
(Munnich, Ranney & Song, 2007; Thagard, 2006). Therefore, it is important to assess not only surprise, but also
whether the surprise had an emotional or intense character. In other words, surprise may mediate improved
episodic memory, or it may indicate the existence of prior knowledge that may facilitate changes in semantic
memory. Of course, these routes to improved estimation may operate partly or wholly in parallel.
        While the hypotheses that follow are certainly not exhaustive, they constitute a set of potential reasons
for the efficacy of the EPIC procedure. Most generally, engaging in estimation with feedback may result in a
general increase in one's estimation ability (as Ranney et al., 2008, observed following a one-week, EPIC-
related/inspired  curriculum);  such  an  effect would  be    seen  even   for  items that received   no  feedback.  We
additionally considered    that learning  would  be   driven  by   surprise (e.g., Munnich    et al., 2005).  Moreover,
improvements in estimation could be driven by a direct (potentially approximate) episodic memory of feedback.
If all improvement were driven by episodic memory, though, we would expect little extra power in a model that
included both surprise and episodic memory ratings beyond the power of a model that only included one of
these. If, however, a model including both surprise and memory provides a significantly better fit, this offers
some indirect evidence that at least a portion of improvement is occurring through a non-episodic route.
        We additionally considered the optimal timing for feedback: Immediate engagement with feedback
following the generation of an incorrect estimation may (a) interfere with the successful learning of the new,
correct, immediately provided information. However, another possibility regarding immediate feedback is that it
may (b) help encourage an individual to both engage with and correct her beliefs. Thus, if we were to find that
participants improve more with delayed feedback than immediate feedback, hypothesis (a) would be supported.
Alternatively, if performance were superior with immediate feedback, (b) would seem more plausible.

Experimental Methods
The following experiment was designed to assess whether estimative improvement occurs even with respect to
items for which no feedback was received­­as was found in curricular NDI studies (e.g., Munnich et al., 2004;
Ranney  et   al., 2008).   The  experiment addresses   (1)  the  effects of  the   timing  of feedback    on subsequent
improvements in numerical estimation­­as well as (2) whether these improvements are necessarily mediated by
episodic memory. A subset of the EPIC procedure was used to explore these issues; participants engaged only in
estimation ("E") and feedback ("I"), leaving aside personal preference ("P" and "C").

Participants
Twelve people (seven female) participated (and 19 participated in a later experiment that replicated our main
findings), including  University   of California, Berkeley,    undergraduates     and members    of   the general public
recruited via online recruitment systems (RPP and RSVP). They received either course credit or $20 for their
participation in two one-hour sessions over two consecutive days. Ages ranged from 18-56 years.

Materials
Numerical facts (106 of them) were selected from Ranney et al.'s (2008) collection (See the introduction for an
example). Three statistical facts were set aside for the basis of example items (namely US population, world
population,  and   US Gross    National  Income). Items    ranged  over  a  number    of topics, and  included  politics,
population   dynamics,     economics, the  environment,    education,    crime  etc.  Most    items were   expressed in
percentage form, with the rest being counts of dollars, people, events, or things. For numbers above 999, a
comma   was  used, as   in "13,600."  For numbers   in the millions, billions,  or trillions, the appropriate word was
used to indicate    the  order  of magnitude   (e.g.,  "300   million").   This   was intended   to   minimize  possible
confusions about the exact value of the number.

Procedure
Custom software utilizing Vision Egg (Straw, 2008) presented all materials and collected responses (source
code available upon request).   Descriptions of numerical     facts were presented in four or  fewer  lines of text (with
fewer than 55 characters per line). A prompt for numeric entry was located below the description. Feedback
concerning the veridical value was provided in a third location, between the description and the text-entry area.

Blocks of Items
Items were randomly distributed into the following four kinds of blocks. Each of these blocks was involved in
two or more phases over the course of the experiment. E: Participants only provided Estimates in a single
phase. EI:   Participants   provided  Estimates,  followed    immediately      by  correct numerical     Information as
feedback (i.e., feedback was provided in the same phase as the initial estimation). E_I: Participants provided
Estimates, and then received correct numerical Information in a phase that was well-separated (but by less

                                                    461  ·   © ISLS
                                                   ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

than 45 minutes) from the phase in which they provided their Estimate (i.e., "_" signifies a temporal delay).
New: A block of items was reserved to provide a gauge of false recognition or false recollection.

Experimental Phases
Participants engaged in a number of self-paced phases on each of the two consecutive days, as Figure 1 depicts.
The structure of stimulus presentation and response collection was uniform across a given phase. During the
first day, analogous to a "study" period, participants completed three partially similar phases of numerical
estimation and/or informative feedback. (See Phases 1-3 in Figure 1.) The second day was analogous to a "test"
period, in which participants' learning was assessed (Phases 4-7 in Figure 1).

 Figure 1. A schematic of the experiment's seven phases. Phase 1: Estimates were obtained for the E and E_I
blocks of items (23 each), randomly intermixed in one phase. Phase 2: Participants provided 23 Estimates that
   were immediately followed by Informing the participant of the correct value. Phase 3: Feedback (I) was
provided for the 23 items from the E_I block that had been Estimated in Phase 1. Phases 4-7: Subjects estimated
  (or recalled) quantities and provided explicit memory ratings for all previous items as well as 34 new items.

         During estimation (Phases 1 and 2, with 23 items each), subjects were given a textual description of an
item's quantity, followed   by      a prompt  to   provide   an estimate. For   Phase  2, feedback   was  provided  500
milliseconds after each estimate was entered. For Phase 3 (with 23 items), the correct numerical value was
provided prior to the textual description in order to minimize covert estimation.
         In Phases 2 and 3 (thus, for blocks including "I"), participants provided a self-report on their subjective
sense of surprise. Their responses were restricted to the following three choices: (1) Little or no surprise, (2)
Genuine surprise, or (3)"Visceral" or intense surprise. The presence of any form of surprise is an indication of
pre-existing memory structures, while the distinction between levels (2) and (3) may indicate a difference in the
emotional impact of the feedback for that item. (Note that Munnich, Ranney, & Song, 2007, found that a
prospective measure of surprise reliably predicted the sort of retrospective surprise ratings solicited here.)
         On  Day  2, trials were      similar to the estimation-only    trials in Phase 1  described  above in that no
additional feedback was provided. An additional 34 items from the "new" block were randomly intermixed with
the items presented during study. Furthermore, participants rated their memory for the item according to the
following four levels: (1) "The item is new to me," (2) "The item was presented yesterday, but I have no sense
of the value provided as feedback," (3) "The item was presented yesterday, and I have some sense of the correct
value," or (4) "The item was presented yesterday, and I have a fairly accurate recollection of the value."
         Choice  1 indicates no     recognition or recollection.  This is equivalent to labeling the item as "new," and
it is the correct response for items   from the new block.      As a group, choices 2-4 indicate that the item is "old,"
but with varying levels of familiarity and/or recall.      These are correct responses for the E, EI and E_I blocks
(although choices 3 and 4 entail a belief that the participant actually received feedback at study, and so might
also be considered incorrect for the E block). Choices 2 and 3 indicate perceived recognition, but at least a
partial failure in explicit recall. Choice 4 indicates a subjective sense of fairly complete recall.
         Explicit recall is used herein in a somewhat different way than in most learning and memory studies.
Indeed, these memory ratings can be viewed as a form of metacognition regarding the estimation process.

Analysis
We modeled improvement as a binomial outcome (as did Munnich et al., 2005). This allows for the treatment of
items  that have differing  distributions     within a unified    framework.    (It would  be difficult modeling   both
percentages and values in, say, the billions, particularly given our sample size.) Items were labeled as to whether
estimates improved or not. These labels were fit with a binomial generalized linear model, using the lme4
package in R. This treatment allows for a full multi-factorial mixed-effects analysis. Below, participants are

                                                      462  ·    © ISLS
                                                ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

always included as a random effect, and other factors are treated as fixed effects. Contrasts were evaluated using
the multcomp package, which controls for family-wise error rate (Hothorn, Bretz, & Westfall, 2008).
          Unless otherwise noted, data were pre-processed to remove ties. This was done to allow for a null
hypothesis that 50% of the remaining items randomly improved and 50% randomly worsened. If we counted
ties as  failures to improve,   then random   drift would    end up  spuriously  suggesting  the lack    of an   effect.
Removing ties allowed for tests of whether estimates, on average, improved more than they worsened­­both
formally and when examining graphs. Otherwise, the removal had little effect on the results.

Results

Improvements in Participants' Estimation Accuracy and/or Numerical Recall
Figure 2 shows the proportions for the number of items showing improvement (to any degree), by condition. We
can easily reject a null model (i.e., with all conditions modeled by the same mean) in favor of a model including
the three feedback conditions (! 2(2) = 25.9, p < 10-6). Post-hoc comparisons between each condition and chance
levels, as well as between condition comparisons (as in a Tukey HSD test) were performed simultaneously. In
the  no-feedback   condition  (E), estimation  improvement    did  not differ significantly from chance     (p =  .39),
although improvement with Immediate (EI) and Delayed (E_I) feedback were clearly above chance (p < 10-4).
This may seem quite expected, but it might have been the case that improvements were at least partially driven
by general improvements in estimation skill, and this would have led to at least some modest improvements
even without feedback on test items. Indeed, this kind of estimation skill development was the successfully
accomplished goal of various EPIC-based curricula (e.g., Munnich et al., 2004; Ranney et al., 2008). In the
present,  less    extensive,  experimental   manipulation,   though,   we   understandably    elicit  no    such  skill
improvements. Thus, we assume that these improvements are driven almost entirely by item-specific learning.

Figure 2. Proportion of items from each block for which estimates improved on Day 2 (as compared to estimates
 on Day 1). Items with identical estimates on Day 1 and Day 2 have been removed; thus chance is .5. Asterisks
                                             note significant differences.

          Contrary to part of our hypotheses, participants exhibited essentially equal proportions of estimation
improvements for the EI and E_I blocks.      While these treatments yielded significantly more improvement than
for the no-feedback case (both p's < 10-4), they did not differ significantly from each other (p = .79).

Recollection and Surprise
As   is often the  case, the  participants' forced  familiarity judgments   appeared to  be  superior    to their own
assessments   of  their memory   (Merikle,  2007).  In  participant debriefings, several individuals     claimed  to be
uncertain as to whether items were old even from Phase 1 to Phase 3 for items in the E_I block­­over an
interval of less  than 45 minutes!  However, participants performed well at discriminating between old and new
items a day later when given a forced choice; 76% of new items were identified as new on Day 2, compared to
an average of less than 9% regarding previously seen items. This level of recognition accuracy is not surprising,
given the considerable depth of processing involved­­and the rich, pre-existing, memory structures available for
scaffolding these episodes. (This may be another point of departure regarding items such as the likelihood of a
murder ending in an execution, in contrast to the pre-existing memory structures K-16 students might hold
regarding the physics of mechanics or electromagnetism.      In both cases, though, it seems probable that multiple
conceptual changes may result­­e.g., "Wow, the high murders-per-execution ratio makes me think [a] that
gangsters would rarely fear the death penalty, given [b] how rarely their fellow gang members are executed and
[c] that death rows are basically blossoming geriatric wards, meaning [d] that gangsters would be more likely to
bring guns."   Such conceptual changes do not seem wildly different, in many important respects, than those
required to understand that ballistic trajectories are curvilinear, rather than diagonally rectilinear.)

                                                    463  ·  © ISLS
                                               ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

 Figure 3. Proportions of items with improved estimation accuracy (or recall) on Day 2. The effects of surprise
(Day 1) and explicit memory rating (Day 2) are shown independently via weighted margins, and (the lack of) an
interaction via the central table. Asterisks note individual factors' significant differences; significant interactions
 were not observed. Only items with specific feedback are included (i.e., EI and E_I conditions). Proportions
represent between-subject means, and the number of subjects contributing to each cell is shown in parentheses.

        As the no-feedback condition (E) yielded non-significant changes in estimation accuracy, we hereafter
consider only items from conditions including feedback ("I"; i.e., EI and E_I). These effects are depicted in
Figure 3. We find that a model with both surprise and declarative memory responses cannot be rejected in favor
of a reduced model excluding memory (! 2(3) = 34.8, p < 10-7), and the comparison involving the removal of
surprise is even more striking (!2(2) = 295.22, p < 10-16). An inclusion of an interaction term does not yield a
significantly superior model (! 2(6) = 2.85, p = .8), nor does the inclusion of the feedback condition (EI vs. E_I;
! 2(1) = .8, p = .36). There was a small but non-significant difference between surprise ratings for EI and E_I
blocks: subjects rated 65% of EI block items as surprising ("2" or "3") vs. 59% for E_I. No straightforward
trend was observed with explicit recollection. The timing of feedback may have some effect on estimation
improvement that is mediated by surprise, but such issues seem best addressed in subsequent research. Below,
we only consider comparisons within surprise level and memory ratings independent from one another.
        "Exact   recall" for the value of a given  item     (i.e., memory  response   "4")­­as compared    to other
memorial impressions­­was a highly significant predictor of improved estimation (p's < .001 for ratings "1"
and "2;" p = .01 when compared with response "3"). No other comparisons between memory levels were
significant. For surprise, items with moderate and visceral ratings were significantly more likely to exhibit
improvement    than those with a no-surprise rating (p < .002 in both cases), but did not differ significantly from
one another. According to our earlier logic, this suggests more of an effect of prior knowledge than emotional
impact, although emotional impacts may still play nontrivial roles. Note that participants provided the exact
numerical figure given as feedback only 35% of the time when selecting choice 4. Even if we broaden this
accuracy criterion liberally to items for which participants are within 15% of the true value, they were only
correct about 74% of the time.
        Finally, if we consider the link between surprise and explicit recall, there seemed to have been little
relationship in the present study (as opposed to some other studies). The correlation of fixed effects between
memory and surprise terms in our model was consistently smaller in magnitude than .1. This, combined with the
lack of a significant interaction term, provides some evidence for independent learning processes.

Exclusions
As many as three items lacked estimates from some subjects or exhibited a clear lack of understanding in a
response (e.g., a "10 million" response for a question soliciting a percentage) and these items were excluded
from the analyses above. Due to a technical issue, one participant did not receive the standard E manipulation,
but was included in memory and surprise-related analyses, as these analyses did not include E trials.

Discussion
Given the overall improvements in estimation ability evidenced in curricular studies by Munnich et al. (2004)
and Ranney et al. (2008), it is of interest that we see no statistically significant improvement in items that didn't
receive feedback   (the  "E" block). Nonetheless, it  seems   that   learning in this considerably shorter present

                                                  464  ·   © ISLS
                                                    ICLS 2010    ·  Volume 1

experiment was largely item-specific and related to the integration of feedback. This lack of improvement in the
present experiment may be due to a lack of time for reflection or the development of strategies­­which were
highlighted, taught, and fostered in the curricular studies. (Munnich et al., 2004, and Ranney et al., 2008, also
focused, to a fair degree, on preferences and personalized policies.)
          In  addition,  we    had   originally    hypothesized    that the  EI  block would     yield the greatest  overall
improvement      in estimation.     We   assumed     that immediate      feedback   would  be   more   memorable    because
participants would have the opportunity to directly compare their estimate with the actual value and consider its
validity. This   would   have    arguably   led to  a   more  tangible  interaction  with  the true value  than  in the  E_I
condition. However, our data show that the E_I block, if anything yielded larger improvements. (Although EI
and E_I conditions did not significantly differ, this pattern has held up in subsequent experiments as well.) This
may be due to a number of reasons, warranting further experimental inquiry.
          One possibility is that we are observing something akin to a distributed learning effect­­because even
though the feedback is provided only once, the size of the effect is reminiscent of the effects of well-spaced
study periods reported by Pashler et al. (2007). Note that this is a major departure from standard spacing effects,
as the   correct information     is presented   only  once.   However,    while  EI  items were   only   shown  once before
testing,  item descriptions    in   the E_I  condition    were   shown   twice--initially  in  Phase   1 (when  participants
provided their initial estimates) and again in Phase 3 (when participants were given feedback). This may have
enhanced those items' representations (e.g., with a bit more time-on-task), providing a richer or more stable
context for incorporating feedback (as with Tse et al., 2007). On the other hand, these data might also suggest
that we have not explored the most relevant timescales. For example, the optimal estimate-feedback delay may
be much shorter, as with the work of Johnson and Siefert (1994). A final possibility is that the participants'
assessments of surprise at receiving feedback may inappropriately draw their attention back to their incorrect
prior knowledge. Thus, we might find generally enhanced learning and larger effects of feedback spacing, were
we to encourage participants to engage more fully with the new information­­perhaps as is done in the usual
EPIC procedure, in which participants revise their preferences/policies based on the new information and the
inferencing that such feedback triggers (as in Munnich et al., 2004, and Ranney et al., 2008).

Learning Without Recall
From the point of view of a memory theory, the most interesting result is perhaps the existence of learning even
when participants claimed "no sense" of the numerical value provided at feedback­­rather like a memorial
analog to blindsight (Merikle, 2007). This argues against the notion that improvements in estimation are simply
the result of explicit episodic memory. The result is reminiscent of extant dual-process memory models.                  For
example, Davachi et al. (2003) suggest that successful recognition could occur through a process of recollection
and/or a sense of familiarity.      These processes moreover appear to be subserved by distinct sub-regions in the
medial temporal lobe.      In  the  present  study,  we   see improvement     in numerical  estimation­­which    is perhaps
most akin to a cued recall task for EI and E_I items­­without full recall of the number presented on the previous
day. Thus, the task here is perhaps more naturally expressed in the language of the remember/know distinction
(Knowlton,    1998).  That   is, while  participants  appear  not  to remember a   number   from  the  previous day, there is
still a sense in which they know the number better than they knew it the day before.
          Based on the significance of the existing results, however, it seems reasonable to posit that a non-
episodic form of learning undergirds some of the improvement in participants' abilities to estimate accurately.
Further, the learning for improved estimation (or memory) seems to occur even without an explicit recollection
of the   feedback   from   the prior  day.   This  argues    for some   implicit and/or rapidly   semanticized learning   in
support of these improvements.

Educational Implications
We   have   provided   support    for   the effectiveness    of  instruction  that  engages   with  a  person's pre-existing
knowledge. A finding of central importance to educators is the lack of improvement on E items. It seems that if
the pedagogical goal is to improve numeracy, then simple engagement with a given set of quantities is not
enough to enhance estimation abilities for other quantities. Item specific training could be augmented with more
generalizable    strategies, though,    as  has been    demonstrated     with other  interventions  (e.g., Munnich    et al.,
2004). Students' abilities to estimate quantities for which they have received feedback can be quite good, and it
seems    that there is  at best   a  small  effect  of  whether    students  think  about  their own   beliefs  immediately
preceding or a day prior to receiving correct instruction. This effect is in line with results from elements of the
distributed   learning  literature  (Pashler    et al., 2007)­­perhaps      with some   form   of  priming  for  subsequent
encoding occurring during one's initial estimation.           Future    studies will examine   differing  intervals for both
feedback and retention.      Given our results, though, it is clear that effective learning can occur over a panoply of
semantic, statistical, items in a framework that includes engaging students' pre-existing understandings of the
material. It is worth noting further that, unlike some other forms of conceptual change cited above, the nature of
what was learned here may be of a more continuous nature than, say, "what determines the phases of the moon."

                                                         465  ·   © ISLS
                                                ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

Such    information  may be   more   amenable   to "implicit"  forms   of learning than  concepts  that have  a more
categorical, intricate, or non-linear structure. It bears considering, though, whether one can introduce more
graded forms of learning into the logical structures of science and related fields.
          In general,   participants  displayed  fairly good    recognition  of items   they  had   seen  previously,
distinguishing new items from ones presented the previous day. However, improvements occurred frequently
even when participants claimed "no sense" of the feedback, particularly when they found the item surprising--
in other words, when estimation improvement was predicted more by surprise than by explicit recall. In such
cases, learners seem to have poor metacognitive inclinations­­they do not "know what they know."
          Combined with strategies for evaluating one's own estimates (e.g., those provided in curricula by
Munnich et al., 2004, and Ranney et al., 2008), a learner could be encouraged to generate what they believe to
be a "guess," but which might turn out to be well informed by what they have in fact learned.       If encouraged to
make such guesses, students should still spend time reasoning about their guess; prior work from our group
(Ganpule, 2005) has indicated that good estimators spend more time representing a quantity before estimating it,
consistent with work from the problem solving literature. Guessing too quickly is more often counterproductive.
Indeed, this result encouraged the curricula of Munnich et al. (2004) and Ranney et al. (2008) to highlight the
importance of self-critique and disconfirmation. (However, one of us anecdotally finds people, at times, to be
markedly underconfident estimators. For instance, people frequently claim to have "no idea" of the population
of California, yet often laugh out loud when asked if it could be "1,000.") Another idea is that students might
infer something about the quality of their estimate by introspecting on whether they remember being surprised
at a number during instruction. Such surprise could indicate an improvement of one's sense of magnitude.
          More generally, participants were able to learn something in this experiment without being aware of
their learning. This strongly suggests that non-episodic (i.e., implicit or rapidly semanticized) learning processes
could be involved even in the development of "declarative" factual information. Thus, depending upon an
instructor's particular pedagogical   goals, one   might   proceed   with instruction without concern   for   students'
initial awareness   of  their improved   sense  of  certain   facts (perhaps as in  "immersion"    language-learning
experiences). Over the course of an intervention, one would hope that students would eventually come to know
and trust their new knowledge on the topic, but such metacognitive awareness needn't come lock-step with
improvements in the more basic knowledge. This line of reasoning is reminiscent of studies of children applying
abstract mathematical rules before they are aware of doing so (Siegler, 2000).
          Of course there is also a clear role for explicit episodic recall in learning numerical information. In
particular,  when    participants    displayed  zero    or  moderate    amounts    of   surprise,  improvements    in
estimation/recollection were likely only if they believed they could recall the number. Thus, when students lack
sufficient schemas for incorporating the numerical knowledge and the information imparted is unsurprising, rote
memorization may be virtually the only remaining route. Of course, a complete pedagogy could include the
construction of knowledge structures that would then allow for the parallel recruitment of non-episodic learning.
          Instructional materials  that elicit surprise  in   students  may  allow  such students   to  learn without
conscious awareness that they have learned anything­­at least in domains that are scaffolded by nontrivial
preexisting knowledge. If the material is unsurprising, it appears that episodic encoding may be a critical step in
successful improvement. It should be noted that "surprise" might be often used as too specific a notion. It may
be that the relevant feature has more to do with general emotional, motivational, or inspirational, salience­­or
how interesting the material is to students. (See Kang et al., 2009, on connections between surprise, motivation,
and curiosity, the latter two of which are likely enhanced by soliciting estimates­­and even preferences­­as in
the EPIC procedure). Certainly, however, it seems that there are multiple routes to learning even relatively
concise facts, and a successful pedagogy might usefully engage factors such as surprise and engagement with
pre-existing knowledge to bolster more rote forms of learning.

References
Chi, M. T. (2005). Commonsense conceptions of emergent processes: Why some misconceptions are robust.
          The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 14(2), 161­199.
Clark, D., & Ivry, R. B. (in press). Multiple systems for motor skill learning. Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews:
          Cognitive Science.
Davachi, L., Mitchell, J. P., & Wagner, A. D. (2003). Multiple routes to memory: Distinct medial temporal lobe
          processes build item and source memories. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 100(4),
          2157­2162. doi:10.1073/pnas.0337195100
diSessa, A. A., & Sherin, B. L. (1998). What changes in conceptual change? International Journal of Science
          Education, 20(10), 1155­1191.
Ganpule, S. (2005). Strategy use in numerical estimation: Investigating the effects of an EPIC curriculum.
          Unpublished master's thesis, University of California, Berkeley.
Garcia de Osuna, J., Ranney, M., & Nelson, J. (2004). Qualitative and quantitative effects of surprise:(Mis)
          estimates, rationales,  and feedback-induced     preference   changes while   considering  abortion.  In K.

                                                    466  ·   © ISLS
                                              ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

       Forbus, D. Gentner, & T. Regier (Eds.), Proceedings of the Twenty-Sixth Annual Conference of the
       Cognitive Science Society (pp. 422-427). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Hothorn, T., Bretz, F., & Westfall, P. (2008). Simultaneous inference in general parametric models. Biometrical
       Journal, 50(3), 346­363.
Johnson, H. M., & Seifert, C. M. (1994). Sources of the continued influence effect: When misinformation in
       memory      affects later inferences.   Journal   of Experimental    Psychology   Learning   Memory    and
       Cognition, 20, 1420-1420.
Kang, M. J., Hsu, M., Krajbich, I. M., Loewenstein, G., McClure, S. M., Wang, J. T., & Camerer, C. F. (2009).
       The    wick in the   candle of  learning: Epistemic   curiosity  activates reward  circuitry and   enhances
       memory. Psychological Science, 20(8), 963-973. doi:10.1111/j.1467-9280.2009.02402.x
Knowlton, B.  J. (1998).   The   relationship between    remembering    and knowing:  A   cognitive  neuroscience
       perspective. Acta psychologica, 98(2-3), 253-265.
Lord, C. G., Ross, L., & Lepper, M. R. (1979). Biased assimilation and attitude polarization: The effects of prior
       theories on subsequently considered evidence. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 37(11),
       2098­2109.
Merikle, P. (2007). Preconscious processing. In M. Velmans & S. Schneider (Eds.), The Blackwell companion
       to consciousness. Malden, MA: Wiley-Blackwell.
Munnich,  E., Ranney,  M.,   Nelson,   J., Garcia de    Osuna,   J., &  Brazil, N. (2003).  Policy  shift  through
       Numerically-Driven Inferencing: An EPIC experiment about when base rates matter. In R. Alterman &
       D. Kirsh (Eds.), Proceedings of the Twenty-fifth Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society
       (pp. 834­839). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Munnich, E., Ranney, M. A., & Song, M. (2007). Surprise, surprise: The role of surprising numerical feedback
       in belief change. In D. S. McNamara & G. Trafton (Eds.), Proceedings of the twenty-ninth annual
       conference of the cognitive science society (pp. 503­508). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Munnich, E. L., Ranney, M. A., & Appel, D. M. (2004). Numerically-Driven Inferencing in instruction: The
       relatively broad transfer of estimation skills. In K. Forbus, D. Gentner, & T. Regier (Eds.), Proceedings
       of the Twenty-sixth Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 987­992). Mahwah, NJ:
       Erlbaum.
Munnich, E. L., Ranney, M. A., & Bachman, M. L. N. (2005). The longevities of policy-shifts and memories
       due to single feedback numbers. In B. G. Bara, L. Barsalou, & M. Bucciarelli (Eds.), Proceedings of
       the Twenty-seventh Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 1553­1558). Mahwah,
       NJ: Erlbaum.
Nadel, L., & Moscovitch, M. (1997). Memory consolidation, retrograde amnesia and the hippocampal complex.
       Current Opinion in Neurobiology, 7(2), 217­227.
Pashler, H., Rohrer, D., Cepeda, N. J., & Carpenter, S. K. (2007). Enhancing learning and retarding forgetting:
       Choices and consequences. Psychonomic Bulletin and Review, 14(2), 187­193.
Ranney, M., Cheng, F., Garcia de Osuna, J., & Nelson, J. (2001). Numerically driven inferencing: A new
       paradigm for examining judgments, decisions, and policies involving base rates. Paper presented at the
       Annual Meeting of the Society for Judgment & Decision Making.
Ranney, M. A., Rinne, L., Yarnall, L., Munnich, E., Miratrix, L., & Schank, P. (2008). Designing and assessing
       numeracy training for journalists: Toward improving quantitative reasoning among media consumers.
       In P. Kirschner, F. Prins, V. Jonker, & G. Kanselaar (Eds.), International Perspectives in the Learning
       Sciences: Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference for the Learning Sciences, Vol. 2 (pp. 2-
       246 to 2-253). International Society of the Learning Sciences, Inc.
Rinne, L. F., Ranney, M. A., & Lurie, N. H. (2006). Estimation as a catalyst for numeracy: Micro-interventions
       that increase the use of numerical information in decision-making. In S. Barab, K. Hay, & D. Hickey
       (Eds.), Proceedings    of  the seventh  international  conference    on  Learning sciences   (pp. 571-577).
       Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Siegler, R. S. (2000). Unconscious insights. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 9, 79-83.
Straw, A. D. (2008). Vision egg: an open-source library for realtime visual stimulus generation. Frontiers in
       neuroinformatics, 2. doi:10.3389/neuro.11.004.2008
Thagard, P. (2006). Hot Thought: Mechanisms and Applications of Emotional Cognition. The MIT Press.
Tse, D., Langston, R. F., Kakeyama, M., Bethus, I., Spooner, P. A., Wood, E. R., Witter, M. P., et al. (2007).
       Schemas and memory consolidation. Science, 316(5821), 76-82. doi:10.1126/science.1135935

Acknowledgments
We thank Tawny Tsang above all others for myriad forms of assistance, Ed Munnich for extensive comments,
as well as Andrew Galpern and other members of the Reasoning Group at UC Berkeley. Thanks also to Tom
Wickens for statistical advice, Rich Ivry for his overall wisdom and support, and Mick Rugg and Lila Davachi
for their input on experimental design issues. Finally, we thank UC-Berkeley's Committee on Research.

                                                  467  ·  © ISLS
