                                                 ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 2

Connecting Brain and Learning Sciences: An Optical Brain Imaging
Approach to Monitoring Development of Expertise in UAV Piloting
                Murat Perit Çakir, Hasan Ayaz, Justin Menda, Kurtulu! "zzeto#lu, Banu Onaral
       Cognitive Neuroengineering and Quantitative Experimental Research (CONQUER) Collaborative
              School of Biomedical Engineering, Science and Health Systems, Drexel University
                                   3508 Market Street, Philadelphia PA 19104
     mpc48@drexel.edu, ha45@drexel.edu, jm973@drexel.edu, ki25@drexel.edu, banu.onaral@drexel.edu

         Abstract: In this paper we present our ongoing research project on UAV operator training and
         cognitive workload   assessment     for safe piloting   to exemplify   the  potential  for  conducting
         interdisciplinary research  that   incorporates   insights  from  learning    sciences  and  cognitive
         neuroscience.  The   goal   of the  project  is to  devise  cognitive     neuromarkers   to assess   the
         cognitive workload    experienced    by  UAV    operators   and  to monitor    their  development    of
         expertise through analysis of optical brain imaging data and flight-training videos.

The past decade has seen an increasing interest towards connecting research on learning sciences and cognitive
neuroscience around various topics of common interest such as language learning, creative problem solving,
learning disabilities and development of expertise (de Jong et al., 2009). Although the mind, brain and education
movement   has  recently   gained  considerable   momentum,      initial findings   of neuroscience   on  learning  were
received with  reservations  by   educational    researchers  and   practitioners  (Bruer, 1997;    Varma,    Schwartz &
McCandliss, 2006). This was largely due to lack of practical applications of neuroscientific findings to the
design of real-life learning activities and environments. Earlier neuroscientific research in learning was confined
to highly controlled laboratory settings and relied on protocols limited in scope due to the constraints imposed
by the instruments used for monitoring brain activity. However, this body of research has brought important
findings with regard to the correlations between brain activation patterns and basic cognitive processes such as
attention, memory and visual/auditory perception that are fundamental to understanding the biological basis of
higher order cognitive processes like learning. Different neuroimaging modalities such as positron emission
tomography (PET), functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), and electroencephalography (EEG) studies
have  consistently found   correlations   between    specific  brain  activation    patterns and   underlying   cognitive
processes. Moreover, recent advances in brain imaging technology have led to the design of more portable
instruments that afford new ways to study learning in real life settings. Therefore, recent developments have
opened up new and exciting possibilities for collaboration across learning sciences and cognitive neuroscience,
which may shed further light on our collective quest for better understanding the nature of learning.
         This paper introduces an ongoing research study where we aim to identify cognitive indices related to
Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAV) operations by using an emerging optical brain imaging technique called
functional near-infrared (fNIR) spectroscopy. We brought together an interdisciplinary team of researchers with
backgrounds  in cognitive    neuroscience,   biomedical   engineering,   signal    processing, and   learning sciences to
study the  correlation between    increasingly   competent    performance    demonstrated      by  novice  pilots  during
simulated missions and brain activation data obtained from subjects' prefrontal cortices that correspond to an
area known to be associated with executive functions (e.g. judgment, decision making, planning).
         fNIR is a neuroimaging modality that enables continuous, noninvasive, and portable monitoring of
changes in blood oxygenation and blood volume related to human brain function. fNIR technology uses specific
wavelengths of light, introduced at the scalp, to enable the noninvasive measurement of changes in the relative
ratios of deoxygenated hemoglobin (deoxy-Hb) and oxygenated hemoglobin (oxy-Hb) in the capillary beds
during brain activity. Over the last decade, studies in the laboratory have established that fNIR spectroscopy
provides a veridical measure of oxygenation in the brain. Our recent findings indicate that fNIR can effectively
monitor  cognitive  tasks  such   as attention,   working    memory,     target categorization,   and  problem    solving
(Izzetoglu et al., 2007). These experimental outcomes compare favorably with fMRI studies, and in particular,
with the blood oxygenation level dependent signal. Since fNIR can be implemented in the form of a wearable
and minimally intrusive device, it has the capacity to monitor brain activity under real life conditions and in
everyday   environments.   Moreover,     the fNIR    system   is  amenable      to integration  with  other   established
physiological and neurobehavioral measures, including EEG, eye tracking, pupil reflex, heart rate variability,
respiration, and electrodermal activity.
         Research on human factors of UAV flight has identified several reasons underlying mishaps in UAV
operations (Cooke   et  al., 2006).  Firstly,    UAV  operators     have  limited   situational  awareness    due  to  the
disembodied nature of UAV flight where operators need to fly UAVs by relying on limited camera angles.
Since commands are transmitted over satellite links, UAVs are less responsive to operator input as compared to
manned aircraft. In addition to this, typical UAV missions take long durations of time that require transitions

                                                     462  ·  © ISLS
                                                ICLS 2010  ·   Volume 2

from long periods of dull flight mode to critical moments where operators need to stay alert to engage with a
target or to attend to a contingency. In short, physically and cognitively taxing aspects of UAV flight have
resulted in a large number of mishaps during military and civilian use. Therefore, devising reliable indices for
assessing cognitive load and level of expertise are of critical importance for evaluating training regiments and
interface designs, and ultimately for improving the safety and success of UAV operations.
           We are currently in the data collection phase of our research project. Our initial pilot study includes 10
adults who have no prior experience with UAV flight. The simulation platform is based on Microsoft's Flight
Simulator X with the Predator UAV add-on by Firstclass Simulations. Using a complete joystick, throttle, and
rudder pedal controller set, this simulation environment approximates an actual MQ-1 Predator user interface
(Figure  1). After completing   a  demo   session, each    subject completed  a total  of   8 two-hour  long  training
missions within three weeks. During each session subjects fly variants of the same mission, where they are
asked   to successfully take off,  locate a  submarine  in   a specified  geographical area,   pass over  it to allow
identification photographs to be taken, navigate back to an airfield with given coordinates, fly within 500ft of
the ground en route to the airfield over mountainous terrain, and successfully land after following a contingency
maneuver revealed towards the end of the mission. These aspects, as well as other factors such as crosswinds,
are added to the simulation to create realistic cognitive and physical demands, similar to those experienced by a
real UAV pilot. The simulation environment allows us to replay each session. In addition to the flight video, we
collect brain activation  data, as well   as additional parameters   such  as pitch,  roll, yaw,  altitude, longitude,
latitude and air speed from within the simulation to aid in the assessment of performance.
           We employ both quantitative and qualitative methods to monitor the progress of each subject. Critical
aspects of the mission that are likely to increase or decrease cognitive load (e.g. actively searching for a target,
navigating towards a set of coordinates, etc.), are identified through video analysis and the flight data. Once
critical moments are identified and sampled, fNIR data collected at those moments will be correlated with
operator performance to identify cognitive markers indicating expertise development and cognitive workload.
           Our preliminary analysis has focused on the moment when two pilots reported that they have detected
the submarine by pressing a button during 16 missions. In an effort to measure the effect of sub sighting on the
change in oxygenation levels in the prefrontal cortex, we have compared 100-second blocks before and after the
subjects located the submarine. For preprocessing the signals, a linear phase, finite impulse response (FIR) low
pass filter with cut-off frequency of 0.1Hz is applied to the raw fNIR data to eliminate high frequency noise.
Next, for oxygenation calculations, modified Beer Lambert Law is applied to the filtered data to calculate oxy-
hemoglobin and deoxy-hemoglobin concentration changes for 16 measurement locations (voxels). The averages
of total hemoglobin concentration changes were calculated for pre- and post- blocks, and then normalized by
calculating  z-scores for each  pair independently.  Repeated    measures   analyses  of  variance, with the  Geiser-
Greenhouse correction, indicated that the decrease in oxygenation only at voxel 2 is significant in both subjects
F(1,28)=794.73, p<0.023. This result is in-line with our previous findings (Izzetoglu et al., 2007) and can be
interpreted as a sign of relief where cognitive resources corresponding to voxel 2 become less active once the
search task is complete. Therefore, voxel 2 seems to be highly associated with the search process.

                Figure 1: The Experimental Setup for the UAV study and the location of voxel 2

References
Cooke, N. J., Pringle, H., Pederson, H., Connor, O., & Salas, E. (2006). Human Factors of Remotely Operated
        Vehicles. The Netherlands: Elsevier.
de Jong, T., van Gog, T., Jenks, K., Manlove, S. et al. (2009). Explorations in Learning and the Brain: On the
        Potential of Cognitive Neuroscience for Educational Science. New York, NY: Springer.
Izzetoglu M, Bunce S, Izzetoglu K, Onaral B, Pourrezaei K, (2007). Functional Brain Imaging Using Near
        Infrared Technology for Cognitive Activity Assessment. IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology
        Magazine, Special issue on the Role of Optical Imaging in Augmented Cognition, 26(4):38-46.
Szucs,  D.  & Goswami,    U. (2007).  Educational   Neuroscience:    Defining a  New   Discipline   for the  Study of
        Mental Representations. Mind, Brain, and Education, 1 (3), 114- 127.
Varma, S., Schwartz, D. L., & McCandliss, B. (2006). Is Neuroscience a Learning Science? In Barab, S. A.,
        Hay, K. E., and Hickey, D. T. (Eds) Proceedings of ICLS2006. Bloomington, IN: LEA. pp 792-798.

                                                    463  ·  © ISLS
