                                                 ICLS 2010    Volume 2

  Activating childhood expertise to engage with disciplinary concepts
         Sasha Palmquist, University of Pittsburgh, 3939 O'Hara St., Pittsburgh, PA 15260 sap9@pitt.edu

         Abstract:  Child experts in museums have demonstrated their ability to rehearse well organized
         dinosaur  knowledge   in conversation  with    their  parents  that distinguishes them   from  novice
         children and parents (Palmquist & Crowley, 2007). This study builds on research about parent-
         child learning conversations and considers the potential opportunities made possible when prior
         knowledge can be activated in museum exhibitions to support learning conversations that include
         ecological and evolutionary relationships.

Research on early childhood expertise has found that child experts distinguish themselves from novices in their
ability to organize dinosaur knowledge, reason hierarchically, generate inferences about behaviors, and categorize
novel dinosaur examples (Chi, Hutchinson, and Robin, 1989; Gobbo & Chi, 1986). The islands of expertise concept
suggests that this level of childhood knowledge can emerge through the convergence of parent child activity and
engagement with learning resources around a topic like dinosaurs (Crowley & Jacobs, 2002). Parents are often well
positioned to provide explanations during conversations with their children across contexts that have the potential to
support early science learning and the development of scientific literacy (Callanan & Jipson, 2001; Callanan &
Oakes,   1992; Crowley   et. al,  2001). Museums       provide opportunities    for intergenerational learning  through
conversation where children and adults are more equitably empowered to adopt the roles of knowledge presentation
and reception (Hilke, 1989). Child experts in museums have demonstrated their ability to rehearse well organized
dinosaur knowledge in conversation with their parents that distinguishes them from novice children and parents
(Palmquist & Crowley, 2007). This study considered whether parents and children in a dinosaur exhibition could use
islands  of expertise as a   knowledge   resource   to support   learning  conversations   that include ecological   and
evolutionary relationships. This analysis describes patterns of parent-child learning conversations observed among
expert and novice families and considers the implications for disciplinary engagement and the design of learning
environments.

Research Context
The redesigned Dinosaur in Their Time exhibition highlights the Carnegie collection of Mesozoic fossils. Dinosaurs
are displayed in ecological and temporal contexts that suggest a narrative of interactions that may have occurred
between different species including pterosaurs, early mammals, and birds. The layout and design of the information
mediation (printed labels, touch screen labels, videos, and murals) was intended to support conversations about
ecological and evolutionary relationships.

Methods
A total of 50 families with children between the ages of 5-8 years old participated in this study. Target children
included 30  boys  and 20  girls with a  mean  age   of  6  years, 9 months.   A dinosaur  knowledge    assessment   was
completed by all children that measured ability to identify dinosaurs, familiarity with causal relationship between
features and  behaviors, awareness  of   extinction theories,  familiarity with  paleontology   practices, and temporal
relationships between dinosaurs. Parents and children completed a pre and post visit task in which they discussed
images of the exhibition and were encouraged to engage with ecological and evolutionary themes.
         Through a combination of emergent and deductive approaches, three coding categories were developed to
explore patterns of topic and thematic engagement in parent-child conversations: object focused talk, ecology talk,
and evolutionary talk. Object focused talk captured four types of conversations about the specimens and features of
the exhibition. These include: identification, dinosaur comparisons, form & function, and affectivetalk. Ecology talk
captured levels of connection    between species  that   parents and   children noticed  and discussed.    Evolution talk
captured the themes of change over time and common ancestry.

                                                                                                                       !
!
                                                     466     ISLS
                                                ICLS 2010    Volume 2

Preliminary Findings
Novice and expert children and their families produced different patterns of learning during visits to this exhibition.
Consistent with previous research, expert children consistently labeled species with their scientific names (both
dinosaur and non dinosaur), made comparisons between dinosaurs, highlighted examples of form and function and
often commented on their favorite species and features. Novice children also engaged in conversations across these
categories but more often referred to dinosaurs through descriptive labels and followed the lead of their parents
when  they engaged in dinosaur comparisons and recognized        form   and  function relationships between  dinosaur
features. Patterns of disciplinary talk captured by ecological and evolutionary coding categories suggested that
experts and their parents engaged in more explanatory depth than novices.

Conclusions
This study builds on research about parent-child learning conversations and considers the potential opportunities
made possible when prior knowledge can be activated in museum exhibitions. Examining how islands of expertise
in a topic like dinosaurs might facilitate early engagement with disciplinary thinking and reasoning providesa model
for exploring this kind of interest driven learning pathway across contexts.

References
Callanan, M. A., & Jipson, J. (2001). Explanatory conversations and young children's developing
        scientific literacy. In K. Crowley, C. D. Schunn, & T. Okada (Eds.), Designing for science: Implications
        from everyday, classroom, and professional science. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Callanan, M. A., & Oakes, L. A. (1992). Preschoolers' questions and parent's explanations: Causal
        thinking in everyday activity. Cognitive Development, 7, 231-233.
Chi, M.T.H., Hutchinson, J. & Robin, A. F. (1989) How inferences about novel domain-related concepts
        can be constrained by structural knowledge. Merrill-Palmer Quarterly 35, 27-62.
Crowley, K., Callanan, M., Jipson, J., Galco, J., Topping, K., & Shrager, J. (2001). Shared scientific
        thinking in everyday parent-child activity. Science Education, 85, 712-732.
Crowley, K. & Jacobs, M. (2002). Islands of expertise and the development of family scientific literacy.
        In G. Leinhardt, K. Crowley, & K. Knutson (Eds.) Learning conversations in museums (pp. 333-356).
        Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Gobbo, C., & Chi, M. T. H. (1986). How knowledge is structured and used by expert and novice children. Cognitive
        Development, 1, 221-237
Palmquist, S. & Crowley, K. (2007). From teachers to testers: How parents talk to novice and expert children in a
        natural history museum. Science Education, 91(5), 783-804.

                                                                                                                     !
!
                                                    467     ISLS
