                                                   ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

The Role of Concretization in Acquiring Design Knowledge
                                Tamar Ronen Fuhrmann, tamarrf@gmail.com
                                          Yael Kali, yaelk@technion.ac.il

          Abstract: This research explored the nature of design knowledge by examining the processes
          in  which   graduate    students   in education   learned    to design    educational technologies.     We
          developed two rubrics to assess: (a) the degree to which students were able to translate their
          design ideas into concrete design artifacts (concretization rubric), and (b) the degree to which
          they  designed    artifacts  that followed   a socio-constructivist    pedagogical    approach  versus   a
          teacher-centered      transmissionst  model    (epistemology     rubric).  Outcomes   indicated    that as
          students developed their concretization skills, they were able to become aware to and reduce
          gaps between their "theoretical" and "applied" epistemologies. By making their design ideas
          more concrete, students were able to carry out productive negotiations about these ideas with
          instructors and peers, and to explore them in relation to theory and to expert design knowledge.

Rationale
Research in the learning sciences has shown that many opportunities to learn arise in the course of designing an
artifact in general, and in designing an artifact intended for others to learn with, in particular (Papert, 1991). The
potential of designing as a process that supports learning has been documented for a wide range of ages and
levels of expertise. For instance, Harel (1991) explored the learning that takes place when fourth grade children
develop mathematical software products for other students in their school. She showed that the young designers
learned  not   only  about    mathematics    (fractions) and   programming      (Logo),  but  also about  design   and  user
interface. Kafai     (2006)   showed   similar  outcomes    with    fifth grade  children  who   designed    and  developed
computer   games     for  their peers. She   argues  that: "The   greatest  learning  benefit  remains  reserved   for  those
engaged in the design process, the game designers, and not those at the receiving end, the game players" (p. 39).
The impact     of engaging    students  in  design  processes    on their  learning  was  also  found   with  middle   school
students;  for instance,   Kolodner    et al. (2003)   indicated  that the  Learning   By  Design   approach   significantly
enhanced middle school students' motivation, their collaboration and metacognitive skills, and their scientific
understanding in topics included in the products they developed (earth and life sciences).
          In this research we explore the learning that occurs in a design process with a target audience that
received   only   little attention  in the  learning by    design   literature, namely,  graduate   students  in  education.
Researchers in various disciplines, such as the sciences of learning, instruction and design have recently begun
to synthesize   practical  and   theoretical  knowledge    regarding   how  to   guide and inspire   creators of  innovative
educational    tools (DiGiano,      Goldman,    &  Chorost,    2009).  However,     more  research   is required   to   better
understand    the ways     in   which  graduate   students  in  education--who      are potential   educators,    curriculum-
designers,   learning-scientists,   or  policy  makers--develop      skills in   designing technology-based       curriculum
modules, and how they can be supported in this process.
          In an earlier study, Ronen-Fuhrmann, Kali, and Hoadley (2008), showed that there is an important
added value in engaging graduate students in designing their own technology-based curriculum modules; while
working    on  their design   projects, students  became    more    aware   of  gaps between    what was  defined    as their
"theoretical epistemologies about learning" (ideas expressed during general discussions about design, usually
representing a socio-constructivist approach) and their "applied epistemologies about learning" (ideas reflected
in artifacts they created, which tended to apply more transmissionist approaches), and were able to reduce these
gaps. In this manner, students' epistemologies about learning became more coherent ­ an important outcome for
students in education, whether or not they intend to design curriculum materials. In the current study we focus
on the nature of knowledge and skills that students gain in educational technology design courses ­ a type of
knowledge which the literature generally refers to as design knowledge. We focus on a specific aspect of design
knowledge found in this research ­ the ability to concretize abstract design ideas, and explore the relationship
between students' development of concretization skills and their ability to reduce their epistemological gaps.

Research Settings
This research investigated the learning that took place in a semester-long course named "Designing Educational
Technologies"     designated    for graduate    students in science    education,   which  was  designed,    developed   and
instructed by the authors of this paper. Students in the course were introduced with theoretical and practical
aspects of   educational   technology   design;   they worked    in groups   of  two or  three  to design a  mockup     of an
educational technology module, but were not required to develop or implement these modules. The rationale

                                                       468   ·  © ISLS
                                                     ICLS 2010    ·   Volume 1

was  to  focus      on exploring   students'    learning   while     designing,     without    the constraints    caused   by    any
development tool, and without requiring a time-consuming development process.
         The   course    was  based  on   an  instructional  model,     which   evolved  in    an  iterative design    process in a
previous study (Ronen-Fuhrmann et al., 2008). The final version of the model includes three main elements,
which  reflect    a unique   application  and   integration    of three  frameworks:    (a)    the ADDIE     structure   (Analyze,
Design Develop, Implement, Evaluate) (Dick, Carey, & Carey, 2001).                    (b) the studio approach to instruction
(Hoadley & Kim, 2003; Schon, 1983), and (c) the use of the Design Principles Database (DPD)                             (http://edu-
design-principles.org),      a web-based resource of socio-constructivist pedagogical design-principles, which were
written by design experts (Kali, 2006; Kali & Linn, 2007; Kali, Linn, & Roseman, 2008).

Methodology
We used a case-study methodology to examine students' learning processes and their development of design
knowledge throughout the course. A collective case-study approach­often referred to as "multiple case study"
(Stake, 1994)--was implemented. This approach is aimed at providing insights into an issue or problem or to
refine a theory by exploring similarities and patterns between several case-studies. In this research, each group
of 2-3 students, who worked on one design project during the course, was defined as a case-study.
         The study was conducted with 14 groups (33 graduate students) who participated in three enactments
of the  Designing      Educational   Technologies     course   between     the  years 2005-2007.        Most students   had  some
experience in teaching or were active science teachers. They had some experience in designing curricula but
most  of them      had no    experience   in designing    technology-based      learning  modules.      In  order   to characterize
student learning in each of the iterations the following data sources were used (Table 1).

Table 1: Data sources.

Data source                       Description

Likert type surveys               At the end of each enactment students were asked to evaluate various elements of the
                                  course (such as the structuring of the design process, working with peers, using the DPD
                                  etc.) on a 1 to 5 scale.

Reflective essay                  At the end of each enactment students were required to write a reflective assay about
                                  their design process.

Semi-structured interviews        At  the end  of each   enactment    we  conducted   interviews   with two students   who were
                                  asked to reflect about their design process.

Records of online discussions     Whole   class   online discussions    about   the literature and   group   online discussions
                                  regarding the design of the group's module were automatically recorded at the courses'
                                  website.

Student artifacts                 During the semester we collected documents produced at various stages of the course.
                                  These documents included formal design artifacts students were required to write, as
                                  well as informal notes and sketches students created to discuss their ideas with peers
                                  and with us.

Reflective journal                Following   each   class-meeting  we   documented   events   related  to  each of the  groups'
                                  progress, the discussions we had with students, or other events that seemed relevant for
                                  analyzing each group's learning processes.

         These      data were  analyzed    using  two    rubrics;   the first, entitled "concretization      rubric"   was used   to
evaluate the degree to which students were able to translate their design ideas into design artifacts; the second,
entitled "epistemology       rubric" was   used   to examine     the  epistemological   changes      that  students  went  through
during   the course.   We    explain our  rationale   for  developing    these  rubrics, and     the way    we   used  them  in  the
sections below.

Concretization Rubric
From early stages of the research we noticed that some students were able to easily translate their design ideas
into concrete     artifacts, while   other   students  found     this process   very    difficult.  Following    our   preliminary
observations, we decided to focus our assessment of design artifacts created by students using this lens. We
developed    a rubric    (Table 2)   which    describes    six levels   of concretization      of  design   ideas.  Each   level  is
associated with a stage in the design process in which a higher level of concretization is required. Thus, level 0
represents a stage in which students are required to discuss their module only in a theoretical manner. Level 5
represents the highest level of concretization; an artifact at this level should depict a full learning environment
with a clear navigation system illustrating sequences of activities with clear instructions for learners.

                                                         469   ·  © ISLS
                                                        ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

         It   is important  to note   that although        each  stage   in the instructional model      was   designed   to     provide
students with     the   design skills   required     at   that stage, including   guidelines  for      concretization,   we      did not
anticipate a one-to-one relationship between the knowledge taught and the knowledge gained by students at each
stage. We also want to stress that we do not view concretization as a goal of the design process. Rather, we refer
to concretization as important means to reach pedagogically sound artifacts.

Table 2: Rubric for assessing concretization of design ideas.

        Level of                 Design Artifact                Example Student Expressions and Artifacts              Required in
    concretization               Characteristics                                                                          Stage

  0 ­ Theoretical           No design artifact. Only           "It's very important to build activities that would   Analysis
      knowledge             theoretical sayings regarding      be relevant and interesting to the learner"
                            a planned module.

  1 ­ Collection of         A collection of design ideas       "Learning throughout the whole module should          Brainstorm
      design ideas          for the module. The ideas          follow a specific inquiry question". (Excerpt         Activities
                            only generally refer to the        from a discussion of one of the groups
                            way a learner might act in         regarding their design of a biology module.
                            the module.                        They planned to design the activities around an
                                                               inquiry question but were not concerned at this
                                                               stage about the nature of this question).

  2 ­ Initial activity      Graphical or verbal                "First we should show them [the learners] the         Build Flow
      sequence              description of a set of            story about the family tree, then have them
                            activities, with an indication     review the algorithm for scanning the tree, and
                            of which activity should take      then use the simulation" (Excerpt from a
                            place before or after              discussion regarding the design of a
                            another.                           technology for high-school computer-science
                                                               learners)

  3 ­ Initial               Ideas are translated to            Figure 1a shows a sketch of the way students          Design
      translation into      actual features and                envisioned an activity they planned for a             Features
      features              presented in a way that            module in genetics. Learners in this activity
                            shows how a learner might          were required to decide whether they can
                            act in the module.                 donate blood to a kid with cystic fibrosis. At this
                                                               stage this was the only activity they developed
                                                               in their module.

  4 ­ Initial learning      Mockup of the module               (See Figure 1b showing design knowledge               Mockup:
      environment           showing some of the                level 5 ­ full learning environment as                Iteration 1
                            activities, with instructions      reference).
                            for learners. An initial
                            navigation system is
                            present.

  5 ­ Full learning         Mockup of the module               Figure 1b shows one screen from a mockup of           Mockup:
      environment           showing most of the                a module designed for teaching logical thinking       Iteration 2
                            activities with clear              for middle school math students. The buttons
                            instructions for learners. A       at the top and side of the screen indicate that
                            clear navigating system is         this screen is part of the whole learning
                            represented.                       environment. Each of these buttons was linked
                                                               to a screen in the mockup, which was
                                                               developed in a similar level of detail.

                                                            470   ·  © ISLS
                                                    ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

 (a) Design artifact showing level 3 of concretization          (b) Design artifact showing level 5 of concretization

                      Figure 1. Examples of artifacts showing levels 3 and 5 of concretization.

Epistemology Rubric
The term "epistemology" in the learning sciences has traditionally referred to several entities in the nature of
knowing, such as beliefs, conceptual understanding, perceptions, feelings and emotions. Since our analysis did
not enable us to fully distinguish between these entities, we decided to use the general term "epistemology" in
order to refer to any idea regarding how people learn expressed by the students, in their sayings and doings.
        As mentioned above, a gap between students' "theoretical" and "applied" epistemologies was revealed
in an earlier stage of this study (Ronen-Fuhrmann et al., 2008); at the beginning of the semester, when engaged
in theoretical discourse, students tended to advocate socio-constructivists paradigms, whereas when engaged in
designing their technology-based    modules,        more  than   half  of the  students  tended    to neglect these    ideas  and
apply more traditional approaches.
        In order to quantitatively assess "low" and "high" levels of epistemology, we relied on studies that
describe an instructionist view of learning as equivalent to naïve epistemology, and a socio-constructivist view,
as analogous to sophisticated epistemology (Maor & Taylor, 1995; Schommer, 1990). Inductive analysis of our
data indicated  that  there are three    main dimensions      in  students'   sayings and    artifacts in the design    process,
which express their epistemologies: (a) learner activity, (b) collaboration, and (c) content accessibility. We used
these dimensions to develop the epistemology rubric (Table 3)

Table 3: Epistemology rubric.
                            Dimension                             Low                    Medium                       High
     Learner activityThe degree to which students expressed ideasthat support active engagement of learnerswithin a technology-based learning environment.Passive: e.g. learnerreads or viewsinformation.E.g. learner clicks onlinks.Active: e.g. learnermanipulatesvariables
     CollaborationThe degree to which the students supportedusing technology in ways that enable learners toIndividual learninglearn from each otherGroup work is notsupported bytechnologyCollaboration isintrinsic to theactivity
     Content accessibilityThe degree to which students expressed viewsthat support making the contents of a learningenvironment accessible to learners.No effort to connectMotivational aspectsMotivational aspectscontents to studentare extrinsic toare intrinsic toworldactivitiesactivities

        We  would     like  to note that   we   used    the  epistemology     rubric  to assess    the level  of epistemology
expressed in the artifacts created by groups of students rather than by individuals. Although in many studies
epistemology is attributed to the individual, our rationale for studying group epistemology is based on the work
of researchers such as Fuller (1987) and Goldman (2008), who claimed that there is a strong social aspect to
epistemology, which cannot be overlooked; the individual's way of thinking is considerably influenced by the
ideas expressed by the group of people he or she is interacting with.

                                                         471  ·  © ISLS
                                                 ICLS 2010    ·   Volume 1

Data Analysis Procedure
To assess the design artifacts of the 14 case-study groups using the two rubrics, we first created digital portfolios
for each group, which included all in-progress and final documents created by the group, all of the individual
students' posts in the course's discussion forums, transcriptions of interviews (if there were any for students in
the group),  and   their reflective  essays. Each   portfolio    was   organized by the  stage  of the  design  process
(Analysis, Brainstorm, Build flow etc.). To refine initial versions of both rubrics, we took one example case-
study, and had four researchers--two external researchers and the two authors of this paper--assess the degree
of  concretization  and  epistemology  of  the  group    at each  stage  of the  design process.   Initially, about 60%
agreement was reached. Following several cycles of refinement of the rubric, in which more case studies were
assesses, we reached a degree of about 90% agreement between researchers using the current version of the
rubrics. In this manner seven of the portfolios (50% of the cases) were assessed. The rest of the case-studies
were then assessed by the authors of this paper together (without comparison of individual assessments).

Combining the Two Rubrics to Map Findings
Initial analysis of the  findings   showed   that using  each    of the  rubrics described  above,  we  can  distinguish
between two patterns of learning. Using the concretization rubric, we found that one pattern was represented by
groups   who had   difficulties in  concretizing  their  design   ideas. The  concretization level of  their artifacts at
various stages of the design process was lower than the level required at that stage (see Table 2). On the other
hand there were groups whose pattern did not show any difficulty with the concretization and were sometimes
even ahead of the required level in the design process. This enabled us to refer to the dichotomy: Low versus
High pace of concretization skills acquisition. Using the epistemology rubric, we were able to clearly distinguish
between one pattern, in which groups of students showed a gap at beginning stages of the semester, as described
above,  versus another   pattern of  those who    showed      a coherent   epistemology throughout  the semester.  This
enabled us to refer to the dichotomy: Coherent versus Non-coherent pattern of group epistemology. Using these
two dichotomies, we developed a four-quadrant matrix (Figure 2) to map our findings regarding the relations
between concretization and epistemology.

                         Figure 2. The four-quadrant concretization/epistemology matrix.

Outcomes
Following an in-depth analysis of each of the 14 case-studies, in which we used both the concretization and the
epistemology rubrics using all the data sources, we were able to map the cases into the four-quadrant matrix.
The results of this mappying are represented in table 4. As can be seen from the the table, two of the cases were
mapped in quadrant 1, another two in quadrant 2, three more in quadrant 3, and 7 cases--more than half of the
students--were   mapped    in quadrant  4.   Additionally,    the anaysis  of each of   the cases' patterns  of learning
revealled that groups that were classified as belonging to quadrant 4 significantly reduced their episteomogical
gaps throughout the semester, whereas groups that belonged to quadrant 3 only did so to a small extent. We
argue that the high pace of their acquisition of concretization skills was an important factor in enabling groups
in quadrant 4 to reduce their epistemological gaps. To support this claim, which we further discuss in the final
section  of this paper,  we   first describe in   detail one    case-study  representing and  illustrating  the learning
processes of groups that were classified as belonging to quadrant 4.

                                                     472    ·   © ISLS
                                               ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

Table 4: Mapping of the 14 case-studies using the concretization/epistemology matrix.
Quadrant    # of Groups    # of Students     Pattern

   1              2               5          Coherent epistemology throughout the semesterLow pace of acquiring concretization skills

   2              2               4          Coherent epistemology throughout the semester andHigh pace of acquiring concretization skills

                                             Non-coherent epistemology at beginning of semester
   3              3               6          Minor reducing of epistemological gap
                                             Low pace of acquiring concretization skills
                                             Non-coherent epistemology throughout the semester and
   4              7               18         Major reducing of epistemological gap
                                             High pace of acquiring concretization skills

  Total          14               33

Illustrating Learning Processes in Quadrant 4: The case of I,S&E
I,S&E designed a technology-based module designated for high-school computer-science learners. Their module
focused on recursive algorithms for scanning data-structure trees. One of the features they designed, from very
early stages of the design process was an animation that demonstrates a certain algorithm for scanning a tree.
Their (potential) learners were required to solve problems that utilize the demonstrated algorithm.
        Analysis of  the design   artifacts they  produced  at   various stages   of      the design  process using    the
concretization rubric (left graph in Figure 3) indicates that this group's acquisition of concretization skills was
of a high pace (high pace was defined as a slope that is higher or equals to 0.75, where each stage of the design
course  was numbered     consecutively  starting with  "Analysis=1").   I,S&E had         come  up with  the idea   of the
animation as early as the Analysis stage (in which they were still not required to suggest ideas for activities).
They continued at a "normal", or "required" pace (see dotted line in Figure 3 - left graph) in the Brainstorm
Activities and Build Flow stages. When required to design features, they were still struggling with their flow of
activities, but they gradually progressed until they reached level four of concretization in their final mockup.
        The analysis of IS&Es' learning process using the epistemology rubric (Figure 3, right side) revealed that
at the beginning of the semester,    in general discussions about educational technologies, each of these students
expressed ideas that we classified as high level of sophistication with regards to epistemology (level 3 in each of
the dimensions of the epistemology rubric). However, as can be seen in figure 3, there was a large drop at the
Analysis stage, with respect to the Learning Activity and Content Accessibly dimensions, which continued with a
drop of the Collaboration dimension at the Build Flow stage. These drops represent the gap described earlier,
between "theoretical" and "applied" epistemologies. Specifically, when IS&E began to design their animation, it
required learners only to passively watch the animation, and there was no attempt to make the contents more
accessible. Collaborative aspects were minimal (a forum was designed for Q&A). Gradually, as this feature was
revised following   discussions  with  peers  and  instructors,  and following    the     use  of the  Design Principles
Database, this feature   became   a  manipulable  tool, which    enabled learners  to     solve   problems by  exploring
various ways to  scan   given trees, as well  as their  own trees.  Our  analysis  of     their final mockup,  using   the
epistemology   rubric   was   as follows:   Learning    Activity  =  3   (learner manipulates         variables); Content
Accessibility = 2 (motivational aspects were eventually at an intermediate level); Collaboration = 3 (activities
that required learners to solve problems in tasks created by their peers were designed). Thus - we interpreted
their learning process as representing a major reduction of their groups' epistemological gap. The dotted line in
left graph of Figure 3, which represents the average between the three dimensions, illustrates this reduction of
the epistemological gap.

                                                   473  ·  © ISLS
                                                                                               ICLS 2010     ·        Volume 1

  &                                                                                                            $
                                        @*.:+/42A/42*." 1;200                                                                                 -:42>24,
                                        DE<):4)F"G/:)                                                                                         @*00H*+/42*.
  %                                                                                                                                           -::)112H2024,
=)>)0"*?"@*.:+/42A/42*. $#                                                                                                                    D<214) 5*0*C," />+/C)*0*C, #D<214)5
  "

  !                                                                                                            "
                             '()*+,   -./0,121 3+/2.14*+5          60*7    6)/48+)1 9*:;8<!"    62./0                   '()*+,    -./0,121  3+/2.14*+5          60*7      6)/48+)1  9*:;8<!"    62./0
                                                      B)12C.":*8+1)"14/C)1                                                                     B)12C.":*8+1)"14/C)1

                              Figure 3: Analysis of the learning processes of I,S&E: Acquisition of concretization skills (left), and changes in
                                                                                             group epistemology (right)

                             Discussion
                              The mapping of the 14 case-studies using the four-quadrant concretization/epistemology matrix, revealed the
                              important   role        of       concretization       in helping  students     to      reduce    epistemological              gaps.    The   cases    mapped    in
                              quadrants 1 and 3 illustrate that moving from general design ideas to actual activities was a difficult task for
                              many of the students. Concretization of a high level, in the context of educational technology design, requires
                              not only to design the details of certain features, but also to be able to describe how these features fit together in
                              a coherent learning environment, and design different paths learners will be able to use in the environment. This
                              requires a designer to deal with very high level of detail of the activities, and at the same time envision a flow of
                              activities or scenarios that would enable a potential learner to acquire knowledge using the designed module.
                                        Our           findings      illustrate that      as  students     concretized          their design            ideas    and   represented     them    in
                              sequences of activities, they exposed their pedagogical way of thinking to others. This enabled them to negotiate
                              and reexamine their thinking with peers and instructors and to compare the design solutions they came up with,
                              with those of experts. The exposure of ideas, induced by the concretization, brought to identification of gaps
                              between students' views about how people learn, and pedagogical notions expressed in artifacts they designed at
                              initial stages of the course (Ronen-Fuhrmann et al., 2007). Their views of learning, as stated in discussions,
                              usually represented socio-constructivist approaches, while many of their initial design artifacts represented more
                              naïve,  transmissionist             views    of learning.      As students'    artifacts         became      more        concrete,      they also    represented
                              more advanced pedagogical views of learning. The gaps were reduced as a result of refinements students made
                              throughout       the     design       process.   Following       Wilensky's            (1991)    notion  of   concretization             as  representing      the
                              richness  and     connectedness             of  abstract     concepts,    we   argue      that   a person     who             can verbally   explain    abstract
                              pedagogical ideas, but has a difficulty to concretize them as features in a learning environment, lacks a deep and
                              connected understanding of these ideas, and of the theoretical underpinnings behind them. To design concrete
                              features that convey their ideas about learning, students in the current research were engaged in a process of
                              connecting their ideas with design knowledge of peers, instructors, and experts. This process enabled them to
                              develop   a      richer         set of    connections     in  their knowledge           about    learning     theory,          and    thus develop     a deeper
                              understanding about learning.
                                        Thus, in the context of educational technology design, we view concretization as: (a) an essential skill
                              in the process of gaining design knowledge, and (b) a way to assist students to reflect and reduce gaps in their
                              understanding about learning theory. This twofold notion of concretization is in agreement with the Learning By
                              Design literature (e.g., Harel, 1991; Kafai, 2006; Kolodner et al., 2003; Papert, 1991), which shows that when
                              learners design an artifact that explains a certain topic in a certain subject matter, they learn many things about
                              design, but they also learn a whole lot about the topic they are designing for. In this study, the topic was not only
                              the science or math embedded in the students' modules, but also the learning theory behind the instruction that
                              they designed.

                                                                                                      474  ·  © ISLS
                                                 ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

References
Dick, W., Carey, L., & Carey, J. O. (2001). The systematic design of instruction (5th ed.). New York: Addison-
         Wesley Educational Publishers.
DiGiano,    C., Goldman,    S., &   Chorost, M.  (2009).   Educating  learning   technology  designers:  Guiding   and
         inspiring creators of innovative educational tools. N.Y.: Routledge
Fuller, S. (1987). On regulating what is known: A way to social epistemology. Synthese, 73, 145-183.
Goldman, A. (2008). Social epistemology. In E. N. Zalta (Ed.), The Stanford encyclopedia of philosophy (Fall
         2008 ed.(.
Harel, I. (1991). Children designers: Interdisciplinary constructions for learning and knowing mathematics in a
         computer-rich school. Norwood, NJ: Ablex Publishing.
Hoadley,    C., &   Kim,  D.   (2003).  Learning,  design   and  technology: The   creation   of  a design  studio   for
         educational innovation. In A. P. d. Reis & P. Isaías (Eds.), Proceedings of the IADIS international
         conference e-Society 2003 (pp. 510-519). Lisbon, Portugal: IADIS Press.
Kafai, Y. (2006). Playing and making games for learning. Games and Culture, 1(1), 36-40.
Kali, Y. (2006). Collaborative knowledge building using the Design Principles Database. International Journal
         of Computer Support for Collaborative Learning, 1(2), 187-201.
Kali, Y., & Linn, M. C. (2007). Technology-enhanced support strategies for inquiry learning. In J. M. Spector,
         M. D. Merrill, J. J. G. V. Merriënboer & M. P. Driscoll (Eds.), Handbook of research on educational
         communications and technology (3rd Edition) (pp. 445-490). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Kali, Y  ,.Linn,  M.  C.,   &   Roseman,  J. E.  (2008). Designing    coherent   science  education:  Implications   for
         curriculum, instruction, and policy. NY: Teachers College Press.
Kolodner, J. L., Crismond, D., Fasse, B., Gray, J., Holbrook, J., & Puntembakar, S. (2003). Putting a Student-
         Centered Learning by DesignTM Curriculum into Practice: Lessons learned. Journal of the Learning
         Sciences, 12, 495 - 548.
Maor,   D., &   Taylor, P.  C.  (1995). Teacher   epistemology   and  scientific inquiry  in computerized   classroom
         environments. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 32(8), 839-854.
Papert, S.  (1991).  Situating   constructionism.  In I.   Harel &  S.  Papert   (Eds.), Constructionism   (pp. 1­11).
         Norwood, NJ: Ablex.
Ronen-Fuhrmann,     T.,  Kali,  Y.,  &  Hoadley,  C.  M.   (2008). Helping  education    students understand  learning
         through designing. Educational Technology, 48(2), 26-33.
Schommer,    M.  (1990).   The  effects of beliefs about   the nature of knowledge   on   comprehension.    Journal  of
         Educational Psychology, 82(3), 498-504.
Schon, D. (1983). The reflective practitioner: How professionals think in action. New York: Basic Books.
Stake, R. E. (1994). Case studies. In N. K. Densin & Y. S. Lincoln (Eds.), Handbook of Qualitative Research
         (pp. 236-247). Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE Publications.
Wilensky,   U.   (1 .(991Abstract    meditations   on the   concrete   and concrete   implications   for   mathematics
         education.  In  I. Harel   &  S. Papert (Eds.),  Constructionism.  Norwood,     MA:  Norwood,     MA:  Ablex
         Publishing.

Acknowledgements
This article is based on work supported by the National Science Foundation under grant number ESI-0334199.
Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed are ours and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Science Foundation. We benefited from helpful conversations with the Technology-
Enhanced Learning in Science group centered at the University of California, Berkeley, and with the Design
Group   at  the  Department     of Education  in Technology     and Science  at  the Technion     - Israel Institute of
Technology. Finally, we thank all those who contributed from their design knowledge and experience to the
Design Principles Database.

                                                     475  ·  © ISLS
