                                               ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 2

        Unpacking the Design Process in Design-based Research

                  Mingfong Jan, Yam San Chee, Ek Ming Tan, National Institute of Education,
                   Nanyang Technological University, 1 Nanyang Walk, Singapore 637616
              Email: mingfongjan@gmail.com, yamsan.chee@nie.edu.sg, ekming.tan@nie.edu.sg

        Abstract: Characterizing the design process is critical for design-based research as a research
        method. In this study, we propose that the design process of design-based research may be
        perceived   as a  dialogic  process among     four  major  design  components--frameworks         for
        learning, the affordances of the chosen instructional tools, domain knowledge presentation,
        and contextual limitations. It is essential for researchers to align these design components
        based on the frameworks for learning.

Developing Design-based Research as a Research Method
Designing and studying a learning context is an emerging method employed by many learning scientists in
transforming learning practices with new approaches of learning. This method in studying how learning occurs
in designed environments is often coined as design experiment (Brown, 1992; diSessa & Cobb, 2004), design
research (Edelson, 2002), or design-based research (Barab & Squire, 2004).
        As an emerging research method, design-based research has yet developed itself as a comprehensive
research method like ethnography or case studies. Though there are some key features many design-based
researchers would identify as core elements of design-based research, researchers have not reached general
agreements on certain key constructs of design-based research, such as issues of validity, appropriate units of
analysis, and the concept of context (Sandoval & Bell, 2004).
        Examining    the  design-based   research literature, we   find   that efforts   in developing   design-based
research as a research methodology contribute mostly to (1) how theoretical constructs may inform design (e.g.,
diSessa &   Cobb,  2004),  (2) what  the design-based     research method    may  contribute   to in  terms  of theory
development (e.g., Edelson, 2002), and (3) how design-based research differs from other research approaches
that investigate learning (e.g., Sandoval &  Bell, 2004).     Based   on the research    literature, we argue that the
following features are key constructs for design-based research as a research method:
        1.   The design in design-based research is informed and guided by theoretical constructs of learning.
        2.   Design-based   research   engineers  the  learning   context in   order  to transform    current learning
             practice.
        3.   Design-based research studies learning in the designed context, which is also shaped by the local
             social-cultural-material environment.
        4.   Design-based research seeks to improve design and develop context-laden theories via iterative
             design and enactment.
        Such   broad   strokes   about design-based   research    not only   help  us  identify   the  major  research
orientations toward developing design-based research as a method, but also help us articulate the missing pieces
in the puzzle. In this puzzle, little has been argued about the design process through which a design-based
research project takes shape. Arguments have been made mostly on the theories that inform design, designing
and engineering the learning context, and the theories to be developed. Little, however, is theorized when it
comes to the process that shapes design-based research. We maintain that the design process in a design-based
research demands more attentions than it is currently receiving. Characterizing the design process constitutes an
important step toward the development of design-based research as a research methodology.

Research Method
One way to explore how the design process may be characterized is to build cases along design challenges.
Design challenges reflect the gaps unforeseen by researchers and issues hard to resolve using conventional
methods. Situating the analytic primacy in design challenges provides a pragmatic approach in understanding a
key aspect of the design process in design-based research.
        We employ a method akin to participatory action research (Kemmis & McTaggart, 2000) to examine
the  design challenges  of a   game-based   learning  project The   Legends    of Alkhimia,   an  inquiry  curriculum
designed for secondary Chemistry in Singapore. To clarify what, when and how major design challenges turn
into design decisions and curricular activities, we analyze the following data: (1) major design documents such
as the game design narratives and flow charts, (2) finalized game products, and (3) a reflective account of the
design process among key project participants.

Design of the Legends of Alkhimia Game

                                                   470  ·  © ISLS
                                              ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 2

In a ten-day chemistry curriculum (20 hours), young people role-play as teams of four apprentice chemists to
solve six levels of game challenges presented in the Legends of Alkhimia game. The game engage young people
in cycles of scientific inquiry. In order to defeat monsters made of unknown substances, players propose
hypotheses, conduct virtual experiments and test the effectiveness of their hypotheses and weapons in virtual
combats. The scientific inquiry is situated in a personal narrative in which young people describe their
experiences in the Legends of Alkhimia curriculum.

Findings and Discussion
Our efforts in unpacking the design process suggests four major design challenges in this game-based learning
project: (1) conceptualizing theoretical constructs that informs learning, (2) reframing chemistry domain
knowledge, (3) transforming theoretical constructs as game design features and curricular activities, and (4)
situating curricular design in local school culture. The following describes how these challenges emerge in the
design process.
       We initiated the design process with the goal to transform the content-mastery learning paradigm with
game-based learning approaches. Therefore, we asked what it means to learn and why learning chemistry is
important to young people. Our questions eventually boiled down to the mantra "situating the inquiry of self in
the inquiry of science." We drew from Dewey (1938) and scientific inquiry literature (White & Frederiksen,
1998) as our orienting frameworks for learning, but these frameworks do not inform game and activity design as
directly as domain-specific instructional theories (diSessa & Cobb, 2004). The situation was further complicated
by the need to rethink how chemistry might be learned without foregrounding chemistry contents. We classify
the above challenges as "theoretical challenges" in design-based research. The other two major challenges fall
into design category. Not only did we have to transform the orienting frameworks into concrete game and
activity design decisions, but also situate the design decisions within the constraints of local school culture and
curricular structure. We classify such challenges as "practical challenges."
       The theoretical and practical challenges above are the major stumbling blocks in the design process of
this design-based research project. To further thematize these design challenges, we conclude that a design-
based research project aiming to transform learning with technologies requires appropriate alignment of four
major design components: frameworks for learning, the affordances of the chosen instructional tools, domain
knowledge presentation, and contextual limitations. In our design practice, these design components are deeply
intertwined. Ideally, frameworks for learning is the core based on which the other components of design are
aligned with in a dialogic process. In reality, however, the contextual limitations, such as the underlying culture
and structure of schooling, often dominate the other design components.

Conclusion
In this paper, we argue that it is critical to unpack the design process in design-based research in order to
develop design-based research as a research method for learning. This explorative study is our initial attempt at
characterizing the design process in a game-based learning project. We maintain that depicting design process
along design challenges affords researchers a beneficial way to unpack the design process in a design-based
research. We present two types of challenges that emerge in the Legends of Alkhimia game-based learning
project: theoretical challenges and practical challenges. Four core design components are derived from the
design challenges. We believe that these are also core design components shared by many other design-based
research projects. The success of a design-based research depends largely on the alignment of these core design
components and it is critical to align the design based on the frameworks of learning.

References
Barab, S. A. & Squire, K. D. (2004). Design-based research: Putting a stake in the ground. The Journal of
       Learning Sciences, 13(1), 1-14.
Brown, A.  L.   (1992). Design experiments: Theoretical    and   methodological  challenges in creating  complex
       interventions in classroom settings. The Journal of Learning Sciences, 2(2), 141­178.
Dewey, J. (1938). Logic: the theory of inquiry. New York: Holt and Co.
diSessa, A. A., & Cobb, P. (2004). Ontological innovation and the role of theory in design experiments. The
       Journal of Learning Sciences, 13(1), 77-103.
Edelson, D.C. (2002). Design research: What we learn when we engage in design. The Journal of Learning
       Sciences, 11(1), 105-121.
Kemmis, S., & McTaggart, R. (2000). Participatory action research. In N. K. Denzin & Y. S. Lincoln (Eds.),
       Handbook of Qualitative Research (2nd ed., pp. 567-605). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Sandoval, W.    A. &  Bell, P. (2004). Design-Based      Research  Methods   for Studying Learning  in   Context:
       Introduction. Educational Psychologist, 39(4), 199­201.
White, B., & Frederiksen, J. (1998). Inquiry, Modeling, and Metacognition: Making Science Accessible to All
       Students. Cognition and Instruction, 16(1), 3-118.

                                                  471  ·  © ISLS
