                                                ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 2

    Knowledge eCommons: Merging Computer Conferencing and
                                                      Wikis
              Jim Hewitt, Earl Woodruff, OISE University of Toronto, 252 Bloor St. W. Toronto ON
                          Email: jhewitt@oise.utoronto.ca, ewoodruff@oise.utoronto.ca

         Abstract: Asynchronous computer mediated conferencing (CMC) is widely employed as a
         medium for collaborative discourse in distance education courses.           However, one frequently
         cited problem with CMC is the lack of coherence in many online discussions.            To address this
         problem, we have developed a new technology called "Knowledge eCommons" that uses wiki
         functionality   to  provide   representational   guidance    for  online    discourse.     Our   poster
         presentation describes the results of our initial Knowledge eCommons design experiments.

Introduction
Despite the tremendous promise of CMC, the educational benefits of online discourse are uncertain. While
students   in online courses  frequently  interact   with   one another    and   exchange  information,   there   is little
empirical evidence that they are engaged in the sophisticated processes of joint meaning-making and social
negotiation (Wallace, 2003).     In fact, conventional threaded discussions have been characterized as lacking
coherence     (Herring, 1999; Thomas,     2002), and   are    thought to   offer   relatively weak   support  for online
collaborative knowledge construction (Hewitt, 2001; Suthers et al., 2008).         Hewitt (2001) argues that the source
of the  coherence    problem  is  the  intrinsically divergent  nature    of   threaded   discourse. Over  time,  online
discussions tend to branch into dozens of sub-discussions.      It is not uncommon for participants to be engaged in
many parallel conversations, not all of which are necessarily germane to the original purpose of the thread.
While branching is often useful for drawing out a broad range of ideas and perspectives, the resulting lack of
coherence makes it difficult to ascertain whether or not the group is making progress.            Moreover, it is often
unclear which direction the discourse is taking, what conclusions the group has reached, or whether particular
issues warrant further inquiry.
         A promising solution to the coherence problem involves augmenting conventional threaded discourse
with a shared meta-level representation of the group's progress. For example, this might involve displaying an
online discussion on one part of a computer screen, and a discussion summary on another part of the screen.             As
the discussion unfolds, the jointly-owned summary is updated. Shared, explicit representations of this sort are
advantageous because they encourage participants to clarify their thinking, identify areas of disagreement, and
help learner's monitor the group's growing understanding (Brna, Cox, & Good, 2001).               Past efforts to provide
representational guidance for CMC have used various discussion visualization tools as an adjunct technology
(e.g., Reyes   & Tchounikine,    2003; Suthers,  2003;   Suthers   et al., 2008).     For example,   in  one experiment
(Suthers et al., 2008), students were asked to continually update a group concept map as they engaged in online
discussion with a partner.   This produced promising results.    In line with expectations, it was discovered that the
small  groups   (dyads)  who  maintained   a   shared concept   map   during    their discussion  were    more   likely to
converge   to  similar  conclusions,  and score  higher   on  post-tests   than  dyads  in the   control  condition  (i.e.,
discussion-only).    However, the authors of the study questioned the practicality of this approach with larger
groups, or over longer periods of time.

Wiki Supports for the Synthesis of Ideas
The current   study  is also concerned    with discourse    coherence,  but  it approaches    the problem   from  a  new
direction. Rather than use concept maps, we explore how wiki-style supports might provide representational
guidance. Wikis offer several advantages in this regard.      As the success of Wikipedia illustrates,   wikis are useful
technologies for creating complex, cohesive artifacts authored by many individuals (Wheeler, Yeomans, &
Wheeler, 2008). The ability of wikis to support group coherence is grounded in three different design elements:
1) The existence of a single group-owned document that necessitates negotiation among participants; 2) The
preservation of all previous versions of the group-owned document, which prevents the loss of data and permits
backtracking; and 3) The provision of meta-level communication supports in which participants can identify
problems,  resolve   disagreements   and  negotiate   consensus.    Since    a  wiki  page is  a  single, jointly owned
construct, it can serve as an up-to-date summary of the discussion that can guide further discursive activity.

Knowledge eCommons
The current program of research is being carried out using a new open-source learning environment called
Knowledge     eCommons     (KeC), which   has  been   specifically  designed    to investigate  the  coherence   problem.
While conventional threaded discourse environments are powerful for promoting a diversity of ideas, they tend
to be weak at encouraging the collapsing of messages into one larger idea, or the creation of a collective

                                                     472  ·  © ISLS
                                               ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 2

summary.    To address this shortcoming, KeC encourages the interplay between the expansion of ideas in the
discussion mode and the synthesis of ideas in the wiki mode. To illustrate: In one of the current trials, graduate
students discussed the educational potential of handheld computers in a KeC forum on the left side of the
screen.  As their discussion progressed, they periodically updated a wiki page summary on the right side of the
screen. After some discussion, one of the students added a new sentence to the wiki page, "We still need to
answer the big question, `Do handhelds offer any advantages over laptops beyond cost? This inspired new
discussion. This process continued to repeat, with an ongoing interplay between discussion messages on the left
side of the screen, and summary statements and new ideas on the right side.

Method
We are currently conducting a series of design experiments (Brown, 1992) crafted to explore how to optimize
the interplay between the idea expanding nature of the asynchronous discourse forum and the idea condensing
nature of the wiki. Our first trial was conducted in an online graduate course in September-December 2009
(n=17). Our poster presentation will focus on this initial experiment.    A second trial is currently underway. The
online wiki pages, students interviews and a questionnaire serve as our primary data sources.

Results
The results of the initial trial suggest that the summary wiki page offers promise as a tool for representational
guidance. The final wiki pages were judged to be excellent summaries of the course material. Interview data
reveal that the high level of visibility associated with the wiki page's construction (i.e., people could easily see
who made contributions, and the nature of those contributions) produced a heightened sense of accountability
among students, which encouraged participation. However, some students felt that this visibility made people
more reluctant to edit or delete the text of their classmates. Students were also cautious about making large-
scale organizational changes to the wiki page, worrying that their actions might be viewed as presumptuous.
         To move students beyond the construction of simple summaries, a number of scaffold labels were
added to the wiki pages in December 2009.     These scaffolds include: "Big ideas from this week", "Unresolved
issues", "New ideas that move us ahead", and "What we don't understand yet".          The goal of these scaffolds was
to foster a deeper and more reflective collective analysis of the group's progress.
         The full poster presentation will provide a more detailed account of the completed research and a
demonstration of the Knowledge eCommons environment (if facilities for a demonstration are available).

References
Brna, P., Cox, R., & Good, J. (2001). Learning to think and communicate with diagrams: 14 questions to
         consider. Artificial Intelligence Review, 15(1­2), 115­134.
Brown, A.L. (1992)   Design Experiments:      Theoretical and methodological challenges in evaluating complex
         interventions in classroom settings. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 2(2), 141-178.
Gunawardena,  C.N.,  Lowe,    C.A. and   Anderson,     T.  (1997). Analysis    of  a  global  online debate and  the
         development of   an interaction analysis  model     for  examining   social  construction  of knowledge in
         computer conferencing. Journal of Educational Computing Research, 17, 397 ­ 431.
Herring, S. C. (1999). Interactional coherence in CMC.       Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication, 4(4).
         Retrieved on Sept 30, 2009 from http://www3.interscience.wiley.com/journal/120837770/abstract
Hewitt, J. (2001). Beyond threaded discourse. International Journal of Educational Telecommunications, 7(3),
         207-221.
Kear, K. (2001). Following the thread in computer conferences. Computers & Education, 37, 81­99.
Reyes,  P &  Tchounikine,  P.  (2003).   Supporting    emergence       of threaded   learning conversations through
         augmenting interactional and sequential coherenence. In B. Wasson, S. Ludvigsen & U. Hoppe (Eds).
         Designing for change (pp. 83-92). The Netherlands: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Suthers, D. (2003). Representational guidance    for   collaborative   inquiry. In   J. Andriessen,  M. Baker &  D.
         Suthers (Eds.) Arguing to learn: Confronting cognitions in computer-supported learning environments
         (pp. 27-46). AA Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Suthers, D. D., Vatrapu,  R., Medina,    R.,  Joseph,  S.,   & Dwyer,     N. (2008).  Beyond   Threaded  Discussion:
         Representational Guidance   in  Asynchronous        Collaborative   Learning   Environments.  Computers &
         Education 50(4), 1103-1127.
Thomas, M. J. W. (2002). Learning within incoherent structures: the space of online discussion forums. Journal
         of Computer Assisted Learning, 18, 351-366.
Wallace, R. (2003). Online learning in higher education: A review of research on interactions among teachers
         and students. Education, Communication & Information, 3(2), 241-280.
Wheeler, S., Yeomans, P., & Wheeler, D. (2008). The good, the bad and the wiki: Evaluating student-generated
         content for collaborative learning. British Journal of Educational Technology, 39(6), 987-995.

                                                   473  ·  © ISLS
