                                               ICLS 2010    ·  Volume 2

 Coordination and contextuality: Revealing the nature of emergent
     mathematical understanding by means of a clinical interview
                                            Mariana Levin, Rozy Brar
                                        University of California, Berkeley
                                           {levin, brar}@berkeley.edu

        Abstract:    Clinical interviews   provide   a rich   source of  data   about the  nature of student
        understanding. We use the "knowledge in pieces" (diSessa, 1993) epistemological framework
        to analyze a clinical interview of a sixth-grade student's knowledge of fraction equivalence.
        We focus on the coordination of his knowledge across representational contexts. Our analysis
        reveals a local understanding of "fraction as quantity" that we hypothesize could be leveraged
        in helping the student build a more coordinated understanding of fraction equivalence.

Introduction
In March of 2004, Deborah Loewenberg Ball conducted a public, ninety-minute clinical interview with one
sixth-grade student,  Brandon,  at the  first MSRI     "Critical Issues    in Mathematics   Education"  Workshop    on
Assessment. The purpose of the interview was to give a vivid demonstration of what clinical interviews reveal
about student understanding.   Over the course of 90 minutes, Ball and Brandon explored a variety of fraction
concepts, using several different representational forms (e.g. area models, number lines, Hindu-Arabic notation,
the physical activity of paper    folding, and  "real    world"  contexts).   Schoenfeld's  (2007) discussion   of this
interview illustrates the complex nature of what it means to learn and understand by highlighting various aspects
of Brandon's emergent knowledge of fractions. In this poster, we develop a complementary line of analysis and
explore what  we can   conclude   about Brandon's      understanding    of fractions  through the lens of a particular
epistemological frame.

Theoretical perspective
The "knowledge in pieces" (KiP) epistemological framework starts from the assumption that it is productive to
think about emergent knowledge of a domain as a complex system of diverse and loosely organized pieces (as
opposed to an integrated, coherent system) (diSessa, 1993, 2004). Two central ideas of KiP are coordination
and contextuality. One of the indications of deep conceptual understanding from this framework is "seeing" and
coordinating relevant knowledge across a broad range of contexts. Furthermore, KiP highlights the productive
role of prior knowledge in building deeper understandings of a domain.

Focus of inquiry
To illustrate the nature of our analysis, we share here a summary of one striking example of a "coordination
issue" across three representational contexts in which he explores fraction equivalence:       Hindu-arabic notation,
area model, and number line.    In order to get traction on why the lack of coordination across contexts is not
salient to Brandon, we focus on the question of how Brandon attends to features of the representational forms
and what this reveals about his understanding of fraction equivalence.

A summary of an exemplar preliminary analysis
Table 1: Contextuality and coordination in the case of Brandon's knowledge of fraction equivalence

 Hindu-         In the context of working with fraction notation, Ball asks Brandon if he can write another
 Arabic         fraction for one-fourth.   Brandon writes down 2/8 as another fraction for 1/4 and explains
 Notation       "Umm, two-eights `cause it takes four--it takes four two's to equal eight, so two would be 25
 Context        percent--or one-fourth."
 Area Model     Later in the interview, Ball and Brandon are working together with area models.             Ball asks
 Context        Brandon to draw area models of 1/4 and 2/8. She then asks him which one he thinks is bigger.
                In this  context,  Brandon    answers    that  1/4  is  larger  than  2/8 and  reasons that it is the
                denominator alone that determines the size of a fraction: fourths are "bigger chunks" than
                eighths and so 1/4 is bigger than 2/8. This is despite having just constructed area models for
                1/4 and 2/8 that suggest visually that 1/4 and 2/8 represent the same amount of shaded area.
                When Ball re-directs Brandon to the fraction notation context and his previous assertion,
                Brandon sees no conflict with his previous assertion that 2/8 is another fraction for 1/4
                and his new assertion that 1/4 is greater than 2/8.
 Number         After  Ball   and Brandon     finish discussing  area   models,  they  turn to working   on  fraction

                                                     478  ·  © ISLS
                                              ICLS 2010    ·  Volume 2

 Line Context    equivalence using number lines. Brandon has labeled 1/4 and 2/8 at the same position on a
                 number line. In this context, Brandon again concludes that 1/4 is greater than 2/8 and
                 reveals an understanding that is similar in nature to what he shows in the area model context.
                 Specifically, he reasons that it is the length of the line segments that determine the size of the
                 fraction: since fourths are longer segments than eighths, 1/4 is bigger than 2/8. This is despite
                 having constructed a number line on which 1/4 and 2/8 label the same position that suggests
                 visually that 1/4 and 2/8 represent the same distance from zero. When Ball re-directs Brandon
                 to the location of  1/4 and 2/8     on the   number   line, Brandon    sees no conflict with  the
                 noticing that 1/4 and 2/8 label the same position on the number line juxtaposed with his
                 statement that 1/4 is greater than 2/8.

Discussion
In this poster, we used the "knowledge in pieces" epistemological perspective to frame the phenomenon of a
student  reasoning  about fraction  equivalence   across   a range  of  representational contexts.   In the example
discussed above, we see that Brandon has different ways of comparing fractions and determining "sameness"
across the different representational contexts. When he works with area models and number lines, he cues up a
rule involving the denominator in order to compare fractions.       He can specify the logic of his rule locally in
terms of features of the representational form at hand (i.e. chunks of pieces or lengths of segments).

We hypothesize that in order to understand equivalence of fractions, Brandon must first develop a coordinated
understanding of fractions as quantities. That is, he must come to see a fraction as a relationship between the
numerator   and denominator    that represents    an amount      (Mack, 1990).     When    reasoning about  fraction
equivalence, "quantity"   is not salient to  Brandon     in  his interpretations of  area   model  and  number  line
representations. Without recognizing fractions as quantities, it makes little sense to ask whether two fractions
are equivalent or whether one fraction is bigger than another.     We see resolving this issue as deeper than merely
learning the conventions  about  how  to properly    express  fractions as   quantities in whatever  representational
system (number line, area model, etc) he is working with. We see the kernel of a "fraction as a quantity"
understanding in his talk about the fraction notation 1/4 and 2/8 as both representing 25% of the whole.        We
hypothesize that this idea could be leveraged in helping Brandon build a more coordinated understanding of
fraction equivalence.

Conclusions
The preliminary analysis discussed in this poster raises issues about how we interpret the nature of student
reasoning revealed  through  clinical interviews. On one hand, probes across representational contexts can paint a
complex picture of student understanding of mathematical ideas like equivalence of fractions.           However, our
analysis makes us aware that we cannot consider various representational forms as neutral windows into student
thought about underlying mathematical ideas.      Rather, expanding our focus to include the ways that students
themselves understand the purpose of representation can help us give a more accurate characterization of how
they understand underlying mathematical ideas.

References
Ball, D. & Peoples, B. (2007). Assessing a Student's Mathematical Knowledge by Way of Interview. InAlan H.
         Schoenfeld (Ed.) (2007). Assessing mathematical proficiency. Cambridge University Press.
         Streaming video available at
         http://www.msri.org/communications/vmath/VMathVideos/VideoInfo/2653/show_video
diSessa, A.  A. (1993). Toward   an  epistemology    of  physics.  Cognition   and Instruction, 10  (2­3),  105­225;
         responses to commentary, 261­280.
diSessa, A. A. (2004). Contextuality and coordination in conceptual change. In E. Redish and M. Vicentini
      (eds.), Proceedings of the International School of Physics "Enrico Fermi:" Research on physics
      education (pp. 137-156). Amsterdam: ISO Press/Italian Physics Society.
Mack, N.  (1990).  Learning fractions with understanding:    Building  on informal knowledge. Journal for
      Research in Mathematics Education, 21, 16-32.
Schoenfeld, A. H. (2007).  Reflections on an Assessment Interview:      What a  Close   Look at Student
         Understanding Can Reveal.    In Alan H. Schoenfeld (Ed.) (2007). Assessing        mathematical  proficiency.
         Cambridge University Press.

                                                    479  ·  © ISLS
