                                                 ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 2

    A Photograph-Based Measure of Students' Beliefs About Math
                                       Lee Martin and Pamela Gourley-Delaney
                    University of California, Davis, One Shields Avenue, Davis, CA 95616
                          Email: leemartin@ucdavis.edu, pgourleydelaney@ucdavis.edu

         Abstract:  While   there   is some    consensus    on the    importance  of students' beliefs  about
         mathematics,  it can    be difficult to measure    those beliefs. Thirty-five  sixth-graders  and   54
         undergraduates completed a photo sort task that required them to make judgments about the
         extent to which activities depicted in a series of photographs "involved math." Results show
         the measure had some desirable properties, thus providing a proof of concept for non-verbal,
         photograph-based measures of students' views of mathematics.

Introduction
Students' beliefs about what is and is not mathematical are associated with a number of important problem-
solving and  motivational   outcomes     (Muis,   2004).   In  particular, studies  have  shown   that the   belief that
mathematics is largely computational and meaningless outside of the classroom context can be a significant
barrier to flexibility in problem solving (e.g., Schoenfeld, 1991). Despite widespread interest in students' beliefs
about mathematics,   they  can   be difficult to assess  properly.  Hammer      and Elby  (2002) note  that, in spite of
evidence to  the contrary,  many    researchers  tacitly assume   that students'  beliefs are coherent  and  consistent
across context and across time. This mistaken assumption can lead to an over-reliance on verbal measures of
beliefs, such as surveys and questionnaires, which can misrepresent these beliefs. As such, new, non-verbal
measures of students' beliefs about mathematics may be particularly valuable to the field.
         This paper reports on an exploratory effort to develop such a measure. As a part of a broader design
study looking at students' views of mathematics in and out of school, a photo sort task was developed to help
assess students' views of mathematics. As Schwartz, Chang, and Martin (2008) note, one of the most important
contributions that design research can make is the development of new research instrumentation (i.e., measures)
that can be shared with others. The photo sort task and its properties are the focus of the analysis here.

Method

Participants
Participants were 35 sixth-grade students (19 girls, 16 boys) from a diverse middle school in an urban area in
California. Students  participated  as  part  of their math    class. In addition,  54 undergraduates  enrolled   in  an
education course served as a comparison group.

Materials and Procedure
The photo   sort task made    use   of a set  of 25 photographs       depicting everyday  activities such  as   cooking,
construction, dancing, and playing videogames (photos are available from the authors on request). Each student
sorted the photographs into one of four categories based on whether they thought the activity "involved math":
definitely math; probably math; probably not math; and definitely math. Students then categorized the photos
based on their experience with the activities: things they had done themselves (personal experience), things they
had not done but a family member had done (family experience), and things neither they nor a family member
had done (no experience).
         Following this initial photo sort, students completed a series of homework and in-class activities that
gave them the opportunity to take their own photographs, share those photos with classmates, and participate in
online and in-person discussions about what "counts" as mathematics. Students then completed a second set of
ratings for the photo sort task.
         In addition to the sixth-graders, a group of 54 undergraduates completed a modified version of the
photo sort task. The instructions were the same, but they viewed digital projections of the photographs, rather
than sorting physical prints. Their data served as an adult baseline.

Results
We present three pieces of evidence for the value of the photo sort task as a measure of students' beliefs about
what "counts" as mathematical. First, sixth-grade students' ratings from the first and second photo sort were
moderately highly correlated, r = .62. While this correlation is not as high as one would expect for a well-
established measure,  it is a reasonably   good   indication   that students'   responses were not   random,  but   were
related to an enduring underlying variable.

                                                     482  ·  © ISLS
                                                  ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 2

         Second, students' ratings of activities were predicted by their experiences with those activities. There
was a risk that a spurious association between experience and rating could arise from the choice of photographs
(e.g., if photos showed only two activities, math class in school ­ high experience and high math ­ and writing
novels ­ low experience and low math). To address this potential problem, we treated undergraduate data as an
approximately normative guide to how mathematical each photograph was (results remain the same with or
without this correction) . For each sixth-grade rating, we computed the deviation from the mean undergraduate
rating for   that photograph.    For  example,   undergraduates   rated  the photograph    of  people  playing chess  as
"probably math" and dancing as "probably not math." A sixth grader who rated both photographs as "probably
not math" (as many did) would have deviation scores of -1 and 0, respectively, for those two items.

                    Figure 1. Sixth graders' deviation from adult ratings on the photo sort task.

         We   found    that sixth-graders' personal  experience   with   activities was predictive  of their ratings for
those activities. That is, students were the most adult-like in their ratings for activities with which they had
personal experience, and the least adult like (and the least willing to call things mathematical) for activities with
which they had little experience (see Figure 1). This result shows that the photo sort measure was sensitive, on
an individual item level, to students' actual, real world experiences. Note that this improves upon measures of
beliefs which treat them as independent of experience (Hammer & Elby, 2002).
         Finally,  as  is evident  in Figure  1, the measure    was  responsive to   an intervention  designed  to have
students reflect on the nature of what counts as mathematics in and out of school. Across all items, mean ratings
increased  about   0.15   points (about  0.4  standard  deviations). The  lack  of   control  group requires caution  in
interpreting  this result,  as other  factors may  be   responsible  for the  change.  However,   the  change  is in the
anticipated direction, and it shows promise for the sensitivity of the measure to an intervention. Further analysis
of the data will investigate the sensitivity of the measure at the individual item level.

Discussion and Conclusion
The photo sort task showed several promising properties. It was reasonably consistent from pre- to post-test,
while  still being  responsive    to  an intervention.  Most   important,  it was    sensitive to students'  real world
experiences with the items depicted in the photographs. The analysis given here should not be taken to suggest
that the photo sort task, as presented, should be widely adopted. Instead, the results provide a proof of concept
that non-verbal, photograph-based tasks may provide a promising addition to researchers' arsenal of measures
of students' beliefs about mathematics.

References
Hammer, D., & Elby, A. (2002). On the form of a personal epistemology. In B.K. Hofer and P.R. Pintrich,
         (Eds.) Personal epistemology: The psychology of beliefs about knowledge and knowing (pp. 169 - 190).
         Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Muis,  K.  R.  (2004).    Personal epistemology   and   mathematics:    A critical  review   and synthesis of  research.
         Review of Educational Research, 74(3), 317-377.
Schoenfeld, A. H. (1991). On mathematics as sense-making: An informal attack on the unfortunate divorce of
         formal    and informal    mathematics.  In  J. F.  Voss, &  D.   N.  Perkins (Eds.),  Informal reasoning    and
         education. (pp. 311-343). Hillsdale, NJ, England: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc.
Schwartz, D. L., Chang, J., & Martin, L. (2008). Innovation and instrumentation: Taking the turn to efficiency.
         In A. E. Kelly, R. A. Lesh, & J. Y. Baek (Eds.), Handbook of design research methods in education:
         Innovations in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics learning and teaching (pp. 47-67).
         New York: Routledge.

                                                      483  ·  © ISLS
