                                                      ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 2

             Identity in Informal Game-based Learning Environments

  Ben DeVane, University of Wisconsin-Madison, 128 Teacher Education, 225 N Mills St., Madison, WI 53706
                                                    ben.devane@gmail.com

          Abstract:    In  the   learning     sciences   some    scholarship   investigating    game-based      learning
          environments has focused on studying large-scale identity transformations rather than describing
          the `everyday' social processes. This paper investigates the specifics of the latter, arguing that
          relational  identity  resources     may   have  be  increasingly   important   for understanding       identity
          formation and learning with games.

Introduction
`Identity' has become an increasingly important analytic construct in the learning sciences for understanding socio-
technical learning practices. Learning is increasingly viewed as part a process of identity transformation ­ a change
in the way a person recognizes herself relative to her mastery of a knowledgeable social practice (Wenger 1999).
          In the learning sciences some scholarship has investigated the way that game-based learning environments
help players take up new identities relative to a given knowledgeable practice (Barab et al., 2007).               However, this
scholarship has focused on studying large-scale identity transformations rather than describing the `everyday' social
processes  that effect  identity   work.   As  part  of a larger research   project aimed    at this end,  this   paper draws  on
methods   from     sociolinguistics    to describe   the  micro-context   of   identity  formation     in game-based      learning
environments.

Theoretical Framework
This study   utilizes both interactionist  (Mead, 1934)    and sociocultural perspectives on identity     (Holland et al., 1998)
that have arisen after it. Interactionist scholarship understands a person's identities and selves to develop primarily
through interaction with and in the social world (Mead, 1934), and places import on how identity is negotiated
through   language.   Sociocultural    scholarship   similarly   emphasizes    the  dialogic and   socially-enacted     nature of
identity, but distinguishes     itself by  emphasizing    the importance    of  social  resources  in    identity self-authorship
(Holland et al., 1998).

Research Context & Method
This investigation grows out of a larger research initiative on game-based learning environments called CivWorld.
Situated  at an after-school    center    for adolescent  working-class  youth,    CivWorld  was     a four year   long   research
project that was focused on helping young people learn about history and geography (see Squire et al., 2008) using
researcher-modified versions of the Civilization historical strategy game series. Data took the form of some two-
hundred hours of program sessions that were audiovideo recorded along with supplemental field notes.
          This investigation adopts tools of inquiry from ethnographic discourse analysis, a sociolinguistic method
for studying how social identities are enacted through language and action over time (Gee & Green, 1998). After a
thematic analysis of general content in the data corpus, both theoretical and representative sampling methods were
used to select data so that the analysis would illuminate some larger research question while reflecting everyday
activity in the space. The verbal data, transcribed in Jeffersonian notation, is presented in stanza form.

Results
Over the course of the analysis, it became evident that participants' identities relative to the CivWorld space were
mediated as much by the club's structures for participation and relationships with other participants as they were by
the game's semiotic system. Participants' trajectories of identity enactment in the space were very much dependent
upon  the  social     resources present    during   significant  moments     of identity  work.   Thes     eries  of  interactions
surrounding Salim one, a young newcomer who is the club illustrate this phenomena.

Example Interaction: Salim and Social Resources
Salim is  an  eight-year-old    whose     brother, Malik,  age   twelve, is  a  frequent and    enthusiastic participant   in  the
CivWorld     club. Although     he has    frequently watched     game sessions,  Salim,  who     has   a  genial  and   deferential
demeanor, has only played the game once some six weeks prior because he was intimidated by the typically older.
As such, Salim is a very young and novice player of a game that can take hundreds of hours to master.

                                                          484  ·  © ISLS
                                                   ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 2

         Salim has chosen to play in a competitive multiplayer game session - his second time playing the game ­
when his brother will arrive to the club late. Two more experienced players, Leo, age eleven, and Matt, age twelve,
have secretly agreed to ally against Salim. They sit at the two computers to his right. Daniel, an adult, sits to Salim's
left to help him with game play. At the start of game play, another sympathetic player attempts to trade to Salim in-
game technologies, which might help him defend himself:

         Daniel:             The Persians wanna trade with you.
         Salim:              [Again?
         Leo [turning]:      DON'T DO IT!] NO! don't do it! >>don't do it! don't do it!<<
         [Matt and Leo physically pull Salim away from his computer and whisper in his ear]
         Salim [grinning]: [B-b-butt <Aaa.aaa.aaah.>
         Daniel [smiling]: No coercion (.) only by talk (.)] no force.

During   this exchange,   Salim   appears to relish the  sudden     attention and  uninvited   physical  contact,  rather than
become upset by it. This attitude extended toward in-game play, where, with Daniel's constant advice and attention,
Salim's non-aggressive civilization flourished despite the attempted in-game assaults by Leo and Matt. By the time
his brother Malik arrives, Salim has by far the highest score in the game. Malik walks by Sami as he enters the room
and greets    a number   of  other participants, including   Leo    and Matt,  with   familiarity before   turning  to Sami's
computer:

         Malik:              Who   are  you?  You're   GREECE?       DAAAANG.        See   Salim?   see?   Good job
                             Salim! Good job!

         Salim   became    a regular  and active  participant    in the CivWorld    club   over the next   four months,   and
continued to participate frequently over the next three years. While his new interest in the game-based learning club
cannot be attributed solely to his experiences that day, it certainly seemed to be a primary motivating factor. Salim
seemed to enjoy the attention of older youth, even if it was hostile, and appeared to take great pleasure in his older
brother's praise.

Discussion
Drawing on sociocultural research on identity (see Holland et al., 1998), Nasir & Cooks have recently             argued that
identity-linked  social  resources  can be  classified as  material,    ideational or relational  ­  e.g.  semiotic artifacts,
cultural models   or social   relationships (2009). Learning     sciences  research   has  thus far placed  primacy    on  the
`material' identity resources in game-based learning environments. By this I mean that researchers have emphasized
the roles, values and dispositions for action that are `designed into' the digital artifact for players to inhabit.
         This   analysis  and evidence  from  other  ongoing     research  suggests   that the  relational identity resources
embedded in the social-discursive space of the game-based learning environment are important for understanding
how identity formation takes place in these spaces. While the extent to which different types of social resources are
leveraged  in   identity work  is  no doubt  contextual,  it seems    that the relational  identity resources   may  have   be
increasingly important for understanding identity in game-based learning environments.

References
Barab, S., Dodge, T., Thomas, M., Jackson, C., & Tuzun, H. (2007). Our designs and the social agendas they carry.
         Journal of the Learning Sciences, 16(2), 263-305.
Gee, J., & Green, J. (1998). Discourse analysis, learning, and social practice: A methodological study. Review of
         research in education, 23(1), 119-63.
Holland, D., Lachicotte,, W., Skinner, D., & Cain, C. (1998). Identity and agency in cultural worlds. Cambridge:
         Harvard University Press.
Mead, G. (1934). Mind, self and society. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Nasir, N., & Cooks, J. (2009). Becoming a Hurdler: How Learning Settings Afford Identities. Anthropology &# 38;
         Education Quarterly, 40(1), 41-61.
Squire, K. D., DeVane, B., & Durga, S. (2008). Designing Centers of Expertise for Academic Learning Through
         Video Games. Theory Into Practice, 47(3), 240-251.
Wenger, E. (1999). Communities of Practice: Learning, Meaning, and Identity. Cambridge: Cambridge University
         Press.

                                                       485   ·  © ISLS
