                                                   ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

                            Extending Students' learning Spaces:
                        Technology-Supported Seamless Learning
                         Wenli Chen, Peter Seow, Hyo-Jeong So, Yancy Toh, & Chee-Kit Looi
     National Institute of Education, Nanyang Technological University, 1 Nanyang Walk, Singapore 637616
     Email: wenli.chen@noe.edu.sg, peter.seow@nie.edu.sg, hyojeong.so@nie.edu.sg, yancy.toh@nie.edu.sg,
                                                 cheekit.looi@nie.edu.sg

              Abstract:    Learning is  interweaved    into and  across  students'  everyday   life activities.
              Technology that is used to support learning should be integrated with everyday life in the
              same way that learning occurs in everyday life: seamlessly. Mobile technologies, with
              their reduced  size and   ease of use,   provide   the potential  to  extend  students'  learning
              spaces and enrich the learning experiences in their daily lives where they move between
              locations, switch from one topic or context to another, and interact with different social
              groups. This paper proposes mobile technology-supported seamless learning and presents
              learning scenarios from our research to illustrate how learning occurs seamlessly across
              time and places mediated by mobile devices.

Introduction
Learning   is interweaved    into and   across students'    everyday   life activities such as watching    videos,  browsing
Internet, reading   book,   playing sports,  talking to  people,  and  shopping.    These   activities can be   resources  and
contexts for learning which should be seen not as a shell that surrounds the learner at a given time and location, but
as a dynamic entity, constructed by the interactions between learners and their environment (Sharples, Taylor, &
Vavoula, 2007). Looi, Seow, Zhang, So, et al     (2009) state that the learning space is no longer defined by the `class'
constrained by scheduled class hours or specific locations, but by `learning' across spaces as they harness ideas and
learning resources gained in one location or context, and apply or develop them in another. They learn across time,
by revisiting knowledge that was gained earlier in a different context. They learn by moving from topic to topic,
managing   a  range  of personal  learning   projects, rather  than  following   a  single curriculum   (Sharples,  Taylor, &
Vavoula, 2007). They learn across social groups, by co-constructing knowledge with another student, a small group,
or a large online community, with the possible involvement of teachers, friends, relatives, experts and members of
other supportive communities.
          Technology that is used to support learning should be integrated with everyday life in the same way that
learning occurs in everyday life: seamlessly. Mobile technologies offer the potential for a new phase in the evolution
of technology-enhanced learning, marked by a continuity of the learning experiences across different contexts. Chan,
Rochelle,  Kinshuk    and  Sharples et  al. (2006) use   the term    "seamless  learning"  to describe  the situations where
students can learn whenever they want to in a variety of scenarios and that they can switch from one scenario to
another easily and quickly using their personal mobile device as a mediator.
          While there is growing recognition that learning can take place anywhere and anytime beyond the walls of
classrooms, until recently learning across spatial and temporal spaces has remained an under-researched area. We
are conducting    a 3-year  project designing   and  investigating   a seamless    learning environment    to bridge Primary
(Elementary) students' different learning spaces by equipping them with personal mobile devices. In this paper, we
explore how to use mobile technology to support seamless learning and present learning scenarios from our research
to illustrate how students use mobile technologies to extend their learning spaces.

Seamless Learning Supported by Mobile Technology
The basic premise of seamless learning is that it is not feasible to equip students with all the knowledge and skills
they need to have for lifelong learning based on snapshots of episodic time frame, location or scenario. Therefore,
students will need to continually enhance their knowledge and skills, in order to address immediate problems and to
participate in a process of continuous learning. We consider student learning as moving beyond the acquisition of
content knowledge to developing the capacity to learn seamlessly.
          As  the use   of mobile technology   such  as  the Smartphone      is becoming   more pervasive   in  our lives,  we
envision  learning   to occur  when   a learner interacts   with  others    and the environment  across    time and  location
seamlessly   through  the  use of the  technology   as a mediating    tool. Moving     away from the   Cartesian perspective

!

                                                       484   ·  © ISLS
                                                   ICLS 2010  ·   Volume 1

where the learner is separated from the world, we view the learner as an active participant in the world. Learning
occurs through   the  rich social interactions   with others  and interactions  with   environment    as shown   in Figure  1.
Learning is developmental and occurs through the interactions a learner may experience at different points of time.
Technology is a nexus connecting the learning experiences of the learner.
                                                                                     !"#$%&"'(")!
                                                                                     !"#$!
                                        0$'(!                                        %&'""(!
                                                                                     )*'$+,!-.$,/01$2!%34&$,5!
                                                                                     617"+#4(!%34&$,8!

                       .(%/&",-!
                                                                                           0(+1"&-&23!,/!4(56/

                                                                                    *&+$,-
                                                                                    9"##:1/*;!
                                                                                    <4#/(;!
                                                                                    <+/$12,!
                                   Figure 1. Technology supported seamless learning

         Stroup  and  Petrosino   (2003) categorize   educational    technology   into two   types: vertical technology    and
horizontal technology - vertical technology is mainly for teachers' needs in a confined setting whereas horizontal
technology is used to meet students' personal needs across multiple physical contexts. Many of today's educational
technologies are used as vertical technologies in the classroom. Seamless learning requires horizontal technologies
that can meet    students'  personal   needs. Mobile   technology    is exactly   a horizontal  technology    because   of  its
affordances. The characteristics of mobile technologies are well suited to support seamless learning (Chen, Seow, So,
Toh, & Looi, in press). The small size and light weight of mobile devices mean that they can be taken to different
sites or moved around within a site, so that they can be available wherever the student needs to learn. The use of the
mobile device becomes a routine practice and is assimilated into everyday life experiences. Equipping with mobile
technologies, students can learn across time and location. The learning experience supported by mobile technology
is unobstrusive -it enables students' data exchange, communication and collaboration with teachers, experts, friends
and  family  members   etc.  As   the  mobile device   can  be  turned  on  and off   instantaneously,   students can   use it
whenever    they need  to,  enabling  them to  make   rapid   connections   between    ideas  and observations.   The   mobile
device can both gather and respond to information specific to the current location, environment and time. This help
student learn in real context.
         Besides,    mobile technology   accommodates      versatile learning  activities.   Students can  type,  draw,  take
photos, do audio or video recording, supporting their multi-modal expressions. The artifacts created by students can
be   saved. The  student's  personal   accumulation    of  resources    and knowledge      is persistent  and can   be   made
immediately   accessible   by  others. The use   of   the device  is adapted   to the  learner's  evolving   abilities, skills,
knowledge and learning styles and designed to support individualized learning, rather than general office work.
         Some of the requirements of technology to support seamless learning can be satisfied by traditional tools
such as notebooks, pencils, textbooks, timetables, and diaries etc. However, mobile technologies can supplement
these by offering learners the opportunity to manage their learning over time, to engage in collaboration, and to
relate information to situated problems. In sum, it is a learning hub for the students to engage in several learning
activities across time and location by using the same devices.
         In our research, each student is equipped with a HTC Tytn II Windows Mobile Smartphone that came with
photo-taking function, stylus pen, keyboard, 3G-enabled Internet surfing data plan and educational applications. The
students used    the Smartphones   in   class and  were    allowed   to bring  home    the   devices. With   the  3G-enabled
Smartphone, they have instant access to the Internet inside and outside school at anytime. The students were trained
in the basic use of the Smartphone such as the camera, internet connectivity, web browsing and GoKnow Mobile
Learning Environment (MLE). GoKnow's MLE is a suite of educational mobile applications comprising Sketchy for
creating animated    drawings, PicoMap    for  creating   concept maps,  iKWL     for  creating KWL,     and MyProjects    for
students to carry out their learning activities.

!

                                                       485  ·  © ISLS
                                                  ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

Research Design
Our research is guided by the following research questions: 1) How does the appropriate use of mobile technologies
mediate planned and emergent learning inside and outside school? 2)          How do students learn seamlessly across the
boundaries of learning spaces? and 3) How do we design for learning to occur seamlessly across the boundaries? To
answer our questions, we studied an experimental Primary (Elementary) Grade 3 (P3, with nine-year old students)
class comprising 39 students and worked closely with the class form and science teacher. The students have been
using the HTC Smartphones since March 2009.

                                           Planned                                    Emergent
                             II Planned learning out of class                  III Emergent learning out
                 Out         e.g., field trip to an art museum                 of class e.g., using mobile
                 Class       which is part of the schoolcurriculum             phones to capture picturesand video clips of animal and
                                                                               directed by self-interest

                 In
                 Class                                                         IV Emergent learning in
                             I Planned learning                                class
                             in class e.g. searching for                       e.g., teachable moments not
                             answers in classrooms                             planned by the teachers
                 Figure 2: Matrix of students learning spaces (adapted from So, Kim, & Looi, 2008)

          Our research attempts to design and investigate a seamless learning environment that allows students to
learn at any time and at any location, and provides children with multiple ways of learning throughout the day. This
is consistent  with what Pea  (2009)   argues: "we   need   to  treat  the activities and life  experiences of  the learners
throughout the day as our units of learning design, description and explanation". The matrix above (Figure 2) shows
the students' learning spaces from two dimensions ­ 1) in class vs. out of class and 2) planned learning (planned by
teachers)  vs. emergent  learning  (not planned     by teachers,   but occurring    unexpectedly  driven  by   student self-
interest/motivation).

"Mobilized" Lesson Design
For the planned learning activities, we designed a series of "mobilized" lessons in class (Zhang, Wong, Seow, Chen,
& Looi, 2009) to help students learn curriculum subjects better. Instead of relying on the textbooks for instruction,
we created instructional tasks for the students to search for information related to the curriculum and scaffold their
learning.  The instructional tasks took advantage    of  the  affordances   of the Internet-enabled   Smartphones   and  the
GoKnow's MLE. For example, we used iKWL to draw out students' prior understanding and encourage inquiry
about the topic. Students use the Internet-enabled Smartphones to search for resources to answer their queries. Many
"mobilized lessons" have an "out-of-classroom" element where the students interact with the environment outside
the classroom   and engage   in activities in their everyday    lives. For  example,   we designed    an English  mobilized
lesson  on prepositions  (Looi, Wong,   So,   Seow, et  al, 2009)  to  support  students' multiple    learning paths. In this
lesson, students  used  the  Sketchy  application   on  their  mobile  devices   to   represent their understanding   of the
prepositions, and took pictures outside the classroom to demonstrate their usage in an authentic context.

Data Collection
A  design  ethnography   approach  (Goldman,    2004)   is  integrated  into   our research to   observe how    students are
engaged in seamless learning when they interact with their handheld devices, peers, teachers and other people in
their learning community (e.g., Barron, 2006; Squire & Klopfer, 2007). Over the past 6 months, we have followed
this P3 class closely to study how they use the Smartphone in and outside of the classroom. Data was obtained
through   extensive observations   in the  school.  The    sources of  data  included   classroom   observations,   informal
conversation with students during their recess breaks, conversations with the teachers, and professional development
sessions  with  teachers as  we  designed   and  reviewed     the  lessons.  Our   researchers  spent  time observing    and

!

                                                       486  ·  © ISLS
                                                 ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

interacting with the class every week for about 6 months. They observed how the students used the Smartphones to
mediate learning in class, how the Smartphones facilitate interactions and learning with others, and the emergent use
of the Smartphone.
         We surveyed the students before the introduction of the Smartphone and again six months after they have
used the device. In the survey, the students reported on their usage, experience and attitudes towards the use of the
Smartphone for learning in and out of school. We conducted structured interviews with the students prior to their use
of the devices.
         In a seamless learning environment, students are `on the move' across different modes of space and time. In
this project, students have 24-7 access of the mobile device so that they can use the tool to engage in a wide range of
activities in and out of the classroom. We have developed and installed a log software program to capture all the
data stored in students' HTC phone. To understand more about the nature of students' learning outside school, we
selected six students from a diverse set of criteria (academic performance, technology competency, socio-economic
status, social skills and richness of informal learning spaces) for in-depth study. For these students, we conducted
monthly visits to their home where we interviewed them and their family members. Through the visits, we hope           to
understand the informal learning environment of the student at home and outside school. Each family was given a
digital camera to capture moments that reflect the student's use of the Smartphones during family activities.

Findings
In this section, we describe a myriad of seamless learning scenarios based on our preliminary findings of the data
collected from the research. The scenarios describe how technology facilitates learning in and across the boundaries
presented in our framework in Figure 3. We present survey results on the 39 students' experiences with and attitudes
towards the Smartphone and its role in learning 6 months after the introduction of HTC phones (September 2009)
and "mobilized lesson. We also compare students' attitudes toward using Smartphone for their learning in and out of
classroom before (February 2009) and half year after the introduction of HTC phones and "mobilized lesson".

Seamless learning Scenarios
Planned Learning in the classroom ­ Planned learning outside class
In a lesson on digestive systems, the students learnt about how a digestive system functions as a system. They had to
understand how different parts of the human digestive system worked together to digest food in the body. Planned
classroom activities included viewing of videos on students' Smartphones and creating animation on the synergistic
processes of the digestive parts. The process of creating the animation enabled students to grasp why and how the
seemingly disparate parts actually work in tandem as a system. For the planned home activity, the teacher wrote a
letter to the parents of the students to invite them to participate in the activity. Students were required to teach their
parents on what they know about the digestive system. After the parents had learnt about the digestive system from
the child, they were asked to share and recount the parts and functions of the digestive system. The students then
used the Smartphone to video or audio record what the parents have shared about the digestive system.
         In class, the teacher paired the students   and  instructed them to  listen or view  their partner's recording
(Figure 4). As they listened or watched the presentation, each student would have to evaluate the parent's knowledge
of the digestive system by using checklist provided to them. For example, students need to validate if the parents
have indeed described the flow of food in the digestive system or demonstrated understanding of where digestion
stops in the system. Learning inside and outside the classroom became a participatory activity between students,
teachers and parents. Students took on the role of teaching their parents what they learnt and students learnt from
their friends through their feedback on the recording. We noticed that students did exhibit accountability for what
their parents had shared and they critically reflected on what they had taught or omitted during the child-parent
sharing. One student in the class was concerned that he had omitted "teaching" his father a function of the digestive
system. This happened after his partner said that he did not hear any mention of it from the video recording of the
student's father.

Planned learning in class ­ Emergent learning out of class
In our planned    lesson, we encouraged the   students to   inquire what they would   like to know   pertaining  to their
selected topic. For  example,  after students listed all  that they  know about animals,   we  asked  them    to list the
questions they would like to know about animals. There are no restrictions on the type of questions they can pose.
Using the Smartphones, they were encouraged to use the Internet to search for the answers to the questions. As
young learners of inquiry, they had initial difficulties in framing the questions. They also needed support from the

!

                                                     487  ·  © ISLS
                                                 ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

teacher and researchers in helping them to make sense and filter the influx of information that emerged from their
search results.
         In class, we promoted inquiry by asking students to list questions they have about a topic and look for
evidences that would help them answer the questions. They would use the 3G-enabled phones to search for answers
and share their answers in class discussions facilitated by the teacher. The planned lesson on the inculcation of
inquiry skills actually spills over to learning practices at home. In one of the interviews with Roy (one of our six
targeted participants for ethnographic study) and his family, his father commented that Roy developed an interest in
asking questions about things around him. His mother recounted that Roy taught her that guppies give birth to young
instead of laying eggs. In one of the lessons, students used the Smartphone to inquire "which fish give birth to young
live?" and "which mammal lays eggs?" In class, we encouraged the development of cognitive processing skills
which includes observation, recording observation on the Smartphone with the camera, and sharing with others. At
home, Roy observed that the fishes in his home aquarium had laid eggs (Figure 3). He used his Smartphone camera
to take pictures of the eggs. His interest and habits of inquiry was supported by his parents. On a holiday trip, Roy
recorded videos   of the fishes and   marine life from   the transparent   base  of the boat  he  was in (Figure 4).  The
Smartphone is a tool to support Roy's emergent learning arising from his interest in marine animals. He used the
Smartphone    to record  his observations outside  the class   and    search for more   information. He  has learnt to be
observant about the world around him and started to find out answers to his questions independently. Roy told us
that he shared his pictures and videos with classmates who shared similar interests in marine animals.

      Figure 3. Roy taking pictures of eggs laid                      Figure 4. Roy taking pictures of marine life he
      by the fish in his home aquarium                                observed from the transparent bottom of a boat

Emergent learning in classroom - Planned learning out of classes - Planned learning in
classroom
Jeremy was one of the participants in our study who showed a keen interest in exploring the use of the mobile
devices when it was first introduced in the classroom. During class, he was observed to explore both the hardware
and software features of the Smartphone (Figure 5). In one lesson, he used Google Maps to find the location of the
school and his home on the map. His exploration was unrelated to what was taught in the class at the time. He was
zooming and panning the map to locate, and making spatial comparison to the location-in-question with respect to
his neighbourhood. He used Google Maps to find directions from the school to his home by entering the start point
and end point of his journey. In a home interview, he shared with the researchers his motivation of using Google
Maps - his grandmother had problems travelling from one place to another as she does not know the directions. He
planned to use Google Maps to help her get around. Jeremy's exploration extended to the social realm as he shared
with his classmates about the use of Google Maps. During class, Jeremy and another classmate used Google Maps to
compare the distances of their homes from school.
         Some of our ideas for learning design are inspired by the students' innovative use of mobile devices in the
emergent learning spaces. For example, when the mobile devices were first introduced to the class, some students
used Google Maps to find the location of their homes on the map (Figure 5) and compared the distances of their
homes from school. To connect the students' emergent use of the Google Maps on the Smartphone to in-school
instruction, the teacher  designed  a math   learning  activity   for the students  to learn distances and   length in an
authentic context.: Each student was asked to find the distances and directions from one point to another point (e.g.
from the school to the swimming complex) by using Google Maps. They then added up the length of the journey and
converted the distance from Kilometers to meters. The use of Google Maps enabled the students to have a better
sense of distance  as the interface displays the  directions   to places  they are  familiar with such as the swimming
complex or the nearby shopping mall from the school. It enabled them to relate distance and time by viewing the

!

                                                     488  ·  © ISLS
                                                   ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

estimated time needed to reach a destination using different modes of travel such as walking or driving using Google
Map.

       Figure 5. Jeremy exploring Google Map in class               Figure 6. Aaron viewingcollection of fishing
                                                                    rods

Emergent learning outside class - Emergent learning in class - Planned learning in class
Aaron had   a strong   interest in fishing. His interest   was   fuelled by his family activities which  include weekend
overseas trips for fishing trips on a boat. His house was filled with equipments and artifacts which reflected the
family's interest in fishing (Figure 6). During interviews, Aaron showed his fishing equipment to the researchers. At
home, he used the Smartphone to view YouTube videos of the marine life. Using search terms on YouTube, he
found videos  that    meet his  interest on demand.  In  the  classroom,   Aaron shared   his videos and  knowledge   with
classmates. One of the students with whom he shared his interest is Roy. In our interview, Roy told us about Aaron
telling him how fast a swordfish could swim in the deep sea. This sparked off an interest for Roy to watch "Blue
Planet" and borrow books from the public library on the deep sea creatures.
         Aaron's interest in the marine life extended to his knowledge about animals. In a lesson where the teacher
asked students     to animate  the characteristics of the   mammals,     Aaron  drew   an Elephant   Shrew.  He  correctly
identified the characteristics of a mammal. His choice of drawing an Elephant Shrew showed his knowledge of
animals. He asked questions about fishes such as "Where do Red Groupers live?", "Where do Water Hares live?"
and "How do fish lay eggs?" in his KWL chart (What do I know, what do I want to know, what have I learned) in
the Smartphone. His knowledge about fishes is impressive for an 8 year old as he stated that "Rabbit fish live in
holes in the water", "fish have gills to breathe in water", and "fish use their fins to swim." In class, he continued to
increase his understanding and interest using the Smartphone to look for information and view videos.

Students' Attitudes towards Smartphones for Learning
The scenarios described above provided us an understanding of how individual student learn in different contexts, in
and out of the classroom, and across different social contexts over time. This project seeks to examine changes in the
39 students' attitudes towards learning with the Smartphone in and out of classroom after introduction of the devices
and designed lessons. In the survey, the students provided feedback on the affordances of the Smartphone and its
role to helping them to learn after six months of usage. The survey results are presented next.
         Among the 39 students, around 80% of the students feel Smartphone helps their learning. 85% agree that
the Smartphone help them learn class subjects and 79% agree that Smartphone help them learn things outside of
school. 62% students agree that they understand better the science concepts learned in class and how things they
learn in class are connected to their daily lives.

  Table 2. Students' attitudes towards HTC phone & its role for learning     (N=39)

                                                                                     Agree         Neutral/     Disagree
                                                                                       (%)      Not sure (%)      (%)
It is easy to use.                                                                     71.8          20.5         7.7
It is light enough for me to carry.                                                    74.4          17.9         7.7
The size of the screen on the HTC Smartphone is too small to do my schoolwork.         25.6          10.3        64.1
The size of  the   keyboard  on  the HTC    Smartphone   is  too  small  to do  myschool work.17.9   15.4        66.7

!

                                                       489  ·  © ISLS
                                                   ICLS 2010   ·   Volume 1

I do not think that using the Smartphone helps my learning                               2.6          17.9          79.5
It helps me learn my class subjects.                                                    84.6          12.8           2.6
It helps me learn things outside of school.                                             78.9          18.4           2.6
It distracts me from doing my school work.                                               7.7          25.6          66.7
I understand the science concepts learned in class better                               61.5          35.9           2.6
I understand better how things I learn in class are connected to my daily life.         61.5          33.3           5.1

          When comparing students' attitudes toward the role of Smartphone in their learning in September survey
with their attitudes in the February survey, we found that from the paired-sample t test, students' attitudes have a
positive  change towards   the use  of mobile   devices    for learning in   class (t(38)=-2.765,  p<.01) and   out of class
(t(38)=-2.321,  p<.05)  after the  introduction of  the  smartphone     and  a  series  of  "mobilized"  lessons (Table  3).
Students like the learning activities using computers and gadgets more than before (t(38)=-2.016, p<.05).

Table 3. Results of paired-sample t test on students attitude (N=39)

                                                                                                   Std.
                                                                                     Mean       Deviation         t
      Mobile device helps me learn my class subjects.               Feb Survey         1.46Sep Survey1.82.643.451-2.765**
  Mobile device helps me learn things outside of school.            Feb SurveySep Survey1.421.76   .683.490   -2.321*
  I like the learning activities using computers and gadgets.       Feb SurveySep Survey1.051.23   .223.536   -2.016*
      I learn more when I work in a group than alone.               Feb Survey         1.37Sep Survey1.68.633.662-2.634*
*p<.05, **p<.01.

          Both survey questions asked students if they think they can learn by "playing video and computer games",
"watching videos on the computer or the web", and "browsing the Internet". Before the HTC phone introduction,
only 26% students feel they can learn by "playing video and computer games", 38% of them think they can learn by
"watching videos on the computer or the web", and 65% think they can learn by "browsing the Internet". Half a year
later after the introduction  of  HTC  phone, the   percentage     increase to 56%,    87%  and  92%  respectively. After 6
months of using the Smartphone, a student gave the following feedback in the survey:

          I like to have more projects on My Projects and have more Sketchy activities. Sketchy helps me learn to
          raw (draw) nicer, write nicer, it helps me to search for more information from the Internet....The Internet
          helps me to search for pictures I like and searching for more information.

          The use of the Smartphone facilitates the students learning and fulfills their own personal interest.     Another
student commented:     "I like using  because   it has games,    worksheets    and teaches  us  more  about animals,   fungi,
materials, length and many other more." A student indicated her interest in using the Smartphone outside of school
when she said "I prefer to use the phone outdoors like in the zoo or park."

Conclusion
This  paper  discusses how    the affordances of   mobile    technology   match    the premises  of seamless  learning,  and
present seamless learning scenarios from our research. Till recently, not many studies in the literature make full use
of the vast potential for learning spaces out of classroom to enrich school education. Studying in and out of class
learning will enable us to gain insights and build theory on the notion of seamless learning. As discussed in this
paper, students' learning spaces can be enhanced or extended by mobile technologies which support learning across
multiple contexts and time scales. Mobile technology can support seamless learning in a variety of contexts over
long periods of time. By enabling learners to learn `anytime, anywhere', mobile technology augments the propensity
for students to  engage in self-directed learning   on  the   fly. Student  could  adapt   the use of mobile technology   in
different contexts for  different  purposes that   could   be  related to   their interests or  learning goals. The  mobile
technology enables students to learn, through ways of organizing ideas, memories and personal resources, to support

!

                                                       490  ·  © ISLS
                                                 ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

seamless learning. It enables students to describe and preserve their observations and reflections, by means of diaries,
planners, timelines, picture taking and audio/video recording etc.
        From   our  initial findings, we  observed    how   learning occurs and  is connected  seamlessly   across  the
boundaries through social interactions and the environment mediated by the use of the technology. Students view the
Smartphones as learning tools as they use it over time inside and outside the classroom. Understanding technology-
supported  seamless  learning   is important  for researchers  and   practitioners  who  are interested  in connecting
classroom learning and out of classroom learning spaces in order to create rich and holistic learning experiences for
the students. We hope this paper will stimulate further discussions on how to design and study seamless learning
environments that can foster 21st century knowledge and skills among the young generation of learners.

References
Barron, B. (2006). Interest and self-sustained learning as catalysts of development: a learning ecologies perspective.
        Human Development, 49, 4, 193­224.
Chan, T.-W., Roschelle, J., Hsi, S., Kinshuk, Sharples M., et al (2006). One-to-one technology enhanced learning:
        an opportunity for global research collaboration. Research and Practice of Technology Enhanced Learning,
        1, 3­29.
Chen, W., Seow, P., So, H.J., Toh, Y, & Looi, C.K. (2010). Connecting learning spaces using mobile technology.
        To appear in Education Technology, September-October, 2010.
Goldman, R. (2004). Video perspectivity meets wild and crazy teens: a design ethnography. Cambridge Journal of
        Education, 34(2), 157-178.
Looi, C.K., Seow, P., Zhang, B.H., So, H.J., Chen W., & Wong, L.H. (2010). Leveraging mobile technology for
        sustainable seamless learning: A research agenda. British Journal of Educational Technology, 41(2), 154-
        169.
Looi, C.K., Wong, L.H., So, H., Seow, P., Toh, Y., Norris, C., Soloway, E., Chen, W., & Zhang, B.H. (2009).
        Anatomy of a mobilized lesson: Learning My Way. Journal of Computers & Education, 53(4), 1120-1132.
Pea, R. (2009).   Fostering  learning in  the networked    world: Trends,  opportunities and  challenges  for learning
        environments    and   education,  Keynote   speech  presented   at 3rd  Redesigning   Pedagogy    International
        Conference. Singapore: National Institute of Education.
Roschelle, J. (2003). Keynote paper: unlocking the learning value of wireless mobile devices. Journal of Computer
        Assisted Learning, 19, 3, 260­272.
Sharples, M.,  Taylor, J.,  & Vavoula,   G. (2007). A  theory  of learning  for the mobile   age. In R. Andrews  &  C.
        Haythornthwaite (Eds.), The Sage Handbook of E-learning Research (pp. 221-247). London: Sage.
So, H. J., Kim, I. S., & Looi, C. K. (2008). Seamless mobile learning: Possibilities and challenges arising from the
        Singapore experience. Educational Technology International, 9(2), 97"121.
Squire, K. & Klopfer, E. (2007). Augmented reality simulations on handheld computers. Journal of the Learning
        Sciences, 16(3), 371­413.
Stroup, W. M. & Petrosino, A. J. (2003). An analysis of horizontal and vertical device design for school-related
        teaching and learning. Education, Communication & Information. Vol.3 (3). pp.327-345.
Zhang,  B. H., Wong,   L.   H., Seow, P., Chen,   W.,  & Looi, C.   K. (2009).  "Mobilizing" curriculum   materials for
        seamless learning--Opportunities and challenges. Paper presented at the Global Chinese Conference on
        Computers in Education, Taipei, Taiwan.

Acknowledgements
This material  is based on    the  work supported   by the  National   Research  Foundation  (Singapore)  under  Grant
NRF2007-IDM005-MOE-008. We also wish to thank Nan Chiau Primary School for collaborating with us on this
research, and Baohui Zhang, Gean Chia and Ivica Boticki for working on various aspects of this project.

!

                                                     491  ·  © ISLS
