                                                       ICLS 2010    ·  Volume 2

                                   Exploring Intersections Between
                       Online and Offline Affinity Space Participation

                          Elizabeth M. King, University of Wisconsin-Madison, emking2@wisc.edu

         Abstract:        In order to  examine   the  literacies   involved   with  the digital media   practices   and
         affinity space involvement of a group of adolescent boys, multiple methods for data collection
         and     analysis    were  adopted  to   supplement     traditional   case  study  methods.     Longitudinal
         research crossing multiple sites from individual and group perspectives was essential to track
         development       of literacies   over time, and    to mark    the  intersection of   trajectories of interest-
         driven     expertise   development      sparked    by    affinity  space   involvement     individually    and
         collectively.

Introduction
"New    capitalism"    (Gee,  Hull   &Lankshear,   1996)    has  caused    many  education-based    tensions   as workers  at  lower
levels of the organization are being called upon for increasingly complex levels of critical thinking, decision making
and  higher  levels    of literacy skills, identified broadly    as   21st century literacies.  Today, unskilled positions have
nearly disappeared and the modern workplace requires all students graduate from high school college ready, as the
preponderance of jobs in the future will require at least some level of post secondary education incorporating broad
based  21st  century   literacies, including    traditional literacy  areas  (Wagner,   2008).  Curtailing the trend of allowing
boys,  especially   those    from  low income,    minority   and    working   class backgrounds,    to opt   out  of literacy  related
activities has never been more urgent.
Research into boys' out of school literacies presents an optimistic picture of the kinds of literacy related activities
they  engage     in using    digital  media.    Affinity    space   involvement    in conjunction   with    digital  media    offers a
potentially rich area for the development of these productive practices.            As Gee (2004) indicates, an affinity group is
a space people congregate to share and forward a particular interest with participation ranging from hanging out to
publishing artifacts, sharing knowledge or furthering the collective knowledge of the space.                Participating in affinity
spaces  associated     with   massively    multiplayer      online  games    (MMOs)     has    been shown      to host   a veritable
"constellation"     of literacy practices   (Steinkuehler,   2007),   while   also  providing   affiliation around   interest  driven
learning (Hayes & King, 2009) immersed in popular culture.                  Supporting  the  development    of broader   21st century
literacies, other studies have highlighted the productivity of participatory culture (Jenkins, 1992), and affinity spaces
associated with participating in online forums (Steinkuehler & Duncan, 2009) as well as writing and publishing fan
fiction (Black, 2005) and taking part in "challenges" associated with The Sims games (Gee & Hayes, in-print).

Description of the Problem
While these studies have been useful in illuminating the kinds of affinity group practices "in the wild," (Hutchins,
1995), they focus on visible contributions published online.           Unpublished practices of literacies shared between peers
both online and offline have largely gone undetected.           Therefore there is currently a somewhat limited picture of the
kinds of literacy practices afforded by online participation, which omits discussion of the intersection between online
and  offline affinity  group  affiliation.  This  appears   to  be  a relevant area to  pursue  especially  concerning   the  literacy
practices of males which, as research suggests is sparked by peer participation and shared as a social practice among
the peer group (Newkirk, 2002).

Description and Discussion of the Research
My research is based on a longitudinal study (three years) of a racially mixed friendship group of eight teenage males
from predominately working class backgrounds.            Research was conducted in multiple locations in naturalistic face to
face environments such as hanging out with friends, sleep overs and home settings, and online in settings such as
in-game and hanging out on social networking sites.             This was supplemented by activities in the quasi-naturalistic
setting of   the University    of  Wisconsin-Madison        GLS   Casual    Learning  Lab  (see  Steinkuehler     &  King, 2009   for
program description).        Data collection methods integrated participation in collaborative and parallel play, numerous
interviews with participants and their parents, field notes from observations of individual and group play, survey
administration and the collection of artifacts documenting literacy practices and digital media involvement.
Case study methodology (Stake, 1995) was effective for providing a basic framework for data collection and analysis
however borrowing from other methodologies was essential (Steinkuehler, Black & Clinton, 2005).                       Incorporating
methods associated with connective ethnography (Leander & McKim, 2003) to trace participation along trajectories
of affinity space involvement and tease out cultural practices stemming from different affinity spaces ported into the

                                                            486   ·  © ISLS
                                                   ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 2

friendship group provided necessary contextual underpinnings for understanding situated practices (Gee, 2004).            Data
analysis provided equally complex challenges and involved multiple perspectives as well.              Being able to shift the
lens of analysis from the individual to the group, as well as from specific incidents to group-enacted practice was
essential.  This was supported by a learning ecologies (Barron, 2006) framework to further explore trajectories of
online involvement to illuminate patterns of affinity space involvement that seeded practices that were subsequently
taken up or rejected by the friendship group.     Adopting a phenomenological perspective to tease out how the boys
learned to "be" experts in their game worlds (Thomas and Brown, 2009) and affinity spaces was also necessary in
order to unpack how literacy practices impacted their online and offline identity.            Adopting an orientation toward
identifying and  studying  the development     of individual     areas  of expertise,  similar to Squire,    DeVane   &  Durga
(2008) as a way of identifying and tracking the dissemination of practices across the group was also beneficial.

Conclusion
The process   of developing    and  adopting   literacy  practices   across  the  group    was  a slow   process   marked    by
unanticipated activities, therefore a   longitudinal study     was essential  to  mark    the dissemination   of practices   and
knowledge   over time.    In addition,   data  collected from    multiple    settings, contexts   and  from   both group     and
individual perspectives, online and offline appeared to provide a more complete picture of the breadth of literacy
practices these boys engage in during the range of their affinity space involvement.            Key challenges involved the
continually evolving nature of the boys' gameplay as well as the complexities associated with collecting data from
collective and parallel gaming practices both triggering the need for data analysis drawing upon multiple methods.

References
       Barron,   B.  (2006).   Interest and   self-sustained   learning as  catalysts  of development:   A   learning  ecology
       perspective. Human Development, 49, 193-224.
       Black, R.W. (2005). Online fan fiction: What technology and popular culture can teach us about writing
       and literacy instruction. New Horizons for Learning Online Journal, XI (2), Spring 2005.
Gee, J. P. (2004). Situated Language and Learning:       A Critique of Traditional Schooling.         New York: Routledge.
       Gee,   J. P., &    Hayes, E.R.   (in print). Women      and Gaming:    The    Sims and   21st Century  Learning.   New
       York: Palgrave.
       Gee,   J. P., Hull, G.  &    Lankshear, C.   (1996).    The New Work Order:        Behind the Language of the New
       Capitalism.    Westview.
       Hayes, E. R., & King, E. M. (2009). Not just a dollhouse:             What the Sims2 can teach us about women's
       IT learning.   On the Horizon, 17(1), 60-69.
       Hutchins, E. (1995). Cognition in the Wild. Cambridge MA: MIT Press.
       Jenkins,   H.   (1992).   Textual    Poachers:    Television     Fans  and     Participatory   Culture.    New    York:
       Routledge.
       Leander, K. M., & McKim, K. K. (2003). Tracing the everyday 'sittings' of adolescents on the internet: A
       strategic   adaptation    of ethnography     across   online    and   offline  spaces.  Education,    Communication,
       Information, 3(2), 211-240.
       Newkirk,    T. (2002).  Misreading     Masculinity:     Boys,   Literacy  and   Popular  Culture.     Portsmouth, NH:
       Heinemann.
       Squire, K. D., DeVane, B., & Durga, S. (2008). Designing Centers of Expertise for Academic Learning
       Through Video Games. Theory Into Practice, 47(3), 240-251.
Stake, R. (1995). The Art of Case Study Research. Thousand Oaks, CA:             Sage.
       Steinkuehler,   C.   (2007).    Massively  multiplayer    online    gaming as   a  constellation of   literacy practices.
       eLearning, 4(3), 297-318.
       Steinkuehler, C. & Duncan, S. (2009). Informal scientific reasoning in online virtual worlds. Journal of
       Science Education & Technology, 17(6), 530-543.
       Steinkuehler,   C.,  &  King,    E. M.  (2009).  Steinkuehler,   C.,  &   King,  B. (2009).   Digital  literacies for the
       disengaged:    Creating   after school contexts  to   support   boys'  game-based   literacy  skills. On  the  Horizon,
       17(1), 47-59.
       Steinkuehler, C. A., Black, R. W., & Clinton, K. A. (2005). Researching literacy as tool, place, and way
       of being. Reading Research Quarterly, 40(1), 7-12.
       Thomas, D., & Brown, J. S. (2009). Why virtual worlds can matter. International Journal of Learning
       and Media, 1(1), 37-49.
       Wagner,    T.  (2008).  The   Global   Achievement    Gap:    Why    Even Our   Best   Schools  Don't  Teach   the  New
       Survival Skills Our Children Need ­ And What We Can Do About It.                New York:      Basic Books.

                                                       487   ·  © ISLS
