                                                    ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 2

                              The Role of Explanations in Learning
                         Organizers: Lauren Barth-Cohen, Jennifer Chiu, Beat Schwendimann,
                                University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley CA, 94720.
                Email: lbarth@berkeley.edu, jenchiu@berkeley.edu, bschwendimann@berkeley.edu

          Abstract:   This  poster session   brings  together   six perspectives   on  the  role  of explanations   in
          learning.  Each poster presents recent empirical and/or theoretical findings that address how, when
          or why    explaining  is beneficial   for learning.   This  session  will highlight   the  similarities and
          differences among how the term explanation is used in cognitive science, psychology, and science
          education with the aim of moving the field towards a better understanding of how explanations
          can support learning. By bringing together these researchers we aim to encourage communication
          around what constitutes an explanation and how the researchers from different communities are
          addressing similar issues, such as the nature of teacher's explanations, student's explanations,
          expert's explanations, and self-explanations and their role in learning.
Introduction
Explaining a phenomenon or why it occurs is viewed as a central element of science.                  Similarly, learning from
scientific explanations is seen as an important goal of science education (National Research Council, 2007).                 A
multi-disciplinary line of research from the science education community, cognitive psychology community and
learning sciences community is interested in understanding the role of explanations in learning.           In this symposium
we bring together these different perspectives to highlight current research surrounding how and why explanations
benefit learning,    and identify  similarities and   differences   among    these  approaches    as  to  what  constitutes  an
explanation.
Rationale
There is a great deal of evidence that the process of generating explanations can be beneficial to learning            (e.g. Chi
et al.  1994), and   there  is some   evidence   that    explaining   can promote   conceptual    change   in  young   children
(Amsterlaw & Wellman, 2006; Chi, 2000), but we do not know in detail how explaining helps learning (Lombrozo,
2006).  Specifically  we   do  not know    what types    of explanations   are  more   or less beneficial  for  learning, what
explanations look like in different disciplines, and what other factors might influence if and how explaining supports
learning.  This symposium has two main foci.         First, we explore the relationship between the explanation and the
type of learning being sought after, and second, we aim to identify variations within the term explanation.
          The researchers in this symposium address the role of explanations in learning in a variety of ways.               For
example,   one  poster   investigates   how  teachers'   pedagogical    content  knowledge     of scientific  explanation    and
argumentation changes while they learn new practices in professional development.            Another poster investigates the
relative impact of explanation, exploration and observation on children's learning of underlying causal relationships
and mechanisms. Across these posters there are differences in the populations being studied and how researchers
operationalize  learning;   however,     the  common      focus    on explanations     in learning   will  enable   productive
communication between the researchers from different perspectives, and should support a fruitful discussion with
audience members.
          Within the learning sciences community the term explanation is used in a variety of ways. The second goal
of this symposium     is to support   a more    precise  understanding    of the  similarities and   differences  among   these
complementary    perspectives.   For  example,   one     presenter views   explanations   as the  "big   ideas" or  conceptual
frameworks that are socially accepted by the professional science community, and aims to help students develop
these kinds of complex understandings. Other posters view constructing explanations as a critical practice within the
scientific community     and   present  research    that explores   how   both   students  and    teachers develop   epistemic
understanding of scientific explanations. A poster from the cognitive science perspective builds upon the philosophy
of science to view explaining as a constraint on learning that facilitates the interpretation of observations in terms of
unifying   patterns. One  poster   puts forth a comprehensive       taxonomy   of  the possible   components    of a scientific
explanation that can be used to characterize and better understand various types of novice and expert explanations
(for a complete summary of posters, see Table 1). By bringing these perspectives together, we aim to encourage
greater  communication      across  fields  and  further    our   collective understanding     of the  nature   and  utility of
explanations.

                                                         488  ·  © ISLS
                                                      ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 2

Table 1. Summaries of research focus, participants, and contributions for each poster.
Presenter      Focus                                   Participants         Research Contribution
Legare &       Compares self-explanation to            36 children aged 5   Explanations promote learning about mechanisms,
Lombrozo       exploration and attention               and 6                but may have less benefit for memory of individual
                                                                            features
McNeill &      Explores changes in teachers'           24 grade 5-8         Teachers need to develop an awareness of the
Knight         pedagogical knowledge of                teachers             nature and importance of scientific explanation and
               scientific explanation and                                   argumentation as a key part of their pedagogical
               argumentation                                                content knowledge
Sandoval et    Investigates relative influence of      400 grade 6 and 7    Will clarify the degree to which conceptual
al.            conceptual and epistemic                students             knowledge and the understanding of epistemic
               understanding on biology students'                           requirements of a scientific explanation promotes
               ability to construct explanations                            learning
Williams &     Explores the effect of explanation      University           Explaining constrains learners to interpret what they
Lombrozo       on the ability to generalize to novel   undergraduates       are learning in terms of general unifying patterns,
               contexts                                                     driving the discovery of subtle generalizations that
                                                                            support transfer to novel problems and situations
White et al.   Presents a comprehensive                Novice and expert    Ability to characterize learners' existing and
               taxonomy for the possible               explanations in      developing explanatory capabilities, as well as to
               components of scientific                physical and life    characterize expert explanations that are generated
               explanations                            science              by teachers and scientists
Zembal-        Investigates how teachers'              Preservice K-5       Preservice teachers were able to adopt an increasing
Saul           preparational experiences mediate       teachers             emphasis on evidence, explanation, and science
               their learning to teach science                              content in addition to classroom discourse

                                        Explanation as a guide to learning
    Cristine Legare, Department of Psychology, University of Texas at Austin, 1 University Station #A8000, Seay
                         Building 5.216, Austin, TX 78712-018. Email: legare@psy.utexas.edu
    Tania Lombrozo, Department of Psychology, University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, CA 94720. Email:
                                                     lombrozo@berkeley.edu

Although prior research with adolescents and adults has demonstrated that self-explanation benefits learning (Chi et
al., 1994), little is known about the effect of self-explanation on learning in young children (but see Crowley &
Siegler, 1999). The objective of the present study is to investigate the relationship between explanation and learning,
and most importantly, to measure learning more directly by comparing self-explanation to other potential learning
mechanisms such as exploration and attention.          Does constructing a causal explanation benefit learning more than
exploration or simple observation?
         In order to test the differential effects of explanation on learning and to explore the relationship between
explanation   and learning   experimentally       we  have constructed    a novel  problem-solving      task that consists    of  a
machine with five interlocking gears (see figure 1). When the gears are connected in the correct way a crank
operates the machine and makes a fan turn.         The three middle gears have peripheral pieces attached to them, which
are used to differentially assess children's memory versus their understanding of the functional mechanism of the
machine.     Prior to participating in the test conditions children observe the intact machine. Using a between-subjects
design, children  will  participate in    one  of four  conditions:    a  control condition in which     children attend    to  the
machine but do not explain or explore (attend condition), exploration without constructing an explanation (explore
condition), exploration after constructing an explanation (explain plus explore condition), and explanation without
exploration (explain condition).

                     Figure 1. Gear machine. Shown with missing part and five candidate parts.

         Following the experimental manipulation, children participate in three additional tasks.             Two of the tasks
are learning measures (presented first) followed by one procedural knowledge measure in which children are asked
to reconstruct the machine.   In each of the learning tasks the intact machine is presented to the child with one gear
missing.  In the functional relationship learning task, five candidate parts are presented to the child, none of which

                                                          489   ·  © ISLS
                                                   ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 2

are identical to the missing part. The choices are: the correct size and shape but different color, a part of the correct
shape but incorrect size, a part of the correct size but incorrect shape, a peripheral part they have seen before but is
not the correct shape, and a distracter part.   In the memory learning task another 5 candidate parts are presented to
the child to assess the child's memory for the exact missing piece.        All 5 pieces are the correct size and shape but
only one is the same color as the missing piece. In each task the child is asked to select the part that will make the
machine work.   After completion of the learning tasks   the machine     is taken apart. All of the gears are removed from
the base, and the peripheral parts are removed from the 3 middle gears. Participants are asked to reconstruct the
machine in exactly the same way they saw it before and make it work.
         Preliminary   analyses  with  32  children  ages  5   to 6,  in  two key   conditions,   indicate that   engaging  in
explanation leads to greater success in recreating the functional relationships within the machine (14 of 16 children)
than simply attending to the machine (6 out of 16 children). Conversely, children who attend to the machine but do
not engage in explanation are more successful in correctly matching peripheral parts to individual gears. Preliminary
analyses also support a benefit for explaining in the learning measures. For the functional relationship learning
measure only, children were more likely to select the correct functional part after engaging in explanation than
merely   attending, t(31)=2.45,  p<.05. This    suggests that    explanation  promotes   learning  about   underlying  causal
relationships and mechanisms, but may have less of a benefit for memory of individual features. In sum, our data
provide preliminary evidence that the process of constructing an explanation differentially promotes causal learning
and suggest    that explanation  plays  a  role in young   children's    learning by   highlighting    functional and  causal
relationships and helping them integrate elements along a causal pathway.

The role of explanation in discovery and generalization: evidence from category learning
         Joseph Williams & Tania Lombrozo, Department of Psychology, University of California, Berkeley
                           Email: joseph_williams@berkeley.edu, lombrozo@berkeley.edu

A convergence of theory and data in education research, cognitive development, and cognitive psychology provides
evidence for the significant role explanation plays in learning. Research in education (Chi et al, 1994) and cognitive
development    (Siegler, 2002)   suggests  that generating   explanations    drives the  acquisition   of knowledge   that  is
retained in the long   term  and  produces  a   depth of   understanding   that  gives   learners the   basis to  transfer and
generalize  to new   situations. Explanation    also plays   a   key role  in theories   of how   conceptual   knowledge     is
represented (Murphy      & Medin,  1985)   and  explaining    can  even   promote   conceptual    change  in  young  children
(Amsterlaw & Wellman, 2006).
         Although explanation's effect on generalization is well-established in real-world contexts, less is known
about the  mechanisms     that underlie explanation's    privileged   effect  on  generalization,  possibly   because of   the
complexity  of  these  domains.  We   used three   experiments    on  how   people  learn   artificial categories in order  to
rigorously test a specific hypothesis: that explaining drives people to interpret what they are learning in terms of
unifying patterns, which drives the discovery of underlying regularities that provide the basis to generalize. This
hypothesis is motivated by theories in philosophy of science about what properties explanations possess, which we
use to address a concern of this symposium: characterizing what explanations are in order to understand why they
help learning.
         Subsumption theories propose that explanations show how what is to be explained is an instance of a
general pattern or regularity. Unification theories propose that explanations are better to the extent they account for
diverse observations under a single pattern. These theories predict the privileged relationship between explanation
and generalization:   trying to  construct explanations    that  satisfy  the properties  of  subsumption     and unification
constrains learning, by driving learners to reason and form beliefs that allow them to interpret what they are learning
in terms of unifying patterns. This drives the discovery of regularities that are present, producing exactly the kind of
knowledge that supports generalization to novel contexts.
         The basic design examined people's learning about a category when explaining, compared to the control
conditions of describing, thinking aloud, and free study. Participants learned about two categories of alien robots,
`glorps' and `drents', from 8 training items. The items' features (color, body shape, foot shape) supported two
different generalizations about category membership: (1) the `75% rule', as 3 glorps and 1 drent had square bodies
while 3 drents and 1 glorp had round bodies, or (2), the subtle `100% rule', as all glorps had pointy feet and all
drents had flat feet- though each robot's feet were a unique shape. Participants were given a sheet displaying the 8
robots with category labels. The robots were also shown onscreen, and participants either explained why robots
might belong to a category, described robots, thought out loud, or were allowed to engage in free study. Following
study, the sheet was removed and participants categorized new robots that pitted the 75% rule against the 100% rule,
received a memory test for the studied robots, and reported perceived differences between glorps and drents.

                                                       490  ·  © ISLS
                                                  ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 2

         Relative to  the  control conditions  of   describing,  thinking  aloud,  and   free study, explaining  promoted
discovery of the subtle 100% foot rule, which supported generalization of category membership to new robots.
Explaining exerted constraints that drove people to discover a regularity that provided a unified explanation for the
membership of all items, as predicted by subsumption and unification accounts. Despite explanation's beneficial
effects on discovery and generalization, describing resulted in better memory for item details and provided insights
into what kind of information explaining is useful for learning. A coding of explanations and descriptions suggested
that explaining might drive the generation of abstract hypotheses. Experiment 2 further suggested that explaining
anomalies plays a role in promoting discovery and rejecting incorrect beliefs, compared to focusing attention on
those anomalies.
         By  testing  the predictions of theories   of explanation,   the  experiments   give  insight  into why and   how
explaining promotes generalization. They further suggest intriguing possibilities for future research: whether the
subsumption and unification constraints of explanation may drive `illusory' discovery. Speculatively, errors such as
forming   `conspiracy theories' or  stereotypes  could  be    due to  explaining   small or   unrepresentative samples    of
observations, which drives the induction of spurious patterns.

    Teachers' Pedagogical Content Knowledge of Students' Science Writing and Talk
                   Katherine L. McNeill, Amanda M. Knight, Boston College, Chestnut Hill, MA
                                   Email: kmcneill@bc.edu, amanda.knight.1@bc.edu

The practice of science is not the uncovering of truth; rather, science is fundamentally about a community of
scientists developing, debating and refining explanations through the use of evidence (Duschl, Schweingruber &
Shouse,  2007).  Implicit in  this essential process   are the  scientific practices  of explanation    and  argumentation.
Developing an explanation in science    focuses on how or why natural phenomena occur         (Nagel, 1961).  Constructing
an argument   includes   both a social  meaning,    which   focuses   on   debate between   multiple    individuals, and  an
individual meaning,   which   focuses on  the  argument    product    as a claim  justified with evidence,   warrants,   and
backing (Jiménez-Aleixandre & Erduran, 2008).       Our goal is to combine these two     practices to help  teachers support
their students in developing explanations about phenomena in which they debate and justify their claims with
appropriate evidence and reasoning (McNeill, Lizotte, Krajcik & Marx, 2006).
         Although recent research suggests the importance of these practices, teachers rarely engage students in
explanation and argumentation in their own science classrooms (Newton, Driver, & Osborne, 1999). One reason for
why this rarely occurs is teachers' lack of pedagogical strategies to support students in this complex practice (Zohar,
2008).   Simon and her colleagues (2006) argue that for teachers to change their classroom practice they need
professional development experiences that focus on teachers' existing understanding of evidence, explanation, and
argumentation. We cannot expect teachers to incorporate explanation and argumentation into their classrooms if
they do not have stronger understandings of these   scientific inquiry practices (Zembal-Saul, 2009).      Teachers require
pedagogical content knowledge (PCK) for scientific inquiry practices or knowledge of how to teach students to
engage in scientific inquiry practices (Davis & Krajcik, 2005). Yet there is currently little research in the field
focused on teachers' understandings or teacher education in this area of scientific explanation and argumentation
(Zohar, 2008).   Consequently, our research looks   to address the following research questions:     1) How does teachers'
pedagogical   content knowledge     for  scientific explanation    and   argumentation    change   while    participating in
professional development focused on this topic?
         This study took place with twenty-four grade 5-8 teachers in a large urban district in New England.             The
teachers participated in a series of workshops over the span of four months.      Multiple data sources were collected to
evaluate teachers' initial pedagogical content knowledge as well as to determine whether or not that knowledge
changed.   Data sources included: pre and post surveys, videotapes of the professional development workshops,
artifacts produced by the teachers, and samples of strong and weak student writing that the teachers brought to the
workshops. The coding schemes for the data sources were developed from the theoretical framework and iterative
analyses  of the data (Miles  &    Huberman,  1994).    Data    sources  were coded   by  two  independent   raters  and  all
disagreements were resolved through discussion.
         Preliminary analysis of the data suggests that the majority of teachers began the professional development
with different understandings of what counts as high quality student writing compared to high quality student talk.
On the pre-survey when teachers were asked to analyze samples of student writing, 67% of teachers included in their
discussion whether or not the student was using evidence in their scientific explanations and 29% commented on
students' reasoning  for  why their  evidence  supported   their  claim.   This is in contrast  to their discussion   of  the
transcripts of student talk where only 48% of the teachers discussed the role of evidence and 15% discussed the
students' reasoning.  Rather, the teachers tended to focus more on the teachers' questions and comments in the

                                                       491  ·  © ISLS
                                                  ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 2

transcript (59%) and student interactions (26%). This suggests the importance of supporting scientific explanations
and argumentation as discourse practices that are not limited to one form of communication, but rather are essential
to developing an effective science classroom culture.     The final poster will explore how these and other aspects of
the teachers' pedagogical content knowledge changed over the course of the workshops.

          Toward an emphasis on evidence and explanation in K-5 science teaching
Carla Zembal-Saul, College of Education, Pennsylvania State University, 148 Chambers Building, University Park,
                                      Pennsylvania 16802. Email: czem@psu.edu

In this work, scientific explanations can be likened to Roth's description of science content ideas (Roth et al., 2009).
They are the "big ideas" accepted within the scientific community, which also serve as the intended outcomes of
student learning. Engaging students in the discourse and practices of science is a means by which explanations are
socially negotiated in school science.
          The  Framework    for  Teaching  School   Science    as  Argument  (Zembal-Saul,     2009)     leverages essential
elements of inquiry (NRC, 2000), emphasizing evidence and argument in the development of scientific explanations
(NRC, 2007). Three main components are fore-grounded in the framework: (1) using an argument structure to
organize learning opportunities, navigate classroom discourse, and shape the science explanation; (2) reasoning
publicly about the construction and evaluation of evidence-based claims; and (3) engaging authentically with the
language of science. Guided by this framework, participation in investigations is not an end in itself, but rather
provides the evidence for negotiating scientific explanations and making sense of science concepts. The aim is to be
explicit  and intentional about    moving  beyond   activities  in   K-5 science  teaching   and  toward    co-constructing
evidence-based explanations.
          In  recent years, argumentation   in school   science    has   gained   support within     the science   education
community (Driver, Newton & Osborne, 2000; Erduran & Jimenez-Aleixandre, 2008; Erduran, Simon & Osborne,
2004). This is due in part to the potential of argumentation practices to engage learners with the language of science
and science learning (Mortimer & Scott, 2003), make thinking visible (Linn, 2000), and support an understanding of
science concepts (Jimenez-Aleixandre, Rodriguez & Duschl, 2000). Some have suggested that arguing to learn may
not be productive given how limitations in content knowledge constrain engagement with the task and quality
argumentation (von Aufschnaiter et al., 2008). There is increasing evidence, however, that scaffolded argumentation
can contribute    to  meaningful   science  learning  (Andriessen,     2006;    Clark   &   Sampson,     2007).  Moreover,
contemporary    definitions of  proficiency in K-8   science    (NRC,    2007)  identify  the centrality   of constructing,
evaluating,   and  using  scientific  explanations,  as   well    as  participating  in   scientific  discourse,   including
argumentation.
          A  fundamental  strand   of my  research  investigates   the ways  in   which  teacher preparation    experiences
informed by the argument framework mediate learning to teach science (Zembal-Saul, 2009, 2007, 2005). This
poster will report on a small-scale study of five preservice elementary teachers' enrolled in their science methods
course and concurrent field experience. The research questions underlying this work are: What is the nature of
participants' initial science teaching? What do participants' self-analyses of teaching reveal about the ways in which
they make sense of the framework? The primary sources of data were (1) video recorded science instruction of each
participant,  which  consisted  of three  consecutive 45-50    minute    lessons, and   (2) video-based    self-analyses of
teaching, which consisted of 10-15 minutes of edited video with text captions justifying why particular clips were
selected. The   teaching  events  were  coded  using  Studiocode!      video analysis   software,    and  event maps  were
constructed. Event maps provided a starting point for examining participants' self-analyses. Analytic categories
were generated through examination of the teaching events and of the focus of preservice teachers' self-analyses.
These categories helped identify the ways in which participants employed aspects of the argument framework to
inform their initial science teaching, as well as how they used the framework to make sense of their practice. Results
suggest that the ways in which preservice teachers think about the role of evidence in science teaching is critical for
an appropriate emphasis on scientific explanations. Additionally, approaches to scientific discourse appear to be
closely  linked to   preservice teachers' thinking  about   children's   engagement   in  constructing   explanations from
evidence.

         Disentangling conceptual and epistemic influences on scientific explanation
    William A. Sandoval, Jarod Kawasaki, Graduate School of Education & Information Studies, University of
 California ­ Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California, 90095. Email: sandoval@gseis.ucla.edu, jkawasaki@ucla.edu,
    Tina Stanford, Sara Carriere, Bladimir Lopez-Prado, SRI International, 333 Ravenswood Ave., Menlo Park,
      California, 94025. Email: tina.stanford@sri.com, sara.carriere@sri.com, bladimir.lopez-prado@sri.com

                                                      492  ·  © ISLS
                                                    ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 2

Constructing   a good    scientific explanation    would seem     to require both a sound     conceptual understanding   of
whatever is being explained and an understanding of the epistemic requirements of what makes an explanation good.
The epistemic standards for a good scientific explanation have been refined historically in response to the issues that
arise from not making conceptual claims and their warrants clear (Bazerman, 1988). This process of making one's
claims and the evidence for them clear involves rhetorical moves aimed not just at making explanations persuasive,
but comprehensible (Kitcher, 1991). For students then, learning to construct scientific explanations entails more than
just learning the scientific theories and concepts that are relevant to explaining particular phenomena. It includes
learning what counts as a good explanation and how to articulate one. It is not simply a cognitive skill (Kuhn &
Udell, 2003; von Aufschnaiter, Erduran, Osborne, & Simon, 2008), but a complex discursive practice driven by
epistemological motives that students often fail to appropriate in the science classroom (Berland & Reiser, 2009).
The analysis of students' explanations of scientific phenomena, therefore, can illuminate both what students know
about a particular topic ­ their conceptual understanding ­ and what they know about how to make a scientific
explanation  ­   their epistemic    understanding.  In practice,  disentangling  these  influences  simply  by  looking   at
students' explanations can be problematic (Kelly & Takao, 2002; Sandoval, 2003).
        The study described here attempts to at least partially disentangle the influences of students' conceptual and
epistemic understanding on their ability to construct good explanations for a complex question in biology. The study
was conducted as part of a field test of curricular materials designed to support guided inquiry into topics of plant
biology    and evolution.    The    specific  focal topics   included   photosynthesis,  transpiration,  structure-function
relationships (in leaves), and evolutionary adaptation. More than 400 grade 6 and 7 students from a large, urban
school district completed a three-week unit, Why do plants look different? The field test employed a pre-post design
to measure learning of the focal topics. The capstone activity of the unit was students' investigation of remote
sensing data to construct an explanation to the driving question. Analyses of the written explanations are based on a
scheme that assesses three aspects of causal explanations: 1) conceptual quality; 2) degree of warrant for claims; and
3) rhetorical reference (Sandoval, 2005). That is, how well do students apply the conceptual ideas targeted in the
unit to explain a complex problem; how well do they understand the epistemic criterion to have evidence for causal
claims; and how well do they justify the relations between evidence and claims? These last two elements reflect
students' appreciation of the epistemic demands of scientific explanation.
        We pursue two questions in our analysis, which is currently underway. The first is whether or not students'
prior knowledge, as measured by the pre-test, predicts their performance on the explanation task. We expect that
prior knowledge should only affect scores of conceptual quality, if anything. If this expectation holds true, it would
suggest students learning something important during the unit about the epistemic demands of explanation. If, on the
other hand, all three aspects of explanation performance are predicted by pre-test score, it would support the claim
that conceptual knowledge is what separates good explanations from bad. A second question we pursue is whether
or not performance on the explanation task, particularly on the epistemic aspects of the task, predicts learning gains
from the   unit. If  so, it  would  suggest   that  learning  the epistemic  demands    of scientific explanation  help  to
consolidate, at the very least, conceptual understanding when learning science. Whatever the specific outcomes of
our analyses, they will clarify the influences of conceptual and epistemic understanding on students' efforts to
construct, and learn from, scientific explanation.
                     Towards a Taxonomy of Explanations in Science Education
  Barbara White, Jennifer L. Chiu, Lauren Barth-Cohen, Beat Schwendimann, Eric Berson, Jennifer King Chen,
     Hillary Swanson, University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley CA, 94720. Email: bywhite@berkeley.edu,
      jenchiu@berkeley.edu, lbarth@berkeley.edu, bschwendimann@berkeley.edu, eberson@berkeley.edu,
                                    jykchen@berkeley.edu, hswanson@berkeley.edu

One major goal of science education is for students to develop sophisticated explanations of the natural world (NRC,
2000). Scientists create and revise conceptual scientific models that they employ to develop and refine explanations.
Scientists also have distinct forms and criteria for accepted explanations. Likewise, inquiry-based teaching enables
students to ask questions, develop conceptual models and explanations, and critique and refine their explanations.
However,    students   build upon   existing, everyday   ideas   to  make  explanations  that are different than  those  of
scientists and   judge   explanations   differently  than    the  way  that  scientists judge  them   (Brewer,   Chinn   &
Samarapungavan,     1998).   Most   existing  approaches  evaluate   students' explanations   along scientific criteria and
overlook learners' existing ideas and skills in generating explanations. Instruction that encourages students to use,
distinguish and refine these existing ideas can promote sophisticated and robust explanations (Linn & Eylon, 2006).

                                                        493  ·  © ISLS
                                                  ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 2

         We aim to characterize learners' existing and developing explanatory capabilities by creating a taxonomy
of explanations that builds from literature in psychology, cognitive science, philosophy of science, and science
education. Existing definitions and operationalizations of scientific explanations tend to be specific to particular
domains with widely varying grain sizes.    We see students' explanations containing a variety of ideas and forms that
cut across these existing taxonomies. For example, students may have naïve ideas about a scientific phenomenon yet
use sophisticated deductive reasoning within their explanation. Students can provide insight into their understanding
of causal mechanisms using narrative forms in explanations. A broad taxonomy of explanations that builds upon the
diversity of expert and novice explanations can capture these varied types of ideas and reasoning. By doing so, a
general taxonomy can identify the fruitful aspects of explaining that novices gain from everyday experience, as well
as identify  aspects of   expert explanations  that   novices  should  develop. Ultimately,   this taxonomy    can guide
curriculum and assessment development, and help students and teachers develop a meta-level understanding of what
constitutes a good explanation.
         This poster presents our taxonomy as developed from our review of the literature and refined through
coding of student and expert explanations in various domains. Our taxonomy outlines general categories of purpose,
form,  content, characteristics, reasoning, and meta-talk.     Purpose identifies  causality and mechanism     within the
explanation. The form category captures the overall structure of the causal explanation, such as a causal chain or
cyclical causality. Content distinguishes specific domain ideas used, such as laws or facts. Characteristics include
attributes of explanations that have been identified as important in the literature, such as generalizability or varying
perspectives. Reasoning captures the various forms of reasoning embedded within explanations, such as deductive
or inductive  reasoning.   Meta-talk  captures the  explainer's  higher-level   knowledge    about what makes    a good
explanation and what are good strategies for explaining, as well as regulatory awareness, such as monitoring of the
effectiveness of an explanation. Our poster will present these categories in detail with data from expert and student
explanations.

References
Amsterlaw, J., & Wellman, H. (2006). Theories of mind in transition: A microgenetic study of the development of
         false belief understanding. Journal of Cognition and Development, 7, 139­172.
Andriessen, J. (2006). Arguing to learn. In R. K. Sawyer (Ed.), The Cambridge handbook of the learning sciences.
         Cambridge, NY: Cambridge University Press.
Bazerman, C. (1988). Shaping written knowledge: The genre and activity of the experimental article in science.
         Madison, WI: University of Wisconsin Press.
Berland, L. K, & Reiser, B. J. (2009). Making sense of argumentation and explanation. Science Education, 93, 26-55
Brewer, W. F., Chinn, C. A., & Samarapungavan, A. (1998). Explanation in scientists and children. Minds and
         Machines, 8, 119 ­ 136
Chi, M.T.H. (2000). Self-explaining: The dual processes of generating inferences and repairing mental models. In R.
         Glaser   (Ed.), Advances    in Instructional Psychology     (pp. 161­237).  Mahwah,    NJ:  Lawrence   Erlbaum
         Associates, Inc.
Chi,  M.  T.  H., de  Leeuw,     N., Chiu,  M.H.,   &  LaVancher,     C.   (1994). Eliciting  self-explanation improves
         understanding. Cognitive Science, 18, 439­477.
Clark, D. & Sampson, V. (2007). Personally-seeded discussions to scaffold online argumentation. International
         Journal of Science Education, 29(3), 253-278.
Crowley K. & Siegler, R. S. (1999) Explanation and generalization in young children's strategy learning. Child
         Development, 70, 2 pp. 304-316
Davis, E. A.    & Krajcik,  J. S. (2005).  Designing   educative  curriculum    materials to  promote  teacher  learning.
         Educational researcher, 34(3), 3-14.
Driver, R. Newton, P. & Osborne, J. (2000). Establishing the norms of scientific argumentation in classrooms.
         Science Education. 84, 287-312.
Duschl, R. A., Schweingruber, H. A., & Shouse, A. W. (Eds.). (2007). Taking science to school: Learning and
         teaching science in grades k-8. Washington D.C.: National Academy Press.
Erduran, S., & Jiménez-Aleixandre, M. P. (Eds.). (2008). Argumentation in science education: perspectives from
         classroom-based research. Dordrecht: Springer.
Erduran, S., Simon, S., & Osborne, J. (2004). TAPping into argumentation: Developments in the application of
         Toulimin's argument pattern for studying science discourse. Science Education, 88(6), 915 ­ 933.
Jiménez-Aleixandre, M., Rodriguez, A., & Duschl, R. (2000). "Doing the lesson" or "doing science": Argument
         in high school genetics. Science Education, 84(6), 757­792.

                                                      494  ·  © ISLS
                                                 ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 2

Jiménez-Aleixandre, M. P. & Erduran, S. (2008). Argumentation in science education: An Overview. In S. Erduran
         & M. P. Jimenez-Aleixandre (Eds.). Argumentation in science education: Perspectives from classroom-
         based research. (pp. 3-28), Dordrecht: Springer.
Kelly, G. J., & Takao, A. (2002). Epistemic levels in argument: an analysis of university oceanography students' use
         of evidence in writing. Science Education, 86, 314-342.
Kitcher, P. (1991). Persuasion. In M. Pera & W. R. Shea (Eds.), Persuading science: the art of scientific rhetoric
         (pp. 3-27). Canton, MA: Science History Publications.
Kuhn, D., & Udell, W. (2003). The development of argument skllls. Child Development         74(5), 1245-1260.
Linn, M. (2000). Designing the knowledge integration environment. International Journal of Science Education,
         22(8), 781 ­ 796.
Linn, M. C., & Eylon, B. ­S. (2006).  Science education.    In P. A. Alexander & P. H. Winne (Eds.) Handbook of
         Educational Psychology, 2nd edition. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Lombrozo, T. (2006). The structure and function of explanations. Trends of Cognitive Sciences, 10 (10), 464-470.
McNeill, K. L., Lizotte, D. J, Krajcik, J., & Marx, R. W. (2006). Supporting students' construction of scientific
         explanations by fading scaffolds in instructional materials. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 15(2),
         153-191.
Miles, M., &  Huberman, A. M. (1994). Qualitative data analysis: An     expanded sourcebook (2nd edition).  Thousand
         Oaks, CA: Sage.
Mortimer, E., & Scott, P. (2003). Meaning making in secondary science classrooms. McGraw-Hill International.
Murphy, G. L., & Medin, D. L. (1985). The role of theories in conceptual coherence. Psychological Review, 92,
         289-316.
Nagel, E. (1961). The structure of science: Problems in the logic of science education.     New York, NY: Harcourt,
         Brace, & World, Inc.
National Research Council (2000). Inquiry and the national science education standards. Washington, D.C.:
         National Academy Press.
National Research Council (2007). Taking science to school: Learning and teaching science in grades K-8.
         Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press.
Newton,   P., Driver, R., & Osborne,  J. (1999).  The    place of   argumentation in the  pedagogy of   school science.
         International Journal of Science Education, 21(5), 553-576.
Roth, K., Chen, C., Lemmens, M., Garnier, H., Wickler, N., Atkins, L., Calabrese Barton, A., Roseman, J. Shouse,
         A. & Zembal-Saul, C. (2009). Coherence and science content storylines in science teaching: Evidence of
         neglect? Evidence of effect?
Sandoval,  W.  A. (2003).   Conceptual and  epistemic    aspects of  students' scientific explanations. Journal of the
         Learning Sciences, 12(1), 5-51.
Sandoval, W. A. (2005). Understanding students' practical epistemologies and their influence on learning through
         inquiry. Science Education 89(4), 634-656.
Siegler,  R.  S.  (2002).  Microgenetic   studies  of    self-explanations.  In  N.  Granott   &  J.  Parziale  (Eds.),
         Microdevelopment: Transition processes in development and learning (pp. 31-58). New York: Cambridge
         University.
Simon, S., Erduran, S. & Osborne, J. (2006). Learning to teach argumentation: Research and development in the
         science classroom. International Journal of Science Education, 28(2-3), 235-260.
von Aufschnaiter, C., Erduran, S., Osborne, J. & Simon, S. (2008). Arguing to learn and learning to argue: Case
         studies of how students' argumentation relates to their scientific knowledge. Journal of Research in Science
         Teaching, 45(1), 101-131.
Zembal-Saul, C. (2009). Learning to teach elementary school science as argument. Science Education, 93(4), 687-
         719.
Zohar, A. (2008). Science teacher education and professional development in argumentation. In S. Erduran & M. P.
         Jimenez-Aleixandre   (Eds.).  Argumentation     in science  education:   Perspectives from  classroom-based
         research. (pp. 245-268), Dordrecht: Springer.

                                                     495  ·  © ISLS
