                                               ICLS 2010    ·  Volume 1

Collaborative Productivity as Self-Sustaining Processes in a Grade
                            4 Knowledge Building Community
             Jianwei Zhang, State University of New York at Albany, USA. jzhang1@albany.edu
  Richard Messina, Institute of Child Study Laboratory School, Toronto, Canada. rmessina@oise.utoronto.ca

        Abstract: This study elaborates collaborative productivity as self-sustaining processes along
        with the role of the teacher in a knowledge building community. The participants were 22
        fourth-graders,  who  investigated    light over   a  three-month   period facilitated   by a veteran
        teacher with the support of Knowledge Forum!. Content analysis of the students' portfolios
        indicates significant advancement of understanding. Qualitative analysis of classroom videos,
        online discourse, and the teacher's reflection journal identifies community interactions and
        teacher scaffolding related to four interrelated processes. These include: (a) accumulating a
        highly variable stock of information and ideas and mobilizing information connection; (b)
        sustained, incremental idea development; (c) critical examination and selection of ideas; and
        (d) distributed  emergent    control. These     processes elaborate  self-organization   mechanisms
        underpinning collaborative productivity, informing new ways to scaffold knowledge building.

Introduction
With knowledge-based     organizations   pervading   a  knowledge    economy     and society,  education is  facing  an
unprecedented  demand    of preparing    students   for collaborative   and creative  knowledge     practices. Various
inquiry-based collaborative learning programs have emerged to achieve high-level collaborative productivity in
a learning community. Students engage in productive sharing, conversation, and collaborative problem solving
that lead to deep understanding and advancement of collective knowledge (Barron & Darling-Hammond, 2008;
Hmelo-Silver & Barrows, 2008). Efforts to explain and support collaborative productivity often focus on the
teacher/designer's role in charting, organizing, and guiding the processes, with student collaborating in fixed
groups following  specific  scripts. This focus   on "strong   leader"  is further heightened    by the argument    that
"minimally guided teaching techniques" do not work (Sweller et al., 2007). Alternative to this "strong leader"
explanation is a self-organization   perspective:   collaborative   productivity  emerges  from  complex,    distributed
interactions with the teacher as an important participant; small intellectual input from the members builds on
one another to enable increasingly complex work and emergent progress. This self-organization perspective
gains support from the recent studies on creative research teams and       professional communities    (Dunbar, 1997;
Sawyer, 2007). In line with these studies, our recent design research traced the improvement of knowledge
building in a Grade 4 classroom. Over three years, the designs evolved from fixed-group collaboration that
involved extensive teacher-coordination to distributed, opportunistic collaboration. The third year design led to
most productive knowledge advancement (Zhang et al., 2009). The present study analyzes an extended iteration
of the above design experiment. The goal is to provide an elaborated account of collaborative productivity as
self-sustaining processes, which will inform new and expanded ways to scaffold knowledge building.
        Our  exploration   of collaborative   productivity    as  self-sustaining processes   was   inspired by  recent
research on creative communities, such as productive research labs (Dunbar, 1997) and innovative professional
communities (Engestrom, 2008). A creative community works as a system that is further embedded in the larger
systems in a field (Csikszentmihalyi, 1999).   Collaborative knowledge creation in these communities unfolds as
self-organizing and emergent processes. "[T]he most innovative teams are those that can restructure themselves
in response to unexpected shifts in the environment; they don't need a strong leader to tell them what to do."
(Sawyer, 2007, p. 17) The mechanism of self-organization "is basically the combination of an evolutionary raw
material--a highly variable   stock  of information     from  which  to select   possible patterns--and  a   means  for
experimentation, for selecting and testing new patterns." (Meadows, 1999, p.15) In light of the notion of self-
organization, we synthesize four essential processes that sustain knowledge creation drawing on the literature on
creativity and knowledge creation.
        (a) Accumulating a highly variable stock of information and ideas, with dynamic information flow.
Creativity emerges when individuals, often working in teams, produce novel variations to the domain that are
recognized  by the field composed     of  peer workers     (Csikszentmihalyi,    1999). Each   domain   (e.g., physics)
evolves a public knowledge base representing the state-of-the-art understanding (Bereiter, 2002). The public
knowledge   space  gives knowledge      and  ideas  an  out-in-the-world    existence (e.g.,  in books).  The   current
knowledge base is the evolutionary outcome of the past work and meanwhile thinking resources and devices for
future advancement, with new advances rooted in the past and further informing ever deeper inquiries.
        (b)  Positive loops   fueling   idea  generation    and   development:    Positive feedback   loops    are self-
reinforcing, with the output of one operation becoming the input to another. As Dunbar (1997) observed in high-
performing research labs, researchers perform cognitive operations and pass the results on to peers, who then

                                                    49   ·   © ISLS
                                                  ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

use the results as the input to further cognitive operations to create new theories and experiments. A series of
small operations   may    lead   to major, often   unexpected   advances,    which   often  cannot     be attributed  to  any
individual. As a part of the positive loops, the knowledge gained about a topic helps knowledge workers to
further identify what is not known and ask deeper questions (Miyake & Norman, 1979), which lead to further
actions to advance knowledge (Bereiter & Scardamalia, 1993).
         (c) Negative loops that enable critical examination and selection of ideas. Positive loops in a creative
system need to be coupled with, and slowed down by, self-correcting negative feedback loops in order to keep
important system states within safe bounds (Meadows, 1999). In academia, the negative loop is partly played
out through blinded peer review and critical academic discourse. The specific criteria used to judge whether a
contribution   is an  improvement/advancement         differ  across  domains.     Such    criteria   and  related  rules of
knowledge    work  are   further internalized   by individuals   and  become    a  part  of their   reflective thinking   and
discourse, so that they can make smart decisions to tease out good ideas from bad ones and choose the most
promising ideas to work on in a way that can be accepted by peers (Csikszentmihalyi, 1999; Sternberg, 2003).
         (d)  Distributed   emergent    control. Innovative   teams   perform    spontaneously      (Sawyer,   2007).   Team
members take on high-level collective cognitive responsibility: They collaboratively monitor their progress and
emergent goals, develop and refine work processes and procedures, and group and re-group in the service of the
emergent needs (Chatzkel, 2003). They invent and adopt various knowledge tools and artifacts to support their
productivity and expand the scope and sophistication of thinking (Hakkarainen, 2009). They critically reflect on
the social  norms   that  specify   accepted ways   of  conducting    research  and   other knowledge      practices, adjust
existing norms, and strive for new paradigms as needed (c.f. Sternberg, 2003).
         Using    the self-organization    mechanisms    as  a  lens,  this  study   views   into   a  knowledge    building
community to understand how collaborative productivity occurs and can be enabled. In a knowledge building
community, students engage in continuous idea improvement to advance the state of the art of the community's
knowledge, mirroring the socio-cognitive dynamics of knowledge creation in the real world (Bereiter, 2002;
Scardamalia, 2002). This process is augmented through technology-based environments such as Knowledge
Forum,   which    provides  a communal     knowledge    space   and related  interaction    tools for  knowledge    building
discourse (see Scardamalia, 2004). This study analyzes the knowledge building work of a Grade 4 classroom
facilitated by a   highly   accomplished    teacher.  The    research questions    include:  (a)  To   what    extent is  the
knowledge    building    community      productive,   gauged     based    on  communal      and     individual    knowledge
advancement? (b) What are the essential community interactions that sustain productive knowledge building?
(c) What role does the teacher play in support of the above community dynamics?

Method

Participants
The  participants  were   a class   of 22  fourth-graders  and  their teacher   at   an elementary     school  in downtown
Toronto. This study analyzes their knowledge building work in optics conducted over a three-month period
supported   by Knowledge      Forum.    The  students   had  been   using  Knowledge       Forum    to conduct    knowledge
building since Grade 1. The teacher had accumulated strong expertise in facilitating knowledge building. An
earlier study analyzed his three-year design experiment on improving classroom designs for knowledge building
in optics, with significant improvement found each year (Zhang et al., 2009).

The Knowledge Building Implementation
The  optics  inquiry  was   conducted   in line  with the  knowledge    building   principles   (Scardamalia,     2002). The
teacher  particularly    focused    on  enhancing    student    collective  responsibility   for    advancing     community
knowledge.   Instead   of   having  students  work   in fixed   small  groups,   the    teacher adopted    an  opportunistic
collaboration  design    that  encouraged    students   to   define   and  elaborate    progressive    inquiry    goals  and,
accordingly,  adapt   their participation  structures  over  time (Zhang     et al., 2009).  As   a result, the   knowledge
building process   involved    a dynamic   flow   between    individual inquiry,     small  group   work,  and  whole-class
conversations and allowed students to group and re-group spontaneously based on their evolving goals. The
students engaged in knowledge building discourse in Knowledge Forum to contribute and improve their ideas,
mirroring and extending their discourse in the classroom. Their idea improvement was further supported by
constructive use of authoritative sources (e.g., books) and experimental work. Student ideas, problems, data, and
reading information were contributed to Knowledge Forum for sustained online discourse.

Data Analyses
To analyze the growth of the community's knowledge space, we traced the online discourse in the seven views
(workspaces) to identify progressive questions and ideas and, then, compared the questions and ideas against the
curriculum guidelines.     Individual knowledge growth was further assessed based on their portfolio notes. Each
student wrote three portfolio notes online that summarized their understanding of light in the first, second, and

                                                      50   ·  © ISLS
                                                ICLS 2010   ·    Volume 1

third month of the inquiry, respectively. The analysis first looked at whether a portfolio note addressed each of
the eight focal knowledge goals identified by the community (e.g. how lenses work). Following content analysis
(Chi, 1997), student writing related to each goal was then coded based on two four-point scales (Zhang et al.,
2007): (a) scientific sophistication (1 - pre-scientific, 2 - hybrid, 3 - basically scientific, and 4 - scientific) and
(b) epistemic complexity (1 - unelaborated facts, 2 ­ elaborated facts, 3 ­ unelaborated explanations, and 4 -
elaborated explanations), measuring effort to produce not only descriptions of the material world but theoretical
explanations of  hidden  mechanisms    (Salmon,   1984).   Two     raters independently      coded  12  portfolio notes to
assess inter-rater reliability, with full agreement for the coding of knowledge goals/themes, Cohen's Kappa =
.83 for scientific sophistication, Cohen's Kappa = .75 for epistemic complexity.
        We analyzed classroom video transcriptions, online discourse, and the teacher's reflection journal to
identify community interactions and teacher scaffolding that had sustained productive knowledge building. The
analysis integrated multiple levels and timescales, with holistic analysis of the whole initiative and detailed
analysis of activity components informing each other (Lemke, 2000).              In the first phase, the focus was on the
community's   three-month  inquiry,  as   a whole, to   understand      how   it started  and  evolved  and  its  changing
conceptual landscape. In the second phase, the focus was on each videotaped classroom episode, such as a
whole-class  conversation, a  small  group   activity, or  a    computer  lab    session, to  identify its focus,  context,
storyline, and connections with other episodes. In the final phase of detailed analysis, the focus was on each
conversation turn in an episode to understand the nature of the discourse move in relation to its preceding and
following conversation as well as the storyline of the episode identified in Phase 2. A more narrow approach to
conversation  analysis  (Sawyer,   2006)  was used to   identify     patterns through     an emergent   inductive  process
(Strauss & Corbin, 1998) without applying a predefined coding scheme and counting each code. Specifically,
we read and re-read the transcriptions and coded specific moves (e.g., asking a challenging question about a
peer's idea, providing  evidence)   represented by   different    conversation    turns,  with the  speaker  of  each turn
identified as either a student or the teacher. We then searched for connections across the specific codes in light
of the contexts of the episodes and the evolution of the whole inquiry, and aggregated the codes into fewer,
more   encompassing    themes, representing   community-level        (system-level)   processes    sustaining knowledge
building. Each theme involved multiple sub-themes, with the encompassed specific moves of the teacher and
those of the students considered side by side. The initial themes and sub-themes were then refined, elaborated,
and validated   through theme  to  theme,   theme  to  data,    data to data  comparison,     including triangulating   the
identified themes and sub-themes to the analysis of the teachers' reflection journals and the online discourse.

Results

To What Extent is the Knowledge Building Community Productive?
Tracing the online discourse helped to understand the conceptual scope and depth of the community knowledge
space. Over  the  three months,  a  total of 168  notes    (excluding   the   66  portfolio  notes) were   created by   the
community    in several views  in  Knowledge    Forum.     In   each  view,   the   students identified deeper    questions
leading to progress in understanding. For example, in the view of "Colors of Light and Rainbows," the students
progressively examined how rainbows are created, why the colors are always in the same order, primary and
secondary colors, the nature of white light, and how we see colored objects. The student discourse addressed all
the expectations for Grade 4 in the Ontario Curriculum and further led the students to understanding many
issues expected for Grades 6 and 8, such as light waves, color vision, colors of opaque objects, concave and
convex lenses, the law of reflection. Individual knowledge advancement was assessed based on content analysis
of student portfolio notes written in the three months, respectively (Table 1). Repeated measures ANOVAs
revealed significant growth across the three months in the number of focal issues/goals addressed (F (2, 42) =
43.03, p < .001, partial " 2 = .67), epistemic complexity (F (2, 42) = 69.20, p < .001, partial " 2 = .77), and
scientific sophistication (F (2, 42) = 70.60, p < .001, partial " 2 = .77).

Table 1: Student knowledge advancement measured based on their portfolio notes.

                                                                     1st Month        2nd Month         3rd Month
# of focal issues addressed so far                                   4.27 (1.83)      6.41 (2.02)       7.36 (.95)
scientific sophistication (1- pre-scientific to 4 - scientific)      1.48 (.66)       2.25 (.74)        2.81 (.48)
complexity (1-unelaborated fact to 4-elaborated explanation)         1.32 (.64)       2.04 (.78)        2.91 (.70)
Note. Numbers are means and standard deviations.

Community Dynamics and the Role of the Teacher
We analyzed the video transcriptions, teacher reflection, and student online discourse to understand how the
productive  knowledge   building   was achieved.   A   specific   focus   was    on identifying significant   moments   of
progress and then tracing backward and forward across activity contexts to understand how the process came

                                                    51   ·  © ISLS
                                                ICLS 2010    ·  Volume 1

about and where it further went.    For example, a whole class conversation was conducted on May 16 that led
progress in understanding how light interacts with opaque materials. The conversation began with students
sitting in a  circle and sharing  observations     of different materials.  The teacher     then   highlighted  a question
originally raised  by  a student in Knowledge      Forum:   "Are  all opaque  things      reflective like  mirrors?   "   The
following shows the first four of the 30 minutes or so discussion to address this and related problems.

Table 2: A Section of the Transcriptions of the May 16 Whole Class Conversation.

Transcription                                                                                Analysis highlight
2:20 GM: Well, there'[re] bricks, which are still opaque. But they're not reflective.        Identifying non-reflective
But I don't know what they are called, like that kind of opaque. JL                          opaque materials, using a
                                                                                             tentative voice.
2:31 JL: I think all opaque materials are reflective, except not all of them reflect light   Contributing an alternative
back. ... OK, let's just say um like...a yellow carpet... your eyes would be able to         idea: All opaque materials
see the yellow of it because it would only reflect yellow light. That means like that        are reflective, by analyzing a
sort of like a tissue for example that would only reflect white, except the yellow           thought experiment (yellow
carpet, since it's like green mixed with red, I believe. Then the beam of red [and           carpet), drawing on
green] light would touch us and your eyes would take it in as yellow.                        knowledge of primary and
                                                                                             secondary colors.
3:58 Teacher: So you're saying everything is reflective then. Every opaque object is         Revoicing student idea;
reflective to some degree. Oh, I hear some people disagree. Can you pass it on? [JL:         highlighting contrasting
SG.]                                                                                         perspectives.
4:07 SG: What about wood? Wood isn't reflective. JL.                                         Bringing in an anomaly.
...
4:53 FJ: I think if wood is shiny and polished, you could see your reflection. I think       Re-analyzing and
it's mostly just shiny objects so it depends on what kind of wood you have, what kind        interpreting the instance as
of table you have, if you see your reflection. SG.                                           non-anomalous.
5:12 SG: Like if you had a glass table.                                                      Supporting fact.
5:16 Teacher: The question is: Are all opaque objects reflective? Have we answered           Highlighting/reminding a
that? ... Do all opaque objects reflect light? Anyone has a theory or evidence to            focal problem and promoting
support that? So, SG, it's yours to pass. [SG: DN.]                                          reflection on progress.
5:35 DN: Um, actually all opaque objects do reflect light, because they reflect their        Articulating an idea and its
own color. So we see them as whatever color they are. TS. [inaudible student talking]        supporting thoughts.
5:57 Teacher: Hold on, let's hear him talk.                                                  Maintaining conversation
                                                                                             norms.
5:59 TS: If they didn't reflect their own color, you wouldn't see a brick of red, or         Extending and elaborating
someone's t-shirt as purple or whatever. RP.                                                 idea.
6:11 RP: What about black?                                                                   Bringing in an anomaly.
6:14  Teacher: Don't  throw it back to him. Give your theory.                                Maintaining norms;
                                                                                             encourage initial thoughts.
6:18 RP: I don't think black reflects. I think that black might reflect light, but it        Summarizing a reading and
might not. Because we had a reading today that um all the colors of the rainbow make         an online note and
white light and there is a note in the database about that, and everything reflects its      identifying black as an
own color. But it didn't say anything about black. EY.                                       unaddressed issue.

         A number of important ideas emerged from the conversation (e.g., all opaque things are reflective,
expect black ones). Tracing each of these ideas back into the prior inquiry activities revealed striking historical
connections and incremental moves. For example, the idea that all opaque things are reflective is rooted in a
small group reading and related experiments on transparent, translucent, and opaque materials conducted on
May 9; the notion that opaque objects reflect light of their own colors traced back to May 12 when group
readings and discussions occurred focusing on how people see colored objects. These ideas were circled back
into the   current conversation  leading to  new    inferences,  connections,   and     meanings   and further   informing
deeper problems and ideas.
         Analyzing community interactions with each episode, such as the one shown above, and searching for
cross-episode connections helped to identify essential processes/patterns enabling collaborative productivity in
the  community.    Four  thematic processes    emerged,     in  consistence with      the  self-organization   mechanisms
sustaining knowledge creation synthesized in the beginning of this paper.

Process 1: Accumulating a Highly Variable Stock of Information and Ideas and Mobilizing
Information Flow and Connection
Sub-process 1a: Accumulating a communal knowledge base that involves a richly connected history of ideas,
with new inquiries evolving out of the old. The students accumulated a communal knowledge base--supported

                                                      52  ·  © ISLS
                                                ICLS 2010    ·  Volume 1

by Knowledge Forum--that helped to enable historical continuity between the old, current, and future work.
Rich information flow took place on the basis of the community's knowledge base. Specifically, the students
shared their understanding and challenges so as to construct a common ground while shaping emergent ideas
and goals. Old ideas, problems, and inquiry works were constantly referred to and circled back to advance the
current inquiry and discourse and further inform emergent goals (e.g., "going back to what X said about... ,
so..."). There was rich cross-referencing between the online and offline spaces and between different inquiry
activities, as illustrated through the May 16 conversation analyzed above.
         The teacher modeled making connections across ideas and activities and attempted to anchor all his
major input  in student  history of inquiry.   Specifically,   he  worked    with   the students  to  formulate  emerging
inquiry focuses/themes in the contexts of student prior inquiry and current interesting events. He helped to
ground  classroom    conversations  in    relation to  students'   accumulated      work    and  ideas,   and  highlighted
connections between current inquiry and prior readings, experiments, and discussions. He also facilitated the
online-offline connections, with important ideas and related inquiry work recorded in Knowledge Forum for
further discussion and inquiry (e.g. "Is anyone writing a note about this experiment?"). When multiple small
groups were conducting different investigations in the classroom, the teacher was often called upon by the
students, who wanted to share with him their wonderments and excitements. He captured important progress of
understanding and then catalyzed community wide discussion, online and offline.
         Sub-process 1b: Making constructive use of information from reading. Efforts to accumulate a vibrant
knowledge base were advanced through student constructive use of reading. To address important problems
emerged from their inquiry, the students found and read a large amount of material. They worked in groups to
understand difficult text, using reading strategies (e.g., questioning, reviewing, summarizing) to deepen their
comprehension and discussion. Reading professional text and bringing important concepts and information to
the community    discourse  helped  the   students  to  expand     the  knowledge      base they    could work   with   and
appropriate  sophisticated language    to represent   and  process   their   ideas. It  further engaged    the students  in
reflective dialogues   between   their local   understanding     and    knowledge      out  in  the  world  (e.g.,  science
communities).   Consistent findings from the readings were synthesized and used by the students to support and
extend their ideas. Inconsistencies were identified leading to further idea development.
         The teacher modeled monitoring knowledge gaps in the community's knowledge space and introduced
new readings by talking about existing questions and related ideas. As the inquiry went deep into the domain,
many  of   the students-generated   problems   required    readings    above  their  current    grade level.   The  teacher
communicated his deep trust and high expectation and inspired students to collaboratively deal with difficult
text for deep understanding. He consulted student interest in the readings to set up reading groups. Occasionally,
he participated in the small groups to co-analyze and reflect on key information from readings, design related
experiments,   model various  reading   strategies. Across     the inquiry   activities, he  helped   the students  to  see
connections between the current work and what they had read.

Process 2: Sustained Idea Development, Powered by Positive Feedback Loops
Sub-process 2a: The more we know, the more we can learn and generate: incremental idea development. The
students connected to and made use of their shared knowledge base and peers' intellectual input to generate new
ideas and   deepen  understanding.  In    the  online and    offline discourse    (e.g.,   Table 2),  the  students    made
connections  to and  drew  upon  existing   ideas  and  inquiry    work   to generate    new   ideas to address    the focal
problems. They often contributed ideas in the form of tentative conditional statements (e.g., maybe...) open to
critics and further input (Engestrom, 2008). Their peers then responded to extend and elaborate these ideas; to
contribute related thought experiments (e.g., what will happen if...), analogies (e.g., between eye and camera),
observations, and supporting facts; to present alternative ideas and anomalies; to identify subordinate questions
and distill challenges; and to summarize different perspectives for deeper conceptualizations. These interactive
moves are characteristic of distributed reasoning observed in productive research teams (Dunbar, 1997), with
existing ideas and knowledge operations constantly taken up by peers to enable further advancement.
         The   teacher nurtured  among     his  students   a   sense   of epistemic     agency   and  empowerment.       He
communicated his deep trust that everyone had something worth saying and could contribute to knowledge
advancement. In classroom conversations, he (a) engaged in active listening to and reading of student ideas; (b)
expressed encouragement, interest, and excitement; (c) asked questions on student ideas for clarification and
deeper thinking; (d) highlighted interesting ideas (including misconceptions) and questions, along with possible
connections, controversies, and gaps; and (e) re-voiced student ideas (see Table 2) to make them more explicit
and formal in light of related domain concepts (Hmelo-Silver & Barrows, 2008; O'Connor & Michaels, 1992).
         Sub-process 2b: The more we know, the more we realize that we do not know, driving us to know more:
Progressively identifying problems and formulating deeper goals. The students actively monitored and distilled
challenging questions emerging from their discussions, reading, and experiments. Integral to their classroom
conversations,  they participated   in meta-discourse     to   identify   emergent   questions   and  review   conceptual
connections  among   the questions  so  as  to evolve   interconnected    deeper    goals.  For  example   in  the May   16

                                                     53  ·   © ISLS
                                                   ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

conversation, the students identified questions such as: Does light reflect off of black opaque objects? How
comes    a mirror  reflect light  of all colors?   Identifying    these issues  led  to  further  idea  development   in the
subsequent discourse, which then brought further problems of understanding to the fore.
           The  teacher explicitly   encouraged    students    to take  on  high-level   responsibilities    and knowledge
operations for sustained deepening of understanding. He encouraged students to ask `why, why,' and not to be
content with a superficial answer. He built on student discussions of emergent questions to propose his framing
of focal inquiry goals, which was then discussed by the community. He engaged in deep listening to and reading
of student ideas and questions, highlighted important problems emerged from classroom conversations, and
asked questions to deepen student-generated ideas instead of directing the students to new tasks (Zhang et al.,
2009). He also reminded/brought back problems that had not been addressed and requested reflective review of
progress (e.g., "Could someone summarize what we've come to so far at this talk?"). The students oftentimes
did the same supported by the teacher's modeling.

Process 3: Critical Examination and Selection of Ideas, as Negative Loops
Sub-process    3a:  Individual    reflection and  critical idea   examination    in  the discourse.    Individual  reflection
appeared to function as a bottom-level mechanism of idea examination and selection to make sure that everyone
contributed clearly presented and carefully reasoned out ideas addressing communal goals. When presenting
information and ideas, the students acknowledged the sources and connections to prior work of peers. They used
conditional statements and indicated both what they knew and what they were not sure about, in reflection of the
"half-baked"    nature  of  their ideas.  Student   idea  input   was  further  examined    and   selected   through critical
dialogues.   In the  dialogues    (e.g., Table  2), the    students  challenged   peer   ideas   by  presenting   alternative
explanations, identified and analyzed anomalies, and raised questions that challenged existing explanations. The
competing explanations, possible anomalies, and challenging questions per se then became objects of critical
discourse. The examination of two competing explanations might lead to giving up one of them; but in many
other cases, it led to rising above different perspectives towards more complicated explanations.
           Related to idea examination and selection, the teacher was cautious not to be the judge of student ideas.
But rather, he highlighted rules of reflective contributions (e.g., contribute ideas with details) and engaged his
students in meta-discourse to review ideas, monitor gaps, conflicts, and challenges, and reflect on progress,
using identified contrasting perspectives to stimulate deeper examination and analysis.
           Sub-process 3b: Empirical testing of ideas. Focusing on important questions and ideas about light, the
students   designed    and  conducted     experiments    and   observations,    often    in small    groups.   The   students
collaboratively identified focal problems and deeper questions to be addressed, generated theories, designed
experiments,    interpreted findings,    and  discussed  new     insights. They   brought   their   new understanding    and
supporting evidence to the subsequent discourse for broad sharing, collective scrutiny, and further build-on.
Their experiments were emergent and idea-centered instead of as pre-scripted tasks, with the goal of collecting
data to examine and develop explanations.
           The teacher listened to and read student ideas and suggested the need of evidence to examine different
ideas, such as by saying: "I'm interested in your theory. Can you design an experiment to test this idea?" He
listened to student proposals for experiments and promoted reflective thinking, such as by asking: "What are the
questions   you  are trying    to answer?"   "What   are   the steps  you   will  go through?"      Based  on  the students'
proposals, the teacher helped them to find needed materials and instruments.

Process 4: Distributed Emergent Control
Sub-process 4a: Co-constructing principles, strategies, and support structures. In all types of inquiry work, the
students reflected on and talked about how things should be done, and why, leading to deep understanding of
what  it means   to  work   as  a  knowledge    building   community.   They    talked   about collective    ownership   over
inquiry questions and ideas, so that a community member might read and find information that was beyond
his/her immediate personal focus. They talked about norms of knowledge building discourse, such as active
listening/reading, contributing ideas in full paragraphs with evidence and details, and making connected and
non-redundant input (e.g., do not write a note that simply repeats a question or idea). The community members
also co-developed    and   utilized  a variety  of  externalized   structures  to guide,    assist, and deepen   knowledge
building. For example, to represent knowledge goals and guide their writing of reflective portfolio notes, the
students collectively generated a list of thematic questions (e.g., how mirrors work) in line with their focal goals
and then turned the questions into a set of new scaffold labels in Knowledge Forum. To assist experimental
design   and reporting,    the teacher   and  his  students   discussed    and agreed   on  key     elements of  a scientific
experiment (e.g., theory, steps, results). The elements were then listed by each student in the front page of
his/her laboratory notebook.
           In the classroom discourse/meta-discourse, the teacher discussed, modeled, and reminded students of
the  basic  conversation   norms   and   rules, which   encouraged     collective engagement,       reflective thinking, and
sustained improvement of ideas. He shared with the students his classroom design ideas open to their input.

                                                       54   ·  © ISLS
                                                 ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

        Sub-process 4b: Collective responsibility, adaptive roles, and opportunistic planning. The students
monitored progress of understanding, identified challenging issues to be addressed, and synthesized important
knowledge advances in each Knowledge Forum view. They brought the advances and challenges to whole-class
conversations   to look  into  possible deep  connections    and   formulate   further   inquiry goals. Individuals   then
decided which aspects of the inquiry goals they wanted to contribute to and in what ways (e.g., theorizing,
experimenting, reading), with those who had shared interest often forming into temporary small groups. The
community awareness of who was working on what further created a social pressure that helped to increase
individual accountability (Zhang et al., 2009). Sometimes, student peers would ask a student/group: "You have
been working on this for a long time. You need to tell us what you have found."
        The    teacher's  classroom   design  was    characteristic  of opportunistic    planning  (Sawyer,    2007).  He
identified related "big ideas" in the domain and thought about how the ideas might be approached in light of his
understanding   of knowledge     building   principles (Scardamalia,    2002)   and  observations  of   previous classes.
Doing so helped him to create a big picture in mind about how the inquiry might evolve while leaving all
detailed processes open and co-improvised with his students (Zhang et al., 2009). He actively observed student
work and listened to their ideas to understand their progress and challenges; contributed to meta-discourse to
formulate, distill, and highlight knowledge goals; created, linked, and adjusted view structures in Knowledge
Forum   in line with  the  evolving   goals; listened  to student  inquiry   plans and   gave suggestions;   and   walked
between small groups to understand their progress and offer on-site advising. Sometimes, he also proposed
action plans. When doing so, he always connected his proposals to existing ideas, questions, and input from the
students, such as by saying "I'm interested what X said earlier about..."

Discussion
The   content analysis  of the  students' online  discourse    and   portfolio notes revealed    high-level collaborative
productivity  achieved   by   the community.     The   qualitative   analyses  of  the   classroom   videos  and   teacher
reflections further elaborated four interrelated processes that sustained the collaborative productivity, with the
teacher's roles identified in each of the processes.
        Efforts to engage students in distributed, opportunistic collaboration for knowledge building often face
the questioning of how students possibly know what to do to make productive progress. Such questioning is
rooted in a common belief that students need a "strong leader" to chart and organize the process of knowledge
building and tell them what tasks/sub-tasks to be done and in which ways (e.g., using scripts). This study
elaborated  collaborative   productivity  as  emergent,     self-organizing  processes.   Neither  the  teacher  nor   the
students knew beforehand how the inquiry would exactly unfold. The course of inquiry and collaboration and
the key moments of progress emerged from an interactional process in which the teacher and his students co-
contributed to the unfolding classroom flow. Student interactions augmented through the shared knowledge
space in Knowledge Forum enabled continuous and incremental idea development. They identified important
and  relevant ideas  from   the  past as  the stepping-stones     of their new   inquiry,  triggering   deeper ideas   and
problems. Each major idea was embedded in the evolving intellectual history of the community, gaining support
from the past work and further informing and enabling future idea development (Tabak, 2004). As a result, new
deepening goals and plans emerged as the inquiry history unfolded. Instead of having the teacher make high-
level decisions    regarding  the rules,  structures,  goals,  and   procedures,   the   community    members    took  on
collective responsibility for evolving goals and developing productive practices and structures.
        The significant advances in the community's knowledge did not come about through sudden insights
that  departed  from    existing  knowledge,     but   through    historical   build-on, incremental    refinement,    and
accumulative selection of ideas (Cziko, 1995; Dunbar, 1997; Sawyer, 2007). Student ideas and questions were
constantly  taken  up   by peers  and   used  as the   input   to further  operations  of  knowledge,    leading   to idea
generation, elaboration, diversification, and improvement. The advanced understanding further helped to inform
deeper problems at the frontier, enabling sustained cycles of progressive problem solving. Thus, the more they
knew, the more they could generate; and the more they realized that they needed to know. These positive loops
fueling sustained idea generation were coupled with critical idea examination and selection. In the knowledge
building discourse, ideas were often contributed in a tentative voice open to critics and further input; competing
explanations, possible anomalies, and challenging questions were raised calling for further examination of ideas;
empirical evidence was collected and brought to discussions.
        Elaborating the self-organization mechanisms underpinning collaborative productivity sheds light on
various aspects of community scaffolding--the community as the provider as well as recipient of scaffolding--
through emergent, distributed processes (Davis & Miyake, 2004; Tabak, 2004). Members use their historically
accumulated ideas to support the current work and inform deepening goals; New ideas and inquiry strategies are
objectified and selectively retained to enabled further advances; Collaborative discourse among the members
enables sustained   chains  of  distributed  reasoning   (Dunbar,  1997);    Supportive  principles, rules, and  external
scaffolding  structures are  developed,   monitored,   and  adapted   through   reflective discourse.   The  roles of  the
teacher aligned with each of the processes exemplify specific teaching designs and strategies to nurture and

                                                      55  ·  © ISLS
                                             ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

support knowledge building. Viewing these specific roles and strategies through the lens of self-organization
helps to understand how these roles synergize with one another (Tabak, 2004) and how teacher scaffolding
leverages community scaffolding for productive knowledge building.
       Future work   needs to  further examine  the    self-organization mechanisms that sustain  collaborative
knowledge building in different grade levels and explore if some of the processes (e.g., positive and negative
loops) can be used as leverage points to help transform classrooms into creative communities.

References
Bereiter, C. (2002). Education and mind in the knowledge age. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Bereiter, C., & Scardamalia, M. (1993). Surpassing ourselves. Chicago, IL: Open Court.
Barron, B., Darling-Hammond, L. (2008). How can we teach for meaningful learning? In L. Darling-Hammond,
       B. Barron, D. Pearson, A. H. Schoenfeld, E. Stage, et al. (Ed.), Powerful learning (pp. 11-70). San
       Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Chatzkel, J. L. (2003). Knowledge capital. New York: Oxford University Press.
Chi, M. T. H. (1997). Quantifying qualitative analysis of verbal data: A practical guide. Journal of the Learning
       Sciences, 6, 271-315.
Csikszentmihalyi, M. (1999). Implications of a systems perspective for the study of creativity. In R.J. Sternberg
       (Ed.), Handbook of creativity (pp. 313-335). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Cziko, G. (1995). Without miracles: Universal selection theory and the second Darwinian revolution.
       Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Davis, E. A., & Miyake, N. (2004). Explorations of scaffolding in complex classroom systems. Journal of the
       Learning Sciences, 13, 265-272.
Dunbar, K. (1997). How scientists think: Online creativity and conceptual change in science. In T. B. Ward, S.
       M. Smith & S. Vaid (Eds.), Conceptual structures and processes: Emergence, discovery and change
       (pp. 461-493). Washington, DC: APA Press.
Engeström, Y. (2008). From teams to knots. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Hakkarainen, K. (2009). A knowledge-practice perspective on technology-mediated learning. International
       Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 4, 213­231
Hmelo-Silver, C. E., & Barrows, H. S. (2008). Facilitating collaborative knowledge building. Cognition and
       Instruction, 26, 48-94.
Lemke, J. (2000). Across the scales of time: Artifacts, activities, and meanings in ecosocial systems. Mind,
       Culture, and Activity, 7, 273-290.
Meadows, D. (1999). Leverage points: Places to intervene in a system. Hartland, VT: The Sustainability
       Institute.
Miyake, N., & Norman, D. A. (1979). To ask a question, one must know enough to know what is not known.
       Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 18, 357-364.
O'Connor, M. C., & Michaels, S. (1992). Aligning academic task and participation status through revoicing:
       Analysis of a classroom discourse strategy. Anthropology and Education Quarterly, 24, 318-335.
Salmon, W. C. (1984). Scientific explanations and the causal structure of the world. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
       University Press.
Sawyer, R. K. (2006). Analyzing collaborative discourse. In R. K. Sawyer (Ed.), Cambridge handbook of the
       learning sciences (pp. 187-204). New York: Cambridge University Press.
Sawyer, R. K. (2007). Group genius: The creative power of collaboration. New York: Basic Books.
Scardamalia, M. (2002). Collective cognitive responsibility for the advancement of knowledge. In B. Smith
       (Eds.), Liberal education in a knowledge society (pp. 67-98). Chicago, IL: Open Court.
Scardamalia, M. (2004). CSILE/Knowledge Forum®. In A. Kovalchick, & K. Dawson (Eds.), Education and
       technology: An encyclopedia (pp. 183-192). Santa Barbara, CA: ABC-CLIO, Inc.
Sternberg, R. J. (2003). The development of creativity as a decision-making process. In R. K. Sawyer et al.
       (Eds.), Creativity and development (pp.91-138). New York: Oxford University Press.
Strauss, A., & Corbin, J. (1998). Basics of qualitative research: Techniques and procedures for developing
       grounded theory (2nd ed). Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Sweller, J., Kirschner, P. A., & Clark, R. E. (2007). Why minimally guided teaching techniques do not work: A
       reply to commentaries. Educational Psychologist, 42, 115-121.
Tabak, I. (2004). Synergy: A complement to emerging patterns of distributed scaffolding. Journal of the
       Learning Sciences, 13, 305-336.
Zhang, J., Scardamalia, M., Lamon, M., Messina, R., & Reeve, R. (2007). Socio-cognitive dynamics of
       knowledge building in 9- and 10-year-olds. Educational Technology Research and Development, 55,
       117­145.
Zhang, J., Scardamalia, M., Reeve, R., & Messina, R. (2009). Designs for collective cognitive responsibility in
       knowledge building communities. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 18, 7­44.

                                                 56  ·  © ISLS
