                                               ICLS 2010   ·   Volume 1

             A Tempest in a Teapot Is but a Drop in the Ocean:
         Action­Objects in Analogical Mathematical Reasoning
                                                  Dor Abrahamson
                       University of California--Berkeley, Berkeley, CA 94720­1670
                                                  dor@berkeley.edu

         Abstract: We discuss a brief transcribed excerpt from a task-based interview with Li, an
         11.5-year-old   participant  in  a design-based     research   study  of   probabilistic  cognition
         pertaining  to  the  binomial.   We   investigate   whether    and   how   Li  made   sense  of   the
         behavior of an unfamiliar computer-based artifact--the diminishing proportional impact
         of  successive  random     samples    on the  overall   shape  of   a dynamically    accumulating
         outcome   distribution.   Li constructed   two  informal   analogical    situations  as multimodal
         discursive  means      of  concretizing,   elaborating,    and  communicating        his  emerging
         understanding   of   the   artifact's behavior.    These   non-routine     utterances   shifted   the
         discourse  to  an explicitly   embodied,     imagistic   space bearing    unique   affordances    for
         negotiated epistemic syntheses of phenomenological and technological constructions of
         quantitative relations. Microgenetic analysis suggests that Li's presymbolic notion was
         not  a static   magnitude    but   an   intensive-quantity    "action­object";    he  subsequently
         unpacked   this dynamical    "a/b"    qualia into  its  constitutive  "a" and    "b" elements.  We
         reflect on implications of this counter-curricular sequence for educational design.

Background: Student Analogy as Researcher Opportunity
We are interested in the phenomenon of mathematics learning. We conceptualize mathematics learning as
the process in which an individual builds meaning for mathematical artifacts, such as notions, semiotic
devices,  and procedures.  We    research   this  learning process   in an   attempt   to understand   what    it is that
students do when they build meaning for mathematical artifacts, what teachers do to support this process,
and what instructional materials may best serve this process. In the current study, we examine one student's
metaphorical reasoning as he attempts to construct meaning for the behavior of an unfamiliar mathematical
artifact. In particular, we seek to determine the student's initial ontology of the artifact as indicating his pre-
articulated phenomenological resources that could plausibly serve as proto-mathematical. So doing, we
question the warrant of some epistemological assumptions underlying traditional mathematics curriculum.
         Our comments in this essentially theoretical paper should be taken as no more than conjectural.
Nevertheless,   an appeal    of the   paper    would  be   the   potentially  effective   theoretical fit, and    hence
methodological fit, between the dynamical nature of the particular artifact at the center of the student's
inquiry and our interest in the dynamics of multimodal mathematical reasoning. This fit enables us to
elaborate on   Phenomenology       tenets  and   Learning-Sciences      conjectures   regarding   the  precedence     of
unreflective perception of action over analytic construction of concepts, as we investigate the purchase of
these conjectures on our empirical data. Ultimately, we hope to draw tentative conclusions aligned with
parallel research efforts so as to offer an intellectual space for conversation informing future studies.
         Probability--the mathematical content selected for this study--is amenable for our investigation
of tension between phenomenological and cultural constructions of situations and artifacts. That is, the
unique epistemological "mode" created by situations involving uncertainty, and in particular the challenges
of articulating such uncertainty symbolically, appears to impel students to seek non-symbolical discursive
genres as means of expressing their intuitive quantitative reasoning (e.g., Rubin & Hammerman, 2007).
The  consequent    protracted   discursive  interim   from   the  embodied     to the  symbolical  is  conducive      for
examining   the microgenesis    of  meaning.   Namely,     we    conjecture  that the  metaphors   generated      by this
study's focal student served him as more than vehicles for communicating "ready-made" coherent notions.
Rather, we believe that the cognitive­discursive actions of evoking and "grammarizing" these metaphors
were instrumental for the student's initial articulation of his reasoning. If this conjecture bears out through
further research, it would present a number of implications for mathematics-education theory and practice.
In terms of theory, we would suggest that idiosyncratic metaphors could enable diverse individual students
to ground   challenging  mathematical     constructs  in   their prior quantitative   experiences,  both   formal    and
informal. In terms of practice, we would encourage teachers to cultivate socio-mathematical classroom
norms of discourse in which such metaphorical constructions are approved and possibly even solicited.

                                                   492   ·  © ISLS
                                               ICLS 2010    ·  Volume 1

Metaphor as a Unique Semiotic Means of Objectification
When students encounter a new situation and attempt to determine what it is, they are tacitly attempting to
determine what it is like. This reasoning process is usually opaque to others as well as, perhaps, to the
students. Usually, it is only when the students subsequently respond in non-normative ways to problem
situations that we assume that their underlying conceptualizations of the situation are non-normative. By
stating their metaphors explicitly, though, students create opportunities to reflect more concretely on their
emerging conceptual system for a given mathematical subject matter content as well as to receive targeted
formative  assessment   and  guidance    in learning   this   content.  We conjecture    that instructional   discourse
around metaphor    plays   a unique   role  in students'  bridging     between   tacit and cultural    constructions of
quantitative  situations. Through    analyzing   a student's   metaphorical    constructions,   we   hope  to promote
research into this conjecture. Our proposal to endorse metaphorical reasoning as central to the practice of
mathematicians and, hence, of mathematics-education researchers, agrees with recent emerging interest in
"embodied" or "multimodal" forms of quantitative reasoning (Abrahamson, 2009b; Edwards, Radford, &
Arzarello,  2009;  Lemke,    1998;   Presmeg,    2006)   as   well   as  with converging    testimonies    and   theory
pertaining to the explorative and desultory process of mathematical learning and discovery (Lakatos, 1976;
Schoenfeld, 1991; Thompson, 1993). Furthermore, demonstrating pivotal roles of multimodal mathematical
reasoning would add to the ongoing conversation among cognitive scientists regarding a looming paradigm
shift from amodal to modal conceptualization of human reasoning (see Barsalou, 2008; but cf. Dove, 2009).
         We   view  mathematical     learning   as  a  dialogic,   distributed,  reflexive,   and  emergent   process.
Students learn by building personal meanings for mathematical artifacts. They do so by appropriating these
artifacts as significant means for multimodal semiotic objectification of their presymbolic notions. It is thus
that designed and guided participation in artifact-based social activities mediates disciplinary knowledge as
internalized  discursive  praxis  (Mariotti,   2009;  Radford,    2008;   Sfard,   2002).  And    yet, students' naïve
presymbolic    notions,   judgments,   implicit    heuristics,   and    inferences  for  quantitative   situations   are
sometimes more sophisticated than they can initially express (e.g., Gelman & Williams, 1998), particularly
when students who are not yet fluent in proportional constructs attempt to express notions of perceptually
privileged intensive   quantities (Piaget,  1952;  Stroup,    2002).    Thus, it is important   that   educators create
opportunities for students to avail of their capacity for pre-articulated quantitative reasoning, such as by
making available in the learning environment mathematical artifacts that accord with structure information
students tacitly  seek  (Abrahamson,     2009b).   In this  negotiation   of  meanings    for mathematical    artifacts
(Cobb  &     Bauersfeld,   1995),    metaphor   serves   as    a  powerful    discursive   engagement,     because    it
explicitizes--for the student, teacher, classroom, and researcher--the student's (idiosyncratic) reasoning.
         That said, for this study we do not take a philosophical or cognitive position as to how students
first develop these metaphors or how they evoke them in situ as inferential discursive mechanisms (cf.
diSessa, 1983; Halliday, 1993; Lakoff & Núñez, 2000; see in Ortony, 1993). Instead, we treat the evocation
of metaphor at a larger analytic granularity, as a species of abductive inference amid encounter with a novel
problem (e.g., Prawat, 1999). Moreover, we are committed to framing students' reasoning as situated not in
a solipsistic void but  as   an integral aspect  of   discourse   (Sfard, 2002).    Particularly, we   are inspired  by
Radford's  (e.g., 2008)   view   of  mathematics   learning    as guided   discursive   processes  in  which  students
appropriate   semiotic artifacts  as means   for objectifying     their presymbolic    notions. From    this semiotic­
cultural perspective, we wish to examine the hypothesis that metaphor, too, is a means of objectification
and to explore its unique properties, roles, and prospects within institutionalized practices of mathematical
learning. We propose that students recall personal experiential gestalts as a means of reifying the emerging
coherence they sense in mathematical artifacts yet initially lack formal constructs or vocabulary to express.

Source Data and Research Questions
The transcribed excerpt that constitutes the source data for our study is from an interview with Li, an 11.5
year-old male student ranked by his mathematics teachers as high-achieving. Li was one of 28 Grades 4­6
study participants from a private suburban K­8 school in the greater San Francisco East Bay area. The
context of these 1-hr. interviews was a design-based research study of late-elementary and middle-school
students' intuitive notions pertaining to the mathematical study of probability as well as the potential roles
that a set of mixed-media technologies of our design could play in enabling these students to leverage any
such naïve notions toward understanding mathematical formulations of random phenomena, specifically
the binomial. Using a flexible protocol, we conducted semi-structured clinical interviews (Ginsburg, 1997).
The sessions were videotaped for subsequent analysis, and selected episodes were transcribed. The research

                                                   493  ·   © ISLS
                                            ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

team employed collaborative qualitative microgenetic analysis techniques (Siegler & Crowley, 1991) as
well as grounded theory (Glaser & Strauss, 1967), through which emergent insights were articulated and
iteratively crosschecked  against the entire data   corpus   as a means    of  consolidating, investigating, and
developing new constructs (diSessa & Cobb, 2004). Instances of student elaborate metaphorical reasoning
were extremely rare (only four identified within a total of 26 hours of data) yet appear to be uniquely
informative. In particular, students' gestures therein enable us to speculate on their conceptualizations of
proportionality and probability (e.g., Alibali, Bassok, Olseth, Syc, & Goldin-Meadow, 1999).
   Figure    1 overviews  four central  objects and    target   artifacts that were used,  constructed,  and/or
automatically generated during the interview. The marbles scooper is used to draw a sample of exactly four
ordered marbles from an "urn" of mixed green and blue marbles (see Figure 1a). This hypergeometric
experiment--during each 4-marbles sample draw, marbles are not replaced--approximates the binomial
due to the ratio of n (4 marbles) to the content of the urn (hundreds of marbles). In the interview, we first
ask the participant to guess what would be the experimental results of scooping. Next, the participant is
guided to use crayons and a pile of stock-paper cards each bearing a blank 2-by-2 matrix (Figure 1b), so as
to create the sample space of the experiment and assemble it in the form of the combinations tower (see
Figure 1c). Later, the dyad engages computer-based simulations of the same experiment (e.g., see interface
fragment--a histogram--in Figure 1d). Here, we examine one student's reaction to one feature of one
artifact--Li's reaction to the diminishing proportional impact of samples in the "4-Blocks" simulation.(1)

                       a.                           b.                c.                        d.
Figure 1. Materials used in the study--theoretical and empirical embodiments of the 2-by-2 mathematical
object: (a) The marbles scooper; (b) a template for performing combinatorial analysis; (c) the combinations
  tower--a distributed sample space of the marbles-scooping experiment; and (d) an actual experimental
outcome distribution produced by "4-Blocks," a computer-based simulation of this probability experiment.
       The     computer-based  model   "4-Blocks,"     built in   NetLogo     (Wilensky, 1999),    simulates the
marbles-box probability experiment. 4-Blocks includes a virtual 2-by-2 array (see Figure 2, next page).
When a virtual sample is taken, each of the four cells in this array is randomly assigned either green or blue
coloration. For example, the sample may be three green and one blue cells in any of the four possible orders
(hence, "3g1b"). The model computes the number of green cells in the array, such as 3, and this value is
supplemented to a list (that by default is not seen by the user). Immediately, the interface reflects this new
result by "bumping up" the appropriate histogram column, such as the second-from-right column, by a
vertical extent commensurate with one unit. A feature of 4-Blocks is that its histogram updates dynamically
even as the experiment is running. (To interact with the 4-Blocks model as well as to view the video clip
discussed herein, visit http://edrl.berkeley.edu/publications/conferences/ICLS/Abrahamson-ICLS2010/.)
       The vertical extent of a unit is dynamically calibrated to the histogram's maximum y-axis value
(e.g., this y-value is 43, in Figure 2). That is, the histogram has an "autoplot" feature: when a category
column "grows" such that it is about to exceed the maximum y-value, this value increases by one unit so as
to accommodate the impending growth. The column thus remains as tall as it was, "glued" to the top of the
histogram   frame, while other columns   appear   to   sag down   a unit.  Consequently,  as   the simulation  is
running, the vertical extent of a single unit keeps diminishing. Thus, when the maximum y-value is 10 (the
default initial value), a unit is 1/10 of the height of the frame, resulting in the perception of a major upward
jolt on the screen when a sample is taken. In Figure 2, a unit would be smaller, at 1/43 of the height. When
the maximum y-value is relatively large, such as 1,000, a unit is only 1/1,000 of the histogram, resulting in
a minute perceptual change. Moreover, at 10,000, an upward motion may demand finer calibration than the
pixels could accommodate, so that very often the columns would not register any perceivable change at all.

                                                494  ·   © ISLS
                                             ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

Figure 2. The 4-Blocks NetLogo simulation of the marbles-box probability experiment after 100 samples.
         This phenomenon--the diminishing perceptual impact of samples as the experiment runs--is a
potentially useful feature of the NetLogo modeling-and-simulation environment, because of its inherent
capacity to gradually shift the user's attention away from the impact of each haphazard sample and toward
the distribution gestalt, which   the user might thus   objectify as  an aggregate   property of the simulated
phenomenon (Wilensky, 1997). Moreover, the absence of numerals along the histogram's x- and y-axes
appears to impact the user's primary construction of relations among the histogram columns: rather than
constructing  these relations as  mediated   through    symbolically  notated absolute values    and calculated
differences among them, the user can construct them proportionately based on immediate perceptions of
relative heights and/or   areas. Thus,  in each and   every  long-term   run of the  simulation, the user may
experience opportunities to witness and reflect on the gradual yet ineluctable emergence of the distribution
shape, such as the 1-4-6-4-1 shape of the marbles-scooping binomial experiment set at p = .5 (Figure 1d);
with guidance, users may be able to construe this shape as objectifying their presymbolic sense of the
phenomenon's aggregate characteristics (e.g., the expected plurality of 2g2b, see Abrahamson, 2009b).
         By and large, such was the case with all our 28 participants, including Li. Yet how would Li make
sense of the histogram? In particular, would Li perceive the impact of each sample upon the distribution as
proportional to the quantity of aggregated outcomes? If so, what resources might this student, who has not
studied ratio-and-proportion formally, bring to bear in making sense of this phenomenon of diminishing
perceptual impact, and how might he articulate his inferences? From an instructional-design perspective, is
the technologically sophisticated semiotic system built into the autoplotting histogram helping or hindering
Li's learning?; is this histogram "cognitively ergonomic" (see in Abrahamson, 2009b), and if so, which
phenomenological resources could it tacitly cue and how might Li articulate these notions mathematically?

Analysis: Analogy-Based Unpacking of Intensive-Quantity Action­Objects
In this section we present and discuss a 41-second videographed excerpt and annotated transcription of a
conversation fragment between Li and the interviewer, in which Li reasons analogically about the samples'
diminishing perceptual impact on the histogram shape. The excerpt begins when Li and Dor have already
negotiated the construction of the sample space, have assembled it in the form of the combinations tower,
have discussed relations between the marbles-box experiment and the combinations tower, and have been
working on 4-Blocks. Doing so, Li draws on non-mathematical phenomena as contexts for his quantitative
reasoning. Li's rhetorical strategy is to build an argument by comparing two extreme cases of sampling: (a)
at the beginning of the experiment, when a relatively small number of outcomes has accumulated so that
each supplementary sample causes quite a "splash"; and (b) well into the experiment, when a considerable
number   of  outcomes has   accumulated,   so that   any   additional sample  causes but a "ripple."  His first
context--the glass/lake analogy--will present this contrast in full, and then the second context--batting
averages--elides the first of the two cases in pragmatic enthymeme and states only the second case. Just
prior to these analogies, though, Li anticipates that the emergent experimental frequency distribution will
resemble the combinations tower in shape; he will then monitor this emergence to evaluate his prediction.
         Dor:    So what do you think might be the shape of the columns, as it goes up?
         Li:     [Gesturing to the combinations tower] Something like this.
         Dor:    Well let's see. [activates experiment, explains autoplotting] So what's happening?

                                                 495  ·  © ISLS
                                            ICLS 2010    ·  Volume 1

        Li:     [Gesturing  to  the   distribution] It's    hovering     at around    this   [gestures   to
                combinations tower].... [20 seconds later, when 5,000 samples have been drawn]
                Look, it's [the frequency distribution] almost exactly like this [the combinations
                tower].... [30 seconds later] Now they're [columns] moving less [inaudible].
        Dor:    Why is it moving less?
        Embedded in the interviewer's questions is an implicit linguistic passage from "the columns" to
"it." Li picks up this cue and accordingly refers to the columnar frequency distribution with the pronoun
"it." Irrespective of the fullness of his understanding at this point, Li's appropriation of the interviewer's
singular pronoun as reference to the column collective suggests he is construing the distribution as an
intact, if amorphous, object. Soon after, Li again frames the aggregate motion as "plural" behavior. Below,
this motion is about to become the object of discussion. Namely, the histogram's figural change is first
described with a verb ("moving") but will soon become a noun ("splash" vs. "ripple") (cf. Bakker, 2007,
for a similar case of Peircean 'hypostatic abstraction' in statistical analysis). What is unique about these
nouns is that they are inherently about change. That is, the object at the core of Li's proto-mathematical
reasoning is not a static magnitude, such as the measured vertical displacement of the histogram bars (an
`a' element) or the cumulative number of samples (a `b' element)--Li's tacit phenomenological primitive
in this dynamical experience is a synthetic a priori--an intact action-based a/b change-over-time intensive-
quantity unit (cf. Stroup, 2002). Thus, technological affordances of visualization media--the dynamical
autoplotting  histogram--may   reverse  mathematics      learning sequences    from   the traditional  magnitudes-
before-relation to relation-before-magnitudes.   Li's    ensuing  metaphorical     outburst,  in which   he   deftly
unpacks the intact a/b change­object into its a and b constituents, we submit, implies that we should take
pause, as mathematics educators, to consider the possibility that students learning intensive quantities, such
as in the mathematics   of    change, may  avail    of   trajectories that  go counter    to traditional curricular
sequencing. It is thus that computers may "restructurate" mathematical content (Wilensky & Papert, 2009).
        Yet   what phenomenological    resources    will  Li bring    to bear  in explicating  the change­object?
Whereas   the NetLogo   histogram,  when  the model      is run,  foregrounds     change  as the salient object  of
attention and may thus render the mathematics of change more accessible to learners, the autoplotting
feature may conceivably challenge students due to its ostensible phenomenological aberration. That is, in
"real life," we may muse, growing aggregates actually occupy greater space. Intriguingly, however, natural
visual perception is a perspectival experience, in which retinal prints of objects depend on their distance:
        Li:     /2 sec/ Because.../3 sec/ [gazes up to the wall] the larger number.../3 sec/ uhh...
                ["checks in" with the interviewer] /2 sec/ [rapidly] Like if you have a little glass
                [iconic gesture: LH cups a glass in natural position near body; gazes at glass] of
                water and you drop a marble in [iconic: LH uncups, rises, drops marble], it's
                gonna be... there's gonna be, like, a splash [LH, palm up, abrupt vertical rise],
                but if you have a big giant lake [LH, palm up, drawn back and up above head to
                encircle expansive lake; RH, in jacket pocket, budges to complete circumference],
                and you throw a marble in [LH catapults marble, then scratches nose], there's
                just gonna be a ripple [joins LH thumb and index, lowers hand to chest height on
                right-side of embodied   space;  taps    fingers together,   possibly marking    marble's
                contact with surface, then inscribes smooth horizontal line across to the left; hand
                opens]. It's a, it... [gestures to histogram, orients gaze and pivots body towards it]
        Dor:    Oh, ok. Like   each   individual additional      sample   [LH  gyrates swiftly,  iterating
                addenda] is causing less of a [LH & RH "contain" combinations-tower outline]...
        Li:     [cuts in mid sentence] Yeah, it's like a batting average in baseball. If you've
                already had five hundred at-bats(2) [LH opens, shifts slightly to the left, palm up,
                "holding" the 500 at-bats, then relaxes], and then you get out one more time, it's
                not going to make it go down that much--it'll make it go down like two points
                [LH pinches thumb and index, as per "ripple," as if to subtract two points], or...
        Dor:    Ok, so as we go along, each successive sample causes less of a commotion.
        Li:     Yeah. [Gazes back at the computer screen] Look, they're just barely moving.
        The conversation, above, pertained to variation in the effect of a single sample on the proportional
distribution of experimental outcomes: as outcomes aggregate, the proportional impact of each additional
sample diminishes. Viewed on the computer screen, the self-compressing histogram converges on the 1-4-

                                                496    ·  © ISLS
                                            ICLS 2010   ·   Volume 1

6-4-1 distribution,  eventually  portraying  the  dynamic      aggregation   as  perceptually  static, albeit the
constantly updating maximal y-axis value reveals the process as additively active. Li appears to understand
this principle. However, this high-achieving 6th-grader's limited fluency with proportional constructs does
not enable him to capture the process with appropriate vocabulary, such as "proportion" and its cognates, or
with suitable mathematical constructs and arithmetic operations for conceptualizing and treating rational
numbers, as witnessed in his aborted attempt, "Because the larger number..." Consequently, Li evokes a
situation analogous to the dynamic artifact yet evaluated as more conducive to objectifying the principle. Li
thus unpacks "splash > ripple" as "one-marble-impact : size-of-glass > one-marble-impact : size-of-lake."
        The key physical dimension underlying the splash-vs.-ripple articulated comparison is the vertical
height of the water displacement in each. And yet, would not a marble thrown into a lake produce a vertical
displacement of water that is at least as large if not larger than in a glass? What is at stake here, it appears,
is not the absolute physical size of phenomena but their pre-rationalized perturbations to the perceptual
field. Thus, ratio is pre-built into perspective as an optical calibration. Moreover, equally sized distal events
are normalized by their containers, because these perceptions' phenomenological circumstances are such
that events occurring in larger containers are physically farther from the viewer and therefore retinally
smaller. Li's spontaneous gestures inscribe the glass and lake as they would be perceived in the unreflective
phenomenology of lived experience, so that the lake occupies little more optical canvas than the glass does
upon Li's "visuo­spatial sketchpad" (see Baddeley & Hitch, 1974).(3) Thus, Li can compare two intensive
quantities--the splash and the ripple--on the basis of their retinal magnitude alone (see Figure 3, below).(4)

        Glass                        Splash                          Lake                       Ripple
  Figure 3. Dominant gestures in Li's glass-vs.-lake comparison analogy, with arrows as action overlays.
        In summary of Li's first analogy, his argumentation responded to the interviewer's request for an
explanation regarding the patterned behavior of a dynamical mathematical object--an electronic histogram
that is confined in its total interface real-estate yet monitors an ever-aggregating vertically surging outcome
distribution. Li's analogical constructions, however, shifted the dyad into an imagistic discursive space,
wherein larger  aggregates   are  in fact  embodied     in larger  objects.  Therein,  Li compared     two intact
experiential events, both  a priori  intensive quantities;  only  through    engaging  in thinking-for-speaking
(Slobin, 1996) did Li unpack each of these quantities "cubistically" (Nemirovsky & Ferrara, 2009) such
that its respective constituents were "liberated" (Bamberger & Ziporyn, 1991) into a and b magnitudes so
that each event was reconstructed as an a/b qualitative quotient. This unpacking is anecdotally enhanced by
Li's essentially unidextrous sequential gesturing, which radicalizes the discursive caveat of linear utterance.
        In selecting a baseball context for his second analogy, Li evokes a situation that is more conducive
to mathematizing his argument. First, monitoring quantitative aspects of this popular activity is a familiar,
culturally appropriate practice.  Second,  the baseball    example   is more   ontologically consistent  than the
water example: in the glass-vs.-lake analogy, the perturbation was caused by a marble dropped into water
and thereafter the marble is ignored, whereas in the baseball scenario, the perturbation was caused by the
player performing an at-bat, which is thereafter added to the denominator of the "batting average" (and to
the numerator,  contingent   on  how   the at-bat played    out). Third,    the baseball  analogy  offers  a  pre-
enumerated set of discrete units, 500 at bats, whereas the water analogy would demand measurement of the
continuous body before further calculation could be performed. Finally, a batting average is an a priori
proportional  construct, so  that this  analogy   is  much     nearer   to the  probability  context--culturally,
semantically, semiotically,  and  arithmetically--than     the water-surface    analogy. Thus,  in selecting  the
baseball analogy, Li also steers the dialogue from the rich imagistic detour, which the interviewer had
countenanced, back to the institutionally normative genre of discussing quantitative reasoning numerically.
Using numbers   as   precise signifiers of  quantity,   in the  baseball   analogy, Li   need not  communicate
magnitudes gesturally--indeed, comparison of the vast "big giant lake" gesture to the modest "500 at-bats"
cupping as well as, analogically, comparison of the lake-impact gesture to the "-2" (read: "-.002") gesture
demonstrate pragmatic contraction in iconicity from the first to the second context (see Radford, 2008).

                                                497   ·  © ISLS
                                                 ICLS 2010    ·   Volume 1

         Having completed his two-analogy argumentation sequence (see Figure 4, below), Li looped the
dyad back to the phenomenon under inquiry. Presumably, the interlocutors, who renew their co-attention to
the histogram, do so with newly shared professional vision established in analogical discursive space.(5)

    Impact                       MAJOR                                          BARELY DISCERNABLE
Context           Before         Perturb      Effect                   Before             Perturb           Effect
 Marbles-
 Scooping
 Experiment                     +1 sample                                                 +1 sample
                                     !                                                      !

                        !                             !                      !                                   !
 Marble inWater    Cup            throwmarble "Splash"                  Lake               throwmarble      "Ripple"
                                                                             !                                   !
 Batting             ­               ­            ­                Batting average at     One out    Batting average at
 Average                                                           500 at-bats (x/500)               501 at-bats (x/501)
    Figure 4. Analogizing the proportional impact of an addend as a function of the size of the aggregate.
         Li's imagistic     analogical  detour   suggests     that he needed    to  step  back  from   the  sophisticated
semiotic device and reconstruct a phenomenological scaffold by which to perform epistemic adjustment
that then enabled him numerical objectification of his presymbolic image of proportional convergence.
Implicit to this process of mathematization was re-describing multimodal phenomenology in conventional
techno­scientific form. This bridging task, an aspect of meta-representational capacity (diSessa & Sherin,
2000), is cognitively non-trivial. We implicate the technologically sophisticated self-adjusting histogram as
complicit  to the  tension     between   Li's tacit     and cultural  presentation     of quantitative information:      by
perceptually foregrounding proportional change over additive change, the autoplotting histogram offers a
cognitively ergonomic engagement of the mathematics of change, yet to avail of this restructurated entry to
the disciplinary  practice,    students   require   guided    opportunities    to negotiate    embodied    and     inscribed
constructions of focal phenomena. Metaphorical reasoning is one means of accomplishing this negotiation.

Conclusions
Whereas there is a certain logical appeal to thinking of an object as somehow cognitively simpler than an
action (object + motion), the phenomenological perspective perceives actions as prior to objects--objects
need to be deliberately pulled out of experience as transcendental to unreflective action. Analysis of Li's
imagistic construction revealed that he was drawing on phenomenological gestalts that are experientially a
priori to mathematically articulated notions of ratio. Understanding such processes could inform the work
of  mathematics   educators.     In  particular, educators      who   reason   about   mathematics    logically    but  not
phenomenologically        are liable to introduce   a/b   constructs  by   initially   presenting  a and   b  as   separate
elements  and   only then     calculating their  quotient     and  suggesting   meanings    for this number.       Yet such
would-be scaffolding may sometimes hamper rather than optimize students' opportunities to draw on their
informal reasoning, particularly their tacit intensive-quantity gestalts, in constructing mathematical notions.
Instructional design solutions, we believe, lie in between, in creating opportunities for students to negotiate
phenomenological qualia and their mathematical reconstructions (Abrahamson, 2009a, 2009b, 2009c).(6)
Endnotes
(1)  Elsewhere, we furnish    detailed explanation  of  the design  motivation  and  rationale and  report on findings  and
     design modifications throughout the iterated study cycles (Abrahamson, 2009c). Therein, we also report on the
     earlier part of Li's interview, focusing on his "semiotic leap" from presymbolic to articulated notions.
(2)  A "batting average" is the cumulative ratio of hits (successful batting) to at-bats (opportunities to do so).
(3)  It could have been fascinating to witness how Li would then inscribe these images using pencil and paper.
(4)  The elongated horizontal extent of the ripple gesture does not map onto any mathematical analog--it is not the a,
     the b, or the a/b--yet it is what one would see/feel, so it is gestured. Paradoxically, this mathematically excessive
     magnitude could constitute a disservice to the comparison, because it inflates the a. Yet this "soothing" gesture
     may be contributing a holistic diminutive affect that thus in fact mitigates the ripple in comparison with the splash.
(5)  The interviewer never appeared perturbed by dimensions of embodiment, discourse, and inscription implicit to
     Li's utterance, because he shares with Li tacit cognitive mechanisms for engaging multimodal reasoning.

                                                     498    ·  © ISLS
                                            ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

(6) The data analyzed herein were collected in a study supported by an NAE/Spencer Postdoctoral Fellowship 2005-6.
     The ideas we present herein are the result of the Seeing Chance group's collaborative work, foremost Mike Bryant
References
Abrahamson, D. (2009a). Embodied design. Educational Studies in Mathematics, 70(1), 27-47.
Abrahamson, D. (2009b). Orchestrating semiotic leaps from tacit to cultural quantitative reasoning.
        Cognition and Instruction, 27(3), 175-224.
Abrahamson, D. (2009). A student's synthesis of tacit and mathematical knowledge as a researcher's lens on
        bridging learning theory. In M. Borovcnik & R. Kapadia (Eds.), Research and developments in
        probability education [Special Issue]. International Electronic Journal of Mathematics Education,
        4(3), 195-226. Accessed Jan. 1, 2010 at http://www.iejme.com/032009/main.htm.
Alibali, M. W., et al. (1999). Illuminating mental representations through speech and gesture. Psych
        Science, 10, 327-333.
Baddeley, A. D., & Hitch, G. J. L. (1974). Working memory. In G. A. Bower (Ed.), The psychology of
        learning and motivation (Vol. 8, pp. 47-89). NYC: Academic Press.
Bakker, A. (2007). Diagrammatic reasoning and hypostatic abstraction in stats. ed. Semiotica, 164(1/4), 9-29.
Bamberger, J., & Ziporyn, E. (1991). Getting it wrong. The World of Music, 34(3), 22-56.
Barsalou, L. W. (2008). Grounded cognition. Annual Review of Psychology, 59, 617-645.
Cobb, P., & Bauersfeld, H. (Eds.). (1995). The emergence of mathematical meaning. Hillsdale, NJ: LEA.
diSessa, A. A. (1983). Phenomenology and the evolution of intuition. In D. Gentner & A. Stevens (Eds.),
        Mental models (pp. 15-33). Hillsdale, NJ: LEA.
diSessa, A. A., & Cobb, P. (2004). Ontological innovation and the role of theory in design experiments.
        Journal of the Learning Sciences, 13(1), 77-103.
diSessa, A. A., & Sherin, B. (2000). Meta-representation. J. of Mathematical Behavior, 19, 385-398.
Dove, G. (2009). Beyond perceptual symbols. Cognition, 110(3), 412-431.
Edwards, L., Radford, L., & Arzarello, F. (2009). Gestures and multimodality in the construction of
        mathematical meaning [Special Issue]. Educational Studies of Mathematics, 70(2).
Gelman, R., & Williams, E. (1998). Enabling constraints for cognitive development and learning. In D.
        Kuhn & R. Siegler (Eds.), Cognition, perception and language (Vol. 2, pp. 575-630). NY: Wiley.
Ginsburg, H. P. (1997). Entering the child's mind. NYC: Cambridge University Press.
Glaser, B. G., & Strauss, A. L. (1967). The discovery of grounded theory. Chicago: Aldine.
Halliday, M. A. K. (1993). Towards a language-based theory of learning. Linguistics and Ed., 5, 93-116.
Lakatos, I. (1976). Proofs and refutations. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Lakoff, G., & Núñez, R. E. (2000). Where mathematics comes from. NYC: Basic Books.
Lemke, J. L. (1998). Multiplying meaning: Visual and verbal semiotics in scientific text. In J. R. Martin &
        R. Veel (Eds.), Reading science (pp. 87-113). London: Routledge.
Mariotti, M. A. (2009). Artifacts and signs after a Vygotskian perspective. ZDM, 41, 427-440.
Nemirovsky, R., & Ferrara, F. (2009). Mathematical imagination and embodied cognition. ESM, 70(2), 159-174.
Ortony, A. (Ed.). (1993). Metaphor and thought. Cambridge: Cambridge U. Press.
Piaget, J. (1952). The child's conception of number. London: Routledge.
Prawat, R. S. (1999). Dewey, Peirce, and the learning paradox. Amer Ed Res J, 36, 47-76.
Presmeg, N. (2006). Research on visualization in learning and teaching mathematics. In A. Gutiérrez & P.
        Boero (Eds.), Handbook of research on the psych. of math. ed. (pp. 205-235). Rotterdam: Sense.
Radford, L. (2008). Iconicity and contraction. ZDM, 40(1), 83-96.
Rubin, A., & Hammerman, J. (2007, Aug.). Soup or stew: Metaphors for the relationship between samples
        and populations. Paper presented at SRTL-5, Warwick, UK.
Schoenfeld, A. H. (1991). On mathematics as sense-making. In J. F. Voss, D. N. Perkins & J. Segal (Eds.),
        Informal reasoning and education (pp. vii-xvii). NJ: LEA.
Sfard, A. (2002). The interplay of intimations and implementations. JLS, 11(2&3), 319-357.
Siegler, R. S., & Crowley, K. (1991). The microgenetic method. Amer Psy, 46(6), 606-620.
Slobin, D. I. (1996). From "thought and language" to "thinking to speaking". In J. Gumperz & S. C.
        Levinson (Eds.), Rethinking linguistic relativity (pp. 70-96). Cambridge: Cambridge U. Press.
Stroup, W. M. (2002). Understanding qualitative calculus. Int J of Comp for Math Learning, 7(2), 167-215.
Thompson, P. W. (1993). Quantitative reasoning, complexity, and additive structures. ESM, 3, 165-208.
Wilensky, U. (1997). What is normal anyway?: Therapy for epistemological anxiety. ESM, 33(2), 171-202.
Wilensky, U. (1999). NetLogo. Northwestern U, Evanston, IL: CCL http://ccl.northwestern.edu/netlogo/.
Wilensky, U., & Papert, S. (2009). Restructurations. (Manuscript in preparation).

                                               499  ·   © ISLS
