                                               ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

     The Many Dimensions of Having a Good Eye: A Methodological
              Reflection of Metaphors in Visual Cognition Analysis
       Andreas Gegenfurtner, Anna Siewiorek, Centre for Learning Research, University of Turku, Finland
                                      Email: angege@utu.fi, amsiew@utu.fi

         Abstract: There seems to be a stable and widelyheld belief among medical practitioners that
         good diagnosticians have a good eyethat is innate, rather than trained. However, there is no
         evidence for any identifiable perceptual trait. Nonetheless, the process of developing a good
         eye in medicine is proposed, indicated, and elaborated by various measures contingent on
         diverse methodological arenas, all of which attempt to advance our understanding of what
         constitutes visual cognition in diagnosing medical images. Thepurpose of this paper is to
         provide a reflection on this methodological pluralism.We first identify four metaphors used in
         the   analysis  of visual  cognition:  activation,  detection,   inference,  and   practice.   These
         metaphors   are  described   with an  empirical  example   and discussed  to  elicit (partly   tacit)
         assumptions    associated  with prototypical    method   decision.s We  then  link   the proposed
         metaphorical    mapping   to what it implies  for  current epistemological,   methodological,    and
         curricular discussions in medicaleducation.

Introduction
There seems to be a stable and widely held belief among medical practitioners thatgood diagnosticians are born
rather than made (Elstein, Shulman, & Sprafka, 1978;Ericsson, 2004; Norman, Coblentz, Brooks, & Babcook,
1992). Indeed, it is a common observation, both in training programs andin clinical practice, that some residents
are quicker and more accurate than others in recognizing subtle abnormalities in medical images. Based on
everyday observation of these kinds, it has subsequently been concluded that diagnostic accuracy is due to
having a "good eye"--one that is innate, rather than trained. However, there is no evidence for any identifiable
perceptual trait. To the contrary, recent researchhas indicated that what has been labeled as a good eye can in
fact be developed through training. For example, Dawes, Vowler, Allen, and Dixon (2004)demonstrated that
detection performance of clinical students was significantly higher aftera 26-week training period than it had
been   before; materials  included  graphics  used  in diverse  medical   disciplines  such   as  plain X-ray   films,
ultrasound,   computer   tomograms,   magnetic  resonance   images,   and positron    emission   tomograms.    Similar
training effects have also been reported in cardiology (Issenberg, McGaghie, Gordon, Symes, Petrusa, Hart, et
al., 2002),   radiology  (Brazeau-Lamontagne,    Charlin,   Gagnon,   Samson,   &  Van   der   Vleuten,  2004),   and
microscopic    pathology  (Crowley,   Lecowski,  Medvedeva,    Tseytlin,  Roh,  &  Jukic, 2006).   Overall,    we can
conclude that training can improve visual accuracy; that recognition of abnormities in perceptual tasks can be
learned; and that good diagnosticians are made rather than born.
         Thus, there is consensus that the development of being a good diagnosticiangoes in concert with the
development of a good eye. What is less clear is what a good eyeis. What precisely is it that develops in novice
diagnosticians through medical education? What must be appropriated to move toward higher accuracy? Some
investigators, particularly Kundel, Nodine, and Carmody (1978), in a now classic study, suggest that the highly
perceptual  nature of   image  comprehension   requires intensive  processing  of visual  data through   oculomotor
activity that guides signal detection and decision-making. Others, particularly Lesgold and colleagues (1988), in
what is now also a classic study,put less emphasis on the perceptual aspect; rather, they suggest that diagnosing
is mainly   a  cognitive inference  that aligns disease   schemata  from     episodic memory     consistent with  the
perceptual  features detected.  Much   medical  research  done  in  both  traditions has been    reviewed   elsewhere
(Boshuizen & Schmidt, 2008; Ericsson, 2004; Kundel, 2007; Norman et al., 1992; Patel, Arocha, & Zhang,
2005). Recently, alternative approaches have been formulated; these suggest that a good eye is indicated by
neurophysiologic events in certain brain areas(Haller & Radue, 2005), and is accomplished through situated
social discourse (Koschmann,     LeBaron,   Goodwin,   Zemel,   &   Dunnington,  2007).  In short, the  metaphor   of
having a good eye in medicine is proposed, indicated, and elaborated by various measurescontingent on diverse
methodological arenas that all attempt to advance our understanding of what constitutes visual cognition.
         The   main  task   of the present study is to    provide a first step in proposing    a  reflection   on this
methodological pluralism. Our goal is to present a framework in which the many dimensions of havinga good
eye can be considered as mutually constituting the richness we have onideas, concepts, and theoriesrelating to
medical image diagnosis. We have no intent to judge some methodological traditions asbeing more valuable
than others, nor do we intend to unify them in some abstract way. Although the idea of what was termed
interactive complexification (Alexander, Schallert, & Reynolds, 2009) is considered meaningful for highlighting
the confluence of factors that determines"any given aspect" of the product and the process of learning to
diagnose medical images, we believe there is, at times, also a place for simple answers. We hope that the

                                                   508  ·  © ISLS
                                                ICLS 2010  ·   Volume 1

framework put forward in this study will provide such a simple answer. The study addresses the questions of
how to analyze visual cognition; how to elicit tacit assumptionsunderlying common research practice; and how
to inform curriculum design for medical training in corporate and higher education setting.s By discussing four
examples drawn from radiology, we identify four metaphorsthat constitute our framework on visual cognition
analysis. Despite its groundwork    in    medical literature,  it could be  assumed  that   the   framework   also  has
implications beyond medicine, due to its common interest in learning and comprehension in technology-rich
vision-intensive contexts.  In the  first part of this  paper, we   introduce four  metaphors     for visual cognition:
activation, detection, inference, and practice. In the second part, we discussthe potential implications of these
metaphors in reconsidering standpoints on epistemology, methodology, and curriculum design.

Four Dimensions of Visual Cognition Analysis: A Metaphorical Mapping
Metaphors are a useful tool for mirroring in simple terms the often complex fundamentality underlying theory
and applied research practice. An example of how metaphorsare able to elicit complex, different, yet partly
tacit, assumptions on a commonly studied phenomenon is the reflection on learning by use of themetaphors
acquisition, participation, and knowledge creation (Paavola, Lipponen, & Hakkarainen, 2002; Sfard1, 998). As
Sfard (1998, p. 4) notes, "metaphors are the most primitive, most elusive, and yet amazingly inofrmative objects
of analysis". We believe that their value and power stems from the fact thatmetaphors converge and portray, in
a snapshot format, what took years of scientific discourse to develop; this allows frank presenattion of positions
and their  entailments   in a condensed    way  and  invites   a  critical(re)consideration of accepted    and perhaps
unreflected practice. Of course, metaphors are simple and simplistic;htere is no claim thatthey attempt to depict
all of the breadth and depth of what often is a complex epistemology.
          Below, we identify, exemplify, and discuss fourmetaphors often used when analyzing visual cognition;
these metaphors are seen as four of themany dimensions possessed by one with "a good eye" in medicine. We
reflect on these metaphors in terms of what they contributeas an answer for the two questions stated above:The
nature of what develops in novice diagnosticians through medical educationis not yet clear. The question of
what must be appropriated to move toward higher accuracy remains to be answered.It is hoped that the value
and significance of this methodological reflectionwill be that it helps to map a scattered and fragmented field of
inquiry. Table 1 serves as the guiding framework for the comparison of the four metaphors, including their
methodological entailments:activation, detection, inference, and practice.

Table 1: A comparative metaphorical mapping of visual cognition analysis in medicine.

                       Activation              Detection                   Inference              Practice
Indicators of visual   Neurophysiologic        Eye movements               Verbal reports         Representational
cognition              activity                                                                   practices
Unit of analysis       Individual              Individual (social)         Individual and         Sociotechnical
                                                                           social
Place of visual        Neural network          Optic system                (Distributed)          Activity system
cognition              system                                              memory system
Analytic time span     Milliseconds            Seconds                     Minutes to few         Minutes to decades
                                                                           hours
Associated             Cognitive               ROC analysis; eye           Protocol analysis      Ethnomethodology
methodology            neuroscience            tracking methodology

Activation Metaphor
Research adhering to the activation metaphor uses measures of neurophysiologic activity as an indicationof
visual cognition. In the activation metaphor, there is a strong emphassi on the neurological and biologicalbasis
of our humanness     (Alexander  et al.,  2009; see  also  Meltzoff,    Kuhl, Movellan,   &  Sejnowski,     2009). This
emphasis might originate from the widely held belief that "information is stored in neural networkisn the brain,
and that human behavior arises from extremely complex communication between neurons in these networskand
also between separate networks or assemblies" (Sauseng & Klimesch, 2008, p. 1003). This neural netwrok
system is  seen  as  the place where  visual   cognition   occurs.  Hence, visual  cognition   is indicated  by neural
activity. Specifically, this activity can be measured by an electroencephalograph(EEG) as the electric current in
axons; by  a magnetoencephalograph        (MEG)   as the   magnetic  field induced  by   thoseelectric  currents;  by a
positron emission tomography (PET) as the blood flow distribution in the cells; or by functional magnetic
resonance imaging (fMRI) scanning as cellular oxygen consumption. Whenever information stored in neural
networks is used for cognitive processes, neural activation occurs that can be measuredwith one of those tools.
For example, if a radiologist formulates a diagnosis based ona patient's fMRI scan, an fMRI scanner could be
used to indicate the processes of this radiologist's visual cognition. These processes areextremely fast; the best
conventional apparatus currently available--the EEG scanner--is able to trace this activity with a temporal

                                                    509  ·  © ISLS
                                               ICLS 2010  ·   Volume 1

resolution in the range of milliseconds(Sauseng & Klimesch, 2008). An empirical example prototypical for the
activation metaphorcan further illustrateepistemological and methodological premises.
        Haller and Radue (2005) investigated differences in neuronal activations of radiologists and layperosns
in reading radiologic and non-radiologic images. Using functional magnetic resonance (fMRI) imaging, the
brain scans showed that radiologic images evoked stronger activations in thebrains of radiologists than in those
of laypersons, with the bilateral middle and inferior temporal gyrus, bilateral medial and middle frontal gyrus,
and left superior and inferior frontal gyrusbeing particularly affected. These regions are generally assumed to
be linked to the encoding and storing of memory of visual objects and events. Hence, this findingseems to
imply that what is seen on the presented image is automatically referenced to memorized images, indicatign an
unconscious,  stimulus-driven   indexical relation  between    the   pictorial representation and  the  corresponding
mental representation.  Being    prototypical  for research    in  neuroscience,   Haller  and  Radue   (2005)   used
technological images as stimuli in a series: Stimuli were shown for 2.5 seconds followed by a fixation crossfor
8.5 seconds to compensate for blood oxygenation leve-ldependent signal delay. Subjects gazed at the stimuli
series with an immobilized head in darkened and (electrical and auditory) noise-protected rooms. Settings of
this kind are highly controlled. These types of controls are necessary because neural measures are highly
sensitive: activation should  be  shown   in  response   to the   stimulus only. Strong   controls therefore  aim to
guarantee bias-free recordings.
        At this point in time, the activation metaphor for visual cognition hasrarely been used in medical
diagnosis studies. However, thecoming together of the learning sciences andneuroscience is beginning to form
an exciting new field (Ansari & Coch, 2006; De Jong, Van Gog, Jenks, Manlove, Van Hell, Jolles et al,. 2009).
An answer comes into play regarding the question of what develops in novice diagnosticians through medical
education; namely, that neuroscience has the potential to trace implicit and experiential learning before it can be
observed in behavior. This will allow usto understand when, how, and why learning occurs. In particular, the
how and why can be tackled within these highly controlled settings. Certainly, it is not a novel statement that
behaviors, such as diagnosing a medical image, that appear similar on the surface may involve veryidfferent
cognitive/perceptual  mechanisms    underlying  this behavior. Neuroscience,      in combination   with the  learning
sciences, now provides a new avenue for tackling these issues, to further understand expertisedevelopment in
novice diagnosticians. Results derived from the activation metaphortherefore have the potential to inform the
design of medical education and training; more on this issue will be offered at a later point in thsipaper.

Detection Metaphor
Detection can be defined as "determining whether a simple, featurally defined stimuul s is present in, or absent
from, the visual field" (Smith & Ratcliff, 2009, p. 283). A central premise of research using the detection
metaphor   is uncertainty; that is, the degree to  which    a subject  is able  to discriminate between   signal (the
stimulus of interest) and noise (background stimuli distracting visual attention, thus causing decision-making
under conditions of uncertainty). In medical image diagnosis, the signal would be a tumo, rwhile noise would be
(healthy)  organic material  surrounding   the tumor.  Clearly,   in pictures  as  complex as  radiographs, with  an
abundance of structures, forms, and elements displayed in manifold shadings of grey, detection of atumor is a
challenging task. Tasks of this kind are frequently used to quantify the ability ofdiscerning between signal and
noise. Two approaches are prevalent: eye-tracking methodology and receiver operating characteristic (ROC)
analysis. Below, an empirical example by Kundel, Nodine, Conant, and Weinstein (2007,)which combined eye-
tracking with ROC analysis, can illuminate prototypical premises of each approach.
        Kundel et al. (2007) investigated rapid initial fixations (detections)on abnormalities on mammograms.
Briefly, they found that more experienced radiologists showed global perceptual proecsses that helped them
detect the abnormality (malignant breast lesions) in less than a second. In contrast, less experienced radiologists
showed search-to-find strategies that took considerably longer to first fixate the abnormality.Visual cognition
differences in these two groups were indicated by eye-tracking and by ROC analysis. With respect to eye-
tracking, the recording of eye movements is usually used to visualize the scan paths of observers.nI Kundel's
study, radiologists with more experience had longer saccades and fewer fixations than did less experienced
radiologists. This empirical evidence is consistent with many studiesthat adhere to the detection metaphor in
radiology (Mello-Thoms, 2003), cardiology (Augustyniak & Tadeusiewicz, 2006), and microscopic pathology
(Krupinski et al., 2006). With respect to ROC analysis,detectability was significantly higher for observerswith
more experience than for those with less experience. Detectability is a measure that quantifies the sum of true
positives and true negatives, divided by the sum of all positives and negativesin a detectability value, da..
        A conclusion can be made that the detection metaphor indicates that novice diagnosticians develop a
good eye through medical education in terms of their ability to discriminate a potential signal from background
noise. This ability can be quantified and expressed mathematically in a formula thatallows comparison of
observers at the individual or the group level. Studies in the detection metaphor, which usually employ eye-
tracking methodology and/or ROC analysis, indicate that superior visual cognition can be characterized as a
high decision-speed accuracy relation: Visual perception changes with arise in experience, from a relatively

                                                   510  ·   © ISLS
                                                 ICLS 2010    ·   Volume 1

slow search-to-find mode to a global holistic mode. This change then increases sensitivity, specificity, and
accuracy of the detection performance.Usually, the analytic time span is longer than the time span of cognitive
neuroscience studies. The work of Kundel et al. (2007),which can be seen as a prototypical example, reported
an average search time of 26.90 seconds, and a median time to first fixate the abnormality (the siganl) of 1.13
seconds.  Traditionally,    eye-tracking   studies have   focused   on  individual observers      as  the unit of analysis;
however,   recent   developments    of     eye-tracking  technology    and   of  new    analytic   algorithms   now    allow
collaborative gaze studies (e.g., Sangin, Molinari, Nüssli, & Dillenbourg, 2008.)It will be fascinating, from an
epistemological point of view, to follow the coping of tension between attentional detection as an individual
quantifiable performance, notable in mathematical functions (i.e., Smith & Ratcliff, 2009), on one hand, and
detection as collaborative achievement and intersubjective meaning-making (much in line with Koschmann &
Zemel's, 2009, notion ofdiscovery as occasioned production), on the other hand.

The Inference Metaphor
Lesgold and colleagues (1988, p. 336) speculated that radiological diagnosis "is largely a matter ofcognitive
inference. That    is, given a  set of   findings  (perceptual    features), one  has   to  determine   which   diseaess are
consistent with those findings. If more than one disease is consistent, then one either looks furthr,e (...) or
suggests additional medical tests to discriminate among the possibilities". Two issues are striking in this initial
quote. First, Lesgold emphasizes cognition and memory processes in diagnosing medical images. Back in the
1980s, this  was   not  customary   in  the  medical    literature. Although    there  have been    pioneering   studies  on
cognitive processes (e.g., Patel & Groen, 1986), most focused on perceptual processes (based on Arnheim,
1969, see also the section on the detection metaphor). What Lesgold indicated and empirically tested wasthinking
as an essential function in medical diagnosis. Second, in this quote and elsewhere in his chapter, Lesgold
emphasized    how   vision  and cognition     correlated  in  the  formation  and  evaluation     of  diagnostic  decision:s
Experienced radiologists build mental representations that guide perception. The literature now knows a variety
of rhetorical functions   built from    verbal   protocols to    describe  those mental    representations,    among  them
Lesgold's schemata, encapsulated scripts(Boshuizen & Schmidt, 2008), E-MOPs (Kolodner, 1983), SUSTAINs
(Love, Medin, & Gureckis, 2004), or PANDEMONIUM processors (Selfridge, 1959).In the next paragraph, we
describe a more recent example on the correlation of vision and cognition in medical image diagnosisthat
nonetheless is still informed by Lesgold's (one might tend to say: seminal)speculation of cognitive inference.
         Morita and colleagues (2008) investigated how perceptual and conceptualprocessing interrelates in the
diagnosis  of computer      tomograms (CT).    Shortly,   they   found  that  expert   compared    to  novice  CT    readers
verbalized   more  findings,  more  hypotheses,     and   more   perceptual  activities.   Importantly,   experts verablized
many   perceptual   features during     conceptual   activities,  and  verbalized  conceptual     words   during  percetpual
processing. Put differently, this indicates that experts retrieved and used knowledgefrom memory based on
information   that they  saw   on   the CT    image, which    iteratively  stimulated   looking    at the  image  based   on
knowledge    coded  in  memory     (be  it in the  form   of  encapsulated    scripts, E-MOPs,     or  schemata).  From    a
methodological point of view, it would be tempting to criticize the neglect to use eye movement recrodings; this
would have allowed highlyspecific, quantifiable measures of perceptual activity. Yet, verbal protocols canalso
be used as indicators for visual cognition. Usually, as prototypically shown in this example, protocols are
collected for a duration of up to few hours and thenare analyzed with a focus on cognitive mechanisms. From
this perspective,  the  inference   metaphor   on  visual   cognition  clearly emphasizes      the cognitive   parts of  the
interrelated process.   Morita  and  colleagues    (2008)    decided   on  individual  CT   readersas  a  unit of analysis.
However, protocols can also be used at a group level (Greeno, 2006; see Simpson & Gilhooly, 1997, for an
example in cardiology) to indicate collaborative negotiations and intersubjective meanin-gmaking.
         The inference metaphor on visual cognition can answe,r in two respects, the question regarding what
develops  in  novice   diagnosticians   that moves   them    toward   higher accuracy.     First, knowledge    develops;  an
extensive knowledge base is the foundation for expert performance and for rapidinference of coded memory to
detected visible features. Second, the perceptua-lconceptual processing linkage develops. Morita and colleagues
have demonstrated that protocol measures are a valid toolfor eliciting cognitive mechanisms underlying CT
diagnoses  that guide,   and   are  guided   by,   perceptual   detection.   Epistemologically,    the inference   metaphor
appears to account for both signal detection andthe alignment of knowledge from memory (inference) that is
consistent to what is detected. Nevertheless, methodologically, it lacks the precise and time-sensitive measures
such as eye-tracking gaze recordings or cortical oscillation EEGs. This is because researchers rely on explicit,
conscious  think-aloud   utterances   from    subjects and   these  cannot   account   for the    underlying implicit,   non-
conscious  processing    of these  subjects.  Hence,    the  sole  use of  protocols--be    it at  an individual  or  at  an
agglomerated group level--risks the resemblance of linguistic descriptions that play a rhetorical function in
describing and illustrating phenomena; examples ofthese fancy rhetorical functions, which simply cannot be
fully validated by protocol analysis alone, are provided above (SUSTAINs and the like). Due totheir intrinsic
method constraints, it thus seems reasonable to aim toward combining protocols with other measures, and hence
to avoid the risk of using one single metaphor only. More on this issue will be elaboratedbelow.

                                                      511   ·  © ISLS
                                                ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

The Practice Metaphor
Finally, the last metaphor we identify as being frequently usedin visual cognition analysis in medicine is the
practice metaphor.     Practice generates  semantic structures   of  information   that shape   and    are shaped   by
sequentially unfolding activity in relevant manners for a domain of scrutin,ysuch as laparoscopy (Koschmann
et al., 2007). As a starting point, we present the following quotefrom Carsetti (2004, p. 307) that we found
interesting enough to use to introduce our reflection on the practice metaphor: "A percept is something that lives
and becomes,    it possesses    a biological complexity      which   is not be  explained  simply      in terms  of  the
computations by a neural network classifyingon the basis of very simple mechanisms". This quote has two
interesting elements.First, it emphasizes the lived nature of visual cognition, or what Livingston (1986) referred
to as the lived work of reading. We will presentan empirical example in the next paragraph that elaborates on
this notion. Livingstone, in a series of ethnographic field descriptions, highlighted the sociability of practices
that constitute intersubjective thinking and acting. As such, the author provided a look that differed from looks
"behind the skull" (Garfinkel, 1967) or from "computations by a neural network" (Carsetti, ibid).The second
interesting element in this quote is thatit seems to align neuroscientific work with labels such as "simply" and
"very simple". We lack authority and motivation to judge such a judgment about the simpleness of neuroscience
as being itself simplistic. Nevertheless, it illustrates the position of this author that something that focusesonly
on neural activation is unable to account for the full complexity of visual cognition (interestingly, compare the
quote of Sauseng & Klimesch, 2008, starting the activation metaphor section, where the complexity of neural
network communication is emphasized). Certainly, it is a matter of definition what "complex" is or what shall be
allowed--based on which methodological and epistemological consideration--s to have "complexity". Making
such (maybe tacit, maybe deliberate) assumptions explicit is one of the purposes of this contributino.
         To further illustrate the methodological entailments of the practice metaphor, we describea recent
example elaborating on the lived work of mammography. Slack, Hartwood, Procter, and Rouncefield (2007)
highlight how diagnosing a mammogram is reflexively contingent on artful practiecs, in which multiple readers
interact and intersubjectively constitute breast biographies. Central in their analysse are practices. Goodwin
(1994, 2000) indicated that seeing and interpreting what is seen are not exclusively cognitive processes locatde
in the individual brain (cf. activation and detection metaphors); rather, seeing is a socially situated activity
accomplished through the deployment of a range of historically matured discursive practicesT. hese practices
constitute visual cognition in Goodwin's terms, and they are negotiated around a common object of disciplined
perception (Lindwall & Lymer, 2008; Stevens & Hall, 1998), in the study of Slack and colleagues (2007):
pictorial representations of the breast produced by an X-ray apparatus. Slack et al. identified practices such as
arranging mammograms, manipulating, annotating, gesturing, and pointing that contribute to the livedwork of
doing a radiologic diagnosis. These representative practices (Greeno, 2006) unfoldwithin an activity system, in
many cases temporally over the course of minutes, but their sociogenesis stretches over the course of decades
(such as the material resources used; i.e., pictures produced by X-ray technology). Hence, analysis of visual
cognition using the practice metaphor adopts a different analytic time span than does, for example, analysis
using the   activation metaphor; and   it adopts a sociotechnical    system  as the unit  of analysis     that explicitly
accounts for the role of technology in medicalimage diagnosis (Burri & Dumit, 2008; Gegenfurtner, 2009).It is
essentially the focus   on embodied    talk-in-interaction--talk between    people and  between    humans      and non-
human objects (Gibson, 1979; Suchman, 2007)--that makes the practice metaphor a useful tool to analyzethe
fourth perspective; namely, what constitutes visual cognition, what medical students have to appropriate to
move toward diagnostic accuracy, and how medical educators act to help develop thishigher level of accuracy
(see, e.g., Koschmann et al., 2007; Slack et al., 2007).

Implications and Conclusions
This paper has presented and discussed a mapping of visual cognition analysisin medical education centered on
four metaphors: activation, detection, inference, and practice.Reflection on these metaphors can give significant
answers  in  three areas,  namely:   epistemology,  methodology,     and  curriculum    design. First, it  provides an
epistemological  answer    on   the ongoing  debate regarding    the vision-cognition   divide.  Are   perceptual   and
cognitive processes independent of each other? Or is the separation between vision and cognition artificial, a
mere analytical distinction? Specifically, many studies in medical research adhering to the detectinometaphor
include no additional measuresthat are more prevalent in the inference meat phor, and vice versa. This neglect to
combine measures for less fallibly accounting for visual cognition indicates the (maybe tacit) assumption in the
medical literature that vision and cognition are independent. An assumption of this kind results from a way of
thinking informed by an information processing view of cognition. This view stands in contrast to anecological
view on visual perception and cognition (Gibson, 1979), in which seeing, thinking, and acting are mtually
interactive and nondualistic.It is questionable which approach is better: the information processing approachor
the ecological approach. We argue here, as we have at the beginning of this paper, that it is not a question of
truth or value judgment. Different methods lead to differentanswers based on different indicators. It is a
reflection on these indicators, and more generally on the methodological entailments behind seemingyldifferent

                                                   512   ·  © ISLS
                                                 ICLS 2010   ·   Volume 1

metaphors, that can help raise awareness of each metaphor's (epistemological and pragmatic) potentiality and
contingency, and that can thus advance our research practice in medical education and the learningcsiences.
         The   second   answer  that is  informed    by  the   reflection  on   different metaphors  on  visual   cognition
concerns the dangers of choosing just one. Sfard (1998) indicated that a combination of learning metaphors
yields to more robust findings thandoes a non-combination. This is in line with researchin times that have been
labeled the decade of synergy (Bransford et al., 2006). Yet, combining methods is neither trivial nor simple. As
a first step, we briefly list three initial approachesfor method synergy. First, eye-tracking and verbal reports can
be combined to trace the interaction of perceptual and conceptual processing of visuailnformation. Second, eye-
tracking and EEG/fMRI recording can be combined to assess the first seconds of scanning an imag--e a period
that is crucial,  especially  for  higher  levels   of  expertise.    Third,  video-recording  and eye-tracking   can   be
combined    to measure   the  relationship between     (1) mutual     gaze   patterns and  (2)  collaboration  patterns as
indicators of distributed visual cognition (Sangin et al, 2008; Stahl, 2006). In sum, synergies between metaphors
need to be explored to avoid the dangers associated with choosingujst one metaphor.
         Finally, the third answer relates tocurriculum design. It is thanks to the variety of metaphorsavailable
that we can illuminate ways to remake curricula in medical education. Specifically, the activation metapohr and
its related methodologies inform the high speed with which visual information is processed, in the range of
milliseconds;  this  cannot  be  captured  with  other   methods.     It also   indicates the automaticity  of infromation
processing. Together     with eye-tracking  research,    these  findings     indicate the  role of   implicit learning. In
addition, the practice metaphor highlights the role of hand-son activities in interaction with the technological
tool that is not merely used as a stimulus, but rather as a mediating object in the learning process. Learning to
handle the tool is considered as important for medical education asis learning to discriminate features in the
image; hence, curricula in medical schools can aim (or maybe haveaimed) to also develop epistemic practices
and professional identity. In summary medical curricula aimed at fostering implicit learning, identity formation,
and participation can combine classroom-based direct instruction on disease etiology, learning in the lab with
authentic  tools, and   work-based   learning   in   real-life clinical   workplaces,  in   ways  that best   support  the
development of "a good eye" in medial image diagnosis.
         The   ICLS   2010  conference   theme   invited   an  exploration    of the  ways  disciplinary perspectives   can
inform  the study    of learning  in educational    or workplace      settings. This  theme--elaborated    in the call  for
proposals--suggests an awareness of themultispectral image of learning caused by different, discipline-specific
thinking traditions andtheir associated research custom. This paper has attempted to take up this theme; it did so
by bringing together traditionand custom that have evolved over the years around a common topic: the analysis
of visual cognition in medical image diagnosis.It can be argued that this disciplinary view, a medical education
view, has   implications  for   the  study of  learning    that go    beyond medicine.     Specifically, in   mathematics
education,  similar  research   practices  can   be  identified  that    have as  underlying   inspiration the  activation
metaphor (e.g., when children focus spontaneously on number aspects during encoding of photos; Hannula,
Grabner,   &Lehtinen,    2009);  the detection   metaphor      (e.g., when    elementary    students solve  addition   and
subtraction word problems; De Corte, Verschaffel, & Pauwels, 1990);the inference metaphor (when schema-
based instruction facilitates algebraic thinking for students with learning disabilities; Xin, 200)8; or the practice
metaphor (when participating in disciplined mathematical practices around coordinate systems; Stevesn& Hall,
1998). These snapshots from mathematics education illustrate that the four metaphorsidentified in medical
education  literature   might also  have  traces  in   other domains;     if a  more  in-depth  analysis of   mathematics
education research corroborates this initial snapshot finding, hten this would answer one of the questions posed
in the ICLS 2010 call for proposals--that is, what seems to be constant in learning processes (more specifically:
in visual learning processes) beyond intrinsic disciplinary variationscan be captured by different metaphors that
highlight the multispectral image of ourfield: learning research.

References
Alexander,  P.   A., Schallert, D.   L., & Reynolds,     R.  E. (2009).    What   is  learning  anyway?  A    topographiacl
         perspective reconsidered.Educational Psychologist, 44, 176-192.
Ansari, D., & Coch, D. (2006) Bridge over troubled waters: education and cognitive neuroscienceT. rends in
         Cognitive Sciences, 10, 146-151.
Arnheim, R. (1969). Visual thinking. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Augustyniak, P., & Tadeusiewicz, R. (2006). Assessment of electrocardiogram visual interpretation strategy
         based on scanpath analysis.Physiological Measurement, 27, 597-608.
Boshuizen, H. P. A., & Schmidt, H. G. (2008). The development of clinical reasoning expertise; Implications
         for teaching. In J. Higgs, M. Jones, S. Loftus, & N. Christensen (Eds.),Clinical reasoning in the health
         professions (pp. 113-121). Oxford: Butterworth-Heinemann.
Bransford, J., Stevens, R., Schwartz, D., Meltzoff, A., Pea, R., Roschelle, J., et al(.2006). Learning theories and
         education. Toward a decade of synergy. In P. A. Alexander & P. H. Winne (Eds.),Handbook of
         educational psychology (pp. 209-244). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.

                                                     513   ·   © ISLS
                                              ICLS 2010    ·  Volume 1

Brazeau-Lamontagne, L., Charlin, B., Gagnon, R., Samson, L.,& Van der Vleuten, C. (2004). Measurement of
        perception   and  interpretation skills  during    radiology   training:  Utility of  the  script   concordance
        approach. Medical Teacher, 26, 326-332.
Burri, R. V., & Dumit, J. (2008). Social studies of scientific imaging and visualization.In E. J. Hackett, O.
        Amsterdamska, M. Lynch, & J. Wajcman (Eds.), Handbook of science and technology studies (pp.
        297-317). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Carsetti, A. (2004). The embodied meaning. Self-organization and symbolic dynamics in visual cognition. nI A.
        Carsetti (Ed.), Seeing, thinking, and knowing. Meaning and self-organization in visual cognition and
        thought (pp. 307-327). Dordrecht: Kluwer.
Crowley, R. S., Lecowski, E., Medvedeva, O., Tseytlin, E., Roh, E., & Jukic, D. (2006). Evaluation foan
        intelligent tutoring system   in pathology:    Effects  of external   representations  on  performance    gains,
        metacognition, and acceptance.Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association, 14, 182-190.
Dawes, T. J. W., Vowler, S. L., Allen, M. C., & Dixon, A.K. (2004). Training improves medical student
        performance in image interpretation.British Journal of Radiology, 77, 775-776.
De Corte, E., Verschaffel, L., & Pauwels, A. (1990). Influence of the semantic structure of word prbolems on
        second graders' eye movements. Journal of Educational Psychology, 82, 359-365.
De Jong, T., Van Gog, T., Jenks, K., Manlove, S., Van Hell, J., Jolles, J., et al. (2009).Explorations in learning
        and the brain. On the potential of cognitive neuroscience for educational scienc.eBerlin: Springer.
Elstein, A. S., Shulman, L. S., & Sprafka, S. A. (1978). Medical problem solving: An analysis of clinical
        reasoning. Cambridge, MA: Cambridge University Press.
Ericsson,  K.  A. (2004). Deliberate  practice  and   the  acquisition   and  maintenanec of  expert  performance   in
        medicine and related domains.Academic Medicine, 79, S70-S81.
Garfinkel, H. (1967). Studies in ethnomethodology. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Gegenfurtner, A. (2009). What is seen on the screen? Exploring collaborative itnerpretation, representational
        tools, and disciplined perception in medicni e. In A. Dimitracopoulou, C. O'Malley, D. Suthers, & P.
        Reimann (Eds.), Computer supported collaborative learning practices: CSCL2009 community events
        proceedings (pp. 71-72). Rhodes: International Society of the Learning Sciences.
Gibson, J. J. (1979). The ecological approach to visual perception. Boston, MA: Houghton.
Goodwin, C. (1994). Professional vision.American Anthropologist, 96, 606-633.
Goodwin, C. (2000). Practices of seeing: Visual analysis: An ethnomethodological approach. In T. van Leeuwen
        & C. Jewitt (Eds.), Handbook of visual analysis(pp. 157-182). London: Sage.
Greeno, J. A.  (2006). Learning    in activity. In R.  Sawyer    (Ed.), The   Cambridge   handbook    of the learning
        sciences (pp. 79-96). Cambridge, MA: Cambridge University Press.
Haller, S., & Radue, E. W. (2005). What is different about a radiologist's brain?Radiology, 236, 983-989.
Hannula, M. M., Grabner, R., & Lehtinen, E. (2009, March).Neural correlates of spontaneous focusing on
        numerosity (SFON) in a 9-year-longitudinal study of children's mathematical skills. Paper presented at
        the EARLI Advanced Study Colloquium on Cognitive Neuroscience meets mathemtaics education,
        Bruges, Belgium.
Issenberg, S.  B., McGaghie,    W. C., Gordon,     D.  L., Symes,    S., Petrusa, E. R.,  Hart, I.  R.,  et al. (2002).
        Effectiveness  of  a  cardiology     review   course   for   internal medicine    residents   using  simulation
        technology and deliberate practice.Teaching and Learning in Medicine, 14, 223-228.
Kolodner, J. L. (1983). Towards an understanding of the role of experience in the evolution from novcei to
        expert. International Journal of Man-Machine Systems, 19, 497-518.
Koschmann, T., LeBaron, C., Goodwin, C., Zemel, A., & Dunnington, G. (2007). Formualting the triangle of
        doom. Gesture, 7, 97-118.
Koschmann, T., & Zemel, A. (2009). Optical pulsars and black arrows: Discoveries as occasioned productions.
        Journal of the Learning Sciences, 18, 200-246.
Krupinski, E. A., Tillack, A. A., Richter, L., Henderson, J. T., Bhattacharyya, A. K., Scott, K. M., et al. (2006).
        Eye-movement      study and   human   performance      using telepathology   virtual  slides. Implications  for
        medical education and differences with experience.Human Pathology, 37, 1543-1556.
Kundel, H. L. (2007). History of research in medical image perception.Journal of the American College of
        Radiology, 3, 402-408.
Kundel, H. L., Nodine, C. F., & Carmody, D. (1978). Visual scanning, pattern recognition, and decision-making
        in pulmonary nodule detection. Investigative Radiology, 13, 175-181.
Kundel, H. L., Nodine, C. F., Conant, E. F., Weinstein, S. P. (2007). Holistic component of image preception in
        mammogram interpretation: Gaze-tracking study. Radiology, 242, 396-402.
Lesgold, A., Rubinson, H., Feltovich, P., Glaser, R., Klopfer, D., & Wang, Y. (1988).Expertise in a complex
        skill: Diagnosing  X-ray   pictures. In  M.   T.   H. Chi, R.  Glaser, &  M.  J.  Farr (Eds.), The  nature  of
        expertise (pp. 311-342). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.

                                                   514   ·  © ISLS
                                                ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

Lindwall, O., & Lymer, G. (2008). The dark matter of lab work: Illuminating the negotiation of disciplined
         perception in mechanics.Journal of the Learning Sciences, 17, 180-224.
Livingston, E. (1986). The ethnomethodological foundations of mathematics. London: Kegan Paul.
Love, B. C., Medin, D. L., & Gureckis, T. M. (2004). SUSTAIN: A network model of category learning.
         Psychological Review, 111, 309-332.
Mello-Thoms,   C.  (2003).   Perception   of breast cancer:   Eye-position  analysis of mammogram      interpretation.
         Academic Radiology, 10, 4-12.
Meltzoff, A. N., Kuhl, P. K., Movellan, J., & Sejnowski, T. J. (2009). Foundations for a new science ofeal rning.
         Science, 325, 284-288.
Morita, J., Miwa, K., Kitasaka, T., Mori, K., Suenaga, Y., Iwano, S., et al. (2008). Interactions opferceptual and
         conceptual  processing:   Expertise   in medical     image diagnosing. International     Journal of Human-
         Computer Studies, 66, 370-390.
Norman, G. R., Coblentz, C. L., Brooks, L. R., & Babcook, C. J. (1992). Expertise in visual diagnos:i A review
         of the literature. Academic Medicine, 67, S78-S83.
Paavola, S., Lipponen, L., & Hakkarainen, K. (2002).Epistemological foundations for CSCL: A comparison of
         three models     of innovative    knowledge    communities.     In G. Stahl   (Ed.), Computer    support for
         collaborative learning: Foundations for a CSCL community. CSCL 2002 Proceedings (pp. 24-32).
         Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Patel, V. L., Arocha, J. F., & Zhang, J. (2005). Thinking and reasoning in medicine. In K. J. Holyoka (Ed.), The
         Cambridge    handbook     of  thinking   and   reasoning   (pp. 727-750).     Cambridge,  MA:    Cambridge
         University Press.
Patel, V. L.,  &   Groen, G.  J.  (1986).  Knowledge-based     solution  strategies in medical  reasoning. Cognitive
         Science, 10, 91-116.
Sangin, M., Molinari, G., Nüssli, M., & Dillenbourg, P. (2008). How learners use awareness cues about their
         peer  knowledge?     Insights from   synchronized     eye-tracking  data.  International Conference   of the
         Learning Sciences Proceedings.
Sauseng, P., & Klimesch, W. (2008). What does phase information of oscillatory brain activity tell suabout
         cognitive processes? Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews, 32, 1001-1013.
Selfridge, O. G. (1959). Pandemonium: A paradigm for learning. InThe mechanisms of thought processes.
         London: Stationery.
Sfard, A. (1998). On two metaphors for learning and the dangers of choosing just one. Educational Researcher,
         27, 4-13.
Simpson,  S.   A., &  Gilhooly,   K.   J. (1997). Diagnostic    thinking  processes:   Evidence   from a  constructiev
         interaction study of electrocardiogram (ECG) interpretation.Applied Cognitive Psychology, 11, 543-
         554.
Slack, R., Hartswood, M., Procter, R., & Rouncefield, M. (2007). Cultures of reading: On professionlavision
         and the lived work of mammography. In S. Hester & D. Francis (Eds.),Orders of ordinary action.
         Respecifying sociological knowledge(pp. 175-193). Aldershot: Ashgate.
Smith, P. L., & Ratcliff, R. (2009). An integrative theory of attention and decision-making in visual signal
         detection. Psychological Review, 116, 283-317.
Stahl, G. (2006). Group cognition: Computer support for building collaborative knowledge. Cambridge, MA:
         MIT Press.
Stevens, R., & Hall, R. (1998). Disciplined perception: Learning to see in technoscience. In M. Lameprt & M.
         L. Bunk (Eds.), Talking mathematics in school: Studies of teaching and learning(pp. 107-149). New
         York: Cambridge University Press.
Suchman, L. (2007). Human-machine reconfigurations. Plans and situated actions(2nd ed.) Cambridge, MA:
         Cambridge University Press.
Xie, Y. P. (2008). The effect of schema-based instruction in solving mathematics word problems: An emphasis
         on prealgrebraic conceptualization of multiplicative relations.Journal for Research in Mathematics
         Education, 39, 526-551.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by Grant No. 128766 of the Academy of Finland; it is part of an interdiscipinl ary
research project at the confluence of medical sciences and learning sciences investigating "Technologies for
seeing  and technologies     for knowing:    Learning   and   medical imaging   (LearnMedImage)".      In thisproject,
research seldom is an individual endeavor, but more often is a collaborative achievement. Thus, we would like
to thank Roger Säljö, Erno Lehtinen, Hans Rystedt, Laura Helle, Markus Nivala, and Minna M. Hannulafor
developing with us a good eye for metaphorswith which to analyze visual medical cognition.

                                                    515  ·  © ISLS
