                                                ICLS 2010    ·   Volume 1

                                      Delinquent or criminal?
       Fostering conceptual understanding of technical terms in
                     computer-mediated collaborative learning
     Elisabeth Paus, University of Muenster, Fliednerstraße 21, 48149 Muenster, e.paus@uni-muenster.de
Gisela M. Gerhards, University of Frankfurt, Senckenberganlage 15, 60054 Frankfurt, giselagerhards@web.de
       Regina Jucks, University of Muenster, Fliednerstraße 21, 48149 Muenster, jucks@uni-muenster.de

         Abstract:   To   ensure  a   complex   understanding     of   the  topics  addressed   in  collaborative
         learning   scenarios, learners  have   to develop     a conceptual   understanding      of the  relevant
         specialist vocabulary.    To  this  end,  they  have    to  exchange    and  discuss   their individual
         knowledge,   which    is usually   gained  through    individual   exploration   of different   learning
         materials. Based on the psycholinguistic concept of lexical alignment, the following study
         analyzes whether providing learners with different technical terms in their respective learning
         materials has a positive impact on information exchange, term understanding, and learning.
         Results showed that dyads whose materials contained different terminology exchanged more
         information  and   performed    better in  a  subsequent    knowledge     test than did    dyads whose
         materials contained the same terminology. The inclusion of illustrations containing different
         terminology  enhanced     these  effects. Implications   for   the selection   and  design   of learning
         materials as well as perspectives for further research are discussed.

Introduction
         In general, language serves as a main tool by which thoughts, needs, attitudes, etc., are expressed. The
main challenge in all verbal and written interactions is to achieve mutual understanding. This holds both for
everyday situations, such as referring to a person or a thing when telling a story, and for more formal situations,
such as referring to the conceptual knowledge that is usually encoded in specialist vocabulary in peer-to-peer
learning situations (Bromme, Rambow, & Nückles, 2001). Focusing on the second scenario, let us imagine a
typical situation in the life of university students: Peter writes Linda a message to coordinate the content of a
presentation they are preparing for a course dealing with Freudian theory. He writes: "... and suppression is
another important defense mechanism we should mention!" Linda answers: "I agree. I'll add suppression to the
defense mechanisms." They probably both know the terms "suppression" and "defense mechanism" because
they have read various texts to prepare for this exchange and the subsequent presentation. From the perspective
of classic communication psychology, this discourse sequence clearly seems to be successful. Peter introduces
two central terms and Linda signals understanding by using the terms without asking for clarification of their
meaning or showing any other signs of mis- or non-understanding.
         Following Clark and colleagues, the process by which interlocutors try to establish that messages have
been received and understood is called grounding (Clark & Brennan, 1991). Grounding is an ongoing process
during communication that serves to determine, to update, and to expand the so-called common ground (e.g.,
Clark, 1992; Clark   &    Marshall,   1981), that  is, the  assumed    shared    knowledge   that  provides the   basis for
communication. The common ground is inferred on the basis of different types of evidence; Clark and Marshall
(1981) described    three heuristics  that people   use  to  estimate   what  an   interlocutor  knows.   Because  in   our
example Peter and Linda communicate in written form and thus cannot rely on verbal or visual signs of mutual
understanding (Monk, 2003), their assumptions about their shared knowledge are based mainly on word use
(linguistic co-presence heuristic). In ongoing communication, newly introduced terms are usually repeated; they
"become part of a `discourse record' that is a subset of interlocutors' common ground" (Barr & Keysar, 2006, p.
6). The use of the same vocabulary is called lexical alignment (Pickering & Garrod, 2005) and takes place in
both spoken (Barr & Keysar, 2002) and written communication (Bromme, Jucks, & Wagner, 2005). According
to Clark and Marshall     (1981),  it is reasonable    and   efficient to  stick to the  lexical  decisions made   by   the
interlocutor in order to express one's own intended meaning. Interlocutors thus "minimize their collaborative
effort--the work that both do from the initiation of each contribution to its mutual acceptance" (principle of
least collaborative effort, Clark & Brennan, 1991, p. 135). Lexical alignment has also been demonstrated for
technical terms in technical communication (Bromme et al., 2005; Jucks, Becker, & Bromme, 2008) such as that
engaged in by Peter and Linda in our example. However, in the context of technical terms ­ as opposed to
everyday terms ­ the difficulty arises that a term's connotations and complexity have to be transmitted within
the choice of words and that an important part of the exchange concerns the underlying concepts. For example,
whereas interlocutors in everyday communication may have different concepts of the meaning underlying the
term "man," this is not relevant for successful communication ("The man is standing on the street."). In contrast,
when interlocutors refer to the meanings underlying technical terms, as in our example, lexical alignment can
conceal different meanings of a term that are relevant for discourse. Thus, where the deep understanding of the

                                                     516   ·  © ISLS
                                                ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

meaning   underlying   a  term is concerned    (and not   simply  the   reference   to an object   in the  world),  lexical
alignment may obscure the fact that the interlocutors have different conceptualizations of a term.
         It has already been demonstrated that interlocutors' comprehension of the meaning of a technical term
may  be   differently  elaborated   (Bromme    et   al.,  2001).  In    particular, research    on   expert  ­    layperson
communication    has  shown    that the underlying   meaning    of    a technical   term  and  the interlocutors'   mental
representation  may   differ (Jucks  &   Bromme,    2007).    Whereas     experts  are  usually aware    of  the  complex
knowledge encapsulated by technical terms (Schmidt & Boshuizen, 1992), laypersons' understanding of their
meaning is often rather vague or even erroneous (Gittelman, Mahabee-Gittens, & Gonzalez-del-Ray, 2004).
When interlocutors use the same words, differences in their knowledge of the underlying concepts are very
difficult to detect. In general, it is difficult for people to distinguish between their own and their partner's
knowledge of a particular subject, as has been demonstrated experimentally by Keysar (1994). In the same vein,
Nickerson (1999) has shown that people tend to impute their own knowledge to others and only gradually
become aware of others' knowledge states. Gauging others' conceptual knowledge about technical terms poses
an additional difficulty: Because the underlying meaning is usually rather complex and the context of definition
may vary (Paus & Jucks, 2009), it is very difficult for interlocutors to define an explicit criterion for knowing
"enough" about a term.
         Let us now return to our example: Peter introduces the words "suppression" and "defence mechanism."
Linda absorbs these words without showing any signs of mis- or non-understanding ­ lexical alignment occurs.
However, the assumption of shared knowledge, or common ground, may be mistaken, because Peter and Linda
do not necessarily share the same knowledge of the underlying conceptual meanings. Consequently, using the
same words can lead to particularly ineffective communication: Interlocutors communicate based on an illusion
of common ground that prevents them from exchanging their knowledge explicitly and thereby developing a
differentiated understanding of the concepts underlying the specialist terms. Lexical alignment of technical
terms can thus be expected have certain costs in the area of learning and understanding. Indeed, Paus and Jucks
(2008) have shown that the use of the same lexical encoding may--tacitly--be taken as an indicator of common
ground   in computer-mediated     peer-to-peer learning     settings. In  an  experimental    study,  university  students
working   on  a  cooperative   learning task  gained   more   individual     knowledge    and  showed    more  elaborated
discourse   patterns when  the  two  participants   in a  learner  dyad    were   provided   with  different terminology
describing the same technical concept. These findings can be interpreted as follows: If linguistic co-presence is
interrupted because the learning partners lack a joint vocabulary, their attention is explicitly drawn to their own
and their partner's understanding of the terms. Not having the same words available allows them to assume less
overlap in knowledge (Wu & Keysar, 2008). To increase their shared knowledge, they discuss the meaning of
the terms.  Individual    knowledge   about  the underlying    conceptual     meaning     is therefore   exchanged   more
explicitly, thus fostering the development of a differentiated understanding of the meaning of technical terms as
well as a better understanding of the topic in general. To conclude, learners' attention has to be focused on their
understanding of technical terms.
         Research    has  already shown   that scientific   illustrations  in text  materials  attract   readers' attention
(Jucks, Bromme, & Runde, 2007) and "... exert a specific impact on the form and content of replies" (pp. 213-
214). Providing learners with content-specific visualization tools is also known to have a positive effect on both
communication and problem solving (Fischer, Bruhn, Gräsel, & Mandl, 2002). Nevertheless, the use of a term
unfamiliar to the learning partner may initially cause confusion (Wu & Keysar, 2008). Although this confusion
should prompt the more explicit elaboration of the meaning of specialist terms, interlocutors may not be aware
of the resulting knowledge gain and instead feel a higher level of uncertainty.
         Based   on  these considerations,   our hypotheses    for    the present   research  were    as follows:  (1) We
expected learning partners who were provided with different terms encoding the same underlying concepts to
exchange    more information   and  to  gain a better  understanding      of  the terms  and  the  learning  content   than
learning partners who     were provided  with  the  same    terms.    (2) Additionally,   because  learners'  attention is
attracted to the information provided in illustrations, we expected the predicted effects to be increased by the
inclusion of illustrations in which the main concepts were also encoded by different technical terms. (3) Finally,
we examined the effect of different terminology on learners' feelings of uncertainty. We expected learning
partners provided    with different technical  terms   to feel more     uncertainty  about   their own    knowledge    than
learning partners provided with the same terms.

Method
Participants and Design
         Participants were 72 undergraduate psychology students (47 female, 25 male) at the University of
Frankfurt. Mean age was 24.37 years (SD = 4.63). All participants were German native speakers. They were
assigned to 36 learning dyads and randomly assigned to three conditions: texts with the same terminology, texts
with different terminology, texts with an illustration and different terminology. Participation was voluntary and
rewarded with 7 euro. Learning outcomes were assessed for each participant individually (sample size: 72

                                                    517   ·  © ISLS
                                                 ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

participants, with 24 in each condition); the communication process was analyzed within dyads (sample size: 36
dyads, with 12 in each condition).

Procedure
         Two students participated in each trial. They were tested individually in separate rooms and were
assigned  gender-neutral pseudo-email      addresses   to  prevent them   from  making   any  assumptions   about   each
other. Note that we decided on email rather than chat as the communication medium due to practical aspects of
data collection.  Each  room    was equipped    with   the necessary  technology   and  an   experimenter   was present
throughout. Access to external Internet sites was blocked to prevent participants from using information sources
other than the texts provided. First, it was ensured that the participants' computer skills met the demands of the
experiment. The partners in each dyad were then given different texts to read and understand with no time limit.
They were then set a collaborative task, to be discussed and completed with their partner at their own pace via e-
mail. To ensure that the learning scenario was as realistic as possible, no further instructions were given on the
procedure and/or the collaboration process (e.g., length, structure, etc.). After the collaborative task, the learning
materials were   removed     to ensure independent     knowledge     generation in the  knowledge    tests. Participants
provided with an illustration were asked to rate the perceived importance of the illustration for solving the
collaborative task. Moreover, all participants were asked to rate their feeling of uncertainty with regard to their
knowledge of the topic covered. Afterwards, they were administered a knowledge posttest comprising a cloze
task (Taylor, 1957) and a multiple-choice test. Finally, demographic data including the frequency of computer
usage were obtained.

Materials
Learning texts
         The learning texts were original extracts from two child psychiatry textbooks (Herpertz-Dahlmann,
2005; Schmeck, 2004). Both extracts dealt with the development of a social behavior disorder; each was around
500 words long. Except for some abridgements to ensure that the two texts had the same length and format, no
modifications  were  made.      Although  both   texts addressed     the same   topic, there  were  differences  in  the
description of   theoretical models    and   in the detail   of the  information   presented.  Both  texts  covered  all
information assessed in the knowledge posttest.

Manipulation of the learning material
We first drew up a list of terminology specific to the topics covered. Fifteen key concepts were identified. Some
of the terminology used to designate the same underlying concept in the original texts differed (e.g., prevalence
vs. frequency); some of it was the same (e.g., monozygotic). In cases where the terminology was the same in
both texts, we   looked for  synonyms     in a  dictionary   of foreign  words  (Wermke,     Klosa, Kunkel-Razum,     &
Scholze-Stubenrecht, 2001). Each term was matched with a synonym that had the same meaning in the present
context. Two different versions of the text material were then constructed by manipulating the usage of the 15
key concepts. In the different terminology condition, the 15 key concepts were used in one encoding (e.g.,
prevalence) in one text and in the other encoding (frequency) in the other text. In the control condition, the same
terminology (prevalence) was used in both texts. When matching the words, we sought to maintain a balance
across the  texts in the use    of  terms  stemming    from    Latin or  Greek  and    terms with  German    roots. The
illustrations were both taken from the respective textbooks. They contained 5 vs. 6 of the 15 manipulated terms
as well as further terms relating to the development of a social disorder. The terms in the illustration were
adapted to the terminology used in the respective version of the text.

Collaborative task
         We set participants two questions to be worked on collaboratively. The questions were designed to
support the integration of factual knowledge on the topic at hand as well as the production of inferences during
the learning process. To answer the first question, they had to refer to the case study of a 13-year-old boy with
behavioral problems. They were asked to list all factors that might have influenced his behavior. The second
question concerned the prevalence of social behavioral disorders in boys and girls. Learning partners had to
exchange the information contained in their individual texts in order to succeed in the collaborative task.

Dependent Measures
         Three sets of outcome measures were considered: information exchange, individual knowledge gain,
and subjective measures.

Information exchange
         Three measures were used to assess information exchange within the dyads:

                                                     518   ·  © ISLS
                                                 ICLS 2010    ·  Volume 1

         Communication. To assess information pooling during communication, we determined the number of
questions   asked  and  the number   of  explanations   given    within   each  dyad. We   restricted  the assessment    to
questions and explanations relating to the relevant terminology. Participants' questions and explanations were
transcribed   and analyzed   (by  a second  rater)  according      to predefined criteria. Interrater  reliability  for  the
numbers of questions asked (K = 1.0, p < .001) and the number of explanations given (K = 1.0, p < .001) was
satisfactory.
         Knowledge exchange items. The multiple-choice test included questions tapping knowledge of contents
that were included in only one version of the text (six questions for each text). These items were intended to
measure information pooling between the learning partners, regardless of the usage of technical terms. Learning
partners  could   answer    these items  correctly   only     if   they had   exchanged    their individual   knowledge.
Additionally, for the two conditions in which learners were provided with different terms, we counted the
number of technical terms from the partner's learning material that were used in a cloze procedure to determine
how many of these terms had been absorbed from the partner.

Individual learning outcomes
         Individual knowledge gain was measured by the following indicators:
         Multiple choice test: General understanding of the contents covered was assessed by a multiple-choice
test with 28 tasks, each with four response alternatives. All distractors were chosen such that an uninformed
participant perceived them as being correct with the same probability (Bortz & Döring, 1995). One point was
given for each correct answer, and one point was subtracted for each incorrect answer. Hence, the maximum
number of attainable points was 28.
         Cloze  procedure.   We   developed    a cloze   test   requiring participants  to fill  in words  that had  been
removed from a text to determine whether they could reproduce the topic-relevant terminology in a continuous
text, thus  demonstrating    an understanding    of the  underlying     concepts  (Taylor,  1957).   A  rational   deletion
procedure was used to identify the 10 words that were omitted; only content words (subjects, objects, adjectives,
and   verbs)  were removed      (Kobayashi, 2002).   Eight      of the  omitted  words  were     drawn  from  the   list of
manipulated terminology. We were thus able to test the participants' understanding of the terms. The remaining
two items tested the main topics covered in the two texts. Participants were given one point for each gap filled
correctly. Thus, the maximum number of attainable points was 10.

Subjective ratings
         Relevance of illustration. Participants were asked to rate the perceived relevance of the illustration on a
5-point scale ranging from not true to true.
         Feeling of uncertainty. Likewise, participants were asked to rate their perceived uncertainty on a 5-
point scale from not true to true to determine whether the provision of different terminology influenced their
feeling of uncertainty.

Results
         In this section, we report the effects on the three sets of outcome measures. Unless otherwise indicated,
analyses were performed using SPSS 17. Participants in the three conditions did not differ in frequency of
computer usage, F(2,69) = 0.92, p = .402, frequency of internet usage, F(2,69) = 0.14, p = .873, or subjective
self-ratings, F(2,69) = 0.64, p. = .53.

Information Exchange
         Communication. The length of communications was M = 587.36 words (SD = 215.37); there was no
effect of condition, F(2,33) = 3.10, p > 0.05, ns. MANOVAs with the number of questions/explanations relating
to the manipulated vocabulary as dependent variables revealed a main effect of condition, F(4,66) = 2.79, p <
0.05, !p2 = .15. However, a univariate analysis revealed no differences in the number of questions across the
three conditions, F(2,33) = .88, p > 0.05, ns. In contrast, a univariate analysis of the number of explanations
revealed  a  main  effect of condition,  F(2,33)  =  6.67,  p    < 0.05,  !p2 = .15, with  participants in the  different-
terminology with illustration condition giving more explanations (M = 5.92, SD = 3.0) than participants in the
different-terminology   without   illustration condition    (M     =  3.92, SD  =  3.2) or  participants   in   the same-
terminology condition (M = 1.67, SD = 2.27). Most explanations related to the terms "prevalence," "frequency,"
"social pressures," "age group," "adolescence," "psycho-social risk factors," and "genetic."
         Knowledge exchange items. An ANOVA revealed an effect of condition on the number of correctly
solved multiple-choice items designed to measure information exchange, F(2,69) =11.17, p < 0.001, !p2 = .25. A
post hoc test (S-N-K) showed that the same-terminology group differed from the different-terminology group
with illustration (p < 0.05) and from the different-terminology group without illustration (p < 0.05), whereas no
difference was found between these two groups (p > 0.05, ns).

                                                     519  ·   © ISLS
                                              ICLS 2010    ·  Volume 1

        In the cloze task, participants in the different-terminology condition used M = 0.75 (SD = 0.98) terms
from their partner's learning material to fill the gaps and M = 3.25 (SD = 1.90) terms from their own material.
However, the difference between groups in term usage was not significant, t(46) = -.29, p > 0.05, ns.

                                Figure 1. Mean number of questions asked
                             and explanations given in the communication process

Individual Learning Outcomes
        To examine the effects of condition on students' learning performance, we conducted a MANOVA on
the number of points attained in the multiple-choice test and in the cloze test. Pillai's trace showed an effect of
condition, F(4,138) =6.65, p < 0.001, !p2 = .16.
        Multiple-choice test. On average, participants scored 14.46 (SD = 7.61) of the available 28 points.
Univariate analysis revealed a main effect of condition on points attained in the multiple-choice test, F(2,69) =
12.8, p < 0.001, !p2 = .27. A post hoc test (S-N-K) revealed that the same-terminology group differed from both
different-terminology groups (p < 0.05). Moreover, the two different-terminology groups differed from each
other (p < 0.05).
        Cloze test. On average, participants correctly filled in 5.46 (SD = 2.53) of the 10 gaps. An ANOVA
showed a main effect of condition, F(2,69) = 10.53, p < 0.001, !p2 = .23. A post hoc test (S-N-K) revealed that
the same-terminology   group differed from both     different-terminology   conditions (p < 0.05). However,  no
difference was found between the different-terminology conditions with and without illustration (p > 0.05, ns).

                        Figure 2. Mean scores in the cloze test and multiple-choice test

Subjective Ratings
        Relevance of illustration. On average, the illustration was rated as being rather helpful (M = 3.46, SD =
1.41). To test how this perception related to objective learning outcomes, we correlated the subjective rating of
the illustration's relevance for learning with the objective learning outcome in the multiple-choice test. The
correlation was not significant, K = .251, p > 0.05, ns.
        Feeling of uncertainty. Participants reported little uncertainty about their knowledge (M = 1.71, SD =
0.86). An ANOVA revealed no difference between the three groups, F(2, 69) = 0.39, p > 0.05, ns.

                                                  520    ·  © ISLS
                                                 ICLS 2010  ·    Volume 1

Discussion
           These     results emphasize  the   pivotal role  played    by  technical  terms   in the   development   of   a
conceptual   understanding    of   learning contents.   We  hypothesized     that   presenting  learners with   materials
containing different lexical encodings of the same concept would initiate more reflection on their own and their
partner's knowledge. We therefore expected learners to realize that their knowledge differed from that of their
partner, which would prompt them to exchange knowledge and to elaborate the meaning of the technical terms
in more   depth.  In the   following, we    discuss our  findings  with   regard  to information   exchange,   individual
learning outcomes, and additional subjective self-ratings.

Information Exchange
           In  accordance     with  our  hypothesis,    learners  in  the  different-terminology      condition with    an
illustration made more explanatory statements about this terminology than did learners in the same-terminology
condition. Taking into account that our experimental manipulation was limited to the lexical encoding of 15 key
concepts, we interpret these results as evidence for the role of word choices in learning situations. The findings
indicate that exposure to different terminology prompts learners to communicate in a more productive way,
exchanging information about the underlying meaning of the terms. We attribute this difference to the use of
different terms   in their   communication    on the collaborative   task  making    participants  being more   aware   of
potential problems of understanding. In particular, the results highlight the specific role of illustrations for
information exchange in the given learning setting. As hypothesized, illustrations strongly focused the learners'
attention on their own learning material, making them more aware of differences in the terminology used. To
establish a common ground, they provided an explanation for the terms they used. In contrast, the explicit
exchange of information did not seem necessary for dyads in the same-terminology condition, who assumed
their partners to have similar understanding of the term as themselves (knowledge effect; Bromme et al., 2001).
           Moreover, learners who exchanged more information were more familiar with the contents of their
partner's learning material: Participants in the different-terminology conditions were better able to solve the
multiple-choice items designed to measure information exchange. However, the same did not apply to recall of
technical terms: In the cloze task, participants clearly reverted to the technical terms used in their own material.
Hence, whereas increased information exchange led to more knowledge about non-shared contents, learners
stuck to their own material on the lexical level.

Individual Learning Outcomes
           We examined learners' individual learning outcomes in terms of their conceptual understanding of
the topic and their understanding of the technical terms used. Performance on the multiple-choice test differed
across all three groups, with participants in the different-terminology with illustration condition achieving the
highest scores. These findings support our hypothesis that elaboration of learning content can be improved by
placing different  vocabulary    in cooperative   learning  texts  and  that this   effect can  be further  enhanced    by
including an illustration. Besides focusing learners' attention on the technical terms used, illustrations also help
them to   better understand    the  relations between   the concepts   (Larkin   &   Simon,  1987).   In the cloze  task,
participants  in  the  different-terminology     conditions   outperformed    participants   in   the same-terminology
condition. However, provision of an illustration had no additional influence here. In conclusion, it seems that
inclusion of an illustration using different terminology to encode the same concepts has a positive effect on the
development    of a  differentiated   understanding   of learning  contents,   but   does  not  particularly affect term
understanding.
           Participants  also  reported that   the  illustration helped   them   to  understand   the learning  contents.
However, this perception was not systematically related to objective learning outcomes.

Limitations and Future Perspectives
           In contrast to our hypothesis, participants' subjective ratings of uncertainty did not differ across
conditions: Participants in all conditions reported little uncertainty about their knowledge. It is likely that the
meaning of most of the manipulated terms could simply be deduced from the context. This interpretation is
supported by the finding that the number of questions asked to clarify the underlying meaning of terms did not
differ across conditions either. Participants only explicitly queried the meaning of very specific terms that are
not used in everyday language. It seems that communication partners exchanged knowledge not because they
were unable to understand each other, but because the different terminology used in the learning materials
signaled different knowledge and thus led to perspective taking. Participants realized that their knowledge was
not necessarily the same and thus started to explain their individual understanding of the term. It seems likely
that this spontaneous provision of explanations directly reduced uncertainty and, in turn, the need to request
more  details. It remains    an  open  question  whether    the  lack of  questions   formulated   can   be  attributed to
characteristics of the terms or to the fact that the meaning was already clarified. Paus & Jucks (2009) have
shown that learners' perceived understanding is affected by the origin of terms (e.g., Greek, Latin, Germanic).

                                                     521  ·  © ISLS
                                                 ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

In Germany, terms with Germanic roots are more easily accessible, perceived to be more familiar, and better
understood. To address this question, the characteristics of the terms used in collaborative learning situations
could be varied more systematically in future research. Individual factors, such as the degree of expertise in the
field (see  Gittelman  et  al., 2004;  Schmidt &   Boshuizen,     1992) or  foreign  language skills, may  also affect
perceived   understanding  of   terms. Additionally,  the   correspondence   between  subjective  assessments   of the
cooperation process and the perceived difficulty of the learning materials warrants analysis. It is important to
find out whether and how learners perceive themselves to learn in collaborative learning environments and to
identify how much pressure they face in coming to a mutual understanding. Future research should thus assess
the mental processes underlying the learners' behavior; for instance, in retrospective analyses. Last but not least,
it remains  unclear   what  role   social  expectancy  plays   in admitting   a feeling  of uncertainty   about one's
knowledge.
            The experimental setting investigated in this study can be considered a typical learning situation at
university. However,     although   learning partners   often   do  not  know   each  other,  especially  in distance
universities, the question arises of how their level of acquaintance affects communication behavior. It can be
assumed    that learners   are  acting in  social roles  predefined     by previous  interaction situations  and   that
motivational and social-psychological aspects of discourse behavior are strongly influenced by those roles. In
the present study, for instance, participants made assumptions about their partner's gender based on his or her
way   of formulating  messages    and  coordinating  the   interaction. Future  research should  clarify  whether  our
findings can be transferred to other learning situations: What is the impact of group size? How does the medium
influence communication behavior? Are there any differences in comparison to face-to-face learning scenarios?
Characteristics  of the  learning  partners  should  also   be taken into   account. Spiro, Coulson,   Feltovich,  and
Anderson (1994) argued that humanities students can be expected to use heuristic procedures to solve problems
and to debate different alternatives. These students can thus be able to recognize that two terms may exist to
describe the same underlying concept. In addition, learners' age can be expected to impact the development of
assumptions about knowledge. Several researchers have concluded that this development proceeds stepwise
(King & Kitchener, 1994; Kuhn, 1991; Perry, 1970). The validity of the present results should thus be verified
for other learners, such as school students.

            In summary, our findings indicate that the terminology used in learning materials impacts learning
behavior in discourse. Moreover, the notation of knowledge contents (text vs. illustration) influences the way
learners elaborate information. These aspects should therefore be considered in the design and selection of
learning materials.

References
Barr, D. J., & Keysar, B. (2002). Anchoring comprehension in linguistic precedents. Journal of Memory and
         Language, 46, 391-418.
Barr, D. J., & Keysar, B. (2006). Perspective taking and the coordination of meaning in language use. In M. J.
         Traxler  &    M.  A.    Gernsbacher   (Eds.),  Handbook     of  psycholinguistics  (Vol.  2,  pp.  901-938).
         Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Bortz, J., & Döring, N. (1995): Forschungsmethoden und Evaluation (2nd ed.). Berlin: Springer.
Bromme, R., Jucks, R., & Wagner, T. (2005). How to refer to "diabetes"? Language in online health advice.
         Applied Cognitive Psychology, 19, 569-586.
Bromme, R., Rambow, R., & Nueckles, M. (2001). Expertise and estimating what other people know: The
         influence  of  professional   experience and   type   of knowledge.    Journal of  Experimental  Psychology
         Applied, 7, 317-330.
Clark, H. H. (1992). Arenas of language use. Chicago, IL: The University of Chicago Press.
Clark, H. H., & Brennan, S. E. (1991). Grounding in communication. In L. B. Resnick, J. M. Levine, & S. D.
         Teasley (Eds.), Perspectives on socially shared cognition (pp. 127-149). Washington, DC: APA Books.
Clark, H. H., & Marshall, C. R. (1981). Definite reference and mutual knowledge. In A. Joshi, B. Webber, & I.
         Sag (Eds.). Elements of discourse understanding (pp. 10-63). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University
         Press.
Fischer, F., Bruhn, J., Gräsel, C., & Mandl, H. (2002). Fostering collaborative knowledge construction with
         visualization tools. Learning and Instruction, 12, 213-232.
Gittelman, M. A., Mahabee-Gittens, E. M., & Gonzales-del-Rey, J. (2004). Common medical terms defined by
         parents: Are we speaking the same language? Pediatric Emergency Care, 20, 754-758.
Hawkins, J., & Pea, R. D. (1987). Tools for bridging the cultures of everyday and scientific thinking. Journal
         for Research in Science Teaching, 24, 291-307. [nicht im Text]
Herpertz-Dahlmann,     B., Hagenah,    U., Vloet, T.,  &    Holtkamp,   K. (2005).  Essstörungen  in  der Adoleszenz
         [Eating disorders in adolescence]. Praxis der Kinderpsychologie und Kinderpsychiatrie, 54(4) 249-
         267.

                                                    522   ·  © ISLS
                                                ICLS 2010    ·   Volume 1

Jucks, R., Becker, B.-M., & Bromme, R (2008). Lexical entrainment in written discourse: Is experts' word use
         adapted to the addressee? Discourse Processes, 45, 497-518.
Jucks, R., & Bromme, R. (2007). Choice of words in doctor­patient communication: An analysis of health-
         related Internet sites. Health Communication, 21, 267-277.
Jucks, R., Bromme, R., & Runde, A. (2007). Explaining with non-shared illustrations: How they constrain
         explanations. Learning and Instruction, 17, 204-218.
Keysar, B.   (1994).  The  illusory  transparency   of  intention:   Linguistic perspective-taking  in  text. Cognitive
         Psychology, 26(2), 165-208.
King, P.   M.,  &    Kitchener, K.S. (1994).  Developing        reflective judgement: Understanding    and    promoting
        intellectual growth and critical thinking in adolescents and adults. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Kobayashi, M. (2002). Cloze tests revisited. Exploring item characteristics with special attention to scoring
        methods. The Modern Language Journal, 86, 571-586.
Kuhn, D. (1991). The skills of argument. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Larkin, J. H., & Simon, H. A. (1987). Why a diagram is (sometimes) worth ten thousand words. Cognitive
         Science, 11, 65-99.
Monk, A. (2003). Common ground in electronically mediated communication: Clark's theory of language use.
         In J. M. Carroll (Ed.), HCI models, theories, and frameworks: Toward a multidisciplinary science (pp.
         265-289). San Francisco: Morgan Kaufmann.
Nickerson, R. S. (1999). How we know--and sometimes misjudge--what others know: Imputing one's own
         knowledge to others. Psychological Bulletin, 125, 737-759.
Paus, E.,  &  Jucks,  R. (2008).  Do  we    really mean    the  same?    The  relationship between  word  choices  and
        computer-mediated       cooperative  learning.  In   P. A. Kirschner,   F.  Prins, V. Jonker, &  G.   Kanselaar
        (Eds.). International Perspectives in the Learning Sciences: Cre8ing a learning world. Proceedings of
         the 8th International Conference for the Learning Sciences (Vol. 2, pp. 172-180).
Paus, E., & Jucks, R. (2009). Words and meaning. How the lexical encoding of technical concepts contributes to
        their   mental  representation.  In  N. Taatgen,     H.  van    Rjn, L. Schomaker,    &  J. Nerbornne    (Eds.).
        Proceedings of the 31st Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 496-501Perry, W. G.
        (1970). Forms of intellectual and ethical development in the college years: A scheme. New York: Holt.
Pickering, M.   J.,. &  Garrod,  S.  (2005). Establishing    and   using   routines during  dialogue: Implications  for
        psychology     and  linguistics.  In  A.    Cutler     (Ed.)  Twenty-first  century   psycholinguistics:  Four
        Cornerstones (pp. 85-101). London, UK: Erlbaum.
Schmeck, K. (2004). Störungen des Sozialverhaltens [Disorders of social behavior]. In C. Eggers, J. M. Fegert,
        & F. Resch (Eds.) Lehrbuch der Kinder- und Jugendpsychiatrie (pp. 849-873). Heidelberg, Germany:
        Springer Verlag.
Schmidt, H. G., & Boshuizen, H. P. A. (1992). Encapsulation of biomedical knowledge. In D. A. Evans & V. L.
        Patel (E.). Advanced models of cognition for medical training and practice (pp. 265-282). Berlin,
        Germany: Springer.
Spiro, R. J., Coulson, R. L., Feltovich, P. J., & Anderson, D. K. (1994). Cognitive flexibility theory: Complex
        knowledge acquisition in ill-structured domains. In R. B. Ruddell, M. R.Ruddell, & H. Singer (Eds.),
        Theoretical    models   and  processes  of  reading     (pp. 602-615).   Newark,    DE:  International Reading
        Association.
Taylor, W.   L. (1957).  Cloze   readability scores  as  indices     of individual  differences in comprehension   and
        aptitude. Journal of Applied Psychology, 41, 19-26.
Wermke,    M.,   Klosa,   A.,    Kunkel-Razum,      K.,  &      Scholze-Stubenrecht,   W.     (2001).  Duden    ­  Das
        Fremdwörterbuch [Dictionary of foreign words]. Mannheim, Germany: Brockhaus.
Wu, S., & Keysar, B. (2008). The effect of information overlap on communication effectiveness. Cognitive
        Science, 31, 169-181.

Acknowledgments
         The authors are thankful to Stefanie Diener for her support with data collection and analysis

                                                    523    ·  © ISLS
