                                                 ICLS 2010   ·   Volume 1

  Leading to Win: The Influence of Leadership Styles on Team Performance
                                  during a Computer Game Training

      Anna Siewiorek, Andreas Gegenfurtner, Centre for Learning Research, University of Turku, Finland
                                        Email: amsiew@utu.fi, angege@utu.fi

          Abstract: The purpose of this study is to examine how leadership styles will influence the
          team performance during a computer game training. In order to get a better understanding
          what  leadership    styles   are  going  to be     distinguished,  researchers   observed     students'
          interactions while they played a strategic computer game. In the study, a group of Stanford
          University graduate students participated in the training with a `real esate' computer game.
          The  participants' task  during   the game  was    to manage    an estate company    in   small  teams.
          Students developed goals, discussed problems and tracked progress in order to win the game.
          The   results showed    that  the teams  had    different leadership    styles which    affected   their
          performance. The leadership styles that participants used and how they affected the teams'
          performance are described in the paper.

Introduction
Increasingly,  employers     are demanding   that  college   graduates  have  integrative  skills   (Stephen,    Parente,   &
Brown,   2002)  for  an  interdisciplinary  understanding    of the organization    and  business   dynamics     (Hartenian,
Schellenger, & Frederickson, 2001). However, methods and tools commonly used for teaching this business
dynamic in collages are insufficient to cope with the complexity of organizations and the unstable conditions of
today's  market   (Baker   &    O'Neil, 2002;   Day,  2001;     Lehtinen, 2002).   Especially,   it is  difficult  to   teach
leadership--a central competence for coping with these kinds of conditions--using traditional classroom-based
methods of teaching (e.g., lectures). One solution for that problem is to teach about leadership styles through
strategic computer games. Thus, more studies need to be conducted about the ways of teaching leadership styles
in practice. It would be especially interesting to study how leadership styles influence team performance during
computer gaming training. Previous studies have demonstrated significant linkages among leadership behavior,
team  efficacy, and     team performance    (Pescosolido,    2001). However,     there has been     a lack   of  integration
concerning the relationship between specific leader behaviors and team performance outcomes (Burke et al.,
2006).
          This paper describes serious gaming session that aimed to teach students about business dynamics and
about  leadership styles  i.e.,  which  leadership style  should   be  used  in a specific situation    to manage   similar
situations in their future workplace. Past studies have shown that serious games can successfully foster student
learning  (Kafai, 2006),  engagement    (Kiili  &  Lainema,     2008), and  motivation   (Hense   &   Mandl,     2009).  It is
worth noting that there is an evidence to suggest that playing games allows the brain to `work' more efficiently
and thus, to take in more cognitive material than it would in a more traditional setting (Jenkins, 2002; Perry &
Ballou,  1997).   In addition,   games  can   be  considered    as  powerful    learning environments      because    of the
following:  (a) they  are based   upon  active-learning   techniques,   (b)  they favor  activation   of   prior knowledge
given  that players  must  use   previously  learned  information   in order  to  advance, (c)  they   provide   immediate
feedback enabling players to test hypotheses and learn from their actions, (d) they encompass opportunities for
self-assessment   through    the  mechanisms    of scoring    and   reaching  different  levels,    and  (e) they   provide
opportunities for critical thinking and problem solving skills (Oblinger, 2004). Furthermore, few examples of
using simulation games to develop leadership skills can be found in the military sector (O'Neil & Fisher, 2004).
The military sector also uses simulation-based games in flight and combat training (O'Neil & Andrews, 2000).
For this study, a strategic computer game, "Build-a-lot" (see Appendix), was used in which players met face-to-
face in small teams to manage a virtual real estate company. Participants collaborated in teams in order to win
the game, and group work helped them to share and develop alternative viewpoints. Furthermore, the use of
teams to promote student learning in education has been proven to be fruitful (Michaelsen, Bauman Knight, &
Fink, 2004). For example, in Light's study (2001) of student learning at Harvard, he found student learning
teams  to be  highly  effective.  On   the contrary,  small  group  research  has   identified a number      of  factors that
negatively affect team performance and member satisfaction. These include over-dependence on a dominant
leader (Edmondson, Bohmer, & Pisano, 2001).
          The computer game used for the study presented an enormous amount of complex operations in which
a team leader needed to address the final decision to lead the team to win the game. This kind of computer
game, involving many complex decisions, can connect the players to everyday life experiences. In addition, the
time pressure in the game was crucial, and participants had to make decisions quickly in order to advance to the
next level. The speed of the game was fast, and only quick decision-making could lead teams to win the game.
This gaming environment was interactive, and participants interacted by solving the given tasks in the game.

                                                      524  ·  © ISLS
                                                ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

Therefore,  strategy  and  an appropriate    leadership  were  needed    in order  to be  successful.  Furthermore,    the
training was   competition-based     and  that also   required  implementation     of leadership    skills. The  research
questions were as follows: 1) what leadership styles (if any) could be distinguished during the computer game,
and 2) how have leadership styles influenced team performance during the game?

Leadership styles
Most definitions of leadership claim that it is a process of intentional influence by one person over others "to
guide, structure, and facilitate activities and relationships in a group or organization" (Yukl, 1998, p. 3). In other
words, leadership is defined in terms of problem-solving activities directed at the generation of solutions that
advance team goal attainment (Zaccaro, Rittman, & Marks, 2001). Leadership is typically associated with more
mystical, charismatic qualities such as the ability to influence, arouse, inspire, enthuse, and transform (Bass &
Avolio, 1994; Goleman, 2000), qualities that exist outside of the ordinary and mundane features of daily life.
Additionally, leadership is frequently theorized as the exercise of power, the setting of goals and objectives, the
managing    of cultures, and   the mobilization  of   others  to  get work   done   (Alvesson   &   Sveningsson,     2003;
Gemmill & Oakley, 1992). In addition, leadership has been defined in terms of individual personality traits,
leader behaviors, responses to leader behaviors, interpersonal exchange relationships, interaction patterns, role
relationships, follower  perceptions,  task  goals, organizational    culture, and  nature  of work    processes   (Mello,
2003; Rost, 1991; Yukl, 1989). Hence, leadership is an important component in business dynamics. Below, we
specify four leadership styles in more details: transactional, transformational, heroic, and post-heroic leadership.
         First, transactional leadership is characterized by the clear specification of what followers are expected
to do (e.g., Bryman, 1996) and it is based on a rational exchange relationship between leader and subordinate
(Bass, 1985; Howell & Costley, 2001). The leader articulates what behaviors are required and what will be
rewarded, and provides feedback to the subordinates about their behaviors. The subordinate, in turn, complies
with these   behavior  requirements    if rewards     are desired  (Yun,    Cox,   Sims,   &   Salam,  2007).    In  short,
transactional leadership can be defined as a cost-benefit exchange between leaders and their followers and it is
comprised of three dimensions: contingent reward, active management by exception, and passive management
by exception.
         On    the   other   hand,   transformational   leadership    is  characterized    by   concern     with    people.
Transformational     leaders lead  by  inspiring and    stimulating   followers;   by  creating highly      absorbing and
motivating  visions;  and    by utilizing behaviors     such  as  charisma     and intellectual stimulation     to  induce
performance of subordinates beyond expectations (Conger, Kanungo, & Menon, 2000; Kark, Shamir, & Chen,
2003; Yun et al., 2007). Bass (2000, p. 21) states that transformational leaders "move followers to go beyond
their own self-interests for the good of their group, organization or community, country or society as a whole".
Transformational     leadership is comprised    of  the   following   dimensions:   idealized   influence,   inspirational
motivation, charismatic and intellectual stimulation, and individual consideration.
         Third, heroic leadership is characterized by the following: feelings that leadership is based on superior
knowledge   and   information   (omnipotence);   fearing  failure  (rightness);  keeping   up  appearances    at any  cost
including   blaming  others  (face-saving);  and viewing    subordinates    as inferior   creatures in constant  need  of
assistance  and   rescue (codependency)      (Eicher,  2006).  Two    sub-classes   could  be  distinguished     in heroic
leadership such as: autocratic and coercive leadership styles which have many similarities. The autocratic leader
sequesters  a  high  degree  of  control  and  makes    decisions  without   consulting   team  members.     The    heroic-
autocratic leader determines all policies, techniques, and activity steps, and dictates the particular work tasks
and work companions of each member. The autocratic leader tends to be personal in her praise and criticism of
the work of each member but remains aloof from active group participation (Choi, 2007). On the other hand, in
coercive leadership style leader demands immediate compliance and drive to achieve, initiative, and self-control
(Goleman, 2000).
         Finally, post-heroic leadership takes place when the leader wants others to take responsibility and gain
knowledge (empowerment), encourages innovation and participation even in ambiguous situations (risk-taking),
seeks input and aims for consensus in decision-making (participation), and wants others to grow and learn even
at the  expense   of becoming     dispensable  herself  (development).    Post-heroic   leadership   has thus   become  a
concept used to describe a new conceptualization of leadership that refutes the top-down focus on the leader
typical of most leadership literature and discourse (Bradford & Cohen, 1998; Eicher, 2006, Fletcher, 2004). This
leadership  style is well-suited  to complex,   changing,   and  inter-dependent   environments.    There   are  two  sub-
classes  in post-heroic    leadership: democratic     and   shared  leadership.    First, democratic    leadership   style
emphasizes high group participation, discussion, and group decisions based on consensus encouraged by the
leader.  By  giving  workers    a  voice  in  decisions,  democratic     leaders build    organizational flexibility  and
responsibility and help generate fresh ideas. In addition, because they have a say in setting their goals and the
standards for evaluating success, people operating in a democratic system tend to be very realistic about what
can and cannot be accomplished (Goleman, 2000). Second, shared leadership occurs when all members of a
team are fully engaged in the leadership of the team and are not hesitant to influence and guide their fellow team

                                                    525   ·  © ISLS
                                               ICLS 2010    ·  Volume 1

members in an effort to maximize the potential of the team as a whole (Pearce, 2004). In summary, shared
leadership represents teams whose members are empowered to share the tasks and responsibilities of leadership
(Ensley, Pearson, & Pearce, 2003; Katzenbach, 1997).

Methods
In order to get a better understanding of how leadership styles will affect team performance during computer
game training, three researchers observed students' interactions when they were playing a strategic computer
game called "Build-a-lot" (see Appendix). Researchers were taking detailed notes of all student dialogs and
actions; each researcher had one team to observe and take notes of their interactions and dialogs. The goal of
this observation was to determine what leadership styles (if any) students are going to use during the game and
how this styles will affect team performance. All notes that researched made were transcribed verbatim. For the
purpose  of  data    analysis the   detailed codes    were    developed     which described   each   leadership  style
characteristics. The notes (i.e. each  team  dialogs  and   interactions) were  coded  using  those  leadership styles
characteristics. Nine participants took part in the gaming session. They were divided into three teams, which
competed against each other for one hour. Final scores of the game determined which team won. During the
game, students made many decisions related to running a real estate company. Due to the game's limited time,
the participants became focused during the gaming session and were thoroughly engaged and immersed in the
game. The   time  pressure  increased  the   speed of  their  decision-making.    The gaming   session  took place  at
Stanford University, California, USA in the autumn semester of 2007.

Participants
Nine participants took part in the study (two females and seven males). They were Stanford University graduate
students from different academic backgrounds such as engineering and humanities. The participants in the teams
did not know each other. There were three teams with three participants in each team. They did not consider
themselves experienced users of computer games. The study was the first in which all of them took part in a
gaming  session.  During the   experiment,   participants   worked  together in teams  because  only  in teams  could
leaders be distinguished. Participants were unaware of the purpose of the study.

Description of the game and setting
Participants played "Build-a-lot" (see Appendix) in teams. Players represented real estate moguls whose task
was to take over the housing market as they build, upgrade, sell, and buy houses for huge profits. The purpose
of the gaming session was to teach students business dynamics, how to make decisions quickly. Their goal was
to win the game; the team with the most profit and the highest achieved level won the game. From time to time,
a message from the Mayor (of the city in which they were building houses) appeared on the computer screen
with hints or tasks about the game. If a team managed to get every operation correct, they passed the level in the
game and advanced to the next level. If a team failed a level in the game, they had to repeat that level from the
beginning. Every team had one notebook computer to use along with a computer mouse. The teams played
simultaneously for one hour. During the experiment, there were three researchers to observe the teams; each
researcher had one team to observe. Researchers introduced the game to participants at the beginning and told
them that they could look for help and instructions in the tutorial section in the game, but they could not ask the
observing researchers   any   questions. Team   members       could ask questions  of  other  teams.  The  aim  of the
researchers was   to observe  students'  interactions while   playing   the game  (how  they  collaborated,  how they
made decisions, etc.) and to make detailed notes of all their dialogs and students interactions.

Data Analysis
The main aim of the study was to research how leadership styles which participants applied during the gaming
session will influence the teams' performance. The method of data analysis was discourse analysis (Silverman,
2006). After reading through the transcripts of notes from observations and students dialogs, the transcripts were
coded in  terms  of  transactional, transformational,  heroic  and  post-heroic   leadership styles. These  developed
categories of leadership styles (each had subcategories referring to the given leadership style characteristics)
were used to analyze the data.

Results
The conclusion drawn from the observations is that the teams had different leadership styles, which affected
their performance. The following three sections describe each team's leadership style and how it influenced
performance and the game results.

Team 1.
The leadership style of Team 1 could not be described as one leadership style. The leader of this team applied
different leadership styles such as transformational, heroic, as well as post-heroic leadership styles. In this team

                                                   526    ·  © ISLS
                                                  ICLS 2010    ·  Volume 1

there was an accountable leader who had superior knowledge; all wisdom was concentrated in him, and he
displayed a sense of power and confidence. The leader knew what actions to take during the game, although he
has  not  played  that game    before.   He  possessed  superior    knowledge     which  helped  him   to make    the right
decisions. The dialog below is an example of participant 2 (the leader's) omnipotence:
          Participant 1: `Do we need to train (workers)?'
          Participant 2: `Yes, but it is too expensive.' (He is upgrading houses)
          Participant 1: `How about (if) we build this one?'
          Participant 2: `Maybe not... we have to make more money.'

          Participant 2 knew what to do in this situation, and he determined his teammates' opinions to be less
valuable at this point. In the dialog above, even if participant 1's opinions were turned down by the leader, he
agreed   with it without   insisting on  his  opinions  and    without   trying to persuade  participant  2,   which  could
suggest that participant 2 (the leader) was respected for his knowledge and rightness. This behavior could be
described  as  an idealized    influence  which  is   a characteristic   of transformational   leadership    ­ leaders  are
admired,  respected  and   trusted.  At  the same time,    the   leader of this team  applied intellectual   stimulation to
manage his team. During the competition, participant 2 was the leader who controlled the mouse, read aloud
game instructions, and tried to generalize the guidelines for the team. There were several times when two other
team members brought up questions, and he answered them very quickly. Although he controlled the mouse
during the whole process, he often asked his team members opinions before implementing ideas; hence, team
members    were  included   in  the  process  of addressing      problems  and  finding  solutions. They   participated  in
making some of the decisions, such as what to do next, but they depended on their leader to make the final
decision. Thus, the leadership style was democratic and leader-centered at the same time. Group participation
and discussion was encouraged by the leader. Below is an example:
          Participant 2: `Do you want a workshop?, then, he explains, `the strategy of this level is to build a
          house and get cash, and you need to build a library.'
          Participant 3: `We need more training.'
          Participant 2: `Oh, mail! That's good.' (He opens the mail, team members look at the screen), then he
          asks: `how do you feel about an upgrade?'

          From the dialog above, it could be noted that participant 2 asked for his teammates' opinions because
probably  he   wanted  to   share   the responsibility.  Thus,    the leadership   style present in  this  team   could  be
interpreted as shared leadership also. The leader shared his leadership to some degree with the team members;
he asked them what they think should be done next and waited for their agreement to proceed further. However,
this kind of leadership does not always have a good influence on team performance. Sometimes leaders cannot
make  any  decision    without   getting input from   their   team   members.    This slows  down   the   process  and  the
organization cannot react quickly enough. In this team, participant 2 was often asking his team members for
opinions (although not all of their ideas were adopted and implemented) that helped him to lead the team to win
the game. The best leaders favor participation, but also know when they need to be directive or make decisions
on  their own.   According   to   Lingham    (2004),  teams    with   high  dependence   on a   single  leader   had  lower
performance, less member satisfaction, and a decreased climate of psychological safety. The dependence on a
single leader could be observed in Team 1; however, in the case of this team, team members did not show the
aforementioned attributes. Overall, there was no conflict in the team during the playing the game. Everyone
seemed to be content with the decisions participant 2 made, and the atmosphere of the team was harmonious.
Team   members    were    satisfied with  the  leadership   styles  the  leader  implemented.   In summary,      leadership
techniques  used  by   the  leader  brought   success   to the   overall team   performance;  this  team   won   the  game
competition.

Team 2.
This team's   leadership   style could   be  described  as  heroic    leadership  and to  some  degree    as a post-heroic
leadership. Disagreements in this team came from the fact that one participant dominated and was pushing other
team members to realize his ideas. It could be noted from observations of this team that he was behaving like a
heroic-autocratic leader. He issued orders and he expected them to be followed without questions. He wanted to
determine  all   activity tasks  and steps.  A   high degree     of control is  a  main  characteristic of   the autocratic
leadership style. He wanted to win the game and he was concentrated more on the game performance than on
his team members' satisfaction and their opinions. The example of participant 4's autocratic leadership style can
be noted in the dialog below:
          Participant 5: `What should we do?'
          Participant 4: `We buy houses later, buy one Tudor, we can sell it later.'
          Participant 6: `Colonial first.' (He meant colonial buildings)

                                                      527   ·  © ISLS
                                                ICLS 2010    ·  Volume 1

        Participant   4: `No,  definitively don't  do   it, buy   Tudor.  Better  to build  the Tudor.  Listen to  me!'
        (Participant 6 was against that)
        Participant 4: `Sell a Tudor and buy this one of a higher price, listen to me!'

        In addition, coercive leadership styles could be noted from his behavior as he demanded immediate
compliance. This leadership style is the least effective. It is appropriate during an emergency or crisis situation,
and when used in the short term, but it is not successful in the long term. In this leadership style, team members
do what they are told because they fear being reprimanded. As a result, team members are easy to manage and
the leaders  have all the   control. Unfortunately,  team      members    feel burdened  to question  ideas  and  make
suggestions,  which prevent    good  ideas  from being  heard.      Another downside   involves  team   members   never
deviating from their leaders' orders, even if they do not agree with the orders. When participant 4 was behaving
like a demanding leader who gives orders to team members, they disliked it. During the game, they were willing
to collaborate with each other more, but not with participant 4. They were not satisfied with participant 4's
attitude towards them and the game competition. However on the contrary, highlights of shared leadership style
could be noticed from this team conversations. From time to time there was mutual influence between the team
members. In particular, the female participant was asking two other members' opinions and encouraged them to
exchange ideas. She had the mouse in her hand during the game's competition, and she was trying to discuss
with others all decisions she was about to take. The two other participants were expressing their opinions to her,
and she was implementing what she had been told to do. In general, all team members tried their best to win the
game, and ideas were coming from every team member. They always tried to help each other by expressing
opinions and comments. Here is a note from the observations showing highlights of shared leadership style and
mutual influence in this team: participants 4 and 5 had an idea of buying a house, and participant 6 commented
as follows:
        Participant 6: `Not buy, let's build a house.'
        (They listened to his comment and constructed the house)
        Participant 4: `We can sell it later.'
        Participant 6: `No, let's sell it now.'
        Participant 5: `We'll sell it when we don't have money...'

        Based on the results of the study, the mix of leadership styles implemented in this team cannot lead the
team to be successful and to achieve high performance. Team 2 was the second team to finish the game, and
perhaps this  was due    to one participant's  coercive leadership    style which    was not   effectively  implemented
within the team. In addition, team members were not satisfied with participant 4's dominant influence.

Team 3.
In this team, no clear leadership style could be distinguished, however collaboration could be noted from the
team's  dialogs but nobody     in this team wanted   to    have   a leadership  responsibility  nor did anyone    have a
personality with which to influence others. Leadership involves influence; without influence, leadership does
not exist. This team's way of playing the game lacks clearly distinguished leadership style, although highlights
of shared leadership could be noted in the team's conversations. This team's game score was the lowest, so they
lost the game competition. In general, the lack of leadership could be explained by the "official leader" being
not present  ­ physically   or mentally. Most   of the  time,  team   members    want to have   their leaders to  direct,
inform, or give them feedback. Thus, when the team has no leader, the team's potential is hindered. In addition,
most  team   members     want  to feel a connection     to  their   team; however,   without   the  leader, there is no
organization, but rather chaos. See the note from the observations below as an example of Team 3's lack of
organization:
        Participant 8: `We have to build it.     How many do we have to build? 75? We're out of materials. So
        what's next? Do we have additional instructions? Or just make more money?'
        Participant 7: `We keep making money.'
        Participant 8: `Our strategy is to make money, right?' (Silence, nobody answered the question)

        From the dialog above, one could notice uncertainty of what they have to do. Later, during the game,
when one team member was trying to organize the structure of the team, other team members did not consider
that to be necessary. See the dialog below as an example:
        Participant 7: `We have to buy a house. Raise income.' (Spoke louder)
        (Team members moved forward to read the game instructions)
        Participant 8: `We don't have enough money'.
        Participant 9: `Materials.'
        Participant 8: `OK, now each of us should be in charge of one job.'
        Participants 7 and 9 laughed and nodded their heads.

                                                    528  ·   © ISLS
                                                  ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

         (They almost developed the strategy but without a success)
         Participant 7: `Buy a house to raise income. We need to buy or construct.' Then he adds: `Time is
         running out...'

         In this team, nobody had authority or an answer to the questions other team members were asking.
Furthermore, nobody wanted to be responsible and everyone was making suggestions. Nobody demonstrated a
tendency to dominate this team and to be a leader. Also, nobody's opinion was respected or considered to be
important, they avoided getting involved when important issues aroused. They usually made a decision based on
a situation rather than a person. This team did not respond to situations and problems systematically. The team
cannot have successful performance without a leader who has the authority to make decisions. A team needs a
leader to organize its structure and to successfully lead team members in a complex environment. This team
leadership could   be  described    as  laissez-faire and team's   behavior   could be   described   as passive/avoidant
behavior. The "passive leaders" avoid specifying agreements, clarifying expectations, and providing goals and
standards to be achieved by followers. This style has a negative effect on desired outcomes and has negative
impacts on followers and associates. Therefore, the lack of a leadership role in this team probably caused them
to lose the game competition and have the lowest score. These results provide added support for prior research
that has shown the use of managing-by-exception (laissez-faire) to be an ineffective leadership style (Avolio,
Waldman, & Einstein, 1988).

Discussion
The main concern of the study was to research how leadership styles will affect the team performance during a
computer game training. As a result of the game competition, Team 1 won the game. The leader of this team
used different  leadership   styles such  as transformational:   shared  and  democratic   leadership   styles. The  best
leaders do not just use one style of leadership ­ they are skilled at several, and have the flexibility to switch
between  styles   as the circumstances    dictate (Goleman,     2000). In the case    of Team   1,  the transformational
leadership and the dependence on a single leader (leader-centered style) resulted in effective team performance.
However, the leader-centered leadership style is hardly used alone in today's organizations. One leader alone is
not enough in today's complex work environment. It is becoming more difficult for any one person to be an
expert in all aspects of the work that needs to be done. In fact, research indicates that poor-performing teams
tend to be dominated     by  the  team   leader,  while   high-performing  teams   display   more   dispersed leadership
patterns, i.e., shared leadership (Pearce, 2004). Shared leadership is a complex process, but it was successfully
implemented    in Team   1.  In  this  team, the  role of the   heroic leadership  was   implemented    with  shared and
democratic leadership styles that made a positive impact on the team performance. On the contrary, in Team 2
shared leadership implemented with autocratic and coercive leadership styles did not bring effectiveness to the
team performance.     The leader's    personality was   too  strong and  his  demanding    attitude  towards  other team
members had a negative influence on the team members and the team performance. He wanted to direct and
control all decisions without any meaningful participation by the team members. With this leadership style, it
has been found that most of the decisions made lack in creativity. Although shared leadership was applied in
Team 2, it did not help to win the game. In Team 3, there was no clearly distinguished leadership style which
probably caused    them   to lose   the game.   Team    members    demonstrated   a failure  to take  responsibility for
managing and decision-making. No one in this team provided direction or support; rather, they showed a lack of
caring for their team's performance. This `non-leadership' style could be described as laissez-faire leadership, a
principle which emphasizes independence. So, team members are left alone to do their work with little direction
or supervision. The conclusion from these results is that leadership is needed for successful team performance.
         According    to  Brousseau,    Driver,  Hourihan,   &   Larsson  (2006),   in   order to  advance   in complex
organizations,  leaders  need   to  learn and   apply   more   advanced   decision  styles  for using   information  and
evaluating options. It was found that leader decision styles must evolve to include more complex information
processing that are capable of managing the challenges of a turbulent environment. Today's organizations are
more complex than they used to be, and traditional, heroic leadership styles, when used alone, are not enough to
be successful. Therefore, teaching leadership should change as well. One approach to teach leadership is by
playing a strategic computer game in teams. Teaching with computer games could prepare students to better
cope with  business   world  complexity.     Gaming    sessions as  described in  the  paper   could be implemented   in
college business education to teach students which leadership styles should be used in a specific situation to
manage   similar  situations  in their  future   workplaces.   Classes  based  on   organizing  training  sessions   with
strategic computer games to teach leadership styles have two advantages. First, students experience how they
behave in pressure situations (competition, time pressure, etc); these situations push them to be more successful
and creative or they cause them to drop out without caring about actively participating in the training session.
Second, they see which team wins the game, attempt to interpret the game results, and come to the conclusions
as to why their team performance was not effective if their team lost. This type of experience teaches students
how to behave in certain situations and how the competition affects their behavior. After the gaming session,

                                                      529  ·  © ISLS
                                               ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

they will realize from the experience which type of leadership styles work well and how to behave next time
when placed in a similar situation. However, not everyone has a predisposition to being a leader; a particular
personality type is usually needed. People who have a `leader personality' could be trained to be better leaders
and training such as the type mentioned in this study could help them to develop strategies on how to be more
successful. In summary, playing a strategic computer game in teams of three could provide the tool to learn
applying different leadership styles in different situations.
        The   interesting area  for future inquiry   would   be to   organize leadership  training sessions   in which
participants play in  more  than one   team. In this way,    they will have   an  opportunity to experience   different
leadership styles  with  different  team members.    It would     be fruitful for the game    participants to  conduct
interviews with them after the training and evaluate the leadership styles they have experienced. This kind of
debriefing could help participants to articulate what they have learned for the purpose of knowledge building
(Jonassen, Peck, & Wilson, 1999).

References
Alvesson,  M.,   &   Sveningsson,   S.  (2003). `Managers     doing    leadership: The    extra-ordinarization   of the
        mundane'. Human Relations, 56(12), 1435-1459.
Avolio, B. J., Waldman D. A., & Eisten W. O. (1988). Transformational leadership in a management game
        simulation. Impacting the bottom line. Group & Organization Studies, 13(1), 59-80.
Baker, E. L. & O'Neil, H. F., Jr. (2002). Measuring problem solving in computer environments: current and
        future states. Computers in Human Behavior, 18, 609-622.
Bass, B. M. (1985). Leadership and performance beyond expectations. New York: Free Press.
Bass, B.   M. (2000).   The  future of   leadership  in learning   organizations.  The  Journal  of  Leadership     and
        Organizational Studies, 7(3), 18-40.
Bass, B. M., & Avolio, B. (1994). Improving organizational effectiveness through transformational leadership.
        Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Bradford, D. L., & Cohen, A. R. (1998). Power up: Transforming organizations through shared leadership.
        Chichester, England: Wiley.
Brousseau,   K., Driver, M., Hourihan,   G., &  Larsson,   R.  (2006).  The   seasoned  executive's decision-making
        style. Harvard Business Review, 84(2), 111-121.
Burke, C. S., Stagl, K. C., Klein, C., Goodwin, F. G., Salas, E., & Halpin, M. S. (2006). What type of leadership
        behaviors are functional in teams? A meta-analysis. Leadership Quarterly, 17, 288-307.
Bryman, A. (1996). Leadership in organizations. In S. R. Clegg, C. Hardy & W. R. Nord (Eds.), Handbook of
        organization studies (pp. 276-292). London: Sage.
Conger, J. A., Kanungo, B. N., & Menon, S. T. (2000). Charismatic leadership and follower effects. Journal of
        Organizational Behavior, 21, 747-767.
Day, D. V. (2001). Leadership development: A review in context. The Leadership Quarterly, 11, 581-613.
Edmondson,    A.  C., Bohmer,   R.  M.,  &   Pisano, G.  P.   (2001).  Disrupted  routines: Team   learning   and   new
        technology implementation in hospitals. Administrative Science Quarterly, 46, 685-716.
Eicher, J. P. (2006). Post-heroic leadership: Managing the virtual organization. Retrieved October 20, 2009,
        from http://www.pignc-ispi.com/articles/management/post-heroic.htm
Ensley, M. D., Pearson, A., & Pearce, C. L. (2003). Top management team process, shared leadership, and new
        venture performance: A theoretical model and research agenda. Human Research Management Review,
        13, 329-346.
Fletcher, J. K. (2004). The paradox of postheroic leadership: An essay on gender, power, and transformational
         change. Leadership Quarterly, 15, 647-661.
Gemmill, G., & Oakley, J. (1992). Leadership: An alienating social myth? Human Relations, 45(2), 113-129.
Goleman, D. (2000). Leadership that gets results. Harvard Business Review, 78(2), 78-90.
Hartenian, L. S., Schellenger, M.,&Frederickson, P. (2001). Creation and assessment of an integrated business
        course: One college's experience. Journal of Education for Business, 76(3), 149-159.
Hense, J., & Mandl, H. (2009, August). Learning with digital games: Potentials and best practice in the light of
         theories  of learning,  emotion,  and  motivation.     Paper  presented   at the 13th   EARLI     Conference,
         Amsterdam.
Howell, J. P., & Costley, D. L. (2001). Understanding behaviors for effective leadership. Upper       Saddle     River,
         NJ: Prentice Hall.
Jenkins, H. (2002). Game Theory: Digital Renaissance, Technology Review. MIT. March 29, 2002.
Jonassen, D. H., Peck, K. L., & Wilson, B. G. (1999). Learning with Technology: A Constructivist Perspective.
        Upper Saddle River, NJ: Merrill/Prentice Hall.
Kafai, Y. B. (2006). Playing and making games for learning: Instructionist and constructionist perspectives for
        game studies. Games and Culture, 1, 36-40.

                                                   530   ·  © ISLS
                                                 ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

Kark, R., Shamir, B., & Chen, G. (2003). The two faces of transformational leadership: Empowerment and
          dependency. Journal of Applied Psychology, 88, 246-255.
Katzenbach, J. R. (1997). The myth of top management team. Harvard Business Review, 75(6), 82-91.
Kiili, K., &   Lainema,  T. (2008).  Foundation    for  Measuring   Engagement    in Educational  Games.     Journal of
          Interactive Learning Research, 19, 469-488.
Lehtinen, E. (2002). Commentary. Developing models for distributed problem-based learning: Theoretical and
          methodological reflection. Distance Education, 23(1), 109-117.
Light,  R.  J. (2001).  Making   the  most   of college:   Students   speak their minds.   Cambridge,    MA:  Harvard
          University Press.
Lingham, T. (2004). Developing a measure of conversational learning spaces in teams. Unpublished doctoral
          dissertation, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH.
Mello, J. A. (2003). Profiles in leadership: Enhancing learning through model and theory        building.  Journal   of
          Management Education, 27(3), 344-361.
Michaelsen, L., Bauman Knight, A., & Fink, L. D. (2004). Team-based learning: A transformative use of small
          groups in college teaching. Sterling, VA: Stylus.
Oblinger,   D.  (2004).  The   next  generation   of  educational   engagement.   Journal   of  Interactive  Media   in
          Education, 8, 1-18.
O'Neil,  H.  F., Jr., &  Andrews,    D. H.   (2000).  Aircrew  training   and  assessment.  Mahwah,    NJ:   Lawerence
          Erlbaum Associates, Inc.
O'Neil, H. F., Jr., & Fisher, Y. C. (2004). A technology to support Leader Development:         Computer     Games.  In
          D. V. Day, S. J. Zaccaro, & S. M. Halpin (Eds.), Leader development for transforming organizations:
          growing leaders for tomorrow (pp. 99-121). Mahwah, NJ: Lawerence Erlbaum Associates, Inc.
Pearce,  C.  L.  (2004).  The  future   of leadership:   Combining    vertical  and  shared  leadership   to transform
          knowledge work. Academy of Management Executive, 18(1), 47-57.
Perry, E. L., & Ballou, D. J. (1997). The role of work, play, and fun in microcomputer software training. ACM
          SIGMIS Database, 28(2), 93-112.
Pescosolido, A. T. (2001). Informal leaders and the development of group efficacy. Small Group Research, 32,
          74-93.
Rost, J. (1991). Leadership for the twenty-first century. Westport, CT: Praeger.
Silverman,  D.   (2006). Interpreting  Qualitative  Data:   Methods   for  Analysing Talk,  Text and  Interaction (3rd
          ed.). London: Sage.
Stephen, J., Parente, D. H., & Brown, R. C. (2002). Seeing the forest and the trees: Balancing functional and
          integrative knowledge using large-scale simulations in capstone business strategy classes. Journal of
          Management Education, 26(2), 164-193.
Yukl, G. (1989). Managerial leadership: A review of theory and research. Journal of Management, 15, 251-289.
Yukl, G. (1998). Leadership in   organizations (4th ed.). Upper Saddle      River, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Yun S., Cox J., Sims, H. P., Jr., & Salam S. (2007). Leadership and Teamwork: The Effects of Leadership and
          Job Satisfaction on Team Citizenship. International Journal of Leadership Studies, 2(3), 171-193.
Zaccaro, S. J., Rittman, A. L. & Marks, A. M (2001). Team leadership. The Leadership Quarterly, 12, 451-483.

Appendix
Build-a-lot ­ a strategic computer game, where players are real estate moguls whose task is to take over the
housing market as they build, upgrade, sell and buy houses for huge profits. The objective of the game is to get
Net Value to the highest possible number by building, upgrading and selling properties. The team with the most
profit and the highest achieved level wins the game. If the players manage to get every operation correct, they
pass the current level in the game and advance to the next level. If a team fails a level in the game, they have to
repeat that level from the beginning. During the game, players get the instructions from the mayor of the city in
which they are building houses. To construct a property, players must have the blueprint, enough workers and
enough materials. The players' task is to move from one town to another to improve them and achieve all the
goals in a given period of time. They are asked to build different kinds of houses and buildings, earn a specific
rental income, or earn cash. To achieve these goals, players have to choose exactly what they have to build and
demolish,   which  requires  certain  calculations.  Players  can   build  the following kinds   of  houses:  Rambler,
Colonial, Tudor, Estate, Mansion, and Castle. They should buy the blueprint of each of these, the materials
needed, and a certain number of workers. They can also build a number of buildings like a Post office, Library,
Workshop, Bank, Sawmill, etc. The main advantage of this game is the fact that it makes players think and
calculate  items (for  example,  taxes  that they should    pay) in order   to win. In this environment,   participants
played  in teams,  with  three members     on each   team.  Game   play   with small teams  forces   team  members   to
express  and   exchange  their ideas and   opinions  to  form a  strategy.  Furthermore, teams   are  indispensable  for
successful  performance,  and   individuals  have  to  be  trained to be  able to work  efficiently  and effectively in
groups.

                                                     531  ·  © ISLS
