                                                 ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 2

                The Learning Sciences as a Setting for Learning
             Michael A. Evans, Virginia Tech, School of Education, Blacksburg, VA, mae@vt.edu
         Martin Packer, Duquesne University, Pittsburgh, PA & UNIANDES, Bogotá, packer@duq.edu
      Reed Stevens, Northwestern University, School of Education and Social Policy, Chicago, IL, reed-
                                              stevens@northwestern.edu
             Cody Maddox, Duquesne University, Pittsburgh, PA, codyloganmaddox@hotmail.com
    Keith Sawyer, Washington University, Department of Education, St. Louis, MO, ksawyer@wustl.edu
                      Jorge Larreamendy, UNIANDES, Bogotá, jlarream@uniandes.edu.co

         Abstract: This symposium offers a reflexive examination of the Learning Sciences. We draw
         upon a variety of empirical data to explore the way the Learning Sciences is a distributed
         phenomenon,      built on  assemblages     of artifacts,   in which   cognition is   distributed and
         constructed, and identities are constituted. Our analysis has three steps. First, we explore the
         learning sciences     community   as  a space   in  which  discourse  circulates, concepts  are   put
         forward, and specific kinds of objects have become recognized. Central among these objects,
         of course, is 'learning.' Second, we look in detail at examples of the interactions in which
         learning scientists do their work. Third, we consider how a learning scientist is formed as a
         particular kind of person through participation in formative practices of the community.

Overall Focus of the Symposium
The Learning Sciences have been defined as an interdisciplinary approach to the study and the facilitation of
learning in real-world settings (Bransford, Barron, Pea, Meltzoff, Kuhl, Bell, Stevens, Schwarts, Vye, Reeves,
Roschelle, &    Sabelli,  2006;   Meltzoff,   Kuhl, Movellan,     Sejnowski,   2009).  Learning    Sciences   programs
frequently include faculty with diverse background and training, from fields that may include cognitive science,
psychology, education, machine learning, neuroscience, sociocultural studies, and educational technology. But
what kind of setting is the Learning Sciences itself? Through what kind of participation in real-world activities
do learning scientists learn how to recognize learning, and what do they learn about it? How does someone learn
to be a learning scientist?
         This symposium undertakes a reflexive examination of the learning sciences. The presenters consider a
range of  empirical  data   to  explore  the Learning  Sciences   as   a distributed phenomenon,    an  assemblage   of
artifacts, a space in which cognition is distributed and constructed, a community in which identity is forged. Our
analysis has   three steps. First, we    examine  the  official  discourse  of the   Learning  Sciences,  its texts and
announcements, in order to reconstruct the space in which that discourse circulates, to articulate the concepts
that are advanced, and to identify the specific kinds of objects that the Learning Sciences recognize. Central
among these objects, of course, is `learning.' Second, we look in detail at samples of everyday interactions
among learning scientists in one selected program to see how they do their work. Third, we consider how, in
this program at least, a learning scientist is formed as a particular kind (or kinds) of person through participation
in formative practices of the discipline.
         A number of learning scientists have pointed to the importance of reflexivity in learning. For example,
Sawyer (2006) points out in the introduction to his Handbook of the Learning Sciences:

         "Studies of experts show they are better than novices at planning and criticizing their work -
         both  reflective activities.... Based   on these   findings,  and similar   findings regarding   other
         school subjects, learning scientists often conceive of the problem of learning as a problem of
         transforming novices into experts by developing their ability to reflect on their own thinking
         in these ways" (p. 7).

It is appropriate, then, for learning scientists themselves to be reflective, and work to increase our reflective
activities of, and capacities for, examining our own work. One way to do is this by applying some of the
techniques of objectification of the Learning Sciences to these sciences themselves.
         Indeed, it has been proposed that reflexivity is an important component of all social scientific inquiry,
one that is necessary to avoid the "symbolic violence" of imposing the scientists' conceptual framework on the
people who are studied, or assuming an intellectual attitude when in fact people are engaged in embodied,
practical activity (Bourdieu & Wacquant, 1992). This is not to ignore or deny the challenges involved in any
self-reflexive activity. Blumenfeld,     Kempler, and    Krajcik  (2006)  note that  teachers  and students   "may  not
respond well to the idea of reflecting on and revising their work" (p.475), and they point out the importance of
finding the right motivators and forms of cognitive engagement to promote a reflexive frame of mind. We hope
to demonstrate in this symposium that a reflexive investigation of the Learning Sciences has value.

                                                      53  ·  © ISLS
                                                  ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 2

Major Issues Addressed by the Collected Work
The three presenters will each report on one step of our analysis, though our work has been a collaborative
division of labor. The first presenter (Evans) will describe the results of our activities of tracing and mapping the
"community of practice" of the Learning Sciences as a dispersed and contested network in which concepts are
mobilized to develop claims about specific objects of investigation. The second presenter (Stevens) will add a
temporal dimension, reporting both on our reconstruction of this history of this network and on an interaction
analysis of  an episode    of everyday   activity in a selected    Learning  Sciences   program.   The  third presenters
(Packer and Maddox) will explore the "techniques of the self" in which students become learning scientists
through their participation in such activity. Our intention is that these three steps will lead to a more profound
understanding of the Learning Sciences as a form of life: a human activity system that produces knowledge,
practices, and people that is, in turn, reproduced and transformed by these people as they apply their knowledge
in action.
         The  Learning     Sciences are  frequently  located   in Pasteur's  quadrant,  that is to say  as bridging the
division between `basic' and `applied' research, as seeking fundamental understanding of scientific problems
and at the same time aiming to be beneficial to society at large (Stokes, 1997; Schoenfeld, 1999). The design
studies and design experiments advocated by methodologists in our field hold up this "bridging" feature as
unique, distinguishing us from disciplines more focused on theoretical conjectures and clinical work, such as
cognitive science, neuroscience, and educational psychology (Confrey, 2006). The reflexive examination of the
Learning Sciences in this session has the same dual goals. We hope to understand how our interdisciplinary
enterprise is functioning - what makes it tick. But we also hope that by identifying key characteristics of the
operation of the Learning Sciences - as well as perhaps pointing out some contradictions and obstacles - our
analysis can be beneficial in practical ways, and have application to the training of the next generation of
learning   scientists. The  presentations are   not  intended   as  external criticism, but  rather as  an  example  of
circumspection from within, in which practitioners pause to look around at what we are always already doing, to
articulate what we see to return to our practice with increased clarity. The three presentations will now be
described in more detail in the next sections, a brief overview offered below:

·   Presentation 1: Mapping the Network of the Learning Sciences: traces the network of the Learning Sciences
    and maps its territory, primarily by focusing on the dispersion of concepts in `official' texts such as
    program descriptions, course syllabi, and published papers. The various Learning Sciences programs are
    then located on this map.
·   Presentation 2: The History and Micro-Genesis of the Learning Sciences: reconstructs the history of this
    network and also describes its micro-genesis, through the interaction analysis of an episode of everyday
    interaction obtained through fieldwork at one Learning Science program selected from the map.
·   Presentation 3: The Making of a Learning Scientist: describes how a student becomes a learning scientist,
    based on the same interaction analysis and interviews with newcomers and old-timers.

Presentation 1: Mapping the Network of the Learning Sciences
The first presentation will explore the Learning Sciences as a form of life and a setting for learning. This
presentation traces    and maps  the networks     or assemblages    that define  the Learning   Sciences.  Rather  than
assume from the outset that the Learning Sciences is a coherent, consensual or clearly defined intersubjective
space, we treat it first as a geographically dispersed and temporally dynamic network of participants, artifacts,
and institutions, and then map this network to see where consensus lies and where there is contestation. As
Nespor (1994) has written:

         "interactions   and  situations are... articulated  moments     in networks of  social  relations and
         understandings, in which our experiences and understandings are actually constructed on a far
         larger scale than we happen to define for that moment as the place itself, whether that be a
         street, a region, or even a continent" (p. 3)

         Tracing the linkages of the network that is the Learning Sciences is a necessary first step, then, that
should be   prior to   any examination   of interpersonal   relations or personal  understandings.   It is increasingly
recognized that learning takes place in interactions that are mediated by designed artifacts (Stahl, 2006; Suthers,
2006), and that such artifacts are often arranged in a highly geographically dispersed manner, the extreme case
being international virtual teams of academics, researchers, and collaborators (Bichelmeyer, Cagiltay, Evans,
Paulas, & Soon, 2005; Evans & Schwen, 2006). There are now Learning Science programs in at least three
universities outside the United States (in the Netherlands, the United Kingdom, and Australia), so the network
has now grown to this scale. Given the interdisciplinary character of much research in the Learning Sciences it
is quite likely that even the simplest arrangement will involve sophisticated linkages.

                                                      54  ·  © ISLS
                                                  ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 2

        This first presentation will present the results of our analysis of data from at least twelve recognized
Learning Sciences  programs.      Official program    definitions, statements   of program  goals,   syllabi of  required
courses, and other data provide evidence of the similarities and differences among these programs. In this way,
the assemblages of the Learning Sciences can be said to define a space in which discourse circulates. In the
form of published papers, oral presentations, research reports, informal messages, and so on, this discourse
serves to propose claims about the specific kinds of objects recognized by the learning sciences, using concepts
of various kinds. The concepts of the Learning Sciences serve as a vocabulary in which knowledge claims about
these objects are proposed, contested, and accepted or abandoned. They offer ways for learning scientists to see
the world. Tracing these concepts enables us to see where the Learning Sciences is dynamic and contested, and
where it is unified and homogenous.
        For example, one of the central concepts of the Learning Sciences is cognition, but it is interpreted in a
variety of intersecting ways. Cognition can be understood as the structures and processes of knowledge, so that
the principal goal of teaching     and  learning   is the  transformation   of  cognition. But cognition     can also be
understood as something situated, practical, and even `wild' (Hutchins, 1995). On one side there are laboratory-
based computer models that aim to simulate human knowledge and skills. On another side are ethnographic
studies in which it is insisted that cognition should never be separated from culture. The metaphor of building
knowledge  is  frequently used     (Scardamalia    &  Bereiter,   1994),  but  individuals interpret this metaphor    in
different ways with different presumptions about cognition.
        A  second  central concept     is  that of  social   context. The  Learning  Sciences  tend  to emphasize     the
dynamics of real situations of learning and teaching, in contrast to the laboratory studies of cognitive science.
Attention is focused on the complexities of the real world, and on the need for ecological validity in scientific
studies. But social context can be construed either as an external factor which has an influence or impact on
cognition, or as an intrinsic aspect of cognition, something constitutive of thinking and learning. Social context
can be a concept used to refer to specific circumstances, such as the workplace or classroom, or it can be used to
refer to everyday life, to the essentially social character of all thought and action. In the latter case, even the
laboratory is a social situation.
        While these are concepts that surely are inherent to the Learning Sciences, so that without them it
would not exist, there are others that one might say demonstrate how the network extends to other areas of the
social sciences. One such concept is mediation. Mediation is a major tenet of Vygotsky's (1986) account of
learning and especially concept development in children, since he proposed that people interact with the world
"indirectly" through the use of mediators. In the Learning Sciences the concept has been applied in this way to
analyses of how children acquire understandings of the world around them. From this perspective, it is as
children use cultural and psychological tools (i.e. signs and symbols) that they acquire higher psychological
functions such as analysis and reasoning. This original conception of mediation, though, has been challenged
(Wertsch, 2007) and extended to include rules, community, and division of labor (Barab, Evans, & Baek, 2004).
What might be claimed is that mediation has taken on a broader, more complex place in the learning sciences,
particularly in the digital age (Shaffer & Clinton, 2006).
        Vygotsky's texts on cultural-historical development also make use of the concept of tool. Vygotsky
argued that society's tools, language, signs, and technologies were closely intertwined with their collective
levels of cognition. As a result of the integration, how things are done changes, perhaps forever:
        "As   soon as speech      and the  use   of  symbolic    signs are included  in this  (tool) mediated
        operation, it transforms itself along entirely new lines, overcoming the former natural laws
        and for the first time giving birth to authentically human use of implements... speech and
        actions are  in this case     one  and   the  same   psychological    function" (Vygotsky    &  Luria,
        1930/1993, pp. 108-109)
        But the concept of tool has another lineage in Learning Sciences, one that reflects interests in the
cognitive potential and transformative power of technology. For example, Brown, Collins and Duguid (1989)
recommended that knowledge be thought of as a set of tools. Tools can be learned only through their use, and in
using them the user changes, in particular they come to adopt the belief system of the culture that produced the
tools, because "tools and the way they are used reflect the particular accumulated insights of communities" (p.
33). In this way of talking and seeing, learning is a process of enculturation and apprenticeship, a result of being
embedded in practical activity that, nonetheless, leads to abstract knowledge.
        Finally, the core concept of the Learning Sciences, of course, is learning. Here too what we find is,
understandably, not consensus but an intersection of efforts to carve out a plausible way of conceptualizing the
complexity of  people coming      to do   their work   successfully   together. To  return to the  example    in the  last
paragraph, in Brown, Collins and Duguid's way of talking and seeing, learning is a process of enculturation and
apprenticeship, a result of being embedded in practical activity that, nonetheless, leads to abstract knowledge. In
Vygotsky's texts, in contrast, learning is a process of self-mastery, in which social tools are applied to self.
These various positions and perspectives on learning in the Learning Sciences, at times complementary, at times

                                                       55  ·  © ISLS
                                                  ICLS 2010    ·  Volume 2

in opposition, reflect to some degree its interdisciplinary character. Is learning a neurobiological phenomenon?
Is it a change in internal systems of mental representation? Is it transformation in embodied practical activity?
Here  the  dynamic   tension    of the  Learning  Sciences    is  most  evident,  and  the  sources   of   its creativity and
generativity are most apparent.
          By    tracing these  concepts    of cognition,   social   context,  mediation,   tools  and   learning,   this  first
presentation will construct a map of the territory occupied by the Learning Sciences, and identify its shifting and
contested boundaries. The various Learning Sciences programs can then be located on this map, enabling us to
make a principled selection of a program to study in detail in the second and third steps.

Presentation 2: The History and Micro-Genesis of the Learning Sciences
The second presentation introduces a genetic or temporal dimension into our investigation, both historical and
micro-genetic.   It traces the  history  of   Learning Sciences,    reconstructing    the genealogy   of   its origins in the
Artificial Intelligence and Education conferences of the 1980s, the founding of the Northwestern University
Institute of the Learning Sciences and the Xerox Institute for Research on Learning, the inauguration of the
Journal of the Learning Sciences, the newly-named ICLS conference in 1991 and the subsequent alternation of
ICLS and CSCL conferences, and the founding of ISLS in 2002.
          Roger Schank has argued that it is in stories that humans store and organize knowledge (Schank &
Abelson, 1994). The stories that participants tell about the origins of their community of practice offer important
insights  into  the  character  of   that  community.      This  second    presentation   will draw     both   on   published
retrospective accounts of Learning Sciences and on interviews with selected learning scientists or, at least, those
who would claim that their work addresses problems important to the learning sciences. One way of telling the
story of the Learning Sciences, for example, is as a tale of frustration with cognitive science that led to the birth
of the new journal JLS, a "big ideas" journal that has focused on learning in real-world situations, that has
explored new perspectives and new methodologies as well as novel uses of technology, and from which a
community has grown and matured (Kolodner, 2004).
          Another example is Koschmann's (1994, 1996) retelling of the history of "paradigmatic shifts" in
learning  theory,   models  of  instruction,  and research    issues. His  reconstruction   of   the origins    of computer-
supported collaborative learning describes the accumulations and dissolutions that took place as the field moved
from  its early  roots  in behaviorism,    programmed      instruction, and   instructional efficacy    to socially  oriented
theories of collaborative learning and instruction as enacted practice (Koschmann, 1996, p. 16).
          Like   any good   evolutionary      account, this   presentation   will pay  attention   to   the fit  and   mutual
constitution of organism and environment (in this case the various niches of the Learning Sciences and its
various niches) as well as to the impact of rare but dramatic forces from outside the system. Or, to switch
metaphors, like any genealogy, it will pay attention to the orderly arrangements of patrimony and birthright, as
well as to the accidental encounters that bring strangers together and lead to unforeseen offspring.
          At  the same    time, a  second   temporal   aspect    of the Learning   Sciences    is the   moment-to-moment
processes    of learning   scientists' interactions.   Study  of    face-to-face  interaction  has   become     an  important
methodology for the Learning Sciences (Jordan & Henderson, 1995), and "Many learning scientists study the
moment-to-moment        processes  of  learning"  (Sawyer,     2009,   p.  13).  A reflexive   investigation    of  Learning
Sciences should not neglect this important aspect of understanding the discipline. Consequently, this second
presentation will also report on analysis of a selected episode of everyday interaction. This episode will be
obtained through fieldwork in a selected Learning Sciences program. As Nespor (1994) has pointed out, studies
of face-to-face interaction need to be informed by knowledge of the network in which they are located, and this
will be one way in which the second presentation relates to and is informed by the first.
          In short,  the   second  presentation   will bring     an explicitly  temporal   dimension    to  the  network     of
discourse, concepts, and objects that was described in the first presentation, to explore both the history of how it
came to assume its current form and the ongoing way in which the network is reproduced.

Presentation 3: The Constitution of a Learning Scientist
The third presentation describes the final step in our analysis. Having traced the network of arrangements that
define the community of the Learning Sciences, and having studied in detail both the history of this network and
the interactions in which learning scientists do their daily work, we turn to the specific techniques by which
people become learning scientists. Here too we are able to turn the tools of the Learning Sciences around and
apply them    reflexively,  for this   too has  been   a topic   of  interest in  the Learning    Sciences.    Whether    it is
"peripheral participation," the move from "novice" to "expert," or the formation of "identity," learning scientists
have been interested not only in the ways that learning involves construction of knowledge but also the ways it
transforms the learner as a person.
          Kolodner, for example, has written of LS as a "community of practice" in which a learning scientist is
formed    as a  person   with   "deep   and   abiding"   beliefs  who   can   "harvest"   theories   in  order   to "design"
environments. She has pointed out that although the first members of the Learning Sciences community were

                                                        56  ·  © ISLS
                                                  ICLS 2010    ·  Volume 2

"immigrants" from the shores of other disciplines and endeavors, new learning scientists are now home grown:
"Over the past decade, we've added a generation of young researchers educated by immigrants to the learning
sciences as first-generation learning scientists" (Kolodner, 2004).
          Graduate training in programs in the Learning Sciences is frequently described in terms that reflect the
local theoretical framework. For example, there may be a focus on apprenticeship, as students collaborate with
teams working on funded research projects. Such teams are often interdisciplinary, so students have hands-on
experience of design and methodology from a variety of perspectives. Coursework may emphasize practical
work   on  projects,  closely  tied   to faculty  members'       ongoing   research.  Effort  may   be  made   to establish
community, in part through informal meetings that are both academic and social, in part through participation in
formal events such as conferences and colloquia. Both classroom and research activities may be situated in real-
world settings such as workplaces and schools. Finally, students' research may be directed towards the design of
learning environments and to the transformation of activity in a real setting.
          Such aspects of graduate training can be considered as ways the Learning Sciences has arranged for its
reproduction over time, its continued existence through the production of new practitioners who have not only
the appropriate knowledge and skills but also the practical know-how and everyday common-sense needed to
act as a member. Since Lave and Wenger (1991) coined the phrase "legitimate peripheral participation," if not
before,  learning   scientists have   conceived   of group    membership     as   the  entry  not  only to   new  forms   of
knowledge but also new kinds of identity. As they put it, "one way to think of learning is as the historical
production,  transformation,    and   change  of persons"     (Lave  &   Wenger,    1991, p.  52),  so that  "learning  thus
implies becoming a different person with respect to the possibilities enabled by these systems of relations. To
ignore this aspect of learning is to overlook the fact that learning involves the construction of identities" (p. 53).
But identity is a concept that itself is used in differing ways by different branches of the Learning Sciences
discourse. For example, when Greeno (1997) proposed that "students develop patterns of participation that
contribute to their identities as learners," Anderson, Reder and Simon (1996) complained, "We really do not
know what Greeno means by a student's `identity as learner,' or to what extent he pictures identity as being
subsumed in a `group identity'" (p. 19). An accord was soon reached (Anderson, Greeno, Reder & Simon,
2000), but still for some, identity is equivalent to self-concept: the conception a person has of him or herself.
For others, identity is an aspect of membership, how other participants in a community identify a person. It has
been   suggested  that we  conceive    of learning   as a  process   in which    both  people  and  their  form of life  are
transformed (Packer & Goicoechea, 2000), a transformation with an embodied character, an ontological rather
than merely epistemological process.
          Whether    the transformation    is  thought   of   as  a  peripheral   participant  becoming      non-peripheral,
apprentice becoming master, or novice becoming expert, what is of central importance to us is that the work of
becoming   a learning    scientist is  public and practical,     and so it  can  be  studied. A   particular application  of
interaction analysis, then, is the investigation of participation in those professional activities in which the person
is transformed. The third presentation will draw on analysis of both episodes of interaction and interviews, the
latter as opportunities   to   explore the "ontological    complicity"     that a participant  comes    to have  with  their
community of practice.
          An example of a technique for bringing a student into the Learning Sciences is provided by a research
project co-led by undergraduate students at the University of Chicago. The aim of the project was to identify
children's communicative strategies when faced with the task of solving a geometric puzzle in a group setting,
and so  identify their potential for  creating `distributed'  cognition  in mathematics learning contexts.    One data set
included two groups of three 8-year-old children, one group of boys and the other of girls, each given a tangram
puzzle to solve in two different settings: a physical set-up, using plastic pieces and a board; and a virtual set-up,
using a computer and mouse to maneuver the pieces into place on the screen. By examining the children's
speech,   gestures, gaze  and   actions,  the student   researchers   explored    the points  of  discursive cohesion   that
structured the groups' collaborative reasoning throughout the process of solving the problems. Cohesive points
were identified as "coreferences," understood as the repeated expression of a single referent (Evans et al., 2009).
In this study, the investigators wished to expand the concept of `coreference' to include both verbal and non-
verbal deixis. The result was an expansive rubric for classifying how action, gesture, and speech related to and
built upon one another during the problem-solving process. Viewed in terms of the larger goal of developing
advanced technologies to facilitate collaborative problem solving in mathematics, such results may lead to new
requirements for instructional strategies, technologies, and interventions.
          Our point in summarizing this research project is to emphasize that participation in such projects is one
important  way   that  students  become    seasoned   scientists.    Viewed  reflexively,  such   a project  amounts   to a
communication and learning task for the researchers. They must discover how to establish points of discursive
cohesion as they observe and talk together about the video-recordings of children's interaction. As they develop
a system of classification of children's actions, gesture, gaze and speech, their collective vision of the events
they are studying is transformed. The researchers concluded that pivotal moments of interaction occurred when
the children directed the development of their collaboration by using meta-commentary about the task itself.

                                                        57  ·  © ISLS
                                                   ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 2

Our reflexive   analysis of  this   kind of  example  of  learning   science  research    amounts     to just such  a  meta-
commentary.
        In short, this third presentation will focus on the material practices in which learning scientists are
constituted, the embodied expertise or habitus they come to have, and how this provides them with the methods
(such as interactional devices) that are necessary for them to be successful members of the community.

Connections Among Presentations
In summary,     these  three presentations    work  together    to describe  three    aspects    of the  Learning  Sciences
considered   as a site and   activity of learning,  and   becoming.     The first presentation      maps the  terrain that is
defined by   the  network    of people,  artifacts and    places   that constitute   the Learning     Sciences, the   second
reconstructs the history of this network and describes the ongoing collaborative work in which it is maintained,
while the third explores how one becomes a participant. The search for knowledge will be considered a process
of interaction among members, and a practice in which newcomers become old timers. We hope that we have
shown how the parts of this symposium fit together to create something that is more than their sum.

Potential Significance of the Contributions
Where are the Learning Sciences at this moment? In what direction is the field going? Which questions have
been asked and answered successfully, and which questions apparently resist solution? What questions need to
be addressed in future work? What is the problematic from which these questions arise?
        These are our questions about the Learning Sciences, and in this symposium we will begin to answer
them. In a paper titled "Learning for anything everyday," Heath and McLaughlin (1994) discussed pedagogical
authenticity  and  presented    their ethnographic   research     on fields of    informal    learning.  They   offered two
conclusions that are relevant to any focus on the inter-relationships of participation in diverse communities. The
first is that authenticity cannot be artificially created.   The second is that, nevertheless, it is possible to create
supportive   organizational  or    learning environments     in which   authentic    activity is embedded,    environments
which may increase the likelihood of novice members moving into more sophisticated roles and communal
ways of knowing.
        Heath and McLaughlin concluded that pedagogical authenticity is to be found in the structure of tools
and activities, both current and historical that define participation in a specific community. This suggests that
authentic curricula should include access to "the social distribution of knowledge and skills through personal,
interpersonal and community working together" (Heath and McLaughlin, 1994, p. 473), and that analyses of this
distribution  are necessary     if we   are  to understand   how     people work     together    in a  community.     Taking
participation seriously  means     thinking  in  spatial-temporal  terms.   Authentic    curricula   are explicit efforts  to
provide students entry into the experiences afforded by being part of the historical-material-social geographies
of participation. Authenticity     also requires  relevancy;    when    institutions such as   the  Learning   Sciences   are
certainly created, the goals, values, initiatives, and functions of the social organization must be relevant to the
day-to-day needs of the participants and communities involved.
        Heath     and  McLaughlin       also indentified  structural    features   shared     by successful,   authentically
embedded informal learning fields (cf. Schneider & Evans, 2008), features we will look for in our analysis of
Learning Sciences:

    1.  Organizations serve as border zones: they support active participation in the community while
        brokering and preparing participants to participate in other organizations. The community's
        participation shares values, skills, and roles with these other communities.
    2.  Successful organizations value novices as a resource that contributes much-needed talent, perspectives,
        and experience. The division of labor is non-hierarchical and there is a strong sense of belonging.
    3.  All participants contribute to defining problems and finding solutions or to the plan of action. There is
        intense collaboration, with activity organized around a relevant problem, project, or product.
    4.  Participants are accountable to each other and to the group.
    5.  There are few community rules of conduct, but these are strictly enforced.
    6.  Participants are continuously assessing themselves and each other, and are assessed by people outside
        the community that they perform for, provide products to, or interact with.

Participants (alphabetical order)
Michael A. Evans ­ Presentation 1: The Learning Sciences as a Community of Practice
Dr. Evans, an assistant professor in the department of learning sciences and technologies at Virginia Tech,
teaches courses and conducts research focusing on the application of human learning theory to the design and
development of instructional materials and systems. Graduate courses taught include games and simulations for
education,   instructional   multimedia     development,     and,  perhaps  most     relevant    to  the  symposium,    and

                                                       58  ·  © ISLS
                                                ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 2

introduction  to the learning  sciences for  advanced    masters   and  doctoral students.  His publications include
Facilitating guided participation through mobile technologies: Designing creative learning environments for
self and others (Journal of Computing for Higher Education), Transforming e-learning into ee-learning: The
centrality of sociocultural participation (Innovate: Journal of Online Education), and Conceptual and practical
issues related to the design for and sustainability of Communities of Practice: The case of e-portfolio use in
preservice teacher training (Technology, Pedagogy, & Education).

Jorge Larreamendy, UNIANDES ­ Chair
Dr. Larreamendy is associate professor and chair of the Department of Psychology at the University of the
Andes in Bogotá, Colombia. He was a visiting professor at the Learning Research and Development Center,
Pittsburgh. His research interests center on scientific reasoning, informal learning, and learning in communities
of practice. His publications include Going the distance with online education (Review of Educational Research
with G.  Leinhardt),  Learning,  identity, and  instructional   explanations (to  appear in   Stein & Kucan   (Eds.),
Instructional explanations in the disciplines).

Cody Maddox - Presentation 3: The Constitution of a Learning Scientist
Cody Maddox is a graduate student in the Department of Psychology at Duquesne University in Pittsburgh.

Martin Packer ­ Presentation 3: The Constitution of a Learning Scientist
Dr. Packer is an associate professor in the Department of Psychology at Duquesne University in Pittsburgh, and
associate professor in the Department of Psychology at the University of the Andes in Bogotá, Colombia. He
teaches courses in developmental psychology and qualitative research methodology. He is one of the founding
editors of the journal Qualitative Research in Psychology, published by Taylor & Francis. He is author of
Changing Classes: School Reform and the New Economy, and co-editor of Cultural and Critical Perspectives
on Human Development. His book The Science of Qualitative: Towards a Historical Ontology will be published
this year by Cambridge University Press.

Keith Sawyer, University of Washington, St Louis ­ Discussant
Dr. Sawyer is an Associate Professor of Education at Washington University, with additional appointments in
the Department of Psychology and the School of Business.        He is author of Group Genius: The Creative Power
Of Collaboration   and editor of The Cambridge     Handbook      Of The  Learning   Sciences.   He studies creativity,
collaboration, and learning.

Reed Stevens ­ Presentation 2: Interaction Analysis of the Learning Sciences
Dr. Stevens is Professor of Learning Sciences at Northwestern University. His research interests include
learning and activity in a wide range of places and situations; design of learning tools -- curriculum, activities,
and technologies. Publications include (co-authors cited in reference below) Foundations and opportunities for
an interdisciplinary science of learning (The Cambridge Handbook of the Learning Sciences).

Acknowledgements
Students in  Dr.  Evans'  Fall  2009 graduate    course    on  the foundations   of the learning  sciences provided
thoughtful feedback and suggestions for revision on portions of earlier drafts of this proposal. Research on
geometric puzzles partially funded by the National Science Foundation (IIS # 0736151).

References
Anderson,  J. R.,  Reder, L.   M., &    Simon,   H.  A.    (1996).  Situated learning   and education.  Educational
         Researcher, 25(4), 5­11.
Anderson, J. R., Greeno, J. G., Reder, L. M., & Simon, H. A. (2000). Perspectives on learning, thinking, and
         activity. Educational Researcher, 29(4), 11-13.
Barab, S. A. Evans, M. A., & Baek, E. (2004). Activity Theory as a lens for characterizing the participatory
         unit. In D. H. Jonassen (Ed.), Handbook of research for educational communications and technology,
         (2nd ed, pp. 199-214). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Bichelmeyer, B.A., Cagiltay, K., Evans M.A., Paulas, T., & Soon, J.A. (2005). Collaboration among
         multicultural virtual teams: Issues, challenges, strategies. In C. Howard, J. Boettcher, L. Justice, K.
         Schenk, P. Rogers, & G. Berg (Vol. Eds.), Encyclopedia of distance learning, (Vol. 2, pp. 256-263).
         Hershey, PA: Idea Group.
Blumenfeld, P.K., Kempler, T.M., & Krajcik, J.S. (2006). Motivation and cognitive engagement in learning
         environments. In K. Sawyer (ed.), The Cambridge Handbook of the Learning Sciences, (pp. 475-488).
         New York: Cambridge University Press.

                                                     59  ·  © ISLS
                                                 ICLS 2010    ·  Volume 2

Bourdieu, P., & Wacquant, L. J. D. (1992). An invitation to reflexive sociology. Chicago: University of Chicago
         Press.
Bransford, J.D., Brown, A. L., & Cocking, R. R. (Eds.). (2000). How people learn: Brain, mind, experience,
         and school. Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
Bransford, J.D., Barron,, B., Pea, R.D., Meltzoff, A., Kuhl, P. Bell, P., Stevens, R., Schwartz, D.L., Vye, N.
         Reeves,    B.,    Roschelle,   J.,  &  Sabelli,     N.H.   (2006).  Foundations    and  opportunities   for  an
         interdisciplinary science of learning. In K. Sawyer (ed.), The Cambridge Handbook of the Learning
         Sciences, (pp. 19-34). New York: Cambridge University Press.
Brown, J.S., Collins, A., & Duguid, P. (1989). Situated cognition and the culture of learning. Educational
         Researcher, 18(1), 32-42.
Confrey,  J. (2006).  The   evolution   of  design studies   as  methodology.   In K.  Sawyer   (ed.), The   Cambridge
         Handbook of the Learning Sciences, (pp. 135-151). New York: Cambridge University Press.
Evans,   M.A.  &   Schwen,  T.M.     (2006).  Chasing    a   fault across ship and   shore: Explaining  the  context  of
         troubleshooting in the U.S. Navy. Performance Improvement Quarterly, 19(2), 211-229.
Evans, M.A., Ryon, E., Feenstra, A., & McNeill, D. (2009).           Discourse  coding from    a multimodal approach:
         Distributed cognition & geometric problem solving in young children. Paper presented at the Alpine-
         Rendezvous Workshop, November 30 - December 2, 2009, Garmisch-Partenkirchen, Germany.
Greeno, J. G. (1997). On claims that answer the wrong questions. Educational Researcher, 26(1), 5­17.
Heath, S.B., & McLaughlin, M.W. (1994). Learning for anything everyday. Curriculum Studies, 26(5), 471-489.
Hutchins, E. (1995). Cognition in the Wild. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Jordan, B. & Henderson, A. (1995). Interaction analysis: Foundations and practice. The Journal of the Learning
         Sciences, 4(1), 39-104.
Kolodner,   J. L.  (2004).  The Learning     Sciences:   Past,   Present, and  Future. Educational    Technology:    The
         Magazine for Managers of Change in Education, 44 (3), 37 - 42.
Koschmann,     T.  (1994). Toward    a  theory of  computer      support  for collaborative  learning. The   Journal  of
         Learning Sciences, 3(3), 219-225.
Koschmann, T. (1996). Paradigm shifts and instructional technology: An introduction. In T. Koschmann (ed.),
         CSCL: Theory and practice of an emergent paradigm, (pp. 1-23). Mahwah, NJ: LEA.
Lave, J., & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning: Legitimate peripheral participation. New York: Cambridge
         University Press.
Meltzoff, A.N., Kuhl, P.K., Movellan, J., & Sejnowski, T.J. (2009). Foundations for a new science of learning.
         Science,325, 284-288.
Nespor,  J.  (1994).    Knowledge    in Motion:    space,    time   and   curriculum in  undergraduate     physics   and
         management. Falmer Press: London.
Packer, M. J., & Goicoechea, J. (2000). Sociocultural and constructivist theories of learning: Ontology, not just
         epistemology. Educational Psychologist, 35(4), 227-241.
Scardamalia, M., & Bereiter, C. (1994). Computer support for knowledge-building communities. The Journal of
         the Learning Sciences, 3(3), 265-283.
Shaffer, D.W.,    & Clinton, K.A.    (2006). Toolforthoughts:      Reexamining    Thinking  in the Digital  Age.  Mind,
         Culture, and Activity, 13(4), 283-300.
Schank,  R.C.,  &   Abelson,  R.P.   (1977).  Scripts, plans,      goals and  understanding:   An  inquiry  into human
         knowledge structures. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Schneider,   S.B., &  Evans,  M.A.   (2008,  October/November).       Transforming   e-learning  into  ee-learning:  The
         centrality   of sociocultural  participation.   Innovate:   Journal   of Online Education,    5(1). Retrieved
         October 30, 2008 from http://www.innovateonline.info/index.php?view=article&id=511.
Schoenfeld,  A.H.   (1999).  Looking    toward the  21st   century:   Challenges  of educational   theory  and practice.
         Educational Researcher, 28(7), 4-14.
Stahl, G. (2006). Group cognition: Computer support for building collaborative knowledge. Cambridge, MA:
     MIT Press.
Stokes,  D.  E. (1997).    Pasteur's Quadrant:     Basic   Science   and   Technological Innovation.   The   Brookings
         Institution.
Suthers, D.D.   (2006).   Technology    affordances for    intersubjective  meaning  making:    A  research agenda   for
         CSCL. International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 1(3), 315-337.
Vygotsky, L.S. (1986). Thought and Language - Revised Edition. Boston, MA: The MIT Press.
Wertsch, J.W. (2007). Mediation. In H. Daniels, M. Cole, & J.W. Wertsch (eds.), The Cambridge companion to
         Vygotsky (178-192). New York: Cambridge University Press.

                                                      60   ·  © ISLS
