                                                 ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

                          Analyzing Collaborative Knowledge
                    Construction in Secondary School Biology
     Vanessa L. Peters, James D. Slotta, Ontario Institute for Studies in Education, University of Toronto
                          252 Bloor Street West, Toronto, Ontario, Canada M5S 1V6
                                 Email: vlpeters@gmail.com, jslotta@gmail.com

         Abstract: This research investigates student collaboration in a high school biology curriculum
         that was based on the Knowledge Community and Inquiry (KCI) model. Using co-design, the
         researchers collaborated with three high school science teachers to design a curriculum where
         112 grade-ten biology students collaboratively developed a community wiki about Canadian
         ecozones and biodiversity issues. Students then used the wiki as the primary resource for a
         subsequent  inquiry   activity. This  paper   analyzes  students'  contributions to the knowledge
         base, test performance, and student satisfaction to evaluate the efficacy of the KCI model. A
         new   method  of analysis  for  collaborative   wiki  artifacts was developed   to measure student
         interaction in the wiki. We found that students who were higher contributors to the knowledge
         base performed better on a post-test than students who were measured as low contributors.
         Our  findings suggest   that  the KCI    model  is  a promising   mechanism   for   supporting  both
         collaborative and individual learning.

Introduction
Increasingly, scholars are emphasizing the importance of preparing students for the complex problems of a
"knowledge society" (Drucker, 1959; Bereiter, 2002). Such 21st century skills are important for students to
become   productive   citizens   in a    technological   and   knowledge-oriented   society  (Lemke,     Coughlin, &
Reifsneider, 2009). Such skills cannot be taught in isolation; rather, they must be learned in the context of a
knowledge community where individuals collectively pursue the advancement of ideas. Many educators have
noted the mismatch between conventional school curriculum and the needs of citizens in a knowledge society
(Tapscott & Williams, 2006; diSessa, 2000). While schools struggle to raise student achievement on basic skills,
scholars have identified a full spectrum of cognitive and metacognitive skills that are not being addressed,
including inquiry, critical thinking, design and collaboration (Slotta & Linn, 2009). Thus, the traditional forms
of lecture and homework that still predominate in today's classrooms are not desirable models for the design of
technology-enhanced learning (Collins & Halverson, 2009).
         The domains of science and technology are particularly reliant on high levels of knowledge work, yet
in classroom settings teachers routinely employ rote learning in an effort to cover the mandated curriculum
content (Slotta & Linn, 2009). This is particularly the case in secondary school science, which covers more
topics than any other subject, thus resulting in textbooks that have been described as being "a mile wide and an
inch deep"  (Schmidt,  McKnight,     &   Raizen,   1997, p.   62). Secondary  teachers are   responsible for  teaching
specific content matter,  making    it difficult to design   learning activities where students  can pursue    a deep
understanding of science topics. All science lessons must fit within a tight schedule of content coverage, with
outcomes that are assessable by conventional measures. The fast pace of most science courses leaves teachers
little or no time to ask their students "big-picture" questions, or engage them in personally relevant topics.
         This paper begins by considering the established research traditions of knowledge communities and
scaffolded inquiry, as well as a recent pedagogical model that describes how these two traditions can be blended
to create engaging new curriculum for secondary science students (see Slotta, 2007; Slotta & Peters, 2008). We
discuss the important innovation of co-design (Roschelle, Penuel, & Sechtman, 2006), which offers a means for
creating such  curriculum  in  a way     that meets teachers'   expectations without   undermining  the  researchers'
objectives. We discuss an eight-week design study where a technology-enhanced curriculum was co-designed
according to the Knowledge Community and Inquiry model. In our analysis, we evaluate students' contributions
to the   community   knowledge    base,   the  effects of   such   contributions on test  performance,   and  student
satisfaction with the curriculum unit.

Theoretical Framework
A number of promising instructional approaches have already shown to engage students in deep collaborative
inquiry. In the research program called Fostering a Communities of Learners (FCL), Brown and Campione
(1996)   scaffolded student  learning    within  a  peer community.      The key   components   of FCL    ­   research,
information sharing (jigsaw), and consequential tasks (performing) ­ provide structure and support for students'
collaborations within   the  learning    community.      When   combined,    these  components   form    an   effective
instructional strategy that fosters critical reflection and deep understanding of disciplinary content. An important
characteristic of FCL activities is that they are independently purposeful, yet they cohere to form a functional

                                                     548  ·  © ISLS
                                                 ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

system. Although FCL is scripted, it must be emphasized that simply following a series of steps is not enough ­
teachers must understand the goals and philosophies that underlie the approach.
          An important theoretical contribution of FCL is the notion of diverse expertise. In their classroom
implementations     of  FCL,   Brown   and  Campione      (1996)    found   that students  came    to highly  value  the
contributions of their peers. These contributions were not always about content, they were often related to using
the computers or managing the group (Collins, Joseph, & Bielaczyc, 2004). This observation solidified the
importance of information sharing for fostering a sense of community among learners. The students also offered
suggestions for refining the design of FCL (Bielaczyc, 2006), such as recommending that information sharing
occur sooner in the process rather than at the very end of the project. This suggestion resulted in an innovation
called crosstalk, which involves students presenting their preliminary findings to the entire class. Crosstalk
became a mechanism for a peer-review of ideas that would often result in students pursuing a new line of
inquiry (Bielaczyc, 2006).
          Another important consideration in the research literature is that of scaffolded inquiry. Researchers
have developed a number of prominent pedagogical approaches that provide students with rich collaborative
inquiry activities, many of which include technology-enhanced tools and materials (e.g., Linn & Hsi, 2000;
Slotta, 2004; Songer, 2006). Broadly speaking, inquiry learning is an instructional approach where students
research   and investigate   some  phenomenon      before making    inferences   about it (Kuhn,   Black, Keselman,   &
Kaplan, 2000). For some educational researchers, the goal of inquiry learning is to teach students to work in
ways that are similar to the way real scientists work. Students pose questions, formulate hypotheses, and then
design    investigations to  test those  hypotheses   (White    &    Frederiksen,  1998).    For other  researchers, the
experimentation cycle is just one of many possible inquiry patterns (Linn & Eylon, 2006). In all models of
inquiry, the teacher does not assume the role of "sage on the stage" (King, 1993), but that of a facilitator who
guides    students in leading  their own  investigations   (de Jong   &  van  Joolingen,   1998).  Students  engaged  in
inquiry activities learn domain-specific content while developing their reasoning skills (Hmelo-Silver, Duncan,
& Chinn, 2007) and their ability to understand and apply scientific principles and concepts (Schwab, 1962).
          Both  inquiry   learning   and knowledge     communities      emphasize   the   importance   of   collaborative
knowledge     construction.  Here,   collaboration refers  to  the  coordinated   efforts resulting from  "a  continued
attempt   to construct   and maintain  a shared    conception  of  a problem"    (Roschelle  &   Teasley, 1995, p.   70).
Fischer, Bruhn, Gräsel, & Mandl (2002) describe four characteristics of collaborative knowledge construction:
(a) individuals bring their prior knowledge to the learning situation, (b) there is a cause for a learning partner to
share that knowledge, (c) a consensus is reached about the content or given facts, and (d) individual perspectives
are integrated into a common understanding of the task or problem. This form of learning, in which students
become productive knowledge workers, citizens and lifelong learners (Stahl, 2000), always occurs in a social
context, either face-to-face or computer mediated. The essential element is the provision of a shared space for
individuals to engage in social negotiation.
          The two research traditions of scaffolded inquiry and knowledge communities provide mechanisms for
deeply engaging students in science learning. However, despite widespread enthusiasm, these approaches have
yet to make strong headway in science classrooms, as researchers have yet to determine how they can promote
new cultures of learning while remaining sensitive to curriculum standards: What types of pedagogical and
technological  innovations    are required to  transform   classrooms    into learning  communities?    How   can these
innovations be designed? What supports do teachers need to enact new approaches in a manner that does not
undermine the theoretical commitments of the design? These are questions that need to be addressed before
inquiry-oriented instruction can pervade secondary school science curricula.

Knowledge Community and Inquiry
In an effort to make headway on these problems, Slotta (2007) has developed the Knowledge Community and
Inquiry (KCI) model which combines collaborative knowledge construction with scripted inquiry activities to
target specific curriculum learning objectives (Figure 1). The model begins with a collaborative knowledge
construction   activity  where students  explore   and   investigate  their own   ideas   as a   community  of  learners,
creating knowledge artifacts that are aggregated into a communal knowledge base. An important component of
collaborative knowledge construction is that learning activities (such as inquiry-type investigations) must be
guided by the community itself through the knowledge construction process (Scardamalia & Bereiter, 1996).
Common themes, ideas or interests should emerge, reflecting the "voice" of the community. The instructor must
listen to this voice and respond by designing activities that reflect students' interests. The latter process is
critical, but  also challenging   to  execute, since  the    design  of any   activity must   also  address the content
expectations and learning goals of the curriculum.
           It is no easy task to design activities that respond to community interests while addressing learning
goals and adhering to time constraints. In the KCI model, scripted activities are co-designed by teachers and
researchers only after the knowledge construction phase is complete, resulting in new activities that build upon
the themes that were identified within the knowledge base. Students then work independently or collaboratively

                                                     549   ·  © ISLS
                                               ICLS 2010  ·   Volume 1

on the scripted activities, drawing on knowledge elements from the community knowledge base, producing new
contributions to that knowledge base, and completing inquiry tasks that are directly connected to assessable
content learning outcomes. KCI attempts to support the development of such curriculum by working closely
with teachers to develop a carefully controlled flow of collaborative knowledge construction and scaffolded
inquiry activities that are specifically designed to address the mandated curriculum.

                 Figure 1. Flow diagram of a Knowledge Community and Inquiry curriculum.

Methodology
The research discussed here was the second iteration of a design-oriented study that implemented the KCI
model. Design   research   (Brown, 1992;   Collins, 1992)   was an  appropriate   methodology   for this study as it
supports multiple investigations across a number of contexts (McCanliss, Kalchman, & Bryant, 2003). Design
research can be characterized by its iterative design cycles and formative research in authentic settings such as a
real classroom (Edelson, 2002). Another important method used in this study was co-design (Roschelle, Penuel,
& Shechtman, 2006), where teachers and researchers work in close partnership when designing all curriculum
materials  and activities. Since  it was   important   that our biodiversity  unit  target the  curriculum   content
expectations, the teachers' input was essential for creating relevant and ecologically valid materials.

Participants and Data Sources
Participants included 112 grade ten biology students and three experienced science teachers. The co-educational
school involved in this study provides specialized curriculum for high-achieving students in grades 7 through
12. Initially created as a laboratory school, this unique institution prides itself on new and innovative classroom
practices. Admission  to   the school is   competitive and   based  on  students' score on  the Secondary    School
Admission   Test (SSAT),    with 98%    of new admissions    being  accepted  from  grade  6 students.   The school
population is ethnically diverse, with the majority of students coming from middle to upper-middle class homes.
The school has a strong commitment to the liberal arts and sciences curriculum, and students are expected to
fully engage in their academic program. There is a strong emphasis on community, and individual acceleration
and early course specialization are discouraged. Assessment is ongoing throughout the school year and consists
of formal progress reports and performance improvement plans.

Design and Procedure
The teachers   began the   Biodiversity lesson by   placing  students  into one of eight   Canadian  biome   groups.
Working in these groups, students could choose a geographical region from Canada for which they would create
a wiki "Ecozone Page". A template was used to scaffold students to include specific biology content and to help
them set up their wiki page. While it was important to preserve the open-ended feeling of collaborative editing

                                                   550  ·   © ISLS
                                             ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

that typifies wikis, it was equally important to our project that we provide students with a simple, structured way
to create wiki pages that scaffolded their treatment of science concepts. We therefore created a new hybrid wiki
environment that improved control over student accounts, groups, editing permissions and other features. This
environment includes a special "New Page" web form (developed using Ruby on Rails) that collects metadata
(e.g., with check boxes and text fields), and then generates a new wiki page with pre-specified headers to help
scaffold students' wiki entries as well as the specified authoring and access permissions (see Figure 2).

                                   Figure 2. "New Ecozone Page" script.

        Students in all four classes contributed to this same wiki repository, adding to and editing their peers'
ecozone  pages.  After the knowledge  construction   activity, students  were  tested on    their knowledge  about
Canadian biomes and ecozones. After working on the ecozone pages, students worked in pairs to create another
wiki article about an issue or problem that posed an environmental threat to a Canadian region. Students could
draw on their expertise by writing about an issue from the same ecozone they had written about in the first
activity. Because biodiversity issues are not restricted to one ecozone, and to encourage synthesis of the wider
knowledge base, students were asked to make connections between the different regions. Students were also
asked to link to their peers' wiki pages wherever possible when referencing them in their biodiversity issue
page.

Data Sources and Analysis
Data for this study were drawn from the revision logs of students' contribution to the wiki resource, pre and
post-test scores and student interviews. Content analysis was performed on a subset of students' wiki edits to
gain insight into their authoring practices, and to determine the level of collaboration that was occurring. The
pre and post-tests were used to gauge the effects of wiki authoring on students' test scores. Interviews revealed
students' satisfaction levels with the wiki curriculum, including their perspectives of the co-authoring process.
The use of multiple methods when studying collaboration is desirable since it provides a more complete picture
of student engagement and interaction (Hmelo-Silver, 2003; Naidu & Järvelä, 2006).
        Since there are no accepted guidelines for analyzing wiki contributions, we developed a method of
content analysis to capture students' knowledge contributions    to  the wiki. To begin,     we   defined a unit of
analysis for studying the wiki revision logs. The wiki technology employed in this study labels all contributions
to the wiki as "changes"; however, this characterization is imprecise as it suggests that only a single change is
occurring. We instead labeled such changes as individual "transactions", since it allows for multiple codes to be
assigned to a particular section of the wiki (e.g., adding text, deleting text or moving text). Figure 3 is a screen
shot of a revision history comparing two versions of a wiki page, and shows why this kind of segmentation
(which is labeled as a single change by the wiki software), is inadequate for analysis purposes. Here, we can see
two transactions: T1 and T2 (labeled as such on Figure 3). The upper portion of T1 (red text) shows a section of
text as it appeared before the revision, and how it appeared afterwards (green text). The student who completed
this transaction deleted some text from a paragraph (highlighted in dark red with strikethrough), and added new
text (highlighted in dark green and bolded). In T2, the student added new text without altering any existing text.
Referring to the content in this way enabled us to code wiki interactions without being overly reductionist in
terms of the student's editing process, and permits a finer-grain analysis of wiki content.

                                                 551  ·  © ISLS
                                             ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

      T1

      T2

               Figure 3. Screen shot of a revision history comparing two versions of a wiki
               page. In this comparison there are two "transactions". The first transaction
               (T1) contains text that was deleted and added into existing text. The second
               transaction (T2) contains newly added text.

       We then developed a coding scheme to analyze the wiki contributions of a subset of students, coding
all the transactions they made to every version of every wiki page. For the coding procedure, we first coded for
"transaction type" (move, add, delete or format), then for "content type" (text, image, internal link or external
link). Since substantive contributions would likely be written in prose, only text-based transactions were coded
further ­ as either belonging to peer or self. If the edit was made to a classmate's text it was coded as peer, if it
was made to one's own text it was coded as self.

Results
Students were actively engaged in the construction of the knowledge resource within the wiki, creating 31
ecozone and biome pages, and 47 biodiversity issue pages that showed an average contribution of more than
1500 words per student (M = 1651.55, SD = 1700.40). Prior to analysis, each wiki page was run through
Copyscape©, a web-based utility that compares web documents to check for instances of plagiarism. We found
no cases that warranted concern. In the following sections we present our findings for performance gains, the
collaborative knowledge construction activity and student satisfaction.

Knowledge Construction Activity
To analyze how students were collaborating in the wiki, we applied our coding rubric to a subsample of students
(n = 8) to learn about their editing practices when co-authoring their knowledge artifacts. Overall, the students
contributed an average of 38 transactions (SD = 20.26), with high variability levels between students. Of these
transactions, an average of 4.62 were images, 1.25 were internal links and 3.37 were external links. The total
number of text-based transactions was 269 (M = 33.63, SD = 12.93)
       We were interested in finding out how many of these text transactions involved other students text.
That is, how often were students editing their own text, opposed to that of their peers? Of the students surveyed,
the total number of self-based text edits was 151 (M = 18.78, SD = 8.87) and the total number of peer-based text
edits was 118 (M = 14.75, SD = 9.44). The overall percentage of self vs. peer edits was roughly equal: 56.13%
and 43.87%, respectively (see Table 1).

                                                 552  ·  © ISLS
                                             ICLS 2010      ·  Volume 1

Table 1: Total text-based transactions per student: self and peer.

                                                               Total text edits
 Student                           Self                             Peer                        Total
 Nick                              21                                15                           36
 Nathan                            22                                31                           53
 Patricia                          27                                12                           39
 Marion                            34                                   9                         43
 Dave                               7                                18                           25
 Karen                             14                                23                           37
 Wendy                             15                                10                           25
 Brian                             11                                   0                         11

Performance Gains
We were interested in the effect of the knowledge construction activity on student test performance. We used
only the test scores of two classes (n = 50) that were taught by the same teacher. We then placed these students
into one of two groups based on their total number of text edits: "low contributors" and "high contributors".
Students in the low contributing group were below the median for total words edited, and students in the high
contributing group were above.
        To find out if wiki contribution levels had an effect on test performance we conducted pre and post-
tests. The difference in pre-test scores between the low and high contributing groups were not statistically
significant (t(48) = 0.2429, p = 0.809), as shown in Figure 3. We did, however, find a significant difference
between the two groups on a    post-test (t(50) = 4.68,     p  = <.0001).   Although this finding does not provide
unequivocal evidence of higher learning gains for students who contribute more to the knowledge base, it does
suggest that students who are more involved with the knowledge construction process are also engaging more
with the subject content, resulting in higher test scores.

                       Figure 3. Test Scores from Low and High Contributing Students.

Student Satisfaction
Student interviews were conducted in the beginning, mid, and end-point of the study. A total of twelve students
participated in the interviews. Participants were interviewed in pairs in an informal environment, usually during
the lunch break or after school. Since the students had never used a wiki before, we were interested in their
perspectives of creating a wiki in their science class. All students responded that building a knowledge base was
a fun and novel way to learn biology. One student, Marge, described her perspective of the unit as follows:

        I really enjoyed it because, like, I've never built a wiki site before and it was really cool
        because we actually got to make a webpage in a way ­ and I think it was a really interesting
        way of learning about Canadian biodiversity without just going on other peoples sites and
        memorizing all the information. Because here, I guess when you actually put the effort in

                                                 553  ·     © ISLS
                                                ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

          creating a website you learn a lot more about it, or the subject itself, then when you just read it
          in a book ­ because when you're creating a site you have to do the research and then decide
          what information you need and what information you can leave out because it's either not
          relevant or it's too complicated. But in the long run you do the elimination process with the
          information that you get, so it's really interesting and makes you learn stuff.

          Other  students  commented   on the  authoring   process of  their collaborative  knowledge    construction
activity. For example, some students were against the idea that students could make deletions on their wiki
page. They felt it was preferable for their classmates to leave comments or suggestions, but not actually edit the
original text. They felt this would give them the opportunity to refute changes made by others, and avoid what
they described as "wasted work". According to one student: "I don't agree with people making deletions right
away on your own thing. I think it's better that they leave a comment and say `you could just do this' but you
don't actually   change  the original  text." Other students,  however,   felt  comfortable   about  their classmates
making changes to their wiki articles. In Jason's words:

          Well, I don't really mind [people editing my ecozone page] as long as I know that everything
          is completely recorded in the editing history, but I guess if it was just easier to undo the
          changes, like a bit more immediate, then it wouldn't bother people... but I guess when you're
          posting something to a wiki you have to know that someone else is going to make changes, so
          you just have to be okay with that and move on.

Overall, the students enjoyed making wiki artifacts as part of their biodiversity unit, and felt confident about
using their peers' work as a resource for later activities. Since the wiki environment was new to students,
however, future implementations of this activity would need to consider the social aspects of wiki authoring
such as accepted norms for editing, work distribution and possible role assignment.

Discussion and Conclusion
          Although still ongoing, the findings from this research provide support for the Knowledge Community
and Inquiry model as a mechanism for engaging students in collaborative inquiry. The blended use of wiki-
based knowledge construction and scripted inquiry activities enabled students to make productive use of their
co-constructed   community   resource.  Through   co-design,   we   were  able  to  establish a   successful  research
partnership   with teachers, resulting in curriculum    materials  in  which   the teachers   had  a strong   sense of
ownership. We see this partnership as a positive step towards the "hybrid culture" described by Bereiter (2002),
in which researchers and teachers rely on each other when working towards an educational objective.
          This research also raises new questions concerning collaborative practices in a wiki environment. For
example, despite the relative success of the knowledge construction activity, we still know little about students'
individual practices when working in a wiki: Why do some students contribute more than others? Are all wiki
transactions of the same educative value? And what are the optimal conditions for encouraging students to work
with  the content   contributed by their  peers?  These    questions  open   up an  important   dialogue   for further
investigation ­ and characterization ­ of collaborative knowledge construction and inquiry.

References
Bereiter, C. (2002). Education and mind in the knowledge age (pp. 382-418). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
          Associates.
Bielaczyc, K. (2006). Designing social infrastructure: Critical issues in creating learning environments with
          technology. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 13(3), 301-329.
Brown,   A.   L. (1992). Design  experiments:   Theoretical  and   methodological   challenges  in creating   complex
          interventions in classroom settings. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 2(2), 141-178.
Brown, A. L., & Campione, J. (1996). Psychological theory and the design of innovative learning environments:
          On procedures, principles, and systems. In L. Schauble & R. Glaser (Eds.), Innovations in learning:
          New environments for education, (pp. 289-325). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Collins, A. (1992). Toward a design science of education. In E. Scanlon & T. O'Shea (Eds.), New directions in
          educational technology. New York: Springer-Verlag.
Collins, A., & Halverson, R. (2009). Rethinking education in the age of technology: The digital revolution and
          schooling in America. New York, NY: Teachers College Press.
Collins,  A., Joseph,  D., &  Bielaczyc,  K.   (2004).  Design  research:  Theoretical and    methodological   issues.
          Journal of the Learning Sciences, 13(1), 15-42.
de Jong,  T.,  &   van Joolingen, W.   R. (1998).   Scientific discovery   learning  with  computer   simulations   of
          conceptual domains. Review of Educational Research, 68(2), 179-201.
Drucker, P. F. (1959). Landmarks of tomorrow. New York: Harper & Brothers.

                                                    554  ·  © ISLS
                                              ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

diSessa, A. A. (2000). Changing minds: Computers, learning, and literacy. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Edelson, D. C. (2002). Design research: What we learn when we engage in design. Journal of the Learning
         Sciences, 11(1), 105-121.
Fischer, F., Bruhn, J., Gräsel, C., & Mandl, H. (2002). Fostering collaborative knowledge construction with
         visualization tools. Learning and Instruction, 12, 213-232.
Hmelo-Silver, C. E., Duncan, R. G., & Chinn, C. A. (2007). Scaffolding and achievement in problem based and
         inquiry learning: A response to Kirschner, Sweller, and Clark (2006). Educational Psychologist, 42(2),
         99-107.
Hmelo-Silver, C. E. (2003). Analyzing collaborative knowledge construction: Multiple methods for integrated
         understanding. Computers & Education, 41, 397-420.
King, A. (1993). From sage on the stage to guide on the side. College Teaching, 41(1), 30-35.
Kuhn, D., Black, J., Keselman, A., Kapla, D. (2000). The development of cognitive skills to support inquiry
         learning. Cognition and Instruction 18(4), 495-523.
Linn, M. C., & Eylon, B. S. (2006). Science education: Integrating views of learning and instruction. In P. A.
         Alexander   &  P. H.  Winne  (Eds.), Handbook      of educational psychology     (2nd ed., pp.  511-544).
         Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Linn, M. C., & Hsi, S. (2000). Computers, Teachers, Peers: Science Learning Partners. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence
         Erlbaum Associates.
Lemke, C., Coughlin, E., & Reifsneider, D. (2009). Technology in schools: What the research says: A 2009
         update   [Electronic  Version].   Cisco/Metiri      Group.    Retrieved   February    26,   2010,    from
         http://www.metiri.com/
McCandliss,   B. D.,  Kalchman,  M.,  Bryant, P.   (2003).   Design   experiments  and   laboratory approaches  to
         learning: Steps toward collaborative exchange.    Educational Researcher, 32(1), 14-16.
Naidu, S., & Järvelä, S. (2007). Analyzing CMC content for what? Computers & Education, Computers &
         Education 46,  96­103
Roschelle, J., Penuel, W. R., & Shechtman, N. (2006). Co-design of innovations with teachers: Definition and
         dynamics. Proceedings of the Biennial International Conference of the Learning Sciences (pp. 606-
         612). Bloomington, IN.
Roschelle, J., & Teasley, S. D. (1995). The construction of shared knowledge in collaborative problem solving.
         In C. O'Malley (Ed.), Computer supported collaborative learning (pages 69-97). Heidelberg, Germany:
         Springer-Verlag.
Scardamalia, M., & Bereiter, C. (1996). Adaptation and understanding: A case for new cultures of schooling. In
         S. Vosniadou, E. de Corte, R. Glaser, & H. Mandl (Eds.), International perspectives on the design of
         technology: Supported learning environments (pp. 149-163). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Schmidt, W. H., McKnight, C. C., & Raizen, S. A. (1997). A splintered vision: An investigation of U.S. science
         and mathematics education. Norwell, MA: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Schwab, J. J. (1962). The teaching of science as enquiry. In J. J. Schwab & P. F. Brandweine (Eds.), The
         teaching of science (pp. 3-103). Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Slotta, J. D. (2004). The Web-based inquiry science environment (WISE): Scaffolding knowledge integration in
         the science classroom. In M. C. Linn, P. Bell, & E. Davis (Eds.), Internet Environments for Science
         Education (pp. 203-232). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Slotta, J. D. (2007).  Supporting   collaborative inquiry:  New   architectures, new opportunities.  In  J. Gobert
         (Chair), Fostering peer collaboration with technology. Symposium conducted at the biennial Computer
         Supported Collaborative Learning (CSCL) Conference, New Brunswick, NJ.
Slotta, J. D. & Linn, M. C. (2009). WISE Science:     Inquiry and the Internet in the Science Classroom. Teachers
         College Press.
Slotta, J. D., & Peters, V. L. (2008). A blended model for knowledge communities: Embedding scaffolded
         inquiry. International Perspectives in the Learning Sciences: Cre8ing a learning world. Proceedings of
         the  Eighth  International  Conference    for  the  Learning   Sciences  ­  ICLS   2008    (pp. 343-350).
         International Society of the Learning Sciences, Inc.
Songer, N. (2006). BioKIDS: An animated conversation on the development of curricular activity structures for
         inquiry science. In R. K. Sawyer (Ed.), The Cambridge handbook of the learning sciences (pp. 355-
         370). Cambridge, MA: Cambridge University Press.
Stahl, G. (2000). A model of collaborative knowledge-building. In B. Fishman & S. O'Connor-Divelbiss (Eds.),
         Fourth  International Conference  of     the Learning  Sciences  (pp.   70-77). Mahwah,    NJ:  Lawrence
         Erlbaum.
Tapscott, D., & Williams, A. D. (2006). Wikinomics: How mass collaboration changes everything. London:
         Penguin Group.
White, B. Y., & Frederiksen, J. R. (1998). Inquiry, modeling, and metacognition: Making science accessible to
         all students. Cognition and Instruction, 16(1)3-118.

                                                  555   ·  © ISLS
