                                                      ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

           Spatial Intelligence and the Research ­ Practice Challenge
                            Moshe Krakowski, Yeshiva University, moshe.krakowski@yu.edu
                               Kristin Ratliff, University of Chicago, krratliff@uchicago.edu
                               Louis M. Gomez, University of Pittsburgh, lgomez@pitt.edu
                               Susan Levine, University of Chicago, s-levine@uchicago.edu

           Abstract:  Spatial  intelligence  is  deeply   related   to  success  in the  STEM       disciplines (science,
           technology, engineering, and math) yet teachers are unaware of the concept. This paper reports on
           a teacher, researcher, and designer collaboration focused on translating research shown to improve
           spatial thinking  practice.  This translation    is supported    through  a spatial  "toolkit"   of  activities
           designed to raise teachers' spatial intelligence awareness and improve spatial thinking practice.

Introduction
In this paper    we   will describe    the efforts  of  the Spatial    Intelligence  and  Learning    Center    (SILC)   to impact
elementary school teachers' knowledge and incorporation of spatial content in the school day.These efforts face two
interrelated sets of problems. The first is a central problem of education research: namely, how to translate research
insights developed in the lab into classroom practices. The second relates to the unique nature of spatial intelligence:
as a domain of research it has no named corollary in the school day, greatly exacerbating existing difficulties in
bringing   research  to practice.  Though    spatial   intelligence  has   important implications    for success   in   the STEM
disciplines (Science, Technology, Engineering, and Math), it is not itself an independent discipline. We have yet to
find a school that has a class called "Spatial Knowledge"; rather, unexploited opportunities for spatial instruction are
ubiquitous throughout the existing curriculum.
           In the research literature models have been proposed to bridge the research/practice divide (e.g. Bryk &
Gomez, 2008; Schoenfeld, 2009). These models describe a research effort that is vertically integrated and involves
design collaborations between teachers and researchers. In this paper, we describe a design effort that substantially
follows    these approaches,   but  is modified    to  accommodate      a  domain   in which   the   desired   content  is  entirely
unknown     to teachers,   and does   not  exist in  the  school  curriculum.    We  do  so    by way   of  a  spatial "toolkit"  of
activities, an innovation tailored to the unique circumstances of spatial intelligence research, by allowing teachers
the flexibility to incorporate spatial elements in their curricula, without focusing on one specific domain.

Spatial Intelligence in the Classroom
A  central  hypothesis   of SILC    is that  particular  experiences    that occur  early   in life are important   in  laying   the
groundwork for spatial development. However, unlike other domains, notably language and literacy development,
we currently know little about the preconditions for the development of robust spatial skills. SILC researchers have
addressed this question through a number of studies examining the development of spatial language, engagement in
spatial activities,  and   the relation of   individual   variations    in these areas   to the   development    of    spatial skills
themselves, along with a variety of domains of academic achievement.
           Recent findings have shown that individuals who are more advanced spatial thinkers are more likely to
major   in  STEM     disciplines   in  college   and  to  choose    STEM     career  paths,   even   controlling  for   verbal   and
mathematical     achievement   levels  (e.g. Hedges    &  Chung,    2008;   Shea, Lubinski,    &    Benbow,   2001). Correlations
specifically between visual-spatial ability and initial mathematical skills are even apparent as early as preschool
(Robinson et al., 1996) and relate to middle and high school math achievement (Wolfgang, Stannard, & Jones,
2001). These relationships are not surprising, as spatial reasoning is central to many domains,not only explicitly in
fields such as geometry, algebra, and calculus, but also as a foundational component in many domains (e.g., spatial
reasoning   is required  for   the construction  of   the nonverbal     mental  models   that  may   underlie   early  arithmetical
thinking and is critical to the ability to understand and create the physical models, diagrams, and visualizations used
in fields such as science and engineering).
           This reality highlights the importance of understanding the development of spatial thinking and its support.
While   it was   long believed   that  spatial reasoning    ability  is biologically   fixed,  there is mounting    evidence     that
training enhances spatial performance (Baenninger & Newcombe, 1989; Huttenlocher, Levine, & Vevea, 1998).
Given this context, we would like to understand how the classroom environment and school content contributes to
spatial reasoning,   and   perhaps  more   importantly,   whether    we    can translate the   rich spatial intelligence    data we
gather in the lab to classroom settings. Doing so would allow us to modify the classroom environment to enrich
spatial input, which may enhance the spatial capacities of all students, and might perhaps provide particular benefit
for those students who enter school with deficits in spatial reasoning.

                                                          556   ·  © ISLS
                                                    ICLS 2010    ·  Volume 1

Initial Pilot Work: Identifying a Problem
That we need to modify the existing classroom context to enrich spatial input was made clear in an early pilot study.
In  this work we  explored     the spatial environment    of  a  cohort  of  eight teachers'  classrooms   in  an elite private
elementary    school. We  began     by  cataloguing   the   representations   found  on   the walls     of the classrooms,    as
representations have the potential to contain a great deal of spatial information, such as the information contained in
graphs, charts, maps, and measurement tools (e.g. rulers and thermometers, as in Figure 1). Because representations
represent content visually and include explicit spatialization of data, they constitute an obvious opening for teachers
to target spatial abilities, yet our pilot study demonstrates this is rarely the case.
           Each classroom was photographed, and the representations were entered into a database where they were
organized by representation type, subject area, and spatial content, among other factors.

   Figure 1. Thermometer Representation            Figure 2. Average Number of Representations Per Classroom

Overall, there were more non-spatial representations than spatial representations (with an average of 12.9 per class
to 9.7). As represented in Figure 2, diagrams constituted the only category of spatial representation frequently seen
in classrooms. The majority of representations were decorative, displays of student work, or classroom guidelines,
and very few required the use of spatial thinking (such as mental rotation, scaling, orientation, alignment, etc.), as
even the diagrams (which do represent information spatially) did not make large spatial demands on students.
           We followed  up  the    representation  catalogue   by   conducting  clinical interviews  with    teachers  in  these
classes. We tried to assess the degree to which they were aware of spatial intelligence and the degree to which they
incorporated spatial elements in their classroom activities. For example, we gave teachers a sorting task, presenting
them with more than 40 different pictures of real classroom representations.         Teachers were asked to choose which
of the assortment they would put on their classroom walls. We asked them to describe their decision-making process
and to think about how they would utilize the representations. The following teacher's opening remarks as she
sorted were typical of the responses we received:
           As I'm looking I'm sorting into what different programs require as resources for curriculum­ that
           would be one pile. And included in those resources would be some things that implement our
           program... I would want to include things from different academic areas.
           I also think its really important to include children's work on display, some of these are hints
           about what to do when you're stuck... how to be prepared for school, I think it's important to have
           tips for kids, I also think in many of the classrooms there are class rules that have been generated
           by the class--those I like to post.
           Over the course of the interview we pressed teachers to talk about representations that had explicit spatial
content, such as the more spatially demanding charts and diagrams, and even in those cases teachers did not discuss
spatial thinking. When asked to provide rationales for rejecting representations in their classes, teachers mostly cited
aesthetics  and  the  explicit relationship   of the material    to current  curricular  content  (e.g. "too   cutesy"  or "low
applicability to my   class"). Thus,  our  pilot  study demonstrated     that even  with  respect to representations,     which
represent content visually, and often incorporate explicit spatialization of content, the teachers in our study rarely
considered spatial elements or opportunities for spatial instruction within the existing curriculum.

Translating Lab Research
In the lab, researchers have had numerous insights into spatial learning, which, if translated to the classroom, could
have an impact on students' spatial thinking. The problem, however, is that one cannot unproblematically translate
lab research  to the  classroom.   Even    if we  assume    that   our lab studies produce   real insight   that  is relevant to
classroom instruction, we must still struggle with the translation of that insight intosomething that has educational
utility, a recognition that    helped motivate   the early   development     of design   research (Brown,    1992).   This is a

                                                        557  ·   © ISLS
                                                   ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

problem that has been well articulated in the literature, as researchers have noted that laboratories are radically
different environments than classrooms. In laboratory environments there is one-on-one interaction, with no outside
noise or distraction, the intervention is heavily scripted so that experiments can be replicated, and the intervention is
not embedded     in any   curricular  context. Furthermore    teachers   are not   researchers. Researchers     develop    deep
expertise on very narrow problems, giving them the ability to devote time and energy to relatively small parts of the
curriculum ­ a luxury teachers do not have. Often, teachers to not understand the interventions, or are unwilling to
make  changes    to their  practices, and   in many   cases   they are   deeply  constrained   by   state, district, or  school
regulations.
         A   second  set  of  problems  is  that, unlike other   collaborative   design   projects, we needed    to  introduce
teachers to  entirely new    concepts  regarding   intelligence,  while  having    no pre-existing   coherent  curriculum     to
manipulate, improve, or change within the school curriculum. Improving and engaging students' spatial reasoning is
important  for a  wide   range  of school  content  and  skills, but  it is not  itself a learning   domain;   rather,  it is an
underutilized cognitive ability. Moreover, our pilot work indicated that teachers were entirely unaware of spatial
intelligence as a concept. This challenge magnifies and makes more intractable some of the existing challenges to
moving lab research into the classroom. The problem of acontextuality becomes much more profound when the lab
studies do not concern themselves with school content, but with, for example, spatial alignment, and the problems of
teacher impact become much more difficult, as well. Teachers do not have a baseline understanding of what spatial
intelligence is, the way they do with content areas such as math, science, and reading. While it is true that many
educational innovations are previously unknown to teachers, here we are not restructuring practices, reorganizing
content, or devising new methods, but in essence raising awareness of an entirely new domain of intelligence, and
asking teachers to act on that awareness.
         To understand how these problems are magnified by the lack of content domain let us contrast them with
substantial inquiry learning efforts. Early research, much of it based on lab studies, indicated that the deepest and
most powerful learning takes place in context, and that acontextual learning was weaker and less meaningful. This
insight (much  simplified    here) has  led to  a  spate of  programs    to build  curricula organized     around meaningful
activities, and more authentic organization of content. However while such programs may require pulling content
from different areas of the traditional curriculum in order to organize that content along particular design principles,
the basic content itself remains familiar. With spatial intelligence, however, there is no content that can be pulled
from one place and reorganized; rather, many different content areas need to be taught with more and different
information attached, and in some cases, in different ways.

Overcoming the research ­ practice gap
In recent years, the literature has once again addressed the problem of the research-practice gap, and a growing body
of literature has put forth a model of research to practice that addresses many of our first set of problems. This
literature comes in response, however, to a different set of problems, posed by policy dictates that prioritize large
randomized trials of educational interventions, and push for an understanding of "what works" in education.
         In  response   to  these  mandates,   a  number   of  researchers   (e.g. Bryk   &  Gomez,     2008;   Burkhardt     &
Schoenfeld, 2003; Schoenfeld, 2009) have argued that in order for research to impact practice coherent institutions
need to be developed that support multiple phases of development, from early trial research to broader testing, and
finally to large controlled studies. They have pointed out that in other well-established fields a significant amount of
research and development takes place well before any randomized trials begin, and that any randomized test of an
intervention needs   to  be  built on a solid  theoretical  base.  In this   literature design  research   is identified   as an
exemplar of the type of initial research that can help build theory, identify both what works and why it works, and
can begin to flesh out the conditions under which interventions succeed and fail in practice. Accounts of this type
share many similarities. They call for a vertical integration of the research effort, so that there is real coordination
between the research and practice, a less fragmented infrastructure for research and development, with significant
funds directed at the early, theory building stages, and a variety of research to practice models that begin with the
iterative development of working prototypes and end with wide scale adoption and testing.
         These   models    of a unified   research  effort  that  moves     from  existence  proofs   and  design    testing  to
widespread scaled-up interventions in schools also address the major problems with translating lab research to the
classroom articulated above. Iterative, collaborative efforts between designers, teachers, and researchers are ideal for
producing classroom interventions that work, as these collaborations, with focused effort, can overcome the gap
between  the  lab and   classroom,   moving    incrementally  from   one-on-one,   scripted, a-contextual,    researcher   lead
studies to dynamic classroom activities. This is necessarily an incremental process because the translation is so
complex; it is rare that an intervention will be successfully translated in one session. Instead, multiple iterations take

                                                       558  ·  © ISLS
                                                   ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

place, with teachers involved in the design and analysis, allowing the entire group to adjust to teacher difficulties,
district mandates, and any other obstacles that may present themselves.
       In our preliminary effort to move some of our spatial intelligence insights to the classroom, we envisioned a
research to practice pipeline built on strong collaborations with researchers, designers, and teachers, much like the
models described above. However, our second set of problems, that is, the unique constraints arising from the lack
of target domain in the school day, and the total lack of teacher awareness of the concept of spatial thinking, forced
us to modify the design effort to accommodate the special nature of the domain. In the next section we describe our
design process, and how that design provided a flexible solution to these constraints.
Resolving the curriculum gap: the spatial "toolkit"
To resolve these problems we adopted an approach that utilized the major collaborative features of an integrated
research effort, while deliberately maintaining a broad flexibility that allowed us to work within existing school
curricula and activities. Putnam and Borko (2000) describe two teacher support efforts, the SummerMath program
and the CGI project, which combined intensive summer workshops with the support and involvement of researchers
throughout the school year. Importantly for us, these projects were intended to change teachers' conceptions as well
as their practices. Along those lines, we designed a summer work circle, bringing together nine lower-elementary
public school teachers along with SILC researchers for intensive learning and design sessions, followed that up with
sessions and    support  throughout   the school year,  and  repeated  the  process  again the  next  year, with 4 original
teachers and 10 additional teachers. The nature of the support that we provided, however, was tailored to the nature
of the material we were working with, and primarily took the form of a spatial "toolkit".
         In an influential article on culture, Ann Swidler (1986) argued for two models of cultural impact, active in
different historical circumstances. In one model culture provides a unified system that directs and orient behavior,
and in another culture simply shapes a repertoire of tools, "habits, skills, and styles", which impact action indirectly,
as people pick and choose from the toolkit in ways that may be fragmented and sometimes even contradictory. The
notion of toolkit of resources has been adopted to talk about resources for organizational routines (Spillane, Gomez,
& Mesler, 2009), as people select from available organizational resources to create strategies for action. This notion
had   great appeal   for us. Traditional   models   of  change,  which  implicitly  assume  a   unified conception  that is
introduced to teachers, cannot function when there is no place in the school day or curriculum to direct action.
Instead, we felt that we could work with the teachers to create an actual, literal, toolkit of practices and activities that
draw on the insights we have developed in the lab, but are flexible enough to accompany teachers existing curricula.
By working with the teachers on a toolkit we felt that we would be able to increase teacher awareness of spatial
intelligence and its role in the classroom, and to help teachers design spatially rich activities to compliment their
existing curricula.
         Over the course of the first work circle in the summer of 2008 teachers and researchers co-produced the
first iteration of a spatial toolkit. In  this toolkit, teachers  utilized the knowledge   that they  acquired in  research
presentations and applied it to their curricula, merging their expertise with that of the researchers. The teachers had
free range to develop spatially rich projects on any aspect of the curriculum and classroom experience. For example,
one pair of teachers developed a community mapping activity where the students built a map of their community,
starting with the school at the center, and moving outward to the students' houses and other local landmarks, while
another pair of teachers developed a technique for representing the daily schedule using spatial representations that
were proportional to the length of time for each component of the schedule.
         In  order   to  understand how    teachers were    implementing    toolkit items  generally, during  the  year  we
maintained contact with the teachers, as they filled out a daily checklist of their use of spatial representations and
activities, and reported back to us on their use of the initial items in the toolkit. We found that of the representations
that teachers indicated that they used, 72 percent were used in an explicitly spatial way.

                                                        559  ·  © ISLS
                                                  ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

             Figure 2: Distribution of Toolkit Items Used                 Figure 2a. Following Directions Example

We found that a domain did not need to be explicitly spatial for teachers to begin to incorporate explicitly spatial
elements. One of the most frequently used toolkit items (Figures 2 and 2a, above) was an exercise that teachers use
in the earliest grades to help students learn to follow directions. This activity could be done in any number of ways,
but many teachers saw it as a perfect place for students to follow specifically spatial directions, such as folding a
paper horizontally, putting a triangle in the top left corner, and writing their names perpendicular to the fold.
        We   also  observed classes  where   the  toolkit activities  were   being conducted.    At points  throughout    the
school year we held follow-up sessions where we had the opportunity to get additional feedback from teachers on
the successes or failures of the toolkit activities. At these meetings we were also able to present teachers with new
activity suggestions for them to tailor to their class use, based on our observations of their classes. For example,
teachers expressed interest in a variety of puzzles, and SILC research has shown that puzzle play predicts children's
performance on a mental transformation task (Cannon, Levine, Huttenlocher, & Ratliff, under review). We therefore
developed a series of math puzzles (see Figure 3), such as a math domino game, a number grid puzzle ("What
number am I?"), and a tangram math game, for the teachers to adopt in their classrooms.

                                             Figure 3. Math Puzzle Games
The toolkit format allowed us to modify and revise activities beyond the initial work circle,in order to accommodate
teachers' needs throughout the year, and to insure that teachers were actively aware of spatial intelligence as a factor
in their classrooms.
        Teachers had the ability to pick and choose when and where the activities in the toolkit might be used,
sometimes modifying them to fit their classroom needs. This design choice has numerous affordances particular to
the material we   were working   with, but   it also had  some    constraints. One  constraint   is that modified   material
sometimes  changes   such that  the activity is  no  longer  clearly  representing  the  same concept    as that in the   lab
activity. For example, a training study conducted in SILC labs (Levine, Kwon, Huttenlocher, Ratliff, & Dietz, 2009)
demonstrated greatly improved ability to measure objects that are misaligned on the ruler when unit pieces are
explicitly placed on the ruler (highlighting the space between hash marks as the unit, rather than the hash marks
themselves), and   when  an item  is first misaligned     and   then moved   into  alignment  at the  end   of the ruler. In
observing one  3rd grade  class implementing     a  classroom   version   of this task, we noticed   that the  teacher  had
modified the activity to integrate with a number of different aspects of her curriculum. Instead of using the unit
pieces to measure the spaces, and moving the measured item to the beginning of the ruler, she had the students use
the units as part of a subtraction strategy, with some students putting units on all of the spaces up to the end of the

                                                      560  ·  © ISLS
                                                 ICLS 2010   ·   Volume 1

item, and then removing those that did not align with the item. She explained this strategy to the students by saying
"The turtle is four centimeters long because it ends at 6 and starts at 2; and 6- 2 is 4" (Figure 4).

                             Figure 4: Classroom Adaptation of Measurement Training
          This strategy  seems  like a good   strategy   for solving    misaligned  ruler  problems,    and certainly  takes
advantage of spatial processes such as alignment; however, it is not the strategy that we had investigated in the lab.
On the other hand, when provided with a sample of the practice ISAT standardized assessment that the students take
in 3rd grade, we noted that there were explicit number line questions that demanded exactly the subtraction strategy
that the teacher was urging the students to utilize (Figure 5). This example highlights the sort of interplay between
research and practice the toolkit approach allows.

                                  Figure 5: ISAT Item Using Subtraction Strategy

Multiple types of Toolkit Impact
We believe our spatial toolkit impacts teachers precisely because it does not attempt a unified curriculum to replace
an existing curriculum; it is instead a product that contains a multiplicity of resources, the sum of which can impact
teachers'  understandings  and  practices as  they  choose   those  that  work  for them.  As   we   built toolkit resources
together with teachers and observed their classes we were able to see five different ways in which spatial resources
were integrated into classes, each of which represents some aspect of growing teacher awareness of, and interaction
with, spatial intelligence in the classroom.
          Coherent Independent Content: Although the toolkit as a whole does not offer a unified curriculum some
activities do  independently mirror  content  that  exists   in the school  day  and   can be  used  as  replacements.  For
example, using a ruler is a skill that is taught in the early grades, and, as noted above, is also reflected in the toolkit.
Although   some  teachers  modified  the  activity substantially,   other teachers  used  the  activity without   very many
changes. This is a hallmark of the toolkit approach, which allows teachers to choose how and when they will
implement activities.
          Reorganized Content: Much like an inquiry based curriculum will be organized around a driving question,
pulling from numerous content areas in the process, some toolkit items take existing content and reorganize it
around an underlying spatial concept. For example, together with teachers, we designed a series of activities that
explored   the use of  the number    line as  a tool to  understand     the concept   of  unit as  a basic   foundation  for
understanding a wide range of math content, from addition and subtraction, to fractions and decimals, to area and
perimeter. In the toolkit, teachers were able to utilize these activities as a coherent unit, if so they desired.
          Standalone   Games    and  Attachments:    One     of the  great  strengths  of  the toolkit  is the presence  of
numerous items that are flexible and compatible with a wide range of classroom environments and opportunities for
use. For example, teachers have used spatial puzzles and dominos during free time, center time, and as attachments
to math lessons.
          Classroom Methods: Much of the understanding that we hoped to develop in the teachers did not relate at
all to particular content, but to techniques and tools that draw on spatial resources. For example, during the work
circle teachers  learned about  research  regarding  the use    of gesture  (gesturing helps   children understand   spatial
translation, (Ehrlich,  Levine, &   Goldin-Meadow,     2006))    and   spatial analogies   (Gentner,   Levine, Dhillon,  &

                                                     561   ·    © ISLS
                                                ICLS 2010    ·  Volume 1

Poltermann, 2009). These can be used in any context in the classroom, and their use reflects a deep awareness of the
utility of spatial reasoning a range of circumstances.
        We observed a notable example of this in one of our second grade teachers' classes during the 2008-2009
school year. During the work circle we discussed research by Gentner that demonstrated that differences between
two items are more easily discerned by students when the two items are highly aligned ­ that is, are highly similar,
and differ only in one area. In a unit on time and clocks the teacher, unprompted by the researchers, took this
concept of high alignment and applied it to the classroom to show students the correct orientation of the hands on
the clock. Holding up two clocks that were supposed to represent 3:30 with nearly identical configurations, she
asked them to identify what was different about the two clocks. On one clock the hands were at the six the three, and
on the other clock the hands were at the six and between the three and the four (Figure 6). This was a prime example
of a teacher using a high alignment spatial analogy to communicate content in the classroom.

                                         Figure 6: High Alignment of Clocks
        Language: A major aspect of teacher uptake was in the use and incorporation of spatial language into the
school day. This is one area that teachers immediately "got" and found ways to insert more, and more advanced,
spatial language into their lessons. One teacher started using the cardinal directions when giving instructions to her
students, and informed us during a feedback period that her students were no longer getting lost in the hallways of
the school. Other teachers started to use more advanced terminology than they would have otherwise (for example:
parallel, horizontal, diagonal, and symmetry were all mentioned by teachers).

The Toolkit Approach as a Way to Change Teacher Thinking
In putting together a spatial toolkit we have been trying to introduce the concept ofspatial intelligence to teachers,
and to have teachers begin incorporating their understanding of spatial intelligence into their practices. Unlike a
design for a new science curriculum or a new method for teaching fractions, many of the items in the toolkit might
appear trivial--puzzles, games, following    directions--but   they  serve   an important purpose, and  communicate   a
great deal of information. Because the activities are flexible, engaging, and teacher designed, teachers' perceptions
of teaching have changed   to include  their awareness     of  spatial thinking  as an important  element  of classroom
instruction. Without any radical restructuring of the curriculum or of their methodology, teachers have been thinking
more subtly about spatial content as they teach, and have been organizing their teaching around this thought process.
        For example, teachers responded to an evaluation survey by uniformly commenting on how much their
awareness had changed over the course of the study. One typical teacher wrote, "I have become much more aware of
spatial intelligence and how to incorporate these things in my classroom". Nearly every teacher had some comment
on the need to think explicitly about spatial intelligence while teaching (e.g. a sample of responses to "challenges I
face": Being very explicit in spatial instruction; Thinking spatially about the lessons; Being aware of what I have in
my classroom that ties into spatial thinking; Using specific spatial language, etc.).These responses reflect a reality
in which teachers are using the toolkit as a resource that enables them to keep spatial intelligence in mind while
constructing lessons and designing activities. This represents a major first step in impacting teacher practice.

Final Thoughts
Spatial thinking is critically important for problem solving across the various sciences, as well as in many areas of
daily life. Given recent evidence that spatial cognition is malleable, and hence that spatial learning can be fostered
by effective technology and education (see Liu, Uttal, & Newcomb, 2008), we would naturally like to extend these
findings to educational settings. The first steps in this process are making teachers aware of the existence of spatial
intelligence, and impacting their practice to include activities that promote spatial reasoning.
        In this study, we have tried to demonstrate some of the successes and challenges in introducing spatial
intelligence to teachers and implementing change in the classroom. Because the concept is unknown to teachers,
many areas that contain natural spatial learning opportunities are lost, and because spatial reasoning is not a subject
taught in school we cannot    easily build   curricula  to   promote   it. Many  research-to-practice models  encounter
obstacles when there is no content in the school day matching the research in the lab. The development of the spatial

                                                   562     ·  © ISLS
                                                  ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

toolkit helps fill in the gap, by increasing teacher awareness, and providing teachers with activities to supplement
(rather than replace) their existing curricula. The toolkit approach allows teachers to pick and choose against a
backdrop of resources and support, adjusting their understanding over time, and in concert with researchers.
       As part of an ecology of events the toolkit can be an important early-stage product to spur the conversation
between research and practice. After a number of work circle iterations we should have a good idea of what works
and what doesn't, and under what circumstances different spatial activities will fit into the school day. A publishable
end product could be produced and tried out more widely, giving a broader set of teachers the opportunity to build
awareness of spatial reasoning through engagement in these activities. As teachers become more familiar with the
concept, and more substantially adjust their teaching practices to include spatial content we can begin to test the
impact of that content on students. Once we are certain that teachers "get it", in the sense of flexible integration with
practice, we can explore how that translates to the students, and with that knowledge design even more targeted
toolkit items to deepen student spatial ability.
Baenninger, M., & Newcombe, N. (1989). The role of experience in spatial test performance: A meta-analysis. Sex
       Roles, 20(5), 327-344.
Brown, A. L. (1992). Design experiments: Theoretical and methodological challenges in creating complex
       interventions in classroom settings. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 2(2), 141-178.
Bryk, A. S., & Gomez, L. M. (2008). Ruminations on Reinventing an R&DCapacity for Educational Improvement.
       In F. M. Hess (Ed.), The Future of Educational Entrepreneurship: Possibilities for School Reform.
       Cambridge: Harvard Education Press.
Burkhardt, H., & Schoenfeld, A. H. (2003). Improving educational research: Toward amore useful, more
       influential, and better-funded enterprise. Educational Researcher, 32(9), 3.
Cannon, J., Levine, S. C., Huttenlocher, J., & Ratliff, K. R. (under review). Early puzzle play: A predictor of
       preschoolers' mental rotation skill. Developmental Psychology.
Ehrlich, S. B., Levine, S. C., & Goldin-Meadow, S. (2006). The importance of gesture in children's spatial
       reasoning. Developmental psychology, 42(6), 1259-1268.
Gentner, D., Levine, S., Dhillon, S., & Poltermann, A. (2009).Using structural alignment to facilitate learning of
       spatial concepts in an informal setting.
Hedges, L. V., & Chung, V. (2008). Does spatial ability predict STEM college major and employment:    An
       examination of two longitudinal studies. Paper presented at the Conference Name|. Retrieved Access Date|.
       from URL|.
Huttenlocher, J., Levine, S., & Vevea, J. (1998). Environmental input and cognitive growth: A study using time-
       period comparisons. Child Development, 69(4), 1012-1029.
Levine, S. C., Kwon, M., Huttenlocher, J., Ratliff, K., & Dietz, K. (2009, August, 2009). Children's understanding
       of ruler measurement and units of measure: A training study. Paper presented at the 31st Annual Meeting
       of the Cognitive Science Society, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
Liu, L., Uttal, D., & Newcomb, N. (2008). A meta-analysis of training effects on spatial skills: What works, for
       whom, why and for how long? Paper presented at the Conference on Research and Training in Spatial
       Intelligence, Evanston, IL.
Putnam, R. T., & Borko, H. (2000). What do new views of knowledge and thinking have to say about research on
       teacher learning? Educational Researcher, 29(1), 4-15.
Robinson, N. M., Abbott, R. D., Berninger, V. W., Busse, J., Okamoto, Y., & Barbara, S. (1996). The structure of
       abilities in math-precocious young children: Gender similarities and differences.Journal of Educational
       Psychology, 88(2), 341-352.
Schoenfeld, A. H. (2009). Instructional research and the improvement of practice. In J. D. Bransford, D. J. Stipek,
       N. J. Vye, L. M. Gomez & D. Lam (Eds.), The role of research in educational improvement (pp. 161-188).
       Cambridge: Harvard Education Press.
Shea, D. L., Lubinski, D., & Benbow, C. P. (2001). Importance of assessing spatial ability in intellectually talented
       young adolescents: A 20-year longitudinal study. Journal of Educational Psychology, 93(3), 604-614.
Spillane, J. P., Gomez, L. M., & Mesler, L. (2009). Notes on Reframing the Role of Organizations in Policy
       Implementation. Handbook on Education Policy Research, 409.
Swidler, A. (1986). Culture in action: Symbols and strategies. American sociological review, 51(2), 273-286.
Wolfgang, C. H., Stannard, L. L., & Jones, I. (2001). Block Play Performance among Preschoolers as a Predictor of
       Later School Achievement in Mathematics. Journal of Research in Childhood Education, 15(2), 173-180.

                                                      563  ·  © ISLS
