                                                ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

                       Personal Beliefs about Learning and Teaching:
                                Comparison of student teachers
                                 in the sciences and humanities
                             at different stages of their studies
         Natalia Schlichter, University of Goettingen, DFG Graduate Research Program 1195 "Understanding
        and Enhancing Educational Fit in Schools", Waldweg 26, 37073 Goettingen, Germany, Email:
                                     Natalia.Schlichter@sowi.uni-goettingen.de
             Rainer Watermann, University of Goettingen, Department for Education, Waldweg 26, 37073
                             Goettingen, Germany, Email: rwaterm@uni-goettingen.de
           Matthias Nueckles, University of Freiburg, Department of Educational Science, Rempartstrasse 11,
                    79098 Freiburg, Germany, Email: matthias.nueckles@ezw.uni-freiburg.de

        Abstract: The present project deals with teachers' beliefs as implicit, steady assumptions
        about learning and teaching and especially with `participation', as the least investigated. This
        exploratory study analyzes (1) the representation of beliefs regarding `participation' in student
        teachers' views, the impact (2) of the stage of their studies, and (3) of their discipline studied
        on  the beliefs.   Student   teachers were interviewed     regarding  their views    on learning and
        teaching    (N =   30).  The content  analysis  shows   different  multifaceted  beliefs. The   results
        reveal an alteration in the beliefs during the studies: At the beginning there is a `transmissive-
        emotional'     focusing   which changes   progressively     to  a  more  cognitive   focus  including
        `construction' and `participation', and still `transmission'. Furthermore, the internal structure
        of `participation' in the views of the interviewees does not correspond with the theoretical
        concept. On the basis of these results the possibility of developing a questionnaire for closer
        investigation of `participation' is being discussed.

Introduction
Teachers' beliefs have become a focal point of research in the hope of gaining a better understanding of teacher
behavior. Furthermore, since the rise of cognitive psychology, an more and more attention has been paid in
particular to the juxtaposition of two opinions (Anderson, 1997; Greeno, 1997): the view of teaching as a `direct
transmission' (Resnick & Hall, 1998), with learning seen as an `acquisition' of knowledge; and a `cognitive
construction' view of learning. The current research shows typical patterns: `transmission' vs. `construction'
views (e.g., Staub & Stern, 2002). In addition we find `acquisition' vs. `participation' metaphors (Sfard, 1998),
and `content-centered'   vs. `learning-centered'  teaching    (Kember   &   Kwan,   2000). Empirical   research  so  far
concentrates on the `transmission' vs. `construction' views (Dubberke, Kunter, McElvany, Brunner, & Baumert,
2008); `participation'  is still being neglected. According     to  Sfard  (1998),  the role of  `participation' in  the
learning process, which was introduced as `situated learning' (Greeno, 1997), should be considered to a greater
extent in research.
        Therefore, the current project centers on teachers' beliefs in general and on `participation' in particular.
This study is an exploration of the self-reflected views of learning and teaching as they emerged in interviews
with student teachers. The purpose of this paper is to create a better understanding of student teachers' beliefs
regarding participation. First, the theoretical framework will be presented, defining the term "teachers' beliefs"
and showing the relevant research as well as different views of learning and teaching. The research questions of
this study will then be presented. Next, the methodological information will be described. Finally, the findings
will be presented and the possible implications will be outlined.

Theoretical framework
The term "teachers' beliefs"!
Beliefs are subjective and experience-based perceptions of learning and teaching. Martinez, Sauleda, and Huber
(2001) use  the metaphor     `blueprint of thinking'    to illustrate  the type of  influence   exerted by   beliefs on
perception and  behavior.   Beliefs  about teaching  are   well established   by the time    a student  gets to  college
(Pajares, 1992); they do not change easily or rapidly and are not independent of the discipline taught (Boulton-
Lewis, Smith, McCrindle, Burnett, & Campbell, 2001; Staub & Stern, 2002; van Driel, Bulte, & Verloop, 2007).
        `Belief' is still a `messy construct', as Pajares (1992) called it. Among the terms used to describe
teachers' thinking we find: beliefs, conceptions, orientations (Kember, 1997), perspectives, intentions, teaching
approaches (Trigwell, Prosser & Taylor, 1994), and teaching perspectives (Pratt, 2002). Because of largely
congruent contents all these work will be equally employed for the present study.

                                                    564  ·   © ISLS
                                                ICLS 2010    ·  Volume 1

        We    define  teachers' beliefs  as implicit,  steady,  experience-based     assumptions    about the  nature of
learning and teaching: about the learner, the teacher, the learning and teaching process, instruction, classroom
management, the genesis of knowledge and its growth.

Research on teachers' beliefs
Before addressing the relevant studies, the theoretical background of different beliefs should be briefly outlined.
As pointed out by Sfard (1998), the theoretical paradigms of learning can provide a suitable frame of reference
on  teachers' beliefs. The author     differentiates between    two  basic  metaphors:     1) individual  acquisition of
knowledge  and   2)  participation in  the  community     of   practice. Here, learning    is regarded as  a  process of
becoming a member of a certain community, which requires the ability to communicate in the language of the
community and to act according to its particular norms. The learner is interested in participating in various
activities rather than accumulating personal possessions. In contrast to this position, the individual acquisition
metaphor considers learning as the result of a transmission process of information from the teacher to the
student. Sfard (1998) describes both metaphors under the following aspects: goal of learning, learning, student,
teacher, knowledge, knowing, and motivation. Kember (1997) also employs several dimensions to delimit the
conceptions of teaching: teacher, teaching, student, learning, content, knowledge.
        Sfard (1998) assignes behaviouristic and constructivistic notions of learning to the first metaphor and
notions of situated learning to the second metaphor (Bruner, 1996; Greeno, 1997; Lave, 1987; Lave & Wenger,
1991). Contrary to this position, Martinez et al. (2001) differentiates three main metaphors: 1) learning as
transmission of knowledge, 2) the constructivist metaphor, and 3) teaching and learning as a social process.
According  to  the constructivist  metaphor,  learning   is  described   as an active,  constructive   process which   is
influenced by the subject's prior knowledge and takes place in particular contexts (e.g., Bereiter, 1994; Staub &
Stern, 2002).  According    to   Trigwell   and Prosser      there  is   also  the   distinction between   `conceptual-
change/student-focused'   and   `information-transmission/teacher-focused'         approaches    of  teaching  (see also
Norton, Richardson, Hartley, Newstead, & Mayes, 2005; Postareff & Lindblom-Ylänne, 2008; Trigwell, Prosser
& Taylor, 1994).
        Of equal interest is the research that takes into consideration more than two opposing beliefs: for
instance Pratt, Collins, and Jarvis-Selinger (2001) and Alger (2009). Pratt et al. (2001) worked out five teaching
perspectives: 1) transmission: Effective teaching requires a substantial commitment to the content or subject
matter; 2) apprenticeship: Effective teaching is a process of students enculturation into a set of social norms and
ways of working; 3) developmental: Effective teaching must be planned and conducted "from the learner's point
of view"; 4) nurturing: Effective teaching assumes that long-term, hard, persistent effort to achieve comes from
the heart, as well as the head; and 5) social reform: Effective teaching seeks to change society in substantive
ways.
        There is a growing consensus in research that teachers' beliefs affect the learning of the students.
Teachers' beliefs   influence   their own   perceptions,    which  in  turn   affect their practices  in  the classroom
(Calderhead, 1996).
        Empirical studies have already shown that the `cognitive construction' view, which deals with the
cognitive activation and constructive support of the learners, seems to be more promising in promoting a deeper
understanding during students' learning than the `direct transmission' view (Aquirre & Speer, 2000; Dubberke
et al., 2008; Staub & Stern, 2002). In contrast to this, the `participation' view has been addressed less, and there
are no  suitable   questionnaires  to   measure  teachers'     beliefs   about  learning   and   teaching  in  terms  of
`participation'. Therefore, in this study, we focus on the `participation' aspects of teachers' beliefs.

Research questions and hypotheses
We designed the present study to answer three main questions:
1.  To what extent are the beliefs about learning and teaching described above represented in the views of
    student teachers?
        It is necessary to find out more about what the student teachers' views of learning and teaching are in
general and how important they regard `participation' in the learning process in particular.
2.  Are there any similarities among the student teachers at the same stage of their studies?
        We want to compare the beliefs of the student teachers at the beginning, in the middle and at the end of
their studies. This question should provide more insight into the assumption that the increased knowledge and
practical experience which the students gather during their studies results in more sophisticated beliefs about
learning and teaching.
3.  Are there any similarities among the student teachers in the related disciplines?
        This   question  should   illuminate whether     there  are any   similarities among     the specific  discipline
communities. It can be assumed that differences will exist between the beliefs of student teachers in the sciences
and student teachers in the humanities.

                                                     565  ·  © ISLS
                                                ICLS 2010    ·  Volume 1

         Consequently, the current study was designed to investigate the beliefs of student teachers with the aim
of highlighting their opinions regarding the role of `participation' in the learning process. Moreover, if the
answers to the latter two questions should yield converging results, the design would provide an insight into the
structure of beliefs of student teachers dependent on their knowledge and practical experience, related to the
specific discipline.

Method
Sample and Design
The sample consisted of a total of N = 30 interviewees (11 male, 19 female, mean age: 23.7 years), who were all
students  undergoing    their  teacher preparation    program   at   the   University of  Goettingen.  Two  discipline
communities were represented in the sample: a) the sciences, e.g. mathematics, physics, chemistry, biology and
geography (n = 15); and b) the humanities, e.g. languages, history and theology (n = 15). Furthermore, the
participants were at different stages of their studies: a) at the beginning (n = 10, mean age: 20.9 years), b) in the
middle (n = 10, mean age: 23.1 years), and c) at the end (n = 10, mean age: 27.2 years).

Inquiry Method
For the current study, we used the methodology described by White and Gunstone (1992). We elicited the
participants' views on learning and teaching by asking them to draw a picture which showed their concept or
theory of learning and teaching. The participants were invited to the interview without much prior information
about the topic of our study. The intention was to let them communicate their own thoughts with as little
external influence as possible. After about 15 minutes of drawing, we asked the participants to explain the
picture, thus describing their concepts of learning and teaching. When they had finished doing so, we asked
them pre-designated questions on certain aspects that were of interest within our theoretical framework, like: Is
the teacher or the learner at the center of the learning process? Who is more important in the learning process:
the learner or the teacher? What is the role of the learner in the learning process?
         The interviews were audiotaped and transcribed. In addition, in order to be able to analyze nonverbal
information, we    videotaped   the participants together      with  their  picture during  the interview. All  of   the
interviews were codenamed to ensure that the data (both verbal and videotapes) remained anonymous and
inaccessible to third parties.

Data Analysis
The method we used to analyze the data was based on Chi's "Quantifying Qualitative Analysis of Verbal Data"
(1997). The author recommends the application of this method for verbal data such as explanations or reports.
She emphasizes the main goal of this analysis method as understanding the representation of the knowledge.
Further, we used the computer program MAXQDA, which supports the coding procedure of verbal data. As
preparation for the coding, the interviews were first segmented into single coding units. For this purpose, we
used a procedure originally suggested by Chi (1997). Each interview transcript was divided into segments so
that each segment could be coded independently. The preferred segmentation technique was based on semantic
futures, according   to which   the content  of the   utterances    had  to be interpreted  to  determine  the segment
boundaries, such as knowing that the topic of discussion has been changed. In general, it is a proposition or an
idea. Mostly, one segment is one idea unit:
         Example:
         ...and that I refer to my experiences that I gained when I was a pupil//
         Furthermore, the granularity is referred to as a main point of analysis (see Chi, 1997). Grain sizes can
vary from coarse to fine. For our interview analyses, we opted for the fine grain. Consequently, one segment is
limited to one sentence, as in the above examples. However, the structure of the speech was often unclear and
disorganized; sometimes, it took more than one sentence to express an idea to its conclusion. In this case, one
segment might have been longer than in other interviews:
         Example:
         ...for this purpose,   I thought to myself,    it   should  be  some  sort   of old-fashioned seating
         arrangement, for example one pupil sitting on a bench at a table, then the next row, then the
         next, and the teacher standing here at the front holding the pointer in his hand and teaching at
         the blackboard//
         The first   step was  to develop a  deductive   coding     scheme.  Therefore,   we used aspects  as  `goal of
learning' or `knowledge' (e.g., Kember, 1997; Sfard, 1998). The coding process was performed by two raters
who were trained for this coding procedure. After discussing the category system, they coded the interviews
independently. The inter-rater reliability as determined by Cohen's Kappa wa!"#$$%"&'"(")*+,-*
         The results of this coding process revealed a quite accurate correspondence with the categories of the
"Teaching Perspectives Inventory" (TPI) according to Pratt et al. (2001). In the following section, we present
these categories as well as the results of the study.

                                                    566    ·  © ISLS
                                               ICLS 2010  ·      Volume 1

Results
Category System
Table 1 shows    the category  system.  Due  to space    restrictions,    the   description of each category     cannot  be
presented in complete detail here. The table presents a small excerpt of all of the aspects from each category.

Table 1: The category system.

Name of the category      Content description of the category

                          ! learning as gaining achievement and competencies by the individual
Transmission              ! teacher as an instructor of learning
                          ! knowledge as substance and property by the individual !

                          ! productive without fear of failure
Nurturing                 ! teacher's responsibility to create an atmosphere without fear
                          ! the importance of self-efficacy or self-esteem of the pupils

                          ! learning as a process of enculturation of students into a set of social norms and ways of
Participation               working! teacher is an expert in his/her discipline and a moderator and supporter of learning
                            processes
                          ! learning as an active and constructive process, depended on the previous knowledge
Construction              ! teaching from the learner's point of view
                          ! suitable methods: experience-based and discovery-based learning

                          ! collective as an object of teaching rather than individual
Social Reform             ! encouragement of learners to take a critical stance
                          ! learning as developing a world view and opinions

        To demonstrate two of these categories, the subcategories with anchored examples will be presented in
the following:
        Subcategory of `nurturing' ­ well-being:
        The school and the lesson must take place in a protected space, where the teacher creates
        emotional safety so that the children feel happy and comfortable and do not have any fears
        regarding learning.
        Subcategory of `participation'- `supporting class community':
        As    a pillar of  the classroom  community,      the     teacher supports     the  development of the
        perception of the class as one community. He/she has to ensure that the pupils act as a group
        and not as individuals.

Supplementary Categories
Also of interest are the categories that do not concern the theoretical learning paradigms, but rather address
some supplementary influences on interviewees' thoughts during the interviews. For instance, there were ideas
about learning, which could be described as naïve positive attitudes, for example about the effects of some
specific teaching methods, as well as idealistic attitudes about the teaching profession.
        ...so we can make the lessons very, very interesting if we use the new and creative teaching
        methods//
        The smaller the group, the better the learning//
        The interviewees addressed their experiences as learners very often, but described their experience as
teachers surprisingly rarely, although most of the student teachers were undergoing their school-based teaching
practice during their studies. The focus of the present study is not on such aspects, so we will not address them
further in our analysis.

Internal Structure of Participation
In the theoretical presentation of the construct `participation' (e.g., Sfard, 1998), there are many aspects that
clarify the understanding of learning and teaching according to `participation'.

                                                   567  ·      © ISLS
                                               ICLS 2010  ·   Volume 1

        The  interviewees in   the  present   study made    their statements     spontaneously.   Consequently,    it is
conceivable that some aspects of their beliefs were not addressed. Hence, the view of the interviewees regarding
`participation' differs from the theoretical construct. For instance, some of the theoretical aspects were not
represented completely. The   figure  below    demonstrates   the number     of  the interviewees   who     made  some
statements regarding the respective individual aspect (see Figure 1).

                             Figure 1.The internal structure of the `participation'.

        Most   of the   interviewees  (n   =20)   commented       on   the communication      process    in the   class.
Communication, authenticity in learning, support by the learners, social context, the teacher as a special member
of the class community, the teacher's responsibility to provide learning opportunities were also called often.
Some other aspects as group work, interaction process close this list.
        Of interest is also the fact that some aspects could be seen as overlapping with the category `nurturing'
because of their emotional value, for instance `solidarity'. In conclusion, the first research question can be
answered as follows: the beliefs of the student teachers in the present study contained five main beliefs and also
some  supplementary   contents. Furthermore,    the  beliefs  of  interviewees     contained  `participation', but the
structure did not correspond to the theoretical construct. In the following section, a closer look will be taken at
the different groups of the student teachers.

Student Teachers' Beliefs
In total, the interviews yielded 2262 segments. 74.2 % of them were assigned to the main categories of beliefs
about learning and  teaching;   the other  25.8   % were    described  in  the   section above    (see Supplementary
Categories). The following table (see Table 2) shows the means (in percent) and standard deviations for the
values in the main categories for all the groups of student teachers.

Table 2: Descriptive statistics: Means (in percent) and standard deviations.

                        Whole         Student        Student         Student         Student         Student
                        sample (N     teachers at    teachers in     teachers at     teachers in     teachers in
                        =30)          the            the middle      the end of      the sciences    the
                                      beginning      of their        their studies   (n = 15)        humanities
                                      of their       studies (n =    (n = 10)                        (n = 15)
                                      studies(n      10)
                                      =10)
      Totalstatements   74.20         73.30          70.10           79.20           64.40(29.13)(28.83)(20.76)(37.74)(30.21)84.00(25.27)
      Transmission      25.77         29.22          23.93           24.17           26.07          25.48
                        (12.80)       (17.34)        (8.98)          (11.26)         (15.47)        (9.99)
      Nurturing         15.18         23.86          11.01           10.69           13.47          16.90
                        (12.12)       (12.85)        (9.71)          (9.40)          (10.92)        (13.37)
      Participation     23.9          19.53          29.85           22.33           25.70          22.11
                        (10.83)       (7.39)         (12.34)         (10.37)         (10.92)        (10.81)
      Construction      19.25         13.21          21.35           23.21           27.30          26.83
                        (9.66)        (9.68)         (9.03)          (07.91)         (13.54)        (11.94)
      Social Reform     03.65         04.50          01.10           0               00.12          00.85
                        (3.21)        (3.34)                                         (0.47)0.12     (2.24)

                                                   568  ·  © ISLS
                                                ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

The impact of the stage of studies on the beliefs
The second research question concerned the different stages of the studies. Our sample contained students (a) at
the beginning, (b) in the middle and (c) at the end of their studies to compare the influence of experiencesfrom
the studies on the beliefs. In order to examine the difference in each belief for each group, we conducted a
multivariate GLM model (within subject design). The main effect of beliefs is significant: F = 26.23, p < .001,
and reveals quite strong power, at Eta! = .49 as well as the interaction between beliefs and the stage of the
studies: F = 2.58, p< .05, Eta! = .16. The findings are demonstrated in the figure below (see Figure 2).

                        Figure 2. The distribution of the beliefs for each group of student teachers.

        The difference between the student teachers at different stages in each belief was tested by means of
univariate analysis of variance (ANOVA). The findings show a significant effect of the stages of the studies on
the belief `nurturing' at the .05 level: F = 4.87, p < .05, Eta! = .27. The test of contrasts shows a significant
difference between the student teachers at the beginning and in the middle of their studies: F = 23.25, p < .001,
Eta! = .46.
        The    difference in  `participation'  is also  significant. The  effect   of  the stage  of the studies  on
`participation' is, however, significant only at the .1 level: F = 2.71, p < .1, Eta! = .17. The difference between
the different groups of student appearances as follows: the student teachers in the middle of their studies show
the biggest values compared with much lower values of the student teachers at the beginning and lower values
of the student teachers at the end of their studies: F = 62.11, p < .001. This effect power is quite strong, at Eta! =
.70.
        Furthermore,    the statistics reveal the differences   in `construction'. The   effect of the stages  of the
studies on `construction' is significant at the .05 level: F= 3.57, p < .05, Eta! = .21. The test of contrasts shows
that the student teachers at the beginning of their studies have the lowest values in `construction' compared with
quite higher values of the student teachers at the end and also higher values by the student teachers in the middle
of their studies.
        For all the other beliefs, the differences were not significant. It is noticeable that in some categories,
not all groups made statements: For `social reform', none of the students at the end of their studies made any
statements.
        The following result could be already seen in the figure 2: The student teachers at the end of the studies
possess the three beliefs `transmission', `construction', and `participation' at the quite similar level; the belief
`nurturing' is also represented, but in noticeable smaller extend. This difference was tested by means of t-Test,
computing   for   the beliefs `transmission',  `construction',   and   `participation' a   common    variable named
`cognitive  focus'  previously. The    means  (standard   abbreviations) for `cognitive  focus'  and  `nurturing' are
respectively 23.23 (4.17) and 10.69 (9.40). This difference is significant at the level .05: t = 3 (df = 9), p < .05.
        Due to the quite small groups of the students, all statistics were also reconsidered by means of non-
parametric tests which carried out the findings like the above. Nevertheless, the conditions for ANOVA are
fulfilled: the normal distribution and the homogeneity of variances are given.
        To summarize, the student teachers at different stages of their studies have significant different beliefs.
The development of the beliefs during the studies changes from the `transmissive-emotional' focus including
`transmission'  and   `nurturing' toward  a  `cognitive'  focus including  `construction',  `participation', and  still
`transmission'.

                                                    569  ·  © ISLS
                                                   ICLS 2010  ·   Volume 1

The impact of discipline on beliefs
To examine hypothesis 3, namely that the beliefs of student teachers in the sciences differ from those of student
teachers in the humanities, we conducted analysis of variance (ANOVA), which proved to be insignificant. To
sum up these final results, it can be stated that the expected differences between the beliefs of the student
teachers from the two disciplines were not found.

Conclusions and implications
In this paper, we described a study conducted recently at the University of Goettingen. It was designed with the
aim to highlight how the different beliefs are represented in the thinking of the student teachers and what
differences there are in these beliefs at various stages of their studies and in different disciplines.
          At the beginning of the present study we did not have any expectations as to which beliefs would
revealed by the interviews. In a first analysis, we expected two main paradigms such as `individualistic' vs.
`social' paradigms in learning sciences (Sfard, 1998) or perhaps a `transmission' vs. `construction' view on
learning and teaching (Staub & Stern, 2002). In the end we found not just one or two, but five different beliefs.
These results could be seen in a positive light. An increasing number of researchers are calling for plurality in
looking at the beliefs about teaching and learning. Pratt (2002) warns against the "one size fits all" notion of
good teaching. Even Sfard (1998) points out the "dangers of choosing just one" of the two metaphors.
          In keeping with the recent theoretical framework and empirical research that researchers and educators
should pay more attention to the concept of `participation' in the field of the learning science (Alger, 2009; Lave
&Wenger, 1991; Sfard, 1998), our study set out to investigate student teachers' beliefs regarding `participation'
in more detail. In so doing, we analyzed the internal structure of the notion of `participation' found in our
interviews. This analysis showed that the understanding of learning as `participation' by the student teachers in
our study does not correspond to the theoretical concept. This can possibly be explained by the fact that the
interviewees spoke spontaneously. Consequently, it is conceivable that some aspects of their beliefs were not
addressed. The overlapping areas relate to emotional aspects of group processes like solidarity, which reveals
that the future teachers value the idea of `participation', not only from the perspective of advantages for learning
but also  in  terms  of  the emotional    advantages.  In   addition,  many   aspects concern  social  aspects of group
processes.   There   are no  didactic    aspects or   statements   about   specific learning processes   in a  `learning
community', with the exception of `providing learning opportunities by the teacher'. The constitutive point of
`participation' ­ learning as enculturation ­ is lacking. Thus, this indicates that a one-sided view should be
changed, and that the teacher education should be able to initiate such a change.
          Furthermore, the present study confirmed the hypothesis of underlying similarities among the beliefsof
the students at the same stages of their studies. But, the experimental design of the present study was cross-
sectional, which is why the differences between the student teachers of different stages of their studies cannot be
interpreted  as  definite  changes    in  beliefs, but  should    at  present rather  be understood    as hint  thereof.
Additionally, the teacher preparation program included not the same contents, because of the present system of
Higher Education in Germany. Indeed, especially the clear preference of the student teachers in the middle of
the studies  for `participation'  emphasizes     this fact.  This especially  preference may   be   a cohorts  effect. In
addition, the   student  teachers  at the  beginning   of   their studies  understood  learning  primarily  in terms   of
transmission  of knowledge     from   the  teacher  to the    pupil, seeing the main   responsibility of  the teacher  in
preparing and presenting of the contents of his/her discipline as well as creating an atmosphere without fear in
order to secure of self-efficacy and self-esteem of the children. While the student teachers at the beginning of
their studies show this `transmissive-emotional' focus on the learning and teaching, the beliefs by the student
teachers at the end of their studies tend toward the `cognitive' focus. Thus, this alteration in the beliefs might be
attributable to the increased knowledge the students gather during the studies and practical experience from the
internships allowing to evaluate the role of teacher training a little deeper. We hope that these findings will be
fruitful for educators who work in the field of teacher preparation program.
          The sample also comprised student teachers from various disciplines. The recent research confirmed
similarities in the beliefs in the same or relative disciplines (Boulton-Lewis et al., 2001; Norton, 2005; Pajares,
1992; Pratt et al., 2001; van Driel et al., 2007). Contrary to this research, in the present study differences
between   the student    teachers in  the sciences  and   the   humanities  were not  found.  In the  Higher   Education
program in Germany there are two disciplines which must be studied. Thus, there are students in the sample
who study for instance physic and language. The assignment of the students to each group was made according
to the favorite discipline named by the student. This method of assignation seems to be not selective enough.
          The aim of our study was to highlight the beliefs and how they are represented in the thinking of the
interviewees. Restrictions were kept as more as possible. Due to the restrictive nature of questionnaires, we
decided to work according to the inquiry method of White and Gunstone (1992). The next step could be to use
the results  of  the present  study   to  develop   a questionnaire    to  measure  `participation' even  more  closely.
Furthermore, a future study could interview other groups of people. Beliefs of experienced teachers seem to be

                                                      570   ·  © ISLS
                                                 ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

of particular interest in the light of the present project. As a conclusion of the present study we must bear in
mind that our investigation reveals not actual beliefs, but rather, in the best case scenario, the `blueprints of
beliefs' in the particular interview situation.

        References
Aguirre, J., & Speer, N. M. (2000). Examining the relationship between beliefs and goals in teacher practice.
        Journal of Mathematical Behavior, 18(3), 327-356.
Alger, C. L. (2009). Secondary teachers' conceptual metaphors of teaching and learning: Changes over the
        career span. Teaching and Teacher Education, 25, 743-751.
Anderson,  J., Reder, L. M.,   & Simon,  H.      A.  (1997).  Situative versus cognitive perspectives:  Form  versus
        substance. Educational Researcher, 26(1), 18-21.
Bereiter, C. (1994). Constructivism, socioculturalism, and Popper´s World 3. Educational Researcher, 23(7),
        13-20.
Boulton-Lewis, G. M., Smith, D. J. H., McCrindle, A. R., Burnett, P. C., & Campbell, K. J. (2001). Secondary
        teachers' conceptions of teaching and learning. Learning and Instruction, 11, 35-51.
Bruner, J. (1996). The Culture of Education. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Calderhead, J. (1996). Beliefs and knowledge. In David C. Berliner & Robert C. Calfee (Eds.), Handbook of
        educational psychology (S. 709-725). New York: Macmillan.
Chi, M. T. H. (1997). Quantifying qualitative analyses of verbal data: A practical guide. The Journal of the
        Learning Sciences, 6(3), 271-315.
Dubberke, T., Kunter, M., Mc Elvany, N., Brunner, M., & Baumert, J. (2008). Lerntheoretische Überzeugungen
        von    Mathematiklehrkräften:   Einflüsse       auf  die  Unterrichtsgestaltung  und    den  Lernerfolg  von
        Schülerinnen und Schülern. Zeitschrift für Pädagogische Psychologie, 22, 193-206.
Greeno, J. G. (1997). On claims that answer the wrong questions. Educational Researcher, 26(1), 5-17.
Kember, D. (1997). A reconceptualization of the research into university academics' conceptions of teaching.
        Learning and Instruction, 7(3), 255-275.
Kember, D., & Kwan, K. (2000). Lecturers' approaches to teaching and their relationship to conceptions of
        good teaching. Instructional Science, 28, 469-490.
Lave, J. (1987). Cognition in practice. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Lave, J., & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning: Legitimate peripheral participation. New York: Cambridge
        University Press.
Martinez, M.,  Sauleda,  N., &   Huber, G.      (2001).  Metaphors   as  blueprints of thinking  about  teaching and
        learning. Teaching and Teacher Education, 17, 965-977.
MAXQDA, Software für qualitative Datenanalyse, 1989 ­ 2007, VERBI Software. Consult. Sozialforschung
        GmbH, Berlin-Marburg-Amöneburg, Deutschland.
Norton, L., Richardson, J. T. E., Hartley, J., Newstead, S., & Mayes, J. (2005). Teachers' beliefs and intentions
        concerning teaching in higher education. Higher Education, 50, 537-571.
Pajares, M. F. (1992). Teachers' beliefs and educational research: Cleaning up a messy construct. Review of
        Educational Research, 62(3), 307-332.
Pratt, D. D. (2002). Good teaching: One size fits all? New Directions for Adult and Continuing Education, 93, 5-
        15.
Pratt, D. D., Collins, J. B., & Jarvis-Selinger, S. (2001). Development and use of the Teaching Perspectives
        Inventory  (TPI).  Paper  presented     at  the  Annual   Meeting  of  the  American    Educational Research
        Association   (AERA).    Available       on:   http://www.teachingperspectives.com/PDF/development1.pdf
        (25.02.2010).
Resnick, L. B., & Hall, M. W. (1998). Learning organizations for sustainable education reform. Daedalus, 127,
        89-118.
Sfard, A. (1998). On two metaphors for learning and the dangers of choosing just one. Educational Researcher,
        27(2), 4-13.
Staub, F. C.,  & Stern, E. (2002). The  nature      of  teachers' pedagogical  content  beliefs matters for students'
        achievement     gains:  Quasi-experimental       evidence   from   elementary    mathematics.    Journal  of
        Educational Psychology, (94), 344-355.
Thompson, A. G. (1992). Teachers' beliefs and conceptions: A synthesis of the research. In D. A. Grows (Ed.),
        Handbook of research on mathematics teaching and learning (pp. 127-146). New York: Macmillan.
Trigwell, K., Prosser, M., & Taylor, P. (1994). Qualitative differences in approaches to teaching first year
        university science. Higher Education, 27, 75-84.
Van Driel, J. H., Bulte, A. M. W., & Verloop, N. (2007). The relations between teachers' general beliefs about
        teaching and learning and their domain specific curricular beliefs. Learning and Instruction, 17, 156-
        171.
White, R. T., & Gunstone, R. F. (1992). Probing understanding. London: Flamer Press.

                                                     571  ·  © ISLS
