                                               ICLS 2010   ·    Volume 1

                      Extending the Self-Explanation Effect to
                         Second Language Grammar Learning
                                Ruth Wylie, Kenneth Koedinger, Teruko Mitamura
                                            Carnegie Mellon University
                              5000 Forbes Avenue, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15217
                     Email: rwylie@cs.cmu.edu, koedinger@cmu.edu, teruko@cs.cmu.edu

         Abstract: Self-explanation is an instructional strategy that has shown to be beneficial for
         math and science learning. However, it remains an open question whether these benefits will
         extend to other domains like second language grammar learning. Within the domain of the
         English article system   (teaching students   when     to use  a,  an, the, or no  article  at all), we
         compare two computer-based tutoring conditions in an in vivo classroom study. In the article
         choice  condition,   students  select the   correct    article  to complete    the sentence.    In   the
         explanation choice condition, students are given a sentence with the correct article highlighted
         and choose the rule or feature that best explains the article use. Students (N=101) in both
         conditions  show   significant   learning on  both  procedural     (article choice)   and   declarative
         (explanation choice) tasks. Not surprisingly, we found that declarative instruction (explanation
         choice) led to significant learning of explanations, while procedural practice (article choice)
         led to significant learning of the procedures. More interestingly, we also found evidence of
         cross-type  transfer such that   declarative  practice    led  to  procedural  gains  and   procedural
         practice led to better understanding of the declarative   rules.   In general the effects of prompted
         self-explanation appeared somewhat stronger than those of procedural practice.

Introduction
Self-explanation is an instructional strategy that has lead to increased learning by encouraging students to focus
on key features of the material (Roy & Chi, 2005). However, the majority of this work has been done in math
and science domains like physics (Chi, et al., 1989; Conati &VanLehn, 2000), geometry (Aleven & Koedinger,
2002), and biology (Chi, et al., 1994), with little existing work in domains like second language grammar
learning. The first self-explanation studies were correlational studies that demonstrated that students who self-
explain more learn more (Chi, 1989). Follow-up studies have shown that prompting students to self-explain
increases learning (Chi, et al., 1994), and that having students select explanations from a list of options (rather
than constructing free-formed responses like in previous studies) is also a successful technique (Aleven &
Koedinger, 2002; Renkl, 1999). However, despite being called a domain general strategy (Roy & Chi, 2005),
the self-explanation effect has not been extensively tested in domains other than math and science with the
exception of McNamara's (2004) work on reading comprehension. Our work differs from previous work in its
focus on second language grammar acquisition, a problem-solving domain where there is a strong intuition that
immersive practice, without reflection on rules, is more natural and perhaps best.
         In this paper we compare math and science learning and second language grammar acquisition and
discuss why self-explanation may or may not be beneficial for learning English grammar constructs. We then
describe two systems that we built to evaluate the self-explanation effect in an empirical classroom-based study
within the context of learning the English article system (teaching students when to say "a pencil" versus "the
pencil"). As expected, students in both conditions demonstrate significant learning gains on their tutored skill:
students in the tutored-practice (article choice) condition learn how to select the correct article, and students in
the self-explanation condition   learn  how  to  select correct    explanations   for  article  use. More     surprisingly,
students in both conditions also show cross-type transfer with students in the article choice condition learning
how to select explanations and students in the self-explanation condition learning how to select the correct
article. These results are promising and suggest that self-explanation is beneficial for second language grammar
acquisition and leads to the refinement of both procedural and declarative knowledge.

Article Domain
We chose to focus on the domain of non-native English speakers learning the English article system because of
the importance of acquiring article use skills, the rule-based structure of the article system, and second language
acquisition theory  that suggests articles are  particularly    well suited  for a   rule-based  instructional  approach.
Grammar errors can cause writing to become "intelligible", "irritating", or both (Ellis, 1994), and articles are
one of the last grammar points for English language learners to acquire (Master, 1997). We also chose article
use as a domain    because  its rule-based  nature  makes    it a  good    candidate for studying    the effects  of self-
explanation  in language   learning.   In contrast  to  domains     like   vocabulary   learning where    students   must

                                                    57  ·  © ISLS
                                             ICLS 2010      ·  Volume 1

memorize arbitrary mappings, article usage is generally determined through a set of heuristics based on features
of the sentence (although many exceptions exist). For example, in the sentence, "Yesterday, I bought a car.
Today, the car broke," the article the is used because the noun car has already been mentioned. Furthermore,
according to second language acquisition theory, some grammar constructs are better suited for rule-focused
instruction than others. For example, articles are a type of grammar construct that is often not required for
successful communication (i.e. readers likely understand the sentence, "Yesterday, I went to (no article) store"
even though "Yesterday, I went to the store" is correct), and thus articles and their function within a sentence
are unlikely to be noticed by learners without formal, rule-focused instruction (Williams & Evans 1998).

Domain Differences
While self-explanation has been very successful at increasing learning in math and science domains, there are
inherent differences between math and science and second language learning which may affect the success of
self-explanation in this new domain. One key difference lies in the pedagogical goals of the domains. In math
and science, often students are expected to be able to solve problems and explain the underlying principles. A
typical example of this expectation is in geometry where students are asked to determine the angles of a triangle
and provide the reason or rule(s) for their answer. However, the marker of a successful language learner is
fluency, and knowing when and how to use a particular construct is much more important than knowing why. In
fact, most native speakers of a language have no explicit knowledge of the rules driving their article decisions
yet rarely make mistakes. Another difference lies in the presence and absence of exceptions to rules. In math
and science, there are no exceptions. Provided that the proper conditions are met, a given rule will always apply.
However, there are frequent exceptions to grammar rules. For example, one rule listed in an English as a Second
Language grammar book states that no article should be used before the name of a disease (Cole, 2000); for
example, He has (no article) diabetes. However, many exceptions exists (e.g. He has the flu, She has a cold.)
Perhaps encouraging students to focus on rules and features of the sentence, which may sometimes prove to be
unreliable, is not an effective learning strategy.

Tutor Designs
In our study, we compared a condition where students were tutored on which article to use in a sentence (article
choice) to a condition where  students were        tutored on  the features of  the sentence  relevant  to article use
(explanation choice). Both tutors were developed using the Cognitive Tutoring Authoring Tools (Koedinger, et
al., 2004) and deployed online using Java WebStart. All student actions (answer selections, hint requests) were
logged and time-stamped. Both tutors had 56 example sentences and addressed eight rules for making article
decisions (e.g. "If the noun has already been mentioned, use the" or "If the noun is general and plural, use no
article."). In order to finish working with the tutor, students must have answered all questions correctly.
        The  article choice condition (Figure      1) mimics   cloze   or fill-in-the-blank activities found in many
second language learning textbooks. Using dropdown menus, students select the article ("a", "an", "the", or "no
article") that best completes the sentence. They receive immediate feedback on their selection and have access
to a series of on-demand hints. This form of instruction is designed to give students practice using articles but
does not require them to give a reason or explanation for their choice.

                                                           2

                                                                              3
                              1

Figure 1. In the article choice condition, students choose the article (a, an, the, no article) that best completes the
sentence (1), and receive immediate feedback on their selection. If the answer is right, it turns green (2), and red
                                                   if it is wrong (3).

                                                     58  ·  © ISLS
                                              ICLS 2010    ·  Volume 1

         In this study, we chose to operationalize self-explanation in the form of a menu-based explanation
choice tutor. In this condition   (Figure 2),    students are  presented  with   a sentence    with  the target article
highlighted and asked to choose the rule that best explains the article use. Again, students receive immediate
feedback on their selection and have access to hints.     In this condition, students see examples of correct article
use but do not make any article decisions of their own.

            2

            3

            1

Figure 2. In the explanation choice condition, students choose the feature of the sentence that best explains the
article use (1). Identical to the article choice condition, students receive immediate feedback on their selection.
                       If the answer is right, it turns green (2), and red if it is wrong (3).

         Both tutors employed a similar series of hints that were presented upon student request. The hints first
identified the key feature(s) of the sentence, then provided the rule, and finally, in the article choice condition,
told students which article to select (Table 1).

Table 1: Example hint sequence for the article choice and explanation choice tutors.

Target Sentence: My office is on the third floor.

 Article Choice Hints                                         Explanation Choice Hints
 1. "Third" is an ordinal number.                             1. "Third" is an ordinal number.
 2. Use   "the"  with  ordinal  numbers    and    other       2. Please   select "The noun     is an ordinal number
 ranking words like "next" or "last".                         (like "first", "second",  "third")   or other  ranking
 3. Please select "the" from the highlighted menu.            word (like "next" or "last").

Hypothesis
Our study  addresses  the  question of  whether   self-explanation   is a helpful  instructional   strategy for second
language grammar learning. We hypothesize that students in the explanation choice condition will show greater
learning gains  on article choice   and explanation    choice  tasks  than   those in the article    choice tutor. One
hypothesis for how prompts for self-explanation enhance learning is that they encourage students to notice
relevant features of the problem and enable students to become aware of gaps in their own knowledge (Roy &
Chi, 2005). This feature focusing technique may be beneficial to second language learning students by helping
them attend to parts of the sentence that are important for making article decisions and ignore irrelevant parts.
         Within the field of second language learning, there have been several studies that have investigated the
differences between explicit and implicit grammar instruction. The findings from this study also contribute to

                                                    59  ·  © ISLS
                                                  ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

this debate, since although both conditions are examples of focus on form instruction (Doughty, 2001), the
explanation choice condition which supports explicit practice of rules is an example of explicit instruction,
while the article choice condition affords a more implicit approach to learning. While both approaches have
their own merits, according to a meta-analysis by Norris and Ortega (2000) instructional strategies that include
explicit focus on rules, like the explanation choice condition, are more effective than strategies that are more
implicit in nature, like the article choice condition.
         Self-explanation may also help students by strengthening multiple processes by which to make article
decisions. For example, students could solve the problem through an implicit strategy in which they choose the
article that sounds the most correct, or, if they become proficient at the rules, they could use an explicit strategy
and make their article decision based on the features of the sentence and the rule that applies. Thus, even though
the ultimate goal is to create expert users of the rule and not expert explainers of the rule, self-explanation may
still be a beneficial instructional technique.

Method
The study took place during one 50-minute class period. Students (N=118) were adult English language learners
(mean age = 27.9, SD=7.2) enrolled in the University of Pittsburgh's English Language Institute who came from
a variety of first language backgrounds. In total, there were 13 first languages represented; however the majority
of students spoke Arabic (37%), Korean (18%), or Chinese (15%) as their native language. Students participated
in  the study  as part of  their normal    grammar     class.  There  were  three   class levels: intermediate  (n=30),
intermediate-advanced (n=61) and advanced (n=27). The session started with an introduction to the tutoring and
testing interfaces as well as a brief overview of the rules covered by the tutor. As adult language learners, all of
the students had received some prior instruction on article use, and the goal of the demonstration was simply to
introduce  the vocabulary  that  was   used    in the tutors   and to explain   the tasks  that the students would  be
completing. Students then completed the article choice and explanation choice pretests. Next, students were
randomly assigned within each class to either the article choice or explanation choice condition and completed
the tutored problems. Finally, students did the article choice and explanation choice posttests (Figure 3). Pre-
and posttest forms were counterbalanced.

                    Figure 3. The sequence of tasks students completed as part of the study.

Measures
All  students  were  assessed    on  both  procedural    knowledge     (article choice)   and   declarative  knowledge
(explanation   choice) items. Article   choice    items  were   isomorphic   to those  in  the  article choice tutoring
condition, and students chose the article that best completed the sentence. The explanation choice items were
also identical in form  to those    in the explanation    choice   tutoring condition, where    students  were given a
sentence with the correct article highlighted and asked to explain why that article was used. Two test forms were
created, each with twelve article choice and twelve explanation choice items. For each problem type, there were
eight questions that used rules taught in the tutor (tutored items) and four questions that used rules that were not
taught in the tutor (control items). These items were included in order to measure effects other than those from
the tutoring system (e.g. students becoming familiar with the interface or students becoming fatigued).

Data Sample
Since students participated in the study as part of their normal class activity, there was limited time within
which to collect data. Overall, 86% (101 out of 118) of the students completed all tasks; however, attrition
between conditions was not the same with 95% (55 out of 58) of students in the article choice condition and
77% (46 out of 60) of students in the explanation choice condition completing all tasks (!2(1, N=118) = 7.9, p =
0.005). Pretests scores for the remaining students were not significantly different (t(1, 99) = 1.31, p = 0.192)
(Table 2), but the trend is the direction of concern (i.e., consistent with the hypothesis that low prior knowledge
students  were dropped   from  the   explanation    choice  sample)   with  the explanation   choice group   having an
average pretest score of 62.9% and the article choice group at 58.9%. Based on observation and anecdotal
comments from the classroom teachers, students who ran out of time before completing the posttests fell into
one of two categories: students with low prior knowledge and students with high prior knowledge who were

                                                      60  ·   © ISLS
                                               ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

very meticulous and conscientious in their choices. One student did not take the pretest due to technical error
and was dropped from analysis.

Table 2: After attrition, the pretest scores were slightly higher than before attrition but there was no significant
difference between conditions.

                                                Total Sample             Sample After Attrition
                  Tutoring Condition       N    Pretest Mean (SD)        N      Pretest Mean (SD)
                  Article Choice          58      0.583 (0.162)         55        0.589 (0.159)
                  Explanation Choice      59      0.604 (0.145)         46        0.629 (0.137)

        Even though the pretest scores were not significantly different and we have reason to believe that
attrition may also occur because of the diligence of good students, we thought it best to use a statistical analysis
designed to address such a situation. Propensity score matching (PSM) is a technique that is often used in quasi-
experimental designs to correct for bias. PSM is similar to other types of matching but it combines several
variables into one score on which to cluster participants. Prior work has shown that using propensity scores to
divide students into five groups and then using this subclassification as an additional variable often removes
over 90% of the bias caused by each of the covariates (Rosenbaum & Rubin, 1984). In our study, we wanted to
account for bias due to attrition and thus first calculated a propensity score (1 = highly likely to complete the
study, 0 = very unlikely to complete the study) for each student by running a logistic regression with the binary
variable of whether or not students completed the posttests as the dependent variable. Covariates used in the
regression include: the log of the time spent on the article choice pretest, the log of the time spent on the
explanation choice pretest, the log of the time spent using the tutor, article choice pretest score, explanation
choice pretest score, and course level (intermediate, intermediate-advanced, advanced). The participants were
then divided into groups based on propensity score and this value was used as a between-subjects variable in the
all the analyses.
        The main    reason   for grouping  students using   propensity score  and  not a single measure was   that
individually none of the other variables were highly correlated with completion rate. However the propensity
score, which combines several measures, is highly correlated with whether or not a student would complete the
posttests (r(115)=0.84, p < 0.001) and thus a better metric on which to group.

Results
The following analyses were done with and without the PSM variable and resulted in the same conclusions.
Because we believe they are less biased and thus a more accurate description of the findings, here we report the
results that include the PSM variable.

Learning Gains
Repeated  measures   ANOVA       analyses show that students  in both   conditions  demonstrate significant pre to
posttest improvement on both the article choice measure (F(1, 95) = 29.44, p < 0.001) and the explanation
choice measure (F(1, 91) = 15.09, p < 0.001). In order to determine if tutoring condition had an effect on
posttest scores, a MANCOVA was calculated using article choice and explanation choice posttest scores as the
dependent variables, propensity group and tutoring condition as the independent variables, and article choice
and explanation choice pretest scores as covariates. This reveals a significant effect for condition (F(2, 88) =
5.38, p = 0.006).   Finally, in  order to understand  the   specific affects of the conditions, we ran univariate
between-subjects tests for each test type. These showed that condition significantly affected explanation choice
posttest scores (p=0.023) but not article choice posttest scores (p=0.153).
        Figure 4 uses normalized gain (Hake, 1998) scores to illustrate these results: both groups are learning
the skill on which they were tutored (article choice students show improvement on the article choice task, and
explanation choice students show improvement on the explanation choice task). More surprisingly, both groups
are also learning the transfer skill (article choice students show improvement on the explanation items, and
explanation choice students show improvement on the article choice items). Furthermore, the effects of the self-
explanation condition appear stronger than those of procedural practice. Despite having no tutored practice on
article choice items, students in the explanation choice condition are showing equal gains on the article choice
measure compared to students in the article choice condition and significantly higher gains on the explanation
choice measure.

                                                   61  ·  © ISLS
                                              ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

            Figure 4: Normalized gains scores for article choice and explanation choice measures.

Surprisingly, we see cross-task transfer for both conditions: students using the article choice tutor show a small
but significant gain on the explanation choice items, and students using the explanation choice tutor, who had no
tutored practice with the article choice task, are showing equally high gain scores as those who used the article
choice tutor. In addition to the tutored rules, students were also assessed on four control rules that were not
included in the tutored material. These items were included in order to measure effects other than those from the
tutoring system (e.g. students becoming more familiar with the interface, fatigue, etc.). For these untutored
items, results of a repeated measures ANOVA investigating pre-to-post change across both conditions showed
no improvement for the article choice items (F(1, 95) = 0.01, p = 0.931) and a significant decrease on the
explanation choice items (F(1, 91) = 7.59, p = 0.007). These results support the conclusion that the observed
learning  gains on the tutored rules were   the  result  of students'  experiences with   the  tutors and not      an
unobserved, external factor. The decrease in explanation performance on untutored items may reflect students'
tendency to use explanations consistent with the tutored items, which, of course, are incorrect for the untutored
items.

Processing Time
We also recorded the amount of time it took students to complete each assessment. Since measures of fluency
include both accuracy and speed, reducing the amount of processing time that a student requires is an important
goal. One concern with using self-explanation for teaching grammar is that it might take students longer to
generate a response if they use an explicit, rule-based strategy than if they use an implicit one. A repeated
measures  ANOVA     with log-transformed   pre and   posttest completion  times as the   dependent variables       and
condition and   propensity group as  the independent     variables,  show that  students  in both  conditions      are
significantly faster at completing the posttest than the pretest for both measures (article choice: F(1, 95) = 76.28,
p < 0.001, explanation choice: F(1, 91) = 275.32, p < 0.001) (Figures 5 & 6). A MANCOVA analysis with log-
transformed completion   times for article choice    and   explanation choice  posttests as  dependent  variables,
condition and propensity group as independent variables, and the log-transformed completion times for the
pretests as covariates shows no main effect for condition (F(2, 88) = 0.37, p =0.689). While students in both
tutoring conditions are completing the posttests significantly faster than they complete the pretests, students in
the self-explanation condition are completing the posttests just as fast as those in the article choice condition.

Figures 5 & 6: Students in both conditions and for both measures completed the posttest significantly faster than
  the pretest. More importantly, self-explanation instruction does not appear to be hinder students' speed in
                                           completing the mesures.

                                                  62  ·  © ISLS
                                                 ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

Hint Usage
As mentioned above, the hint structure of the two tutors was very similar, and thus if students in both groups
heavily relied on the hints, their experiences with the tutors might be similar despite the task (article choice vs
explanation choice)    differences. However,    the log data   show    that students  rarely request  a hint   (Figure 7).
Approximately 80% of students using the article choice tutor and 75% of students using the explanation choice
tutor requested hints on fewer than five problems (out of a total of 56 problems) and approximately 50% from
each group  never   requested   a hint. This   suggests   that any  similiarities   seen in  learning between    the   two
conditions is not a result of students seeing similar hints.

   Figure 7: Overall, students using either tutoring system rarely asked for a hint to complete the problems.

Effects of First Language
Finally, in order to determine if a student's first language (L1) had an effect on learning or if there was an
interaction between tutoring condition and first language, we first classified participants' first languages into
one of three categories: L1 has both a definite and indefinite article, L1 does not have a definite but does have
an indefinite article, or L1 has neither a definite nor indefiniet article (Dryer, 2008) and then repeated the
MANCOVA analysis described above, adding first language category as an additional independent variable.
Results show no main effect for first langauge (F(4, 104) = 1.31, p = 0.270) and no interaction between first
language and tutoring condition (F(12, 104) = 0.683, p = 0.765).

Discussion
Both tutoring   conditions   were successful   at increasing   students'    procedural knowledge    (article choice)   and
declarative knowledge (explanation choice). These results suggest that students can learn from self-explaining
not only in math and science domains, but also in new domains like second language grammar learning. The
self-explanation prompts help students both to correctly use articles and to explicitly identify the rules driving
these decisions. Further supporting this finding is the timing data that shows students in the explanation choice
condition  are solving  the  posttest problems    just as   quickly as  their article  choice counterparts.    Thus, self-
explanation improves both facets of fluency, speed and accuracy, just as well as practice.
         While one might expect students in the article choice condition to improve on the article choice posttest
and students in the explanation choice condition to improve on the explanation choice posttest, the fact that we
see cross-task transfer for both tutoring conditions is somewhat surprising, although not unprecedented. In their
study looking at the effects of self-explanation in geometry learning, Aleven & Koedinger (2002) saw similar
results in that students in both the self-explanation condition and problem-solving condition showed significant
learning in their   ability to problem  solve  and  in  their  ability to   provide explanations   or reasons.  One    key
difference  is that in the   geometry   study, students   in the self-explanation    condition had    practice with  both
procedural  (problem   solving)   and   declarative (explaining)    skills, while in   our study,  students  in the  self-
explanation condition did not have any procedural (article choice) practice and were tutored on declarative skills
(explanation choice) only. We hypothesize that the combination of worked examples (i.e. seeing the correct
article highlighted in the problem sentence) and self-explanation prompts encourages students to focus on the
features of the sentence that are important for making article decisions. They are then able to recall and apply
these rules when presented with procedural items on the posttest.
         We see a similar but smaller effect for students in the procedural (article choice) condition in that
despite  having  no  tutored   practice on choosing     explanations,   they   show    significant improvement    on   the

                                                     63   ·  © ISLS
                                               ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

declarative items in the posttest. We hypothesize that the procedural instruction may have led to an increase in
declarative knowledge    through students  inductively    learning  the  rules and   perhaps a priming   effect  by the
pretest. Since all students took the explanation choice pretest, which asked them to use declarative knowledge,
students  may  have   been  looking for   and inductively   generating   the   rules from the  tutored  problems   they
completed, accounting for the small but significant increase in declarative knowledge.
          One limitation of this work is the generalizability of the results. Since the entire study was conducted
during one class period, we had limited time within which to collect data. Due to this limitation, less than 80%
of the  students in  the  explanation choice   condition   finished  all five  stages  of the  study. While    we  used
propensity score matching to account for the attrition in the analysis, we cannot make strong claims about those
students for whom we have no posttest measures. As noted by the classroom teachers, students who did not
finish likely  fell into one of  two  categories: those   with   low prior   knowledge    and  those  with  high  prior
knowledge   who     were  very  diligent. Perhaps  self-explanation      is not  appropriate   for  all students.   The
metalinguistic challenges involved in choosing explanations in a foreign language might be too difficult for the
low prior knowledge students, and asking very diligent students to self-explain each step may be an inefficient
use of class time. To address these issues, on-going research is investigating interventions designed to foster
feature-focusing behavior while minimizing metalinguistic difficulties as well as interweaving procedural and
declarative tasks in order to reduce the amount of overall time needed to complete the tutor.
          In conclusion, this study is one of the first to investigate the effects of self-explanation on language
learning and presents promising results that prompted self-explanation helps students with procedural skills and
enables them to develop explicit knowledge of the rules. Further work is needed to investigate the robustness of
this effect and the extent to which this knowledge transfers to real-world production.

References
Aleven, V. & Koedinger K. (2002). An effective metacognitive strategy: Learning by doing and explaining with
          a computer-based cognitive tutor. Cognitive Science, 26, 147-179.
Chi, M. T. H., Bassok, M., Lewis, M. W., Reimann, P., & Glaser, R. (1989). Self-explanations: How students
          study and use examples in learning to solve problems. Cognitive Science, 13, 145-182.
Chi,   M.T.H.,  de   Leeuw,  N., Chiu,    M.H.,   LaVancher,     C.  (1994).   Eliciting  self-explanations    improves
          understanding.  Cognitive Science, 18, 439-477.
Cole, T. (2000). The Article Book: Practice Towards Mastering a, an, and the. University of Michigan Press.
Conati, C., & VanLehn, K. (2000). Further results from the evaluation of an Intelligent Computer Tutor to
          Coach  Self-Explanation.  Proceedings   of   the   9th International  Conference    on   Intelligent Tutoring
          Systems, 304-313.
Doughty, C. (2001). Cognitive underpinnings of focus on form. In P. Robinson (Ed.), Cognition and Second
          Language Instruction, 206-257.
Dryer, M. (2008) Definite Articles. In: In: Haspelmath, Martin & Dryer, Matthew S. & Gil, David & Comrie,
          Bernard (eds.) The World Atlas of Language Structures Online. Munich: Max Planck Digital Library,
          chapter 37. Available online at http://wals.info/feature/37. Accessed on October 28, 2009.
Ellis, R. (1994). The Study of Second Language Acquisition. Oxford University Press.
Hake,  R.   (1998).  Interactive-engagement    versus  traditional  methods:    a    six-thousand- student  survey   of
          mechanics test data for introductory physics courses. American Journal of Physics, 66, 64 ­ 74.
Koedinger, K., Aleven, V., Heffernan. T., McLaren, B. & Hockenberry, M. (2004). Opening the Door to Non-
          Programmers:   Authoring  Intelligent Tutor   Behavior    by  Demonstration.    Proceedings   of 7th  Annual
          Intelligent Tutoring Systems Conference. Maceio, Brazil.
Master, P. (1997) The English Article System: Acquisition, Function, and Pedagogy. System, 25(2), 215-232.
McNamara, D.S. (2004). SERT: Self-explanation reading training. Discourse Processes, 38, 1-30.
Norris, J. M., & Ortega, L. (2000). Effectiveness of L2 instruction: A research synthesis and quantitative meta-
          analysis. Language Learning, 50, 417-528.
Renkl, A. (1999) Learning mathematics from worked-out examples: Analyzing and fostering self-explanations.
          European Journal of Psychology in Education, 16, 477-488.
Rosenbaum, P. & Rubin, D. (1984) Reducing the bias in observational studies using subclassification on the
          propensity score. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 79, 516-524.
Roy,   M. &   Chi,  M.T.H.  (2005). Self-explanation   in a  multi-media    context.  In R.  Mayer  (Ed.), Cambridge
          Handbook of Multimedia Learning, 271-286.
Williams, J. & Evans, J. (1998). What kind of foucs and on which forms? In C. Doughty & J. Williams (Eds.),
          Focus on Form in Classroom Second Language Acquisition, 139-155.

Acknowledgments
Special thanks to Howard Seltman for help with the analyses, the PSLC CTAT and DataShop teams and our
partner teachers. This work was supported in part by the PSLC (National Science Foundation Award SBE-
0836012) and by the Institute of Education Sciences, U.S. Department of Education (Grant R305B040063).

                                                    64  ·  © ISLS
