                                                  ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

     A Longitudinal Approach to Appropriation of Science Ideas:
           A Study of Students' Trajectories in Thermodynamics
        Abstract:     This    article  provides   an   empirical  analysis    of  data  collected   during   the
        implementation of a teaching proposal on thermodynamics in a class of 20 students (17 year-
        olds) of a scientifically-oriented secondary school in Italy. During the activities, each student
        made       evident   progress  in  gaining   intellectual   autonomy     as  they   took   part  in  the
        teaching/learning       dynamics  of  the classroom.    Although   the research   had, up  to   now, an
        empirical    orientation,   this  paper   aims to    provide  a  contribution  for   advancing   theory
        development in physics education research. The study gives an example of the application of a
        specific model of teaching/learning (the Model of Longitudinal Development) that acted as
        "framework       for action"  in  the design  of  the   learning environment   as   "properly   complex
        territory." The data analysis gives indications for how to develop a theoretical understanding
        of  the    concept   of "personal learning   trajectory"  and it  provides  a  basis for  exploring  the
        factors that can trigger intellectual autonomy.

1. Introduction
This article focuses on an empirical analysis of data collected during the implementation of a teaching proposal
on thermodynamics in a regular 12th grade class in a scientifically-oriented secondary school in Italy.The study
is an example of application of a specific model of teaching/learning (the Model of Longitudinal Development,
described in Section 2), that acted as "framework for action" (diSessa & Cobb, 2004) in the design of a learning
environment as "properly complex territory."
        A framework for action is intrinsically and self-consciously heuristic. The purpose of a framework for
action is to provide some useful focus and direction for the design of learning environments. However, because
frameworks     for action  may   involve  multiple, diverse  design   elements   and  plans  (some  of  which  may   have
inexplicit underlying     assumptions),   frameworks   for   action  are  not  themselves    "theories  of  teaching and
learning" that can be tested or falsified. The results of a design that is informed by the heuristic principles of a
particular framework for action are iterative in nature, and often involve making explicit and gaining a better
understanding of the initial choices made by intuition or guess-work and guided by previous design experiences.
This is what happened also in this study: through feedback from our students, we progressively gained a refined
awareness of both basic features and the potential of the materials we had designed. In sections 3 and 4, we
document this progress by stressing what we had explicitly planned before and during the implementation and
what became, to our surprise, evident in the monitoring of the classroom activities.
        Although empirical in orientation, this study intents to go beyond purely heuristic findings and aims to
provide a contribution to the enterprise of advancing theory development in physics education. The choice of
focusing the study on the specific concept of "learning trajectory," known in the research literature of design
studies (Confrey, 2006), did indeed allow us to find important hints in the data for developing the research from
a more theoretical point of view. In particular, by working on real examples of learning trajectories constructed
by the students themselves, the fairly abstract and mainly evocative word "trajectory" seems to gain specific and
operatively recognizable properties. These properties appear to be good candidates not only for defining it, but
also for potentially including it in a "local theory" (diSessa & Cobb, 2004), aimed at explaining the connections
between individual and collective growth and individuating the factors that can trigger intellectual autonomy
through the construction of personal learning trajectories.
        Section    5  is  devoted  to  implications  for  future  research and   stresses the  need   to point out   such
theoretical foci of attention on which future studies can be carried out.

2. The Model of Longitudinal Development (as a framework for action)
The Model      of  Longitudinal  Development    (MLD)     is the main    product of  the  Italian PRIN   project "F21  -
Teaching and learning pathways in physics for the 21th century, in both "formal" and "informal" education"
(2004-2007). This project involved nine Italian research groups in physics education and was coordinated at
national level by Paolo Guidoni.
        MLD is comprised of a set of shared criteria for designing teaching materials that allow the cognitive
potential of the pupils to be progressively exploited and tuned to the construction of physics knowledge along
the pre-university curriculum (from Kindergarten to upper secondary school) (Guidoni & Levrini, 2008; Levrini
et al., 2009).
        According to the model, the longitudinal development of physics teaching/learning is schematically
seen as a continuous widening of phenomenological evidence correlated to more and more powerful modelling
along 3 macro-levels of development:
-  Level one (K-8) - phenomenological "appropriation" of common life experience;

                                                      572  ·  © ISLS
                                                 ICLS 2010    ·  Volume 1

-   Level two (grades 9-10, the first two years of upper secondary school) - re-arrangement of phenomenologies
    into pre-theory structures (nets of physical concepts);
-   Level three (grades 11-13, the last three years of upper secondary school) - re-arrangement of the previously
    acquired knowledge in terms of physical theories, up to the basic concepts and formal insights of "modern"
    physics.
The    structure of  physical  knowledge    as  discipline    (i.e. its  organization   in  terms   of theories   roughly
corresponding to the traditional "chapters" in which physics is usually taught) is not taken in the model as the
basis on which the whole long-term curriculum can be organized. Rather, the disciplinary structure of physical
knowledge is considered to be a high cultural goal to which students will be progressively and consciously
guided in the last years of upper secondary school.
         In   this  study,  MLD    acted    as  framework       for  action.  The   experiment    on   teaching/learning
thermodynamics, described in the next section, concerns the level Level 3 (L3) and has been designed according
to the following criteria, assumed within MLD as general orienting principles for the design of the experiment:
a. The role of productive complexities in a physics reconstruction for all students (physics as culture). The
    teaching/learning process is assumed to be meaningful if it tunes, in a productive way, three very complex
    systems: Real world, physics and cognitive dynamics. Because of the involved forms of complexities, hyper-
    simplified instructional descriptions and explanations, by making the material seem easy, can dangerously
    distort the learning process as well as the content. On the contrary, once useless complications are avoided,
    forms of unavoidable complexities can be exploited as productive for creating learning environments rich
    enough to enable each student to exploit his/her potential and to follow the route more congenial to his/her
    cognitive style and/or cultural interest. In the proposal on thermodynamics described below, the two main
    sources of productive complexities considered are: (1) The comparison between different approaches to the
    same content (a multi-perspective approach) and (2) the plurality of the dimensions tuned in the proposal (a
    multi-dimensional proposal). Such forms of complexities have been investigated by our research team for
    several years, in particular in studies about teaching/learning modern physics (special relativity and quantum
    physics) (see, for example, Levrini et al., 2008).
b.  The distinction between classroom corridors and students' individual trajectories. The two terms "corridor"
    and "trajectory" are taken from the work of Confrey (2006) who asserts the necessity for research to develop
    teaching paths in actual classrooms in collaboration with researcher-teachers in order to reach two kind of
    goals: i) To    provide teachers "of  guidance (...)   to   organize corridors (...) as intellectual spaces   through
    which students progress" realizing "a particular conceptual trajectory through the corridor", "with variations
    among students", and ii) To allow the researchers to identify the invariants inside the different paths and to
    use them     in "the articulation of   domain-specific      guidance   illuminating  conceptual    corridors" and   in
    "engineering and identifying multiple means for constructing" corridors that can be successfully navigated in
    different ways by different classes.
In short, according to the MLD, the criteria used for designing the teaching materials and strategies are strongly
oriented by the aim of fostering the creation of the learning environment as a properly complex territory, that is:
-   able to outline a wide, coherent perspective where productive complexities are exploited (corridor);
-   suitable to be "navigated" by the students along different trajectories according to different cognitive styles
    and/or cultural interests.

3. The study

The context
The  study  concerns   a teaching/learning  experiment    carried   out  during  regular activities within a class   of a
science-oriented secondary school (Liceo Scientifico "A. Einstein") in Rimini, Italy. The class, composed of
twenty 17-year-old students (9 girls; 11 boys), was attending the 4th year of upper secondary school (12th grade)
and had studied physics from the first year (9th grade). Following the MLD, during the first two years (Level
L2), the teacher (PF, one the authors) carried out activities strongly focused on the problem of guiding students
to construct pre-theory structures (nets of physical concepts) suitable to manage classes of phenomenologies
(concerning motion, heating, light and vision, waves). The re-arrangement of the acquired knowledge in terms
of physical theories (L3) was the general aim of the activities carried out from the third year (11th grade). Before
the teaching  of    thermodynamics   as  a theory, the   curriculum     had  covered  classical mechanics   and   special
relativity. The thermodynamics corridor implemented in class was designed by a research group made up of
researchers in PER, experienced teachers and undergraduate students.
         According to the MLD criteria, the design of the thermodynamics corridor was characterized by the
following basic choices:
-   to  present  the  same  contents  from   different   approaches.    In  this case,  the two   approaches    were  the
    macroscopic and microscopic ones, treated consistently as two different models, that can be compared by
    confronting the complementary explanations the two models give of the same phenomenology;

                                                     573  ·   © ISLS
                                                ICLS 2010   ·   Volume 1

-   to develop a critical-epistemological reflection on the peculiarities of the two approaches through specific
    activities (a questionnaire where students were asked to analyze and discuss excerpts of epistemological
    texts on the distinction between the two approaches, submitted at the beginning of the thermodynamics
    study; two collective discussions about the questionnaire performed at the beginning and at the end of the
    whole work);
-   to emphasize the comparison of thermodynamics with the theories previously studied (classical mechanics
    and special relativity), so as to support learning as a continuous process of refining, re-investing, revising the
    models and the formal structures already acquired by looking at what was already known from new and
    more powerful perspectives.
The previous experiences of the group in designing teaching materials of modern physics (Levrini 2002) have
provided interesting results about both students' understanding of the physical concepts (Levrini & diSessa,
2008), and the development of students' intellectual autonomy in properly complex territories (Levrini et al.
2008).
         Following the research results of many years of investigation about teaching/learning modern physics,
the design  of   the thermodynamics     proposal   was  explicitly     shaped by the   following  two  research-based
assumptions:
1)  A multi-perspective approach can foster deep understanding of the physics concepts.
    In particular, the model of coordination class of learning and conceptual change (diSessa & Sherin, 1998),
    used as  theoretical    framework  for  analyzing   a   complex    classroom  episode,   provided  a theory-based
    explanation of why explicitly exposing, managing, and relating multiple classes of projections of a physical
    concept (the  concept   of proper  time in  special   relativity), also elicited by the  comparison  between  the
    geometrical and operational approach to special relativity, seems to be a good instructional technique to
    work around documented difficulties in conceptual change (in special relativity) (Levrini & diSessa, 2008);
2)  The  multiple dimensions   (phenomenological,   formal,     conceptual,   metacognitive) tuned  by the analysis of
    historical-epistemological debates on the interpretation of the formalism of modern physics can foster the
    creation of a complex learning environment where the students are stimulated to reflect on the intricacies of
    the opinions and their personal involvement with them.
    A heuristic study on the implementation of a teaching proposal on quantum physics enabled us to point out
    that the multi-dimensional learning environment fostered students' intellectual autonomy by encouraging
    them to generate the questions that puzzled them and find out explicitly productive answers by themselves
    (Levrini et al., 2008).
The main methodological feature that distinguishes the research on thermodynamics is the focus on student's
individual trajectories. The pieces of evidence about students' trajectories collected in our previous studies on
different topics mainly came from classroom discussions and therefore the elements of intellectual autonomy
emerged from the occasional individual contributions. In this study the aim of pursuing the individual trajectory
was clear from the beginning and specific activities and instruments were designed for this purpose.

Aims, data sources and methodology
The  study  here  presented  focuses  on a  selection of    the data   we collected  during the whole  experiment   on
teaching/learning thermodynamics. We focus on the transcripts of the individual semi-structured interviews that
were conducted at the end of the whole work. The interviews were specifically performed for addressing some
research questions   that had  arisen from  the previous    study  on   quantum  physics:   Are the properly complex
territories defined above really suitable to be navigated by the students along their own learning trajectories in
an explicit and conscious way? If so, is it possible to point out what identifies an individual trajectory with
respect to the classroom corridor? What features of corridors, teaching strategies and/or collective activities can
trigger the construction of personal trajectories?
         The first two questions will be answered fairly precisely by means of the data analyzed so far, whilst as
far as the third question is concerned, the study will provide a preliminary answer in terms of hypotheses about
the possible factors that enabled students to construct their own trajectories.
         Out of the 20 students of the class, in order to avoid interfering too much with the regular classroom
activities, 10 students (5 boys and 5 girls) have been selected for interviews so as to represent students' variety
as far as motivation to study physics, special interest in thermodynamics, contribution to classroom discussions,
level of performance in regular physics tasks are concerned.
         The interview protocol included:
-   general questions like: What did you find more and less interesting in the work you did on thermodynamics?
    Why? What did you find easier and what more difficult?
-   specific questions addressed to the individual student for clarifying something he/she had said during the
    classroom activities, like: During the last discussion in class you mentioned the existence of an interesting
    relation between thermodynamics and the theories you previously studied (like mechanics). Would you mind
    telling us more about this?

                                                    574   ·  © ISLS
                                                ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

The interviews have been conducted by a masters student (GT) in the presence of a researcher (OL) and another
masters student (MS). They have been audio-recorded and transcribed. In the first step of the heuristic study, we
decided to select 5 out of the 10 interviews so as to analyze a reduced amount of data and to make the search for
criteria to  analyze the  whole  set of data  easier (Glaser  &  Strauss,   1967). The analysis  of the 5  interviews
produced 5 profiles that are illustrated in the next sections. The analysis allowed us to better define the nature of
the trajectories that characterize each student's way of navigating the classroom corridor.

Results
Confrey's distinction between "corridors" and "trajectories" is strongly evocative in pointing out the different
roles of the teacher and the students in the teaching/learning episodes. In the design phase of the study on
thermodynamics, the distinction was taken as a synthetic way to emphasize the need both of assuring an active
role to  the students  in constructing  their own learning    trajectories, and of dedicating research  and teaching
efforts in designing learning environments (corridors) able to foster a resonance between the growth of the
individual intellectual autonomy and the collective classroom progression.
          A major research product of the construction of the students' profiles was the tentative redefinition of
the concept of trajectory that appears to enable us both to extract deeper information from data and to contribute
to the development of a theoretical frame of analysis.
          At the present level of the analysis, in order to share and discuss with other researchers the results of
our attempt at better defining the concept of trajectory, we think it useful to report the 5 profiles reconstructed
from  the   interviews with  the students. For  this purpose   we   also include whole  original sentences  from the
students' protocols so as to respect to the extent possible, the students' style of argumentation.
Michele: Actuality of real life and curiosity for "how things work"
Michele, at the end of his interview, summarizes very clearly his position: "I like Physics because it explains
how reality works, so to say, I'm very curious about how objects work and natural events...".
          Next year Michele will start Engineering at the university. His interests are already precise. The topics
that were most impressive for him were the definition of temperature and the kinetic theory of gases that "better
explains the causes, that is what temperature is, the very word, whereas in the macro [approach] we study the
effects without being able to give a satisfactory explanation of the word", but even more the Carnot Cycle: "real
life is there, let's say, these processes, the engines working through these cycles, therefore I was more interested
in connecting it to real life than in knowing exactly what it is".
          He had previously been highly interested in classical mechanics, getting very good marks on it: "we
were looking for causes there" as he said, it was a "framework" for understanding "things of the real world",
like engines, he was very keen on. While studying thermodynamics he was very quick in dealing with formal
steps for expressing ideal gas laws at microscopic level and in studying heat engines. His out-of-school interests
and his personal objectives have driven also his school-work that gives him satisfaction.
          Also because    of his very  precise  motivation,   Michele    played an important  role  in the classroom
dynamics by taking a very clear position both in favour of the microscopic approach to the first law and in
favour of the macroscopic approach to the second law: He became a stable and respected reference, often
opposed to Matteo's position.
          In spite of his precise preferences, Michele expressed his interest in the whole teaching path, because
"the two ways led to reality" and gave an example of how "scientists work":
          "It seemed to me very interesting for understanding.... these two different ways to manage to arrive to
principles, to how reality was investigated. It was very interesting to me also for understanding how scientists
work, how Einstein, Poincaré worked..."
Matteo: The pleasure of speculating and the search for approaching science from a "humanistic" point of
view
The sentence that better summarizes Matteo's position is: "I take for granted that it is fundamental to speculate
on reality and life, because when you see phenomena and you get formulas out of that, then you have nothing,
no foundation on which to stand. [...]   I believe that in order to find a way to understand a method to reach a
reality [...] it is fundamental to build a basis and to speculate on how theories are found, how concepts are
elaborated. These concepts will certainly last longer than some formula."
          Matteo appears to like neither the formal elements of physics, "too abstract", nor the science claim to
arrive at the truth: "In my opinion Physics should not aim at truth, it should only [...] be useful for mankind [...].
To try to believe it possible to find in phenomena the foundation of truth is, I believe, an assumption out of the
physics domain".
          The main point of his argument is that, in doing science, "human" and "far from reality" frameworks
are projected on the world: [...] the sciences seem to me mainly human constructions, I mean the way man has
to investigate nature, to try to explain, may be without understanding that we cannot explain nature because we

                                                     575  ·  © ISLS
                                               ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

are human, we can only explain by the means we have... [and these] in my opinion are not powerful enough to
catch the laws of nature... they are all human constructions that seem to me very inaccurate".
         Matteo played a role in the discussions similar to that of Michele, taking very precise and opposite
positions to Michele's ones by criticizing the kinetic theory of gases and the microscopic approach in general:
"yes, the approach I prefer, you may already know, is the macroscopic one, because it stops at observing what
happens and does not try to investigate reality, does not aim to understanding how these things happen from the
inside, like the microscopic theory does by probing the bodies and finding some particles that move the same
way... strange things".
         His opinion of science takes a positive turn when Matteo judges the epistemological activities carried
out in the classroom. The topic he particularly enjoyed was the concept of irreversibility connected to the time
arrow: "yes, it is exactly this about entropy, where it develops a way of looking at the world which is a little less
naive, because we see that the world is becoming, that some things that happen cannot be transformed... taken
back to how they were: people get older, the table falls over, the cup breaks... cannot be put together again and
here is a key concept to manage to accept even somehow reality, trying to explain everything following the path
we  went  with these  laws of  mechanics,   which  is an  odd  idea, because    mechanics laws are  reversible  and
therefore there is no reason for a time line and for the time to go ahead; this may be a too philosophical way of
looking at reality, because this way of refusing the becoming of being, of wishing to explain everything, the fact
we understand that something cannot be explained, that there is this time advancing, this becoming that cannot
be reduced to a being, may be this is something I enjoyed, I mean I enjoyed it".
Lorenzo: The pursuit of a unified consistent view of physics
Lorenzo makes his position explicit by saying: "One can see that everything is resumed, it is not divided in
topics each with its own laws, instead everything can be connected, unified; the argument becomes wider, more
uniform".
         Lorenzo appreciated the macroscopic construction of the ideal gas equation because of its unifying
nature: "It was rather quick, with those three laws [Boyle's and Gay Lussac's ones] we quickly arrived to the
ideal gas   law"  and its link to   mechanics  ("trying   to explain   again temperature  by  referring to particle
dynamics). He confirms his position when talking about the comparison of the two approaches: "that in the end
I managed to understand which elements I prefer of one and of the other... I preferred one for some features
and the other for some others, in the end I managed to make everything uniform, therefore I understood the
whole argument rather clearly, thanks to these two ways".
         "Understanding"   means,   for  Lorenzo,  "connecting",  "unify  in  a general framework".  His   focus of
attention is the systematic pursuit of consistency: to solve contradictions, to get rid of spurious elements, by
bringing everything back to the simplest possible framework (in his opinion mechanics is the simplest theory).
         Lorenzo admitted to have met serious difficulties in completing the questionnaire at the beginning of
the teaching path: the key was lacking for giving a unified structure to the lot of information contained in the
excerpts. The comparison between the two different approaches proved very satisfactory to his needs: "...when I
read it again (the questionnaire) [...] I immediately associated microscopic thermodynamics to the constructive
type of theory, at once did it come to me..... and I read them (the excerpts) in an altogether different way, ... and
it was  all clearer than  the first time, I managed    to connect and   realized  immediately  that something   had
changed... [...] and I felt satisfied... because I had then only to read... whereas the first time it had been hard, it
took the whole afternoon, I had to read it many times, many passages were obscure....".
         He concludes by saying: "[...] I noticed a big difference between reading it at the beginning and at the
end, I mean that hadn't I read it at the beginning I might not realize all the work we have done".
         Lorenzo played indeed a fundamental role in the final discussion about the questionnaire: his need for
consistency   was a basic  support  to reflection and  an  incentive toward   pointing  out "contradictions" of  the
overall reasoning (the "jarring notes").
Chiara B.: "Understanding as seeing" and the systematic effort of widening "one's own views" looking
for and testing "new points of view"
In  the final discussion  on  the   questionnaire Chiara  said: "We    have  analyzed  thermodynamics   from   both
perspectives, looking at differences and similarities, I mean we have two different points of view ... it may be
more complete to try to analyze a phenomenon, or whatever is around us, from two different points of view
rather than from one and therefore this teaching path widens what we`ve done. It widened my view".
         "To understand", for Chiara, means "to see". Her interview is full of this metaphor. The comparison
between the two approaches, the two "points of view", as she says, takes a more general, social and cultural
meaning. In learning physics, the comparison has been very interesting because it gave various opportunities to
"play" between the real and the ideal and to use her metaphor of "seeing": from empirical observation of reality
to the investigation through the microscopic approach, of what can only be seen with the "mind's eyes".
         "Talking of the concept of temperature... one [approach] is more tangible, more real, because you see it
with a thermometer, you measure, you say «yes, there is a change in temperature, I see it, I understand it», but

                                                   576  ·  © ISLS
                                                ICLS 2010    ·  Volume 1

also the microscopic one is useful [...] The particle movement, for instance, I cannot see it in a thermometer,
only going to the micro can I see this movement".
         Therefore the microscopic approach has been useful from a personal point of view: "Not so much for
better understanding the macro, that I found easier, but because it gave me a different point of view".
         Her attitude towards physics comes out also when she speaks about irreversibility. In the following
sentence Chiara expresses her surprise in finding also in the concepts of irreversibility the overturn of reality
that allows physics to go beyond appearance: "[I liked] entropy because it was interesting this business of
irreversibility and reversibility of   phenomena,    ... I told to myself  «what  a  strange thing:   phenomena   are
irreversible, there is a before and an after, but I take them for reversible and also here I make another ideal
model, I consider them through other processes», I mean.... it's some kind of overturn always in physics and
that's what I like..."
         Chiara  plays  an   important role in both  classroom     discussions on the   questionnaire because  of  her
passion for "seeing other people's points of view", for "widening one's own view and avoiding getting fixed on
some issues".
Chiara C.: Focus on details and search for "not obvious details that are taken for granted"
"I like physics because I sometimes happen to ask myself... I mean I am rather curious about how things
happen". What Chiara seems to like the best of physics is that "obvious things are not taken for granted".
         Of the thermodynamics corridor she enjoyed everything "that made me notice something I had not
noticed before", like the meaning of measuring an apparently obvious quantity like temperature or the fact that
"a true theory is the one, like thermodynamics, that manages to give the same results from both approaches [... I
believe that] a theory that really works is the one that manages to compare the two ways that can be verified".
         Chiara pays attention to the smallest details that she keeps under control to be sure that the constructed
model of reality is not too idealized or unfounded. "In the microscopic I liked and disliked at the same time this
business of the   model   of a discrete  gas, ideal, rarefied...".   What she  dislikes of the model   is the idea of
"perfection" that appears to give a too ideal and simplified image of reality, neglecting too many details. What
she likes is "to be able to think to a model we can make experiments on and to create such a perfect model that
everybody would be able to imagine a thing like that".
         Once she has been reassured that the model is rooted in reality, she can appreciate it for making her
notice details she had not noticed before: "I liked the macro best because it made me think of things that I took
for granted, whereas I liked the microscopic because there is this model that makes you think, because if you
focus on all the passages to arrive to the final law, we had to take into account a lot of things".
         Chiara played an important role in classroom dynamics because of her attention to details that, when
recognized by all students, became catalysts of the discussions.

The idiosyncratic nature of the way each student reacted to the teaching proposal is evident from the excerpts as
well as  his/her  ability to move  within   thermodynamics      showing   confidence  and  competence   on  the topic
(appropriation).
         What features of the profiles allow us to say that they constructed their own trajectories within the
classroom corridor?
         Looking again at the profiles in order to answer to this question we identified a set of criteria that we
implicitly used in tracing the profiles and that could be used as an explicit tool for re-analyzing the whole set of
data in terms of students' trajectories:
     ·   the line of thought is explicit in the words of the student;
     ·   the line of thought is consistent across the whole interview;
     ·   the specific approach to disciplinary knowledge is not occasional (it can be traced back to the student
         reaction in various classroom activities);
     ·   the arguments are on-task, referring to selected aspects already present in the classroom corridor;
     ·   the keywords, around which the student constructs her/his arguments, reveal personal engagement, by
         being genuine and emotion-laden.

                                                    577    ·  © ISLS
                                                     ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

4. Final reflections and implications for research
The   heuristic study  here    presented started    from  a  "framework     for action"  (diSessa   &  Cobb,   2004) that we
developed according to the MLD produced within the Italian project F21. Such a framework oriented us in
designing   and   managing     the  learning   environment     as  properly    complex   territory. As  far  as the  research
questions are concerned, the study presented here shows that the learning environment really proved to be able
to foster students' intellectual autonomy. More specifically, the profiles outlined from 5 interviews allowed us
to point out specific features that characterize the individual trajectories with respect to the classroom corridor.
In this sense the results, although preliminary, represent an advancement in knowledge on design studies. The
results moreover    illuminate   some    foci  of   attention for  analyzing    the data and   they  point  out the  need for
programmatic and iterative investigations over time along different directions:
1.  Re-shaping the framework for action in more detail and designing future experiments on teaching/learning
    thermodynamics as "successive iterations that can play a role similar to systematic variation in experiment"
    (Confrey, 2006). At present, two new experiments are planned: Experiments where the same corridor and
    the same tasks are proposed to 17-year-old students by different teachers in a different school. This will be
    the opportunity for testing the effects that the new awareness about students trajectories can have: Their
    existence can indeed encourage teachers to foster their construction by the students but it can also affect the
    deeply genuine character of the trajectories described here. In any case, we expect the comparison of these
    variations of the same experiment to provide new hints for studying the classroom dynamics by cutting the
    process on the joint that lies between corridors' and trajectories' features.
2.  Analyzing trajectories within the more general problem of conceptual change and, more precisely, within
    the problem of a longitudinal approach to "appropriation" of science ideas. Meaningful learning of a topic
    requires,  in a quite   obvious  way,    a   long-term    process of  appropriation.    By   appropriation  we  mean  the
    process leading to enter a topic deeply ­ and extensively ­ enough to see that topic in a personal version. In
    other studies   about   appropriation,    concerning     teachers  coping   with  innovative    research   proposals  (De
    Ambrosis    &   Levrini,   submitted), it  has   been   pointed   out to   what  extent  an  appropriation  process,  that
    requires one to find one's own point of view, is a problematic task because of the complex dynamics of
    finding criteria for coherence between (critical) details and a global perspective (Viennot et al., 2005). The
    students' trajectories described above seem to have all the features of an appropriation process, because of
    the personal, genuine, character as well as the coherence they have in situating contents details in a global
    framework sensible to them. The specific point of how, why and under what conditions the construction of
    personal   trajectories  is connected     to  deep   understanding    (conceptual    change)    deserves future  research
    studies,  both  on the   data  examined      in this study   (by  strictly  crossing the  personal  trajectories and  the
    contents comprehension), and on other data where, for example, the personal trajectories seem to distort the
    learning  of  a concept     and where     the   process   of appropriation   and/or  conceptual    changes   seem  to be
    problematic and/or unsuccessful.
3.  Individuating the factors that can trigger intellectual autonomy by the construction of personal learning
    trajectories. A study on "personal excursions"1, in spite of their different features with respect to students'
    trajectories, inspired us in the search for those factors that can made the trajectories' construction possible
    (Azevedo, 2006). In agreement with Azevedo, we think that such factors need not to be identified at a too
    general level: They have indeed "to operate at a level of specificity that allows for a satisfactory explanation
    of the dynamics patterns characteristic of personal excursions [personal trajectories, in our case]". Following
    his suggestions, we think that, as a preliminary answer to the third research question ("What features of
    corridors,  teaching    strategies   and/or     collective   activities  can    trigger  the  construction  of   personal
    trajectories?"), the following factors can be identified:
    -   the specific feature of the content reconstruction that, by means of the comparison between two different
        approaches (macro and micro), is able to create a collective dynamics where students are involved with
        different roles (as partisans, opponents, moderators, disrupters, facilitators, ...). Such a dynamics seems
        to have a productive power in making each student to find her/his more congenial path and progressively
        to test and refine it.
    -   the features of the activities specifically addressed to activate an epistemological meta-discussion of the
        peculiarities of the two approaches. Although unusual, unfamiliar and demanding, the design of such
        activities has been always carried out in such a way that students could find themselves in their "regime
        of competence" (diSessa, 2000, quoted in Azevedo, 2006): Activities where they could approach the new
        epistemological language by applying it to physics domains previously studied.
    -   the  choice  of the     teacher, made       explicit  to  the students,   to  evaluate   their performance    in  the
        epistemological activities, by taking into account not "what they wrote or said in specific", but their level
        of involvement, the coherence of their thinking and the contribution they are able to give in the collective
        discussions.
All these   factors deserve    further studies   specifically    addressed  to  improve  our   theoretical  understanding  of
students' trajectories. So far they seem to suggest that students' trajectories are stimulated and become evident

                                                         578  ·   © ISLS
                                                 ICLS 2010  ·   Volume 1

in contexts where the whole teaching proposal is systematically developed and managed by the teacher through
actions directed to move the learning problems from a plan where only "right-wrong", "yes-no", "bad-good"
answers are possible, to a plan where the problems themselves, although respecting the shared disciplinary
knowledge, admit an analysis in terms of critical evaluation of different possible, consistent, "points of view".

Endnotes
(1) Personal excursions are  defined by Azevedo   as self-initiated, self-directed, self-motivated and relatively long-term
    activities, belonging to a student's trajectory but task-off with respect to the classroom corridor. They represent "key
    events whereby students connect, in a deep and personal way, to the subject matter and overarching goals [of the unit
    proposed to them]" (Azevedo, 2006).

References
Azevedo F. S., (2006). Personal Excursions: Investigating the Dynamics of Student Engagement. International
        Journal of Computers for Mathematical Learning, 11:57-98.
Confrey  J., (2006).  The   evolution   of design studies   as methodology,      in  Sawyer   K.   (ed.), The   Cambridge
        Handbook of The Learning Sciences, Cambridge University Press, 135 ­ 152.
De Ambrosis A., Levrini O., (submitted), How physics teachers cope with innovative teaching proposals: An
        empirical study for reconstructing the appropriation path in the case of Special Relativity.
diSessa, A.  A.,  Sherin  B. L.  (1998).   What   changes   in conceptual   change?    International   Journal  of Science
        Education, 20(10), 1155­1191.
diSessa, A.  A.,  Cobb,   P. (2004).  Ontological    innovation  and   the  role of  theory in  design    experiments. The
        Journal of Learning Sciences, 13(1), 77-103.
Glaser, B.   G., Strauss, A. L.  (1967).   The discovery   of  grounded    theory:   Strategies for qualitative   research.
        Chicago: Aldine.
Guidoni  P., Levrini  O.  (eds.) (2008),   Approcci  e  proposte     per l'insegnamento-apprendimento       della  fisica a
        livello preuniversitario, dal progetto PRIN F 21, Forum Editrice, Udine.
Kattmann U., Duit R., Gropengießer H., Komorek M. (1996). Educational Reconstruction -bringing together
        issues of scientific clarification and students' conceptions-, paper presented at the Annual Meeting of
        National Association of Research in Science Teaching (NARST), St. Louis (MI), April 1996.
Levrini  O.,  (2002).   The  substantivalist view    of  spacetime    proposed      by Minkowski     and   its educational
        implications, Science & Education, 11, 6, 601-617.
Levrini, O., diSessa, A A., (2008). How Students Learn from Multiple Contexts and Definitions: Proper Time as
        a Coordination Class. Physical Review - Special Topics Physics Education Research, 4, 010107-1-18
        (2008).
Levrini O., Fantini P., Pecori B. (2008), "The problem is not understanding the theory, but accepting it": a study
        on students' difficulties in coping with Quantum Physics, in R. Jurdana-Sepic R., V. Labinac, M. Zuvic-
        Butorac, A. Susac (Eds.), GIREP-EPEC Conference, Frontiers of Physics Education (2007, Opatija),
        Selected contributions, 319-324, Rijeka: Zlatni rez (ISBN 978-953-55066-1-4).
Levrini O., Altamore A., Balzano E., Bertozzi E., Gagliardi M., Giordano E., Guidoni P., Rinaudo G., Tarsitani
        C. (2009),  Looking   at the  physics  curriculum   in  terms    of framing    ideas, proceedings   GIREP    2008
        International Conference, MPTL 13th Workshop, Nicosia, Cyprus, August 18-22, 2008.
Viennot L., Chauvet F., Colin P., Rebmann G., (2005). Designing Strategies and Tools for Teacher Training:
        The Role of Critical Details, Examples in Optics, Science Education, 89 (1), 13-27.

                                                     579  ·   © ISLS
