                                              ICLS 2010  ·    Volume 1

                            Discourse as a lens for reframing
                        consideration of learning progressions
 Alicia C. Alonzo, Michigan State University, 330 Erickson Hall, East Lansing, MI 48823, alonzo@msu.edu

         Abstract: Learning progressions ­ descriptions of increasingly sophisticated ways of thinking
         about a topic ­ have generated much interest in the science education community, as a means
         of bridging the chasm between cognitive science research and methods for supporting and
         assessing student  learning.  In order  to fulfill this promise, learning   progressions     must  be
         developed and refined based upon a rigorous process that explores the match between the
         learning progression and available evidence of student learning and is complicated by the
         nature of students' thinking. This paper explores the implications of reframing consideration
         of learning progressions using Gee's notion of discourse. This reframing is posited as a means
         of making sense of students' use and interpretation of words that have both everyday and
         scientific meanings and their apparent inconsistency in responding to assessment items. Data
         collected about  students' understandings    relative   to two learning   progressions    is used  to
         explore this approach.

Learning progressions ­ descriptions of increasingly sophisticated ways of thinking about a topic (National
Research Council [NRC], 2007) ­ have generated much interest in the science education community. The
National Science Foundation (NSF) has issued special calls for projects focused on learning progressions (NSF,
2005, 2006, 2009); the National Research Council has advocated for their use to inform science curricula (NRC,
2007) and assessments (NRC, 2006); and the National Assessment of Educational Progress (NAEP) science
framework called for the inclusion of learning-progression-based items (National Assessment Governing Board,
2008). Learning progressions have been promoted as solutions to wide range of current educational issues,
including a lack of curricular coherence (Gotwals & Songer, 2008), the developmental inappropriateness of
current curricula (Stevens, Shin, Delgado, Krajcik, & Pellegrino, 2007), misalignment between instruction and
assessment (Black & Wilson, 2007), and weaknesses in support for valued teaching practices (Alonzo, 2009;
Furtak, 2009). Learning progressions are viewed as a means of bridging the chasm between cognitive science
research and methods for supporting and assessing student learning.
         In order to fulfill this promise, learning progressions must be developed based upon existing research
and refined based upon a rigorous validation process. The central question guiding this work is the extent to
which the learning  progression    (as a  hypothesis  about  student   learning)  matches    available  evidence.  This
evidence necessarily relies upon methods for eliciting and interpreting student responses relative to the learning
progression. Thus,  the  iterative process  of  developing   and    refining a   learning  progression  must   involve
simultaneous consideration of both student learning and the means by which that learning is assessed. Both the
learning progression and its associated assessment items are influenced by assumptions that are made about
what is progressing and the goal of learning.
         This paper explores an alternative framing of these assumptions, as a means of addressing two current
challenges in work to describe and assess student learning through the use of learning progressions. The paper
first provides an overview of these challenges. Second, the paper describes an alternative framing ­ a different
way of considering what is progressing ­ drawing upon Gee's (1991) notion of discourse. This framing is then
applied to consider evidence of student learning. The paper concludes with a discussion of implications for
future work on learning progressions.
         Throughout  this  paper,  two  learning  progressions   are used    to illustrate these ideas. The  first was
designed to describe the learning that might take place during students' first formal study of Force & Motion
(FM; Alonzo & Steedle, 2009), typically in a middle or high school physical science course. It focuses upon
students' ability to make predictions about situations involving force and/or motion: predicting the force(s),
given information   about  an  object's   motion, and   vice  versa.  The    second learning   progression   describes
elementary school students' learning about Plant Nutrition (PN; Alonzo, Benus, Bennett, & Pinney, 2009). It is
comprised of three "progress variables" (Wilson, 2005): Food for Plants, Energy for Plants, and Plants as
Producers. The discussion in this paper is limited to the first two progress variables, which pertain to students'
explanations surrounding the source of plants' food and energy, respectively.

Two Challenges in Current Work on Learning Progressions
Work  to develop   learning progressions   (and  associated  assessment   items)   must    grapple with the  nature of
student thinking. Prior work (Alonzo & Steedle, 2009) explored two characteristics of students' thinking that
pose  challenges to efforts to  describe  and  assess their   learning. Each    of these   challenges  will be  briefly
described here and illustrated with examples from the two learning progressions.

                                                  588  ·    © ISLS
                                             ICLS 2010  ·    Volume 1

Students' Definitions for Words with Scientific and Everyday Meanings
In many areas of the science curriculum, students encounter words that have both "scientific" and "everyday"
meanings. For example, the word "force" has a variety of everyday meanings (Halloun & Hestenes, 1985)
across a range of different contexts. A sports fan might consider ways in which this word is used as a verb ­ for
example, forcing a double play [in baseball], a game four [in a playoff situation], or a turnover [in basketball or
football] ­ and as a noun, referring to a player as "a force" [such as a defensive lineman in football]. These
examples might lead one to conclude that force has a meaning like "making something happen" (or stopping
something from happening), a much broader definition than that of a physicist. Ioannides & Vosniadou (2001)
explored the ways in which children from 4 to 15 years of age used the word "force". They identified four well-
defined, internally consistent meanings for this word and found that students' use of these definitions varies with
age. Thus, it seems likely that students' ideas about the word "force" change along with their ideas about the
content of the FM learning progression: the relationship between (the scientist's definition of) force and motion.
        Revisions to the FM learning progression (Alonzo & Steedle, 2009) included consideration of the way
in which students' definitions for the word "force" were treated. Students in the target population were expected
to hold an "acquired force" (Ioannides & Vosniadou, 2001, p. 26) or "impetus" view of force (Buridan, as
quoted in Halloun   & Hestenes,   1985, p. 1057): the   idea that moving   objects have some   internal property,
imparted to them by a push or a pull. Typical physics textbooks (e.g., Hewitt, 1997) introduce a scientific
definition for force and then assume students will use that definition to make sense of subsequent discussion of
the relationship between force and motion. Similarly, initial versions of the learning progression first addressed
students' definitions for the word force, such that a lower level (Level X on the left side of Figure 1) was
reserved for students who hold an impetus view of force. Higher levels of the learning progression (Levels X+1
and X+2 on the left side of Figure 1) described increasingly sophisticated ideas about the relationship between
force and motion, assuming that students at those higher levels hold a scientific view of "force".

Figure 1. Revisions to the FM learning progression, reflecting students' definitions for the word "force". Dashed
          boxes represent an "impetus" view of force: solid boxes represent a scientific view of force.

        Perhaps not surprisingly, interview data revealed that students with an impetus view of force could
have different ideas about the relationship between force and motion (Alonzo & Steedle, 2009). For example,
when asked to identify the forces acting upon a ball thrown up into the air, students might say that only the
throwing force is acting on the ball or that both the throwing force and gravity are acting on the ball. The first
response is consistent with the view that the only force acting on an object is one in the direction of its motion.
The second response is slightly more sophisticated, recognizing the importance of net force and the possibility
of forces acting on an object that are not in the direction of its motion. Both of these ideas about the relationship
between force and motion could also be held by students with more scientific views of the word "force". Thus,
as shown on the right side of Figure 1, the learning progression was revised to reflect the possibility of students
with two  different views of "force"  making   progress   in thinking  about the relationship between   force and
motion, such that students' ideas about "force" and their use and interpretation of this word were treated as two
separately progressing entities.
        Work on the second learning progression was similarly complicated by students' definitions for words
such as  "food" and   "energy".   A  review of the   literature indicated that students often  use   these words
interchangeably (Leach, Driver, Scott, & Wood-Robinson, 1996) to describe things that are necessary for plants
to be healthy. Students who do differentiate "food" and "energy" tend to equate food with things that are
"eatable" (Wood-Robinson, 1991; Simpson & Arnold, 1982). Initial data collection surrounding this learning
progression elicited evidence of students' definitions for these words, along with evidence of their thinking

                                                 589  ·  © ISLS
                                                ICLS 2010    ·   Volume 1

about plant nutrition (Alonzo et al., 2009). Once again, it appeared that students could make progress with
respect to underlying ideas about Food for Plants and Energy for Plants, while holding a range of different
definitions for words such as "food" and "energy". The work reported in this paper was motivated by an interest
in this central problem: the way in which students' definitions for words (particularly those with both everyday
and scientific meanings) impact their learning and expression of scientific ideas.

Apparent Inconsistency of Students' Thinking
In physics, students' inconsistency in approaching problems addressing the same underlying principles is well-
documented. Chi, Feltovich, and Glaser (1981) demonstrated that a key characteristic differentiating between
novices and experts is the way in which they categorize physics problems, with experts viewing problems in
terms of underlying principles and novices attending to surface features. Halloun and Hestenes (1985) and
Finegold and Gorsky (1991) identified frameworks that college-level students used to reason about motion and
force, respectively; however, students did not apply these frameworks consistently across different problem
situations.
          Reinforcing  these findings   from    the literature,  inconsistencies   were  observed   in  student  responses
elicited to  explore  the FM   learning  progression   (Alonzo    &   Steedle,    2009). For  example,   a  student  might
describe the forces acting on a stationary object (such as a book on a table), by explaining that "gravity is always
acting." Yet this same student might respond that only a throwing force is acting on a ball tossed into the air,
rejecting the   notion that  gravity  is acting   on   the   moving    ball.  Reliabilities for sets  of   items assessing
understanding    with  respect to  the  learning    progression  were     all moderate.   In  addition,  a relatively low
percentage (59%) of student responses were at the same level across pairs of items that asked essentially the
same question in two different contexts. Similarly, in interviews designed to inform revision of the PN learning
progression (Alonzo et al., 2009), inconsistencies were observed in the way in which students discussed the
source of food for plants. At the beginning of the interviews, students were asked to describe the different parts
of a plant   and to  explain what  each    part did  "to help    the  plant  live and grow."    Many   students  began by
explaining that the roots take in food for the plant. Yet later in the interview, these same students might express
the idea that plants "make" or "produce" their own food.
          Thus, listening to students discuss a set of force and motion problems or talk about "food for plants", it
can be easy to conclude that students' thinking simply doesn't make sense. Although the work described in this
paper was not undertaken to address this puzzle, as will be discussed below, attempts to make sense of students'
use of language had the unexpected, but fruitful, side effect of also suggesting an alternative interpretation for
the apparent inconsistency of students' thinking.

Reframing Thinking about Learning Progressions in Terms of Discourse
Gee (1991) defines discourse as "a socially accepted association among ways of using language, of thinking,
and  of  acting that  can be used  to  identify  oneself   as  a member      of a socially  meaningful   group   or `social
network'" (p. 3). Elizabeth Moje and colleagues (2004) have explored the implications of this perspective for
literacy and  content  instruction in  science   classrooms;     this paper   explores   implications  for describing  and
assessing student learning via learning progressions.
          Returning to a consideration of everyday meanings for the word force, it becomes evident that these
definitions, while   inconsistent with   a scientist's definition,    are completely     consistent with   one's everyday
experiences with force and motion. In everyday experience, forces are required to keep objects moving. A force
is, indeed, required to make something happen (in this case, the motion of an object). One might conceptualize
the whole "package" of one's ideas, experiences, and ways of talking as comprising an "everyday discourse"
with respect to force and motion. We know a lot about words such as "force", "food", and "energy" by virtue of
the way in which we use them to talk about experiences in our everyday lives. Those definitions do not exist in
isolation; rather, they are a part of how we "are in" and interact with the world and, thus, inform the way in
which we think about related ideas (such as the relationship between force and motion or plant nutrition). While
these ideas are perhaps not a central part of our identities, the particular experiences we have in the world ­ by
virtue of being, for example, a sports fan ­ do influence our thinking about words that have both everyday and
scientific meanings and, thus, are tied up with how we make sense of the world.
          This "everyday discourse" can be contrasted with a "scientific discourse".1 The latter includes the use
of words consistent with their scientific definitions, as well as the application of a set of scientific ideas derived
from those definitions to very specific sorts of situations. In many cases, this means accepting a narrower view
of words and ideas than those in one's everyday experience. For example, a physicist would not say that forces
make "something" happen. He/she would use force only to apply to case in which "something" refers to a
change in motion (speed and/or direction). The scientific discourse also requires ­ to a certain extent, at least in
physics ­ that one reside in a fairly idealized world: one in which friction and air resistance are usually ignored.
          Taking a discourse perspective recasts what is progressing in a learning progression in terms of a
transition between "everyday" and "scientific" discourses. In their current forms, the FM and PN learning

                                                     590   ·  © ISLS
                                              ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

progressions  describe the evolution   of  students' thinking  about   a scientific topic. Students'    definitions for
relevant words, such as force, food, or energy, are treated as existing separately from their understanding of the
scientific topic and as a challenge to accessing the real focus of the learning progression. Taking a discourse
perspective   puts  students'  definitions and   ideas  back   together   again.   This  reframing   also   permits  a
reinterpretation of students'  seemingly   inconsistent responses   as   struggles to reconcile   their everyday    and
scientific discourses. Sometimes there may not be a conflict between these two discourses. However, where
everyday and scientific discourses yield different ways of interpreting and reasoning about a given question,
students must choose how they will consider the question being asked. Subtle aspects of the situation ­ such as
the context in which questions are being asked, the particular problem context involved in a given question, and
even particular wording of a question ­ might influence the extent to which students draw upon their everyday
and scientific discourses in making sense of the situation.

Reconsidering Evidence of Student Learning
In this section, data collected with respect to the FM and PN learning progressions are reconsidered in light of
the discussion above, in order to answer the research question, "Does a discourse lens help to interpret students'
responses with respect to the two learning progressions?" This is intended as a "proof of concept" exploration,
as the data were not collected specifically to test the ideas above. Rather, the intent is to explore the fruitfulness
of this reframing, in order to inform future data collection that might more directly evaluate these ideas.

Evidence with Respect to the FM Learning Progression
The data  considered   in this section  was  collected  as  part of two   separate  studies, both   conducted in    the
Midwestern United States. Study 1 involved students from a middle class rural high school who answered
questions about force and motion directly following a unit on this topic in their physical science classes. Data
included 58 students' responses to ordered multiple choice (OMC; Briggs, Alonzo, Schwab, & Wilson, 2006)
items.  Study 2  involved  1088   students  from six   high schools,   representing   a mix  of  rural  and suburban
communities. By virtue of their course enrollment, students were expected to have learned about force and
motion concepts (either in their current science course or one taken in a previous year). Data included students'
responses to a set of OMC force and motion items, plus one question that asked students to indicate whether
they had learned about the content of those items before.
        The source of students' reasoning about the OMC items was not evident in their responses. However,
one might hypothesize that students who have access to the scientific discourse are more likely to reason using
that discourse in situations further removed from their everyday experiences. The available data permits a small
exploration of this hypothesis. In particular, the set of 16 items presented to students in both Study 1 and Study
2 include three pairs of items in which an almost identical question is asked in a familiar and an unfamiliar
context. Questions A and B ask students to describe the motion of an object, first under the influence of a
constant force and then once that force is no longer being applied, respectively. These questions are asked both
in the relatively familiar context of pushing a car (albeit across a frictionless surface) and the less familiar
situation of a rocket traveling in outer space. Question C asks students to describe the forces acting upon a
stationary object, both a boulder resting upon the ground (familiar context) and a mysterious blob suspended in
the air in a scientific laboratory (unfamiliar context). Analysis of responses to these six questions involved the
58 students from Study 1 and 798 students from Study 2 (those who indicated that they had learned about force
and motion concepts before). Students who had not studied force and motion were excluded, as these students
may not have access to the scientific discourse and, thus, would not be expected to exhibit variation in the
discourse used to reason about the different problem contexts.
        Table 1 shows the percentage of students in each study choosing the option corresponding to the
highest learning progression level (as an indicator of the use of scientific discourse) for each item. Shaded cells
indicate statistical significance (p < .05), using the McNemar test. For all comparisons, students selected the
highest learning   progression level at a  similar or   higher rate in   the familiar   context, as compared  to    the
unfamiliar context. However, these rates were statistically significant for only two pairs of items (Question B in
Study 1 and Question C in Study 2). Thus, across the two studies, students who had studied force and motion
concepts seemed somewhat more likely to apply scientific discourse to analysis of unfamiliar contexts, lending a
small degree of support to the proposed reframing.

Table 1: Percentage of students selecting the highest learning progression level for a given item.

                 Study 1 (N=58)                                Study 2 (N=798)
                 Familiar Context      Unfamiliar Context      Familiar Context       Unfamiliar Context
Question A       17.2%                 22.4%                   16.5%                  17.3%
Question B       31.0%                 53.4%                   40.4%                  40.2%
Question C       43.1%                 53.4%                   37.8%                  60.0%

                                                  591   ·  © ISLS
                                              ICLS 2010    ·  Volume 1

Evidence with Respect to the PN Learning Progression
In order to inform revisions of the PN learning progression, semi-structured interviews were conducted with 30
students  (grades  1-6) who    attended a suburban    elementary     school in the Midwestern    US. Because  of  its
proximity to a large research university and hospital, the school enrolled many children whose parents were
associated with these institutions. The school was located on the edge of town and, thus, some of its students
lived on surrounding farmland. A small houseplant was used as a prop during the interviews, and efforts were
made to elicit students' ideas about words such as "food" and "energy", as well as their school-based and
everyday experiences with plants. However, the richest interview data came from students who spontaneously
explained their answers in terms of their own experiences and everyday discourses.
          Interviews were labeled with the gender and grade level of the student, as well as the order in which
they were conducted. For example, 04-M1 indicates the fourth interview, conducted with a male first grader. All
interviews were videotaped, and the videotapes were transcribed prior to analysis. For the purposes of this
paper, interview transcripts were coded to identify instances in which students explicitly provided evidence of
their everyday or scientific discourses; this evidence included explicit use of the words "food" and "energy" as
well as students' discussion of related ideas. Students' examples of how they used words such as "energy" in
their everyday  lives,  descriptions of   out-of-school experiences    with  plants, and explanations  for personal
experiences that informed their thinking about plants were all considered to be evidence of everyday discourse.
Students' discussion of ideas explicitly identified as having been learned in school or from a science text were
considered to represent their scientific discourse. The surrounding interview transcript was then examined for
ways in which students' ideas about plants' sources of food and energy may have been influenced by these two
types of discourse. Themes emerged with respect to each of the two progress variables and are illustrated with
examples from the interview transcripts.

Food for Plants
Consistent with findings from other research (e.g., Cañal, 1999), the students in this sample often expressed the
view that plants manufacture their own food along with the view that plants take in food from the environment.
Some students expressed each idea separately, at different points in the interview, while other students stated
that plants get food both from sources. Although the latter position is represented in the current version of the
Food for Plants progress variable, a student who exhibits the former type of response to the interview questions
appears to be at one level of the progress variable at some times and at a completely different level at other
times. Such a student poses challenges to current conceptualizations of learning progressions, which assume that
a given student will hold a consistent set of ideas that can be used to diagnose his/her level. However, since each
view about the source of food for plants is consistent with a different discourse, students' thinking may be
reinterpreted as struggles to reconcile two different ways of thinking and talking about food for plants.
          Although most students did not explicitly address the source of their ideas about plants manufacturing
their own food, this is unlikely to be a part of most students' everyday experiences and, thus, may be interpreted
as representing  a scientific  discourse. For  example,    a second   grade  boy's  interview (20-M2)  included  the
following statement about the role of the sun in plants' growth: "I think plants use the sun to make their food... I
think  in the photosynthesis   they  do   that." Later  in   the interview,  he explained that   he  had read about
photosynthesis in a science book. Through their school science experiences, many students in the interview
sample had developed a discourse surrounding seeds and their source of food. For example, a third grade girl
(02-F3) explained that she had learned in school that "the seed doesn't need food `cause they have already
food... they have food in their shell."
          Many of the same students also had everyday discourses surrounding food and, in particular, plants'
source for food. Consistent with Roth's (1991) interpretation of student thinking, some students brought in ideas
about human nutrition to explain their ideas about plant nutrition. For example, a third grade girl (17-F3) said,
"We grow because we eat healthy food... Like, if we ate candy bars, like, every single day, like ten a day. We
would get really, really sick. And we wouldn't, like, be very healthy. And we wouldn't grow as well." She went
on to explain that it wouldn't be healthy for plants to take in "a kind of bad soil that's really sugary." Two
students (04-M1 and 21-M5) discussed food for plants in terms of experiences with Venus flytraps, which "eat
bugs" that they fed to the plants. The first grade boy (04-M1) had difficulty reasoning about food for regular
plants, which he recognized did not eat bugs. Most students' out-of-school experiences with plants were situated
in a  discourse about   plants needing  things   from  people    and those  things constituting food for plants. For
example, a third grade girl (02-F3) described in vivid detail her experiences planting trees on her family's farm
over the weekend preceding the interview. She had provided the new trees with both "special food" and water
(that "carries food in it"). For other students, including another third grade girl (17-F3), the water itself, as
something that was required for life, was also food for the plant. She explained that this saying, "'Cause just like
people, they need water to survive." For these students, ideas about human nutrition and human interactions
with plants (part of their everyday discourse) fairly straightforwardly informed their ideas about plants.

                                                   592  ·    © ISLS
                                               ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

        However,     the interviews  also offered numerous    examples  of   students  who   appeared to  be      using
different discourses to make sense of the different questions being asked about food for plants. Many of these
students appeared to be struggling to reconcile everyday and scientific discourses. Often, student's scientific
discourses did not appear to be robust enough to support detailed reasoning about food for plants. Students
seemed to have learned a phrase, such as "plants produce their own food" without details about this process. For
example, consider the following segment of interview transcript involving a second grade girl (02-F3):
        02-F3: [Plants] produce the food.
        Interviewer: Do they use any of the food that they produce?
        02-F3: What do you mean "they produce"?
The idea of plants producing food seems to have limited meaning to the girl. When her ideas about plants'
source of food was probed further in the interview, she seems to have combined ideas about plants taking in
food and water (provided by people such as herself) to explain that "The water actually goes to the leaves and
the leaves can turn it into food. The leaves could have to make the food out of the soil. The water too."         Thus,
like many students in the sample, she appears to be reconciling her ideas about plants taking in food and water
from the environment (to serve as food) with the idea of plants making their own food.

Energy for Plants
Perhaps not surprisingly, students in the interview sample seemed to have limited access to a scientific discourse
surrounding energy. However, they provided many examples of their everyday discourse about energy, allowing
examination of   the way   in  which this discourse   informed their  thinking about   energy for plants.       Students
expressed three main ideas about energy ­ associating energy with movement, electricity, and the sun ­ all of
which were contained in a segment of an interview with a third grade girl (17-F3):
        Well, energy can come from the sun. Energy is, like, a thing that makes you move. Like, if
        you're really hyper you can have a lot of energy so you can, like, run around a lot. And energy
        is, like, batteries have energy in them. And electronics. And, energy from the sun also, like, it
        has vitamins in it. Kind of. So that, like, when it comes down and hits stuff, it makes it
        healthy.
Thus, consistent with    other research (e.g., Nicholls   & Ogborn,   1993), students' everyday   discourses      about
energy often involved movement. These students then tried to make sense of energy for plants in terms of this
way of thinking about energy. One second grade girl (14-F2) used her ideas about energy ("Like if you run then
you kinda get your energy") to conclude that plants would not have energy "unless someone moved it... If
someone picked it up and ran with it, maybe it would have energy."      A third grade girl (02-F3) explained that
plants have energy "not in order to, from here, this plant to move from here to here. Not that type of energy."
She later explained  that  plants needed  energy  so  "the  roots can move   around   to get the food."  Thus,      she
associated plant's energy with motion of its roots. Other students invoked the movement of substances such as
food or water to explain how plants use energy. For example, a fourth grade boy (01-M4) explained that plants
might use energy "to get the food to the, everywhere it needs to go... Like the leaves."
        Students also drew upon their own experiences in thinking about where plants might get energy. For
example, the third grade student above (17-F3), like other students in the sample, believed that the sun was a
source of vitamins for both people and plants. She also explained that people get energy from healthy food:
        You get your energy from food. Like, carrots, and celery, and, um sugar gives you energy, but
        it's a bad kind of, well, it's not really bad, but it just, like, doesn't last very long. So, it's not,
        like, true energy. But, food that has, like, vitamins in it, I think it has, like, the vitamins and
        the calcium combined, that gives you energy. So, that, like, if you eat a bunch of carrots, and
        celery, and vegetables, and fruits, that you'll be really energetic because then you have a lot
        of... you have a lot of nutrients in you. And so then you're like, really healthy."
She went on to explain that plants needed healthy food and vitamins for their energy as well. A second grade
girl (05-F2) explained her knowledge of energy in terms of her mom's position as a track coach:
        [Energy] means exercise and fit, so you can stay in shape and stuff. `Cause I know all this
        stuff because... my mom's a track coach so she teaches about 85 people in this team. And she
        has to tell them about keep fit and stay in shape and stuff.
Later in the interview, she explained that she knew plants get energy from water (as well as sunlight) "'cause we
get energy from water, `cause yesterday I ran a mile. And I needed a lot of water."
        The students in the interview sample had not had many formal learning opportunities surrounding the
concept of "energy", but they drew upon rich everyday discourses to make sense of energy for plants. This led
them to make connections between plants and humans, some of which are consistent with a scientific discourse

                                                  593   ·  © ISLS
                                                ICLS 2010    ·  Volume 1

about energy for plants and some of which are not. Thus, we might predict that their subsequent learning about
plants will involve some struggle to identify aspects of their everyday discourse that are and are not consistent
with scientific discourse.

Conclusions & Implications
The reframing presented in this paper takes as an underlying assumption that science learning involves students'
reconciling  their everyday   and  scientific discourses     and that  this process   will occur  whether   or   not     it is
acknowledged in efforts to describe, support, and assess student learning. While students' prior conceptions are
commonly acknowledged, this perspective takes a broader view of students' ideas, explicitly including ways in
which students draw upon both language and experiences to make sense of phenomena. The preceding sections
of this paper   explored   whether    this  assumption     was   reflected  in   existing  data  surrounding     students'
understanding of force and motion and food and energy for plants. Although the data was not collected to
explicitly address students' everyday discourses, the available evidence seems to support the interpretation that
students draw upon this discourse in making sense of questions about scientific topics, often in conjunction with
the scientific discourse. This interpretation helps to make sense of both students' use of language and their
apparent inconsistency in responding to assessment items and interview questions.
        This   perspective  has    several  implications   for the  design  of  learning   progressions.  First,  treating
students' ideas about   and   language  surrounding     scientific  topics  as both   falling  under the "umbrella"         of
discourse helps to address the perhaps false dichotomy between ideas and language. This helps to resolve the
problem   of how   to "treat" students'    definitions for   words  as part  of  a learning   progression. Second,       this
approach means reframing what is progressing in a learning progression from ideas about a scientific topic to
changes in the extent to which students draw upon scientific discourse in reasoning about scientific questions. It
is important to recognize that this process is not one of replacement, in which students make progress by
gradually discarding their everyday discourses in favor of a scientific one. Instead, one might view this as a
process by which students gradually understand their everyday discourses in light of a scientific one: narrowing
definitions and ideas where necessary and adding additional interpretations to explain existing experiences. As
students make progress with respect to the learning progression, they may draw upon everyday and scientific
discourses to varying degrees; part of what is progressing is students' reliance upon scientific discourse in
appropriate situations. Thus, in this view, one does not expect students to consistently rely upon scientific
discourse to answer all questions and ­ to both describe and support student learning ­ a challenge becomes
figuring out the circumstances under which students might be more likely to draw upon everyday discourse and
to help them to utilize scientific ways of thinking in appropriate circumstances. The reframing proposed in this
paper has the potential to help learning progressions to more accurately reflect the nature of students' thinking
and, thus, to be more useful tools for describing, assessing, and supporting student learning.

Endnotes
(1) This discussion is not meant to imply that everyday and scientific discourses are fully dichotomous. Scientific discourse
    emerges  from  and attempts to  explain everyday   experiences, and, indeed, one  would   expect a scientist (or expert
    student) to have access to both types of discourse and to flexibly draw upon some mixture of the two, depending upon
    the context. One might view these two types of discourse as two ends of a continuum (where the continuum is shorter
    or longer, depending upon the degree of similarity between everyday and scientific discourses in a particular area).

References
Alonzo,   A. C.    (2009,  April). Design   criteria   for   learning  progressions   to  support    teachers'   formative
        assessment practices. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the American Educational Research
        Association, San Diego, CA.
Alonzo, A. C., & Steedle, J. T. (2009). Developing and assessing a force and motion learning progression.
        Science Education, 93, 389-421.
Alonzo, A. C., Benus, M., Bennett, W., & Pinney, B. (2009, September). A learning progression for elementary
        school  students'   understanding    of plant   nutrition.  Paper   presented at   the biennial meeting    of     the
        European Science Education Research Association, Istanbul, Turkey.
Black, P., & Wilson, M. (2007, April). The idea of a learning progression as a core for both instruction and
        assessment. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the American Educational Research Association,
        Chicago.
Briggs, D. C., Alonzo, A. C., Schwab, C., & Wilson, M. (2006). Diagnostic assessment with ordered multiple-
        choice items. Educational Assessment, 11, 33-63.
Cañal, P. (1999). Photosynthesis and "inverse respiration" in plants: an inevitable misconception? International
        Journal of Science Education 21, 363-371.
Chi, M.T.H., Feltovich, P.J., & Glaser, R.    (1981).  Characterization and representation of physics problems           by
        experts and novices. Cognitive Science, 5, 121-152.

                                                   594     ·  © ISLS
                                              ICLS 2010     ·   Volume 1

Finegold, M., & Gorksy, P.  (1991).  Students' concepts of force as applied to related physical systems: A search
         for consistency. International Journal of Science Education, 13, 97-113.
Furtak, E. M. (2009, April). Learning progressions to support teacher development. Paper presented at the
         annual meeting of the American Educational Research Association, San Diego, CA.
Gee, J. P. (1991). What is literacy? In C. Mitchell & K. Weiler (Eds.), Rewriting literacy: Culture and the
         discourse of the other. New York: Bergin & Garvey.
Gotwals, A. W., & Songer, N. B. (2008, March). Scenario-based assessment: Gathering evidence of student
         reasoning in biodiversity. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the American Educational Research
         Association, New York.
Halloun, I. A., & Hestenes, D. (1985). Common sense concepts about motion. American Journal of Physics, 53,
         1056-1065.
Hewitt, P. G. (1997). Conceptual physics (3rd ed.). Menlo Park, CA: Addison-Wesley Publishing Company.
Ioannides, C., & Vosniadou, S. (2001). The changing meanings of force: From coherence to fragmentation.
         Cognitive  Science     Quarterly,  2(1),  5   ­    62.  Retrieved   from   http://www.cs.phs.uoa.gr/el/staff/
         vosniadou/force.pdf
Leach, J., Scott, P., Driver, R., & Wood-Robinson, C. (1996). Children's ideas about ecology 2: ideas found in
         children aged 5-16 about the cycling of matter. International Journal of Science Education, 18, 19-34.
Moje, E. B., Ciechanowski, K. M., Kramer, K., Ellis, L.,Carrillo, R., & Collazo, T. (2004). Working toward
         third space in content area literacy: An examination of everyday funds of knowledge and Discourse.
         Reading Research Quarterly, 39(1), 38-70.
National Assessment   Governing    Board.   (2008).   Science   framework    for the 2009    National Assessment of
         Educational Progress. Retrieved from http://www.nagb.org/publications/frameworks/ science-09.pdf
National Research  Council.  (2006). Systems      for state   science assessment.   Washington,  DC:   The National
         Academies Press.
National Research Council (2007). Taking science to school: Learning and teaching science in grades K-8.
         Washington, DC: The National Academies Press.
National Science Foundation. (2005). Instructional Materials Development program solicitation (NSF 05-612).
         Arlington, VA: Author. Retrieved from http://www.nsf.gov/pubs/2005/nsf05612/ nsf05612.htm
National Science Foundation. (2006). Discovery Research K-12 program solicitation (NSF 06-593. Arlington,
         VA: Author. Retrieved from http://www.nsf.gov/pubs/2006/nsf06593/nsf06593.pdf
National Science  Foundation.   (2009).  Research     and   Evaluation   on  Education in Science and   Engineering
         program   solicitation (NSF  09-601).    Arlington,    VA:   Author.  Retrieved  from  http://www.nsf.gov/
         pubs/2009/nsf09601/nsf09601.txt
Nicholls, G., & Ogborn, J. (1993). Dimensions of children's conceptions of energy. International Journal of
         Science Education, 15, 73-81.
Roth, K. J. (1991). Learning to be comfortable in the neighborhood of science: An analysis of three approaches
         to elementary science   teaching.  In W.     Saul  &   S. A. Jagusch  (Eds.), Vital connections;  Children,
         science, and books (pp. 143-161). Washington, DC: Library of Congress.
Simpson, M. & Arnold, B. (1982). Availability of prerequisite concepts for learning biology at certificate level.
         Journal of biological education, 16(2), 65-72.
Stevens, S.Y., Shin, N.,  Delgado,   C.,   Krajcik,   J., &   Pellegrino, J. (2007,  April). Developing  a learning
         progression for the nature of matter as it relates to nanoscience. Paper presented at the annual meeting
         of the American Educational Research Association, Chicago.
Wilson, M. (2005). Constructing measures: An item response modeling approach. Mahwah, NJ" Lawrence
         Erlbaum Associates.
Wood-Robinson, C. (1991). Young people's ideas about plants. Studies in Science Education, 19, 119­135.

Acknowledgments
Initial development of the FM learning progression was conducted at the University of California, Berkeley with
funding from the National Science Foundation (NSF) (#REC-0087848). Support for subsequent development
and research with respect to this learning progression was provided by the NSF through a Center for Learning
and Teaching grant to CAESL (Center for Assessment and Evaluation of Student Learning), the University of
Iowa College   of Education  Research    Fund,    and  the    Iowa  Mathematics   &  Science  Education  Partnership
(IMSEP). Work on the PN learning progression was funded by IMSEP and the University of Iowa Department
of Teaching & Learning. Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this paper
are those of the author and do not necessarily represent the views of the NSF or other funding agencies.

                                                  595     ·  © ISLS
