                                                ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

   Examining the Role of Verbal Interaction in Team Success on a
                                           Design Challenge
            Xornam S. Apedoe1, Kristina V. Mattis1, Bianca Rowden-Quince1 & Christian D. Schunn2
        1Department of Learning & Instruction, University of San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, 94117
           2Learning Research & Development Center, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 15260
              xapedoe@usfca.edu; kvmattis@usfca.edu; bcrowden@usfca.edu; schunn@pitt.edu

         Abstract:    Collaboration    is  an  essential   component    of   many   project-based      learning
         environments;    however,  verbal    interactions within   groups   can be    ineffective. Extending
         previous  research, this  study  investigated   verbal interactions  within   teams  of  high  school
         students  as  they solved  a  prototypical design-task  called  the  Earthquake   task.  Videotaped
         performance    assessments of  high  and low   performing    teams were analyzed    in depth. Teams
         were  categorized   as high   and  low   performing    using  two   different methods:     (1) highest
         successful structure built and, (2) percentage of successful designs.    Results suggest that teams
         engaged in three different patterns of verbal interactions: Accept-Build, Accept-Build-Discuss-
         Modify,  and   Discussion. High    performing    teams  most   often engaged    in, and    were most
         successful when, their verbal interactions followed the Accept-Build-Discus-Modify pathway.
         The instructional implications of these results for promoting productive group collaboration
         and future research directions are discussed.

Background
With the renewed interest in instructional approaches emphasizing the connection between knowledge and the
context in which it is to be used, there has been resurgence in the use of project-based learning in K-12 science
classrooms. The enthusiasm and belief in the efficacy for project-based learning has waxed and waned over the
years, resulting in only a handful of teachers adopting the approach consistently (Barron et al., 1998). There is
strong evidence   that  problem-and   project-based learning    can be  successful (e.g.  Cognition    and Technology
Group   at Vanderbilt   [CTGV].   1994,   1997; Collins,   Hawkins,    &  Carver,  1991;   Schauble,   Glaser,  Duschl,
Schulze, & John, 1995). Yet, there are several factors that are important for the design of problem-or project-
based learning environments that can influence their impact on student learning outcomes.
         Collaboration is an essential component of many project-based learning environments and can greatly
impact student learning. It provides opportunities for students to extend their thinking, share ideas, and draw on
the expertise of others (Krajcik et al., 1994). Yet, we have much to learn about how to best foster collaboration
for learning (Barron, 2003). Simply having students work together to complete prescribed procedures for an
investigation or task does not constitute collaboration (Marx, Blumenfeld, Krajcik, & Soloway, 1997). Rather,
collaboration involves the construction of shared meanings (Webb & Palincsar, 1996) through the exchange of
ideas.
         Unfortunately, collaboration that is productive and leads to the development of shared understanding is
not always guaranteed (Barron, 2003). Not all verbal exchanges within collaborative groups lead to the solving
of problems  or  the  construction of  shared  meanings.      Rather, productive verbal  interactions   within  a group
require that: (a) ideas are presented clearly and explicitly so that they may become shared, (b) group members
elaborate on their own and others' ideas, and (c) reasoning and evaluation of the ideas is done collaboratively
(Hoek & Seegers, 2005; Mercer, 1996).
         The nature and structure of the task can also shape the collaborative process (Hoek & Seegers, 2005).
Tasks that are likely to benefit most from collaboration are those that require group work and deal with ill-
structured problems (Cohen, 1994). Design is a practice that deals with ill-structured problems that have no
clearly predefined path leading from the problem specification to the final design solution (Fortus, Krajcik,
Dershimer, Marx & Mamlok-Naaman, 2005).           For tasks, such as design tasks, productivity will depend on the
interaction that happens within the group (Cohen, 1994).
         In  order   to better  foster productive   collaboration     within  groups,   we   need   to understand   the
characteristics of interactions that lead to productive group collaborations (Barron, 2003). Much like Barron
(2003), this research is focused on understanding how verbal exchanges between collaborators influences the
collective achievements of the group. While Barron focused on the interaction between collaborators while
solving mathematical problems, this paper reports on the verbal interactions that occur within teams of students
as they work to solve a design challenge. Design tasks provide an interesting context in which to study group
collaborations because unlike math problems, which are well-structured, design problems are characteristically
ill-structured, with ill-defined goals, states or operators (Goel & Pirolli, 1992). Thus, a goal of this research is to
understand the verbal interactions that occur when students collaborate to solve a design challenge. Studies such

                                                    596  ·  © ISLS
                                               ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

as this are necessary if we are to begin to help practitioners and researchers create learning environments that
can take full advantage of collaborative learning in project-based or design-based learning environments.

The Study
This study is situated within the context of a larger study that examined student learning in an 8-week high
school  design-based   learning curriculum    unit. Design-based   learning   is a  particular form  of project-based
learning. In design-based learning, the activity that is meant to promote learning is a design-project; students are
required to use and extend their knowledge of science and math to develop a technological solution to a problem
using available resources.
         The  research  in this  study focused  on   understanding    how    verbal interaction  within teams  affects
performance   in a  design task. The   analysis was   motivated   by   prior research done  within  this context   that
examined the strategies students use to solve a prototypical design task, the Earthquake task (see Apedoe &
Schunn, 2009).   Results suggested that students use both science reasoning strategies (e.g. control of variables)
and design-focused strategies (e.g. adaptive growth). However, the strategies commonly associated with success
in science (e.g. control of variables) did not necessarily lead to success in design.          In addition, while both
science  reasoning  strategies and  design-focused   strategies   led to content  learning, the  content learned   was
different. In this study,  we  extend  the analyses   to investigate  the influence   of verbal  interactions on   team
performance on the Earthquake task.
The research questions of primary interest are:
    1.   What verbal interaction patterns are evident as teams collaborate to complete the Earthquake task?
    2.   What verbal interaction patterns distinguish high and low performing teams, as defined by the highest
         successful structure built?
    3.   What    verbal interaction  patterns distinguish    high and    low performing   teams,  as defined   by   the
         percentage of successful design trials?

Research Design and Methods
Research Design
This study utilized a high-low extreme case design to analyze student team performances on a design task called
the Earthquake   task,  which  was   adapted  from   Azmitia  and  Crowley    (2001).  Extreme-groups    comparisons
provide greater statistical power without bias, and are particularly useful for labor-intensive studies such as
those involving video-data coding. Teams of students completed the task, and the most successful and least
successful performances were analyzed in detail. There were two criteria used to categorize teams as high or
low performing: height of structure, and percentage of successful designs trials regardless of height. Teams that
were considered high performing based on the highest successful structure built may have taken more risks with
their designs, whereas teams that had a high percentage of successful designs, but not necessarily tall structures,
may have been more conservative in their approach. Thus it was of interest to see if the verbal interactions
within teams would differ based on these two different categorizations.

The Earthquake Task
Students were given 54 wooden blocks to build as high a structure as possible that would withstand (i.e. no
blocks fall from the structure) a 20-second simulated earthquake (see Figure 1).      Students were allowed   to build
and test as many structures as they wanted and were given approximately 20 minutes to complete the task.
         The Earthquake design task was chosen based on two important criteria.        First, the Earthquake task has
the three elements that Cross (1994) describes as being common to all design problems: (a) a specified goal, (b)
constraints within which the goal must be achieved, and (c) criteria for recognition of a successful solution.
Akin  to the  design problems   described  by   Goel  &  Pirolli  (1992), the  Earthquake   task is ill-structured and
requires creativity to move from the start state to the goal state.    Secondly, the task did not require students to
have any discipline-specific knowledge about the domain beyond elements of everyday experience.

              Figure 1. Sample student-designed earthquake-proof structure on earthquake simulator

                                                    597  ·  © ISLS
                                               ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

Context & Participants
This research was conducted as part of a larger study that examines student learning in high school design-based
learning units. As part of an effort to reform teaching and learning in high school science classrooms, teachers
from a large urban area in the northeastern United States were invited to implement a design-based science
learning unit in their classrooms. Teachers held design competitions within their classrooms to identify the top
student team design projects, as part of the unit implementation. These top student teams were then invited to
participate in a  Regional  Design  Competition  (See    Reynolds,    Mehalik, Lovell, &  Schunn,    2009  for more
details). During the competition event, while teams waited for their projects to be judged, they were invited to
participate in this study, and complete the Earthquake task. A total of 191 students (42% female, 58% male),
drawn from urban high schools with a moderate proportion of traditionally underserved students, participated in
the study. Participants included 9th, 10th, 11th and 12th grade high school students enrolled in a science course
(e.g. spectrum    science, biology, chemistry,  or   physics)    that implemented  a   design-based  learning  unit.
Participants worked in pre-existing groups of same or mixed gender teams of 2-5 students.

Data Collection & Sources
The   primary  method  of  data collection for  this study   was   performance-assessment   interviews. Data   were
collected during   the Regional   Design   Competition    in  both  2007  and  2008,   with 29 teams    of students
participating in the 2007 session and 30 teams participating in the 2008 session.   Student teams were videotaped
while completing the Earthquake task. During the task, students were asked to explain their designs (e.g. Why
did you build your structure this way?) to help clarify the design choices and problem-solving strategies they
used. The data set analyzed for this paper included videos of 16 teams of students that represented both the
highest and lowest performing teams based on the highest successful structure built. This sub-set was drawn
from a larger dataset of 59 teams of students.

Data Analysis
Video-data was analyzed in multiple passes by the researcher (Miles & Huberman, 1994). A coding scheme was
developed to establish verbal interaction patterns within teams as they completed the design task. A set of 17
videos, that were not included in the final analysis, were viewed and coded. The final coding scheme developed
showed that with the initial presentation of a design idea, the verbal interaction patterns within a team typically
followed one of four pathways: Accept Build, Accept Build-Discuss-Modify, Discussion, or Reject (see Figure
2).

                                  Figure 2. Possible Verbal Interaction Pathways

         The first pathway, Reject describes the situation wherein a design idea is presented by a team member,
but is immediately rejected by the rest of the team.   The second pathway, Accept Build (B), describes instances
wherein the initial design idea is immediately accepted and the team builds a structure.
         The   third  pathway,  Accept   Build-Discuss-Modify      (BDM),   describes   instances   wherein    teams
immediately begin building a structure. However, during the building of the structure, discussion ensues, often
regarding the worthiness of the current design. At this point, either the current design idea is rejected, or a
modification   is proposed.  This proposed   modification     is either accepted or  rejected  until an acceptable
modification is proposed, and building resumes or a structure is tested. If an acceptable modification is not
found, building stops, and the structure is never tested.

                                                   598  ·  © ISLS
                                                 ICLS 2010   ·   Volume 1

        The   fourth  pathway,   Discussion,   begins   with   a design   idea  that is discussed  by the  team  prior  to
physically building   the structure. There  are   three  sub-paths   in  the  Discussion   pathway:  Discussion-Accept,
Discussion-Reject, and Discussion-Proposed Modification.          Discussion-Accept describes instances when a team
member provides a design idea for the structure that is automatically accepted without any further discussion or
modification prior to building and testing the structure.        Discussion-Reject refers to the dismissal of a design
idea after a discussion. In these instances, no structure is built until a new design idea is proposed andaccepted.
Discussion-Proposed    Modification     describes  instances   where   a  modification    to the  current design idea   is
suggested.  These proposed modifications are either accepted or rejected. If accepted, the accepted proposed
modifications    are eventually  tested  after (n) accepted      proposed     modifications  are made. If  the proposed
modification is rejected, then the team would continue to build the structure without any alterations, or until a
new modification was proposed and accepted. All verbal interaction pathways end when the structure is finally
tested to determine whether it could withstand the 20-second simulated earthquake.
        Using the developed coding scheme, two coders independently coded the 16 teams' performances.
Overall agreement between the two coders was 95.5%.           In instances where there was a disagreement in coding,
the discrepancy was discussed and resolved.

Findings
Verbal Interactions Used
All verbal interactions   within teams    were  codable    as  one of   the   aforementioned   pathways.   Other   logical
possibilities, a Reject pathway and two sub-paths, the Discussion-Accept and Discussion-Reject, were never
used by teams.     Teams  used   the remaining    verbal interaction    pathways     with varying  frequency.  The  mean
proportion of trials in which teams' verbal interactions followed the Accept BDM pathway was much greater
than those that followed the Accept B or Discussion pathways. The average number of modifications made per
trial during the Accept BDM pathway was 6.5, while during the Discussion pathway there was an average of 9
modifications per trial.   Table 1 provides a summary of the overall trends in verbal interaction pathway use.
Figure 3 shows the verbal interaction pathways used by teams.

Table 1: Summary of verbal interaction pathway use.

                                                         Mean Proportion of                      Mean Proportion of
  Pathways           Mean Proportion of Use        Successful Designs when Used                  Successful Designs
                           (all trials)                        (all trials)                   (pathway specific trials)
  Accept B                    .23                                 .18                                  .53
Accept BDM                    .63                                 .21                                  .37
 Discussion                   .14                                 .40                                  .50

                          Figure 3. Observed Verbal Pathways Actually Used by Teams

Distinguishing High & Low Performing Teams
Highest Successful Structure Built
Teams were categorized as high performing or low performing based on the highest successful structure they
were able to build. Using a median split teams were divided into high and low groups, with the high groups'
highest successful structures ranging between 13-45 stories tall, while the low group structures ranged from 0-
10 stories tall.
        High     performing teams'      verbal interactions    followed   the  Accept   B   pathway  significantly  more
frequently than   did the low   performing  teams,  t (15)    =  1.94,  p   = 0.04.  However,  there was  no  significant
difference in how frequently high and low performing teams' verbal interactions followed the Accept BDM
pathway, t (14) = -1.04, p = 0.16 or the Discussion pathway, t (8) = -0.44, p = 0.33. Table 2 provides a summary
of the verbal interaction pathways used by high and low performing teams.

                                                     599  ·   © ISLS
                                              ICLS 2010     ·   Volume 1

       With regard to design success, high performing teams had marginally significantly more successful
designs across all trials when using the Accept B pathway, t (14) = 1.43, p = 0.09, as well as within trials that
used the Accept B pathway, t (10) = 1.46, p = 0.09.     High performing teams also had marginally significantly
more successful designs when their verbal interactions followed the Accept BDM pathway over all trials, t (14)
= 1.50, p = 0.08.  When the analysis was narrowed to focus on only successful designs within trials that had
verbal interactions following the Accept BDM pathway, high performing teams performed significantly better, t
(14) = 1.90, p = 0.04. However, there were no significant differences in the amount of successful designs over
all trials, t (14) = 0.83, p = 0.21, or within pathway only trials when verbal interactions followed the Discussion
pathway t (14) = -0.61, p = 0.28. Table 3 provides a summary of the design success and its relation to verbal
pathway use.
       Finally, as part of the Accept BDM and Discussion pathways, the number of modifications proposed by
team members was coded (see Table 3).   There was no significant difference between high and low performing
teams in the number of modifications made per trial when their verbal interactions followed the Accept BDM
pathway, t (14) = 0.82, p = 0.21. There were also no significant differences in the number of modifications made
per trial when their verbal interactions followed theDiscussion pathway, t (12) = 0.59, p = 0.28.

Table 2: Verbal interaction pathway use by high/low teams as defined by highestsuccessful structure.

                       High Performing Teams        Low Performing Teams                  Effect size
                         (M proportion of trials)    (M proportion of trials)                (d)
Accept B*                        .35                              .10                       0.89
Accept BDM                       .55                              .72                       -0.51
Discussion                       .11                              .17                       -0.23
*Indicates statistically significant difference (p<0.05) between high and low performing teams

Table 3: Design success by verbal pathways for high/low teams as defined by highest successful structure.

                                     Accept B                        Accept BDM                    Discussion
  Successful Designs              Mhigh = .23!                       Mhigh = .52!                  Mhigh = .32
      (all trials)                MLow = .06!                         MLow = .27!                  MLow = .17
                                     d = 0.73                          d = 0.75                       d = 0.42

  Successful Designs              Mhigh = .31!                        Mhigh = .61*                 Mhigh = .13
(pathway specific trials)         MLow = .07!                         MLow = .20*                  MLow = .25
                                     d = 0.73                          d = 0.95                       d = -0.29

    Modifications                     N/A                             Mhigh = 31                      Mhigh = 6
      (per trial)                                                     MLow = 22                       MLow = 4
                                                                       d = 0.42                       d = 0.23
* Indicates statistically significant difference (p<0.05) between high and low performing teams
! Indicates marginally statistically significant difference (p<0.10) between high and low performing teams

Percentage of Successful Designs
Although success on the Earthquake task was defined as building as tall a structure as possible that would
withstand a 20-second simulated earthquake, it was of interest to know whether teams who may not have built
the tallest structures, but still had a high proportion of successful trials were engaged in different types of verbal
interactions. Teams were once again evenly split into high and low performing groups, this time based on the
percentage of successful designs they built and tested. The high performing group consisted of teams with a
percentage of successful trials within the range of 38%-100%. The low group was comprised of teams with a
percentage of successful trials within the range of 0%-33%.       This categorization scheme resulted in a number of
teams changing high/low status. Of the 16 total teams, 6 teams (38%) changed high/low status.
       There were no significant differences between high and low performing teams in the frequency of use
of the Accept B, t (14) = 0.19, p = 0.43, the Accept BDM, t (14) = -0.63, p = 0.27, or the Discussion pathways, t
(10) = 0.61, p = 0.28. Table 4 provides a summary of the verbal interaction pathways used by high and low
performing teams.
       With regard to design success, there were no significant differences between high or low performing
teams in the percent of successful designs over all trials when their verbal interactions followed the Accept B
pathway, t (9) = 1.13, p = 0.14. However, there was a marginally significant difference in the proportion of
successful trials within Accept B pathway only      trials,   t (8) = 1.44, p =    0.09. There was    also a significant
difference in the percent of successful design trials when the verbal interactions followed the Accept BDM

                                                   600  ·   © ISLS
                                                  ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

pathway over all trials, t (10) = 3.62, p = 0.00.  When the analysis was narrowed to focus only on the proportion
of successful designs within trials that had verbal interactions that followed the Accept BDM pathway, high
performing   teams  did significantly better,   t (14) =  2.20, p =  0.02. For  verbal interactions that followed  the
Discussion pathway, there was a marginally significant difference in the percent of successful designs over all
trials, t (9) = 1.72, p = 0.06, however, there were no significant differences with the success of trials within
Discussion pathway only trials, t (14) = 0.61, p = 0.28. Table 5 provides a summary of the design success and its
relation to verbal pathway use.
          Finally, there were no significant differences between high and low performing teams in the number of
modifications made per trial when the verbal interactions followed the Accept BDM pathway, t (10) = 0.34,
p = 0.37, or the Discussion pathway, t (10) = 0.61, p = 0.28, (see Table 5).

Table 4: Verbal interaction pathway use by high and low teams as defined by % of successful designs.

                        High Performing Teams          Low Performing Teams             Effect size
                         (M proportion of trials)      (M proportion of trials)            (d)
Accept B                          .24                             .22                      0.07
Accept BDM                        .58                             .69                     -0.32
Discussion                        .18                             .10                      0.30

Table 5: Design success by verbal pathways for high and low teams as defined by % of successful designs.

                                      Accept B                       Accept BDM                     Discussion
  Successful Designs                  Mhigh = .21                     Mhigh = .63                 Mhigh = .39!
       (all trials)                   MLow = .07                     MLow = .16*                  MLow = .10!
                                       d =0 .58                        d = 1.81                     d = 0.86

  Successful Designs                Mhigh = .31!                     Mhigh = .63*                   Mhigh = .25
(pathway specific trials)           MLow = .07!                      MLow = .18*                    MLow = .13
                                       d = 0.74                        d =1.12                      d = 0.29

    Modifications                       N/A                           Mhigh = 28                    Mhigh = 7
        (per trial)                                                   MLow = 25                     MLow = 3
                                                                       d = 0.14                     d = 0.49
* Indicates statistically significant difference (p<0.05) between high and low performing teams
! Indicates marginally statistically significant difference (p<0.10) between high and low performing teams

Discussion
The verbal interactions within both high and low performing teams followed one of three pathways, Accept B,
Accept BDM, or Discussion.      Overall, teams' verbal interactions followed the Accept BDM pathway. That is,
once an initial design idea was posed, teams tended to begin building a structure that encapsulated the initial
idea, and then as they were building, engaged in verbal exchanges wherein proposals for ways to modify the
structure were  made.   Eventually,   after a  number     proposed   modifications were  accepted   or rejected, teams
arrived at a structure that they deemed worthy of `testing' to determine its ability to withstand the 20-second
simulated earthquake.    Overall, there was no statistically significant correlation between the verbal pathways
used and the percentage of successful designs teams built.
          However, when team performance was analyzed by looking at high performing and low performing
teams, there appears to be a relationship between the verbal interaction pathway followed and how successfully
teams were able to complete the design task. Teams that were considered high performing based on the highest
successful structures they built engaged in verbal interaction that followed the Accept B pathway more often
than did the low performing teams. In addition, the high performing teams had marginally significantly more
successful designs when their verbal interactions followed the Accept B pathway than did the low performing
teams. This result suggests that the verbal interaction pattern of: (1) proposing a design idea, (2) accepting the
design idea, and (3) building the design idea without further discussion or modification of the idea prior to
testing, can result in productive collaboration and success on the Earthquake task. The fact that the teams did not
further discuss or modify the original design idea is the distinguishing difference between this pathway and the
Accept BDM pathway during which modifications were made.
          At first  glance, this result     is counter-intuitive   because  it  would   suggest that   accepting   and
implementing ideas without discussion is a good strategy. However, we must be cautious when interpreting this
result, as it is possible that high performing teams began with "better" ideas, and thus discussion or modification
of those ideas was not necessary.   In addition, teams that were considered high performing based on the highest

                                                      601  ·  © ISLS
                                                   ICLS 2010    ·   Volume 1

successful structures they built, engaged in verbal interactions that did not follow the Accept B pathway the
majority  of  the  time.   Rather,   high  performing     teams   most   frequently    engaged  in   verbal interactions    that
followed the Accept BDM       pathway.   Interestingly    enough, high   performing teams    also experienced    great success
when   their verbal  interactions  followed    the Accept   BDM      pathway.   High performing teams had significantly
more   successful  designs    when   their  verbal  interactions     followed   the  Accept  BDM     pathway.    The   primary
difference between the Accept B and Accept BDM pathway is that within the Accept BDM pathway, teams
engage in a cycle of proposing modifications to the initial design idea ­ and either accepting or rejecting those
proposed   modifications    ­  before   completing     building   of the  structure  and  testing  it against   the   simulated
earthquake.     Thus,   it would     appear   that the    added   benefit of    engaging  in  verbal     interactions  that  are
characteristic of the Accept BDM pathway is that the initial design ideas become more refined and consequently
"better" which    results  in the building    of  more  structures   that are   stable enough  to  withstand    the   simulated
earthquake.   Success on the earthquake task appears to be related to the articulation and modification of design
ideas  within  the group.   However,     results   suggest  that  it is not  the number   of  proposed      modifications   that
matters, as these were essentially the same for both high and low performing groups. Rather, it is likely that the
quality of the proposed modifications is what makes a difference. Additional analyses will need to be done to
explore this possibility.
         If we look at the verbal interaction patterns of teams that were considered high performing based on
their percentage of successful designs, a somewhat similar pattern emerges as is seen when teams are considered
high performing based on the highest successful structure they built.           While teams that had a high percentage of
successful   designs  verbal  interactions    did  not use  the   Accept  B  pathway   more   frequently    than did   the  low
performing teams, they did have marginally significantly more successful designs.              This suggests that regardless
of the definition of "high performing" that is used, verbal interactions that follow the Accept B pathway lead to
success  on  the  Earthquake    task,   and in   turn, are  characteristic   of  productive   collaboration.    This  pathway
suggests that the process of "rapid-prototyping," building and testing design ideas with minimal discussion of
those ideas can be effective and lead to success in on this design task. Based on this finding, perhaps a helpful
strategy would    be  to   encourage    teams  employ     this  "rapid  prototyping"   process,   to  take  advantage    of  the
unlimited opportunities for testing. In addition, the Accept BDM verbal interaction pathway appears to be one
that is  characteristic  of   verbal interaction   that   leads  to  productive  collaboration.      Teams   considered     high
performing due to their percentage of successful designs, had significantly more successful designs when this
pathway was used, than did the low performing teams.            Again, the number of proposed modifications made does
not appear to make a difference to the effectiveness of this verbal interaction pathway to lead to productive
collaboration.
         Surprisingly,    verbal  interactions   that  are characteristic   of  the Discussion  pathway     do  not   appear to
foster productive collaboration or success on the Earthquake task.            The only significant difference between the
Discussion pathway and the Accept BDM pathway, is that prior to building a structure the design ideas are
discussed amongst the group members. Once the initial idea has been discussed and proposed modifications
considered, building of the structure commences until it is ready to be tested against the simulated earthquake.
Overall, teams rarely engaged in verbal interactions that followed the Discussion pathway. However, when
teams' verbal interactions did follow the Discussion pathway, those that were considered high performing based
on their percentage of successful designs, had marginally significantly more successful designs than did the low
performing teams.     This was not the case for teams that were considered high performing based on the highest
successful structure built.    Because    all teams    used the  Discussion    pathway  minimally     it is difficult to assess
whether verbal interactions of this type do indeed lead to productive collaboration.
         The results of this study lend support to the claims in the literature that successful verbal interaction
while collaborating involves: (a) clear presentation of ideas, (b) elaboration on ideas by group members, and (c)
reasoning and   evaluation   of ideas collaboratively (Hoek      &   Seegers, 2005;  Mercer, 1996).      Teams that were high
performing engaged in verbal interactions that allowed them to engage with each other's ideas, refining and
improving upon them, until an ideal solution was reached.             In some regards, the Earthquake task was an ideal
task for promoting productive collaboration, because the physical component of the task allowed individuals to
make their ideas clearly visible to their team members simply by building their idea.              Barron (2003) highlights
the  creation  of  a  "joint  problem-solving      space   as   being   particularly important  for   achieving     productive
collaboration.   It can be argued that the Earthquake task in particular, and design-based learning tasks more
generally, are particularly effective at facilitating this process for students because it requires the creation ofan
artifact that represents the thinking of the team.     Teams that were highly successful on the Earthquake task were
likely  able to  take advantage      of being    able  to  make   their  thinking   "visible" through     their design.     This
explanation may also help account for why teams did not make extensive use, and had less success with, verbal
interactions that followed the Discussion pathway.

                                                        602   ·  © ISLS
                                                 ICLS 2010  ·   Volume 1

Future Research
While it was already noted that the average number of proposed modifications did not differ between high and
low  performing   teams  for either  the  Accept   BDM   or    Discussion  pathways,   it is  possible that there was  a
qualitative difference in the modifications proposed that may have contributed to the overall success of the
team. What types of modifications were proposed during the verbal interactions of the high performing teams
and did the types of proposed modifications influence the outcome of the trials? Alternatively, it is possible that
high performing teams began with "better" ideas, and thus discussion or modification of those ideas was not
necessary.  These questions will need to be answered to provide greater understanding of the verbal interactions
that foster productive collaborations.
         Finally, in an effort to further understand collaboration within teams, an additional future study could
look more   closely  at specific team  participants  who   may   have    dominated   a team's   overall performance   by
verbalizing more than others.    Examining     the group   dynamics,   and  the influence  it has on   the teams' overall
performance will help further elucidate the characteristics of teams and their verbal interactions that lead to
productive and successful collaborations.

References
Apedoe, X., & Schunn, C. D. (2009). Understanding how students solve novel design challenges.Poster
         presentation, National Association for Research in Science Teaching, Garden Grove, CA.
Azmitia,  M.,   & Crowley,   K.  (2001).    The  rhythms    of  scientific  thinking:  A  study of collaboration   in an
         earthquake  microworld.    In  K.  Crowley,  C.D.     Schunn, &    T. Okada.  (Eds.),  Designing   for science:
         Implications from everyday, classroom, and professional settings.(pp. 51-82). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum
Barron, B. (2003). When smart groups fail. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 12, 307-359.
Barron, B. J. S., Schwartz, D. L., Vye, N. J., Moore, A., Petrosino, A., Zech, L., & Bransford, J. D. (1998).
         Doing with understanding: Lessons from research on problem- and project-based learning. The Journal
         of the Learning Sciences, 7, 271-311.
Cognition and Technology Group at Vanderbilt. (1994). The Jasper Project: Lessons in curriculum, instruction,
         assessment, and professional development. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Collins, A., Hawkins, J., & Carver, S. M. (1991). A cognitive apprenticeship for disadvantaged students. In B.
         Means, C.Chelemer, & M.S. Knapp (Eds.) Teaching advanced skills to at-risk students (pp. 216-243).
         San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Cohen, E.G. (1994). Restructuring the classoom: Conditions for productive small groups.Review of Educational
         Research, 64, 1-35.
Cross, N. (1994). Engineering design methods: Strategies for product design (2nd ed.). New York, NY: John
         Wiley & Sons.
Fortus, D., Krajcik, J.S., Dershimer, R.C., Marx, R.W., & Mamlok-Naaman, R. (2005). Design-based science
         and real-world problem-solving. International Journal of Science Education, 27, 855-879.
Goel, V. & Pirolli, P. (1992). The structure of design problem space. Cognitive Science, 16, 395-429.
Hoek, D.J., & Seegers, G. (2005). Effects of instruction on verbal interactions during collaborative problem
         solving. Learning Environments Research, 8, 19-39.
Krajcik, J. S., Blumenfeld, P. C., Marx, R. W., & Soloway, E. (1994). A collaborative model for helping middle
         grade science teachers learn project-based instruction. The Elementary School Journal, 94, 483-497.
Marx, R. W., Blumenfeld, P. C., Krajcik, J. S., & Soloway, E. (1997). Enacting project-based Science. The
         Elementary School Journal, 97, 341-358.
Mercer,  N. (1996).  The   quality  of talk in  children's  collaborative   activity  in  the classroom.   Learning  and
         Instruction, 6, 359-377.
Miles, M.   B., &  Huberman,     A. M.   (1994). Qualitative    data analysis:   An   expanded  sourcebook    (2nd  ed.).
         Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Reynolds, B., Mehalik, M. M., Lovell, M. R., & Schunn, C. D. (2009). Increasing student awareness of and
         interest in engineering    as a  career option  through    design-based  learning.   International  Journal  of
         Engineering Education, 25(1), 788-798.
Schauble,  L.,  Glaser, R.,  Duschl,   R.  A., Schulze,    S., &  John,  J. (1995).   Students'  understandings   of  the
         objectives and procedures of experimentation in the science classroom. The Journal of the Learning
         Sciences, 4, 131-166.
Webb, N. M., & Palincsar, A. S. (1996). Group processes in the classroom. In D. C. Berliner & R. C. Calfee
         (Eds.) Handbook of Educational Psychology (pp. 841-873). New York: Prentice Hall.

Author Note
This material is based upon work supported by the National Science Foundation under EEC-0808675. Any
opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this paper are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Science Foundation.

                                                    603  ·   © ISLS
