                                                  ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

  Implementing a Lesson Plan Vs. Attending to Student Inquiry:
      The Struggle of a Student-Teacher During Teaching Science
      L. T. Louca, M. Santis & D. Tzialli, Department of Education Sciences, European University Cyprus,
                                 6, Diogenous Str., Engomi, 1516 Lefkosia, Cyprus
                 Email: Louca.L@cytanet.com.cy, M.Santis@euc.ac.cy, D.Tzialli@euc.ac.cy

         Abstract:   Despite   calls for  student-centered,    inquiry-based instruction    in science, science
         teacher preparation    remains   mostly  teacher-centered,    with  the  underlying   assumption   that
         novice teachers need to form a teaching identity before attending to their students' inquiry. In
         this paper, we  use   the   idea of framing  to  analyze   a  42-minute    science lesson  of  a senior
         kindergarten student-teacher. Findings suggest that the student-teacher struggled for balance
         between  teaching    science  as implementing    a  lesson  plan, and   as attending  to  her students'
         inquiry. We use this evidence to suggest that novice teachers can attend to students' inquiry as
         early as in their student-teaching experience, which suggests additional pressure on the need
         for preparation in teaching science. Thus, the role of science methods courses should be to
         help students understand the different interpretations of teaching within the different frames
         and provide them with strategies for entering more productive frames during teaching.

Introduction
Despite decades of calls for promoting students' inquiry in science in grades K-12 (NRC, 2000; 2007), this
agenda has been slow to become established in instructional practice (Minstrell & van Zee, 2000; Osborne et al.,
2004), possibly for a number of reasons. First, despite a wide consensus regarding the importance of inquiry in
science learning, the education community has yet to agree on precisely what is important in scientific inquiry
(Anderson et al, 2000). For many, inquiry is a method for learning science "content," while for others, inquiry is
a part of science and an objective in itself. Secondly, there is no agreement regarding what "productive" inquiry
should include, especially in the early grades. Answers have varied from general appeals for "messing about" to
more specific targets for developing "concrete" abilities such as controlling variables (e.g., Metz, 1995).
         In contrast to the tangible and more straightforward objectives of traditional content, when considering
these ambiguities,   the difficulty   of  sustaining  instructional    attention to student    inquiry is understandable
(Hammer, 1995). Regardless of the particular account of children's inquiry, there always exists the challenge of
diagnosing  student  progress   in any    classroom  situation  (e.g., Goodwin,     1994).  Developing    such diagnostic
abilities for identifying and responding to students' scientific inquiry depends largely on teachers' professional
development (both pre- and in-service) in teaching science. While a number of studies have looked into how
teachers in primary  and    secondary  education    teach   science (e.g., Kuiper,  1995),  little is  known   about how
kindergarten teachers implement the science aspects of the curriculum (e.g., Kallery & Psillos, 2002). To make
progress in promoting student inquiry especially in early grades, science education needs to develop a better
understanding of how teachers perceive and respond to student inquiry in classroom settings and what struggles
they encounter to implement inquiry-based teaching.
         The  purpose    of this case  study  is  to contribute  towards    this  understanding    and  development,   by
proposing  and  applying    a specific methodological     approach   which   helps  to describe    how  a senior student-
teacher conceived her role in the class and how her behavior reflected a struggle to balance between teaching
science as implementing a lesson plan she had developed and received approval for by her tutor, in contrast to
attending to her students' scientific inquiry. We use the idea of framing (Goffman, 1974; Tannen, 1993; Schank,
1990) to analyze a 42-minute science lesson of this student-teacher. In doing so, we seek to show how using the
idea of "framing" in the context of analyzing student-teaching may prove useful in understanding the process of
novice teachers' professional development and in identifying areas in which teacher education may support this.
We also argue that it is not unrealistic to expect novice teachers to be able to attend to and respond to students'
inquiry during real-time teaching.

Theoretical framework

Emphasis of science education in inquiry-based, student-centered approach
Following recent changes and reforms in curricula, science has become established as part of the early primary
curriculum  (The Curriculum      Guidance    for the Foundation   Stage    QCA/DfEE,    2000). The     National Research
Council (2007) strongly recommended the development of an approach for teaching science in kindergarten
through eighth grade, in which science is viewed as providing opportunities for both learning and development,
or to lay down the foundations in preparation for future learning in science (Kamii & DeVrie, 1993). In this
context, considerable attention is given to children's own explorations and inquiry (QCA/DfEE 2000), with a

                                                     604  ·   © ISLS
                                                  ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

number of researchers emphasizing the importance of engaging young children in hands-on science experiences
which support the development of an early interest and knowledge base in meaningful scientific themes, and
which provide children with an introduction to and support for developing science inquiry skills (e.g., Chen &
McNamee, 2007; Kamii & DeVries, 1993).
          Current emphasis in science education highlights among other things the support of student inquiry
(NRC, 2000; 2007), promoting it as the central strategy for teaching science. The National Science Education
Standards (NRC, 1996) has provided a definition modeled after the work of scientists where scientific inquiry
refers to the diverse ways in which scientists study the natural world and propose explanations based on the
evidence  derived  from      their work.  Inquiry   also refers to  the activities of  students in which    they  develop
knowledge and understanding of scientific ideas, as well as an understanding of how scientists study the natural
world. Numerous other definitions can be found in the literature, which vary in their emphasis (e.g., Barman,
2002; Flick, 2002; Crawford, 2006). Taking all these into account, for the purpose of this paper, we take student
inquiry to mean the pursuit of causal, coherent explanations of natural phenomena (Hammer, 2004) which may
take many forms, both experimental and theoretical. Regardless of the form, the instructional agenda is to help
students learn to engage in that pursuit for themselves. In this view, science inquiry supports the development of
problem solving, communication and thinking abilities as students pose questions about the natural world and
seek the evidence to answer them (NRC, 2000).

Preparing teachers for inquiry-based teaching in science: approaches and challenges
Despite NRC's (2000; 2007) current emphasis on "student-centered" instruction in science education, only a
few programs have been designed to support pre-service teachers in developing their knowledge about scientific
content and inquiry (e.g., McDevitt et al., 1995). On the whole, teacher preparation for teaching science remains
largely teacher-centered. Science methods courses focus on the things teachers (should) do, on instructional
methods (Tobin & Fraser, 1990), management strategies (Feiman-Nemser & Parker 1992), questioning skills
(Fleer & Hardy, 2001), evaluation procedures (Jarvis et al., 2001), and planning processes (Lenton & Turner,
1999), putting   much     of the   emphasis  of teacher  preparation  programs  on  helping  teachers  form    a teaching
identity (e.g., Freese, 2006).
          The   teacher-centered    approach  of preparing    pre-service teachers to  teach science  has   been strongly
influenced by stage-based accounts of teacher development (Kagan, 1992). Teacher developmental stages refer
to the stages through which teachers progressively gain professional knowledge, abilities and beliefs (Nimmo,
1994). This approach proposes that during initial stages of their development, novice teachers need to clarify
and   construct  their self-image    as a  teacher  by   developing  routines  related to  classroom   management      and
instruction. Beginning teachers' concerns tend to focus primarily on self and self-image as a teacher, rather than
on students' learning. Consequently, the level of effort and skill required by beginning teachers to teach science
using inquiry-based approaches may not be achievable for many. Therefore the tendency in these instances is to
revert to authoritarian, teacher-directed approaches (Harlen, 1996). In this context, activities or units that work
are seen to be effective partly because they engage students, in the sense that they keep students interested.
Although this approach results in teachers focusing on their own behavior before they can attend to student
learning, it is seen   as a  crucial step early  in their professional  development    (Kagan,  1992). Once    they   have
"resolved" an image of themselves, novice teachers can then shift their attention to attending to and responding
to their students' inquiry.   Thus,   the  challenge to   integrate aspects of teaching   science  as inquiry,   into their
planning and instruction maybe frustrating for novice teachers.
          Conversely, Crawford (1999) suggests that it is not only possible, but it is also realistic to expect that at
least some novice teachers design and carry out inquiry-based instruction. Novice teachers can be capable of
articulating an emerging knowledge of teaching science as inquiry, and they may espouse philosophies aligned
with this kind of pedagogy (Crawford & Lunetta, 2002; Windschitl, 2003), but they may be incapable of, or
unwilling, for various reasons, to enact teaching science as inquiry in their classroom (McGinnis, Parker, &
Graeber, 2004; Newman et al., 2004).
          Levin,  Hammer      and   Coffey   (2009) provide   an extensive  review    of the challenges   to stage-based
accounts of teacher development, indicating that this view may be misleading and steer teacher education in
science in unproductive directions. They suggest that in a number of studies, pre-service teachers were able to
reflect on several issues related to the content of teaching (Grossman, 1992), and to attend to the substance of
their students'  thinking    (Davis, 2006),  although    Davis  questions  pre-service teachers'  abilities to reflect-in-
action. Despite stage-based accounts implying that after having developed classroom routines teachers focus
their attention to student reasoning, Zeichner and Gore (1990) showed that novice teachers rapidly shift from
progressive,  student-centered     attitudes formed  during   pre-service  to traditional, teacher-centered  approaches
when confronted with the realities of the workplace. Furthermore, studies showed that teachers often become
satisfied with their teacher-centered approach to teaching and are less likely to question their chosen routines
(Grossman, 1992). Finally, Olsen (2007) indicates that such stage-based models focus on implementation and

                                                      605   ·  © ISLS
                                                ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

not necessarily on decision-making processes that take place during teaching and learning, and that such work
has been primarily conducted with in-service teachers.
        We agree with these challenges and we highlight that the ability to attend to students' inquiry is one of
the critical aspects of the pedagogical content knowledge (PCK) that novice teachers need to develop as part of
their pre-service preparation (e.g., Davis & Smithey, 2008). Even though helping pre-service teachers develop
rich pedagogical content knowledge prior to substantial teaching experience is not an easy task (van Driel, De
Jong, & Verloop, 2002). We agree with Davis & Smithey's suggestion that it is possible to provide pre-service
teachers with enough experiences to prepare them to develop "PCK readiness" ­ that is the requirements for
developing abilities to attend to their students' inquiry. Davis & Smithey use the following analogy to illustrate
the idea of "PCK readiness": Kindergarten teachers spend most of the school year helping students develop
"reading readiness" i.e., the skills students need to develop before they can read. None of these skills (how to
hold a book, which direction to turn the pages, the letters and their sounds) is technically "reading," but every
reader needs these skills. Similarly, they suggest that pre-service teachers can learn about the content, how to
represent this to learners, and common ideas learners bring to the science class. Even if this initial knowledge is
in pieces, this forms the building blocks for well-developed and usable PCK.

The idea of framing and how we transfer it to student-teaching
        Though     substantial gains    have   been  made     in understanding    teachers'   professional   knowledge
development (e.g., Munby et al., 2001; Calderhead, 1996; Borko & Putnam, 1996), little is known about the
difficulties novice teachers encountered during teaching science as inquiry (Anderson, 2002), raising questions
about how to support learning and to enact teaching science as inquiry (Newman et al., 2004; Windschitl, 2003).
        To   contribute towards    this end,   we  have adopted    the  term   "framing"  based   on  previous  work in
sociology (Goffman, 1974), sociolinguistics (Tannen, 1993), and cognitive science (Schank, 1990).            Framing is
used to describe the idea that people use knowledge from past experiences to make sense of what is going on in
situations they perceive  to   be similar.  In this sense,   individuals are   accomplished    at attending  to what is
happening around them, searching for signals that indicate the type of activity and making alterations to their
behavior when it appears appropriate (MacLachlan & Reid 1994). For instance, when entering an unfamiliar
restaurant people  immediately    interpret what   kind of  restaurant  it is  based on  activities  around  them: Are
customers waiting for a waiter to take their order or are they standing at a counter ordering food? In this manner
framing influences one's expectations about what is going on as well as their interpretations of what they see or
expect to happen in particular situations, so influencing the way they act.
        We can parallel the manner people frame daily activities with the way pre-service teachers frame their
role in science classrooms. There are many aspects to framing, including how to manage teaching time, maintain
student control and introduce new activities. Additionally, the consideration of whether or how teachers respond
to their students' inquiry may also be an aspect of framing. Their understanding of successful teaching should
include the issue of responding to students' inquiry or not, and in which ways this is done. This perspective may
help to better understand student-teachers' enactment of teaching during the early phases of their careers.
        Our purpose in this paper was to describe how the a senior student-teacher conceived her role in the
class and how her behavior reflected a struggle to balance between teaching science as implementing a prepared
lesson plan, and as attending to her students' emergent inquiry, seeking to identify different ways of teacher
acting during teaching.   While   it is inconceivable   to  focus  only  on   implementing   a lesson   plan with  total
disregard of student inquiry in a student-centered setting, it is also "unacceptable" for a student-teacher to ignore
an informed   lesson plan. This   dilemma    has   implications  for  what  is  seen as  the role  of science   teaching
preparation and how educators support their student teachers' struggle to balance both criteria. In this paper, we
seek to show that the student-teacher was able to attend to her students' inquiry during her teaching early in her
career, despite stage-based accounts of teacher development.

Methodology
This is an interpretive case study focusing on a single science lesson of a senior kindergarten student-teacher.
We recorded and transcribed this lesson in March 2009 as part of the student-teachers' requirements to have five
of their science lessons videotaped, which they subsequently reviewed and discussed with the faculty teaching
science methods, their teaching supervisors and their peers.
        For her last semester of student-teaching (Spring 2009) Mary (the study's participant) was assigned to
an urban public kindergarten school and carried out her nine-week student-teaching practicum in a class of 17
students (age ranging: 4.5 - 5.5 years old). The lesson we analyzed for this paper was her first science lesson
during this student-teaching phase and concerned the solubility of various substances in water. We chose to
analyze this specific lesson because it was easy to identify instances in which Mary followed her lesson plan or
not, as she had an elaborated version of her lesson plan and when following it she would literally read from it.
        For   this paper,  we  used   the   lesson  video   and  its transcript as   our primary   data source.  Using
Videograph software, we coded all the episodes during which Mary talked during whole class discussions. The

                                                    606   ·  © ISLS
                                                    ICLS 2010   ·   Volume 1

coding was based on whether she was following her lesson plan, or making "teaching moves" for which she had
not planned. We used four codes for this analysis where Mary: (1) read directly from her lesson plan, (2)                  did
not read from her lesson plan, (3) followed an open-ended discussion activity that she had planned for (that is
she did not read from her lesson plan, but she was following a pre-planned activity) and (4) students talked. The
coding was carried out by the second and third authors (Cohen's Kappa=0,945) and the resulted differences
were resolved through discussion.
          When agreement was reached, in order to have participant check of our interpretations of the findings,
the first author    carried out   an   open-ended   interview   with  Mary,   during  which  the    video of  the lesson   was
reviewed, pausing it at various points that had been selected based on the findings of the analysis. At those
points, he   asked  Mary    about    her thinking   and   purpose   for  specific  "teaching moves".     In  some  cases,  she
requested to watch the episode under discussion once more. Eventually, she was able to identify the elements of
the students'    thinking   to   which  she  was   responding.    In this way,    we verified   or  made    alterations in our
interpretations of the findings of the code-based analysis.

Findings
For about 14 minutes of the lesson (out of the total 42 of the entire lesson ­ 33.3%) Mary read directly from her
lesson plan, obviously following an elaborately prepared plan. Out of the total 483 utterances coded, this time
corresponded to 86 utterances (17.8%). We refer to these instances as working within an implementing-a-lesson-
plan frame    (Frame   1).  Conversely,     for  about  nine minutes,    (21.42%   of the   total lesson  time)   Mary   spoke
spontaneously    without    searching    to read   what  to say.  This   time corresponded    to  125  utterances  (25.87%).
Within  these  nine  minutes      of spontaneous   talk,  we  identified  two  distinct sub-frames     where  Mary  either  a)
responded directly to her students' thinking or conversational contribution (attending-to student-inquiry-frame ­
Frame 2) or b) she was following an open-ended discussion with her students within her lesson plan's general
structure (lesson-plan free-talk frame ­ Frame 3). The second frame consisted of 49 utterances (10.14%) and
lasted for about 4 minutes (9.5% of the total time), and the third frame consisted of 76 utterances (15.73%) and
went on for about 5 minutes (12.5% of the total time). The remaining 217 utterances corresponded to student
talk in the conversations, while the time unaccounted for was taken up by the children's experimentation (about
9 minutes). Figure 1 represents a timeline graph of the lesson's discourse. From this it is clear that, while there
are instances where Mary worked primarily within one of the three frames identified (e.g., utterances 0-13; 81-
145; 416-449), there are also instances when she shifted to and from between the frames over a short period of
time (e.g., 14-80; 140-231; 350-455). The analysis of the transcript and the subsequent interview with Mary,
allowed   us  to    define  the   characteristics  of  the  frames   identified.     Below   we     describe in  detail  those
characteristics for each of the frames we identified.

               Students talking

          Lesson plan free talk

    Attending to student inquiry

    Implementing a lesson plan

                                 Figure 1. Timeline graph of the student-teacher's discourse

Working within the implementing-a-lesson-plan frame
For most of her teaching time, Mary worked within the implementing-a-lesson-plan frame. She began her lesson
within this frame, and in almost all cases returned to this frame after having shifted to the other frames. From
the interview,   it was clear     that Mary    was very   conscious  of  the  fact that the  lesson  plan   she had prepared
included  prescribed   activities    from   the teacher's official  guide for  teaching  science    in kindergarten,  and  for
which her tutor had given approval thus, she felt that "these are the steps we have been taught to follow".                Her
sense of urgency to fulfill each outlined step was also apparent as she proceeded with the sequence of activities,
paying little attention to her students' responses and understanding. Her questioning, as she turned from one
student   to the next, was       characterized  by the  search  for  the correct,  predefined answer.     The conversational
exchanges that took place in this frame lasted longer than the other two frames, with each of her utterances
lasting for an average of 10s ­ (the duration in frame 2 was about 5 seconds and about 4 seconds in frame 3.)
Consequently,    her questioning       sessions during  this frame   labored   for as long   as  it took  to find the   answer
required. One of the most salient aspects of this frame was the jarring changes from one activity to the next
when Mary felt she `had' to move on.

                                                        607   ·  © ISLS
                                                ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

        In the example below we see Mary cutting short a discussion in order to move on to the next activity.
This discussion, in which students were articulating their hypotheses relating to what had happened to the sugar
in the water, was carried out in attending-to-student-inquiry frame. In this excerpt, Mary reverted back to the
lesson plan's  next  activity  (frame 1)    without linking   it   to her    students'   on-going   discussion, giving  the
impression that it was the lesson plan, not Mary `running' the lesson.
        Mary: Harry says the sugar fell into the water, so what might have happened to the sugar?
        [as it cannot be seen]
        Student 1: It turned into water
        Mary: What do you mean it turned into water?
        Student 2: It melted
        Mary: It may have melted...
        Student 1: It became sugar
        Mary: OK, now I am going to give you each something, OK? You can touch it, smell it,
        but you mustn't taste it, [hands out substances with which the children will experiment]

Working within the attending-to-student-inquiry frame
Our analysis showed that Mary shifted from following her lesson plan to directly responding to her students'
thinking, and  in this attending-to-student-inquiry  frame,    she    did not  read   from  her  lesson  plan.  Rather, she
attended and responded to her students' thinking, even if this led her outside of what she had planned. In these
instances, she spontaneously provided her students with some feedback, comment or conversational direction
that was  not  part of  her lesson  script. This  frame   usually     lasted for short   bursts  of  dialogue  when   Mary
responded  directly to  her students' inquiry   and then   she quickly    reverted    to frame   1. For instance, after the
children's various predictions of what would happen to the substances in water, during which Mary followed her
lesson plan, the different children's predictions caused Mary to abandon her lesson script.
        Mary: How can we be sure what is right? I see we have some disagreements... how will
        we know for sure if our materials will dissolve or not? What should we `scientists' do?
        Student 3: We can sit at our tables and see...
        Mary: See what? Do what at our tables?
        Student 3: Scientific things!
        Mary: Scientific things! Well done, and what do we call these scientific things?
        Student 4: Experiments!
        Mary: Well done Nancy! We're going to do an experiment!
          After this short discussion (frame 2) , Mary shifted back to following her prescribed lesson plan (frame
1) and brought out a chart for noting down the predictions prior the experiments. We suggest that the relatively
brief duration of these exchanges in frame 2 (an average of 5 seconds per teacher utterance) was due to two
factors. First, the fact that the dialogue during this frame was not part of the "official script" seemed to cause
Mary anxiety and a desire to return back to the security of her lesson plan. Second, it became apparent during
the  interview that Mary    somehow   underestimated    the   real value  of  these   activities regarding them    as  only
perfunctory steps   in the process  towards   understanding    the concept    of dissolving.    Nevertheless,   during  this
frame there was cohesion not only within the frame as Mary's questioning directly addressed the children's
conversational  contributions, but   also  as she moved    from    this frame  to   a  different one.  These   moves   were
characterized by a natural flow which did not disrupt the rhythm of the lesson nor disorientate the children.

Working within the lesson-plan free-talk frame
During  analysis  we   identified a third,  somewhat    intermediate,   frame    to the  previous   two. This   frame   was
observed (1) during the discussion of the problem presented (where was the sugar which had fallen into the
water?), (2) while the children identified the materials with which they would experiment, and (3) immediately
following their experiments, when they announced their results to the rest of the class. In this lesson-plan free-
talk frame, Mary also responded to the children without reference to her lesson plan, but on these occasions she
was clearly working within a particular activity she had noted previously as a sub-heading but had not scripted
for in the lesson plan. She responded less specifically to the children's conversational contributions compared to
the second frame, often reflecting their answers back at them when these were wrong (e.g., "is it sugar?") or
repeating their   correct  answers,  meanwhile    using   more   closed   questions      than when    working   within  the
attending-to-student-inquiry frame. This frame always followed on from the implementing-a-lesson-plan frame
and it was apparent that Mary was aware of the pedagogic objective for these activities which, to some extent
restrained her responses to students' inquiry in her attempt to fulfill the objective. On two occasions, when she
moved   from   this third  frame  to  the  attending-to-student-inquiry      frame,   this occurred   when    the children
encountered difficulties in responding appropriately to Mary's more restricted questioning and Mary seemed to
instinctively and effortlessly change her framing to accommodate for this factor and respond directly to the
children's comments, building on these comments to guide the children in their discovery.

                                                    608  ·  © ISLS
                                                ICLS 2010  ·   Volume 1

         The following is a short excerpt in which the children announced their conflicting results for whether
flour dissolved in water or not. In this excerpt, Mary shifted from working in the lesson-plan free-talk frame
(during which she guided students to present their results) to attending-to-student-inquiry frame.
         Mary: Let's look at your results for flour. What happened to the flour? Did it dissolve or
         not dissolve?
         Student 5: It dissolved!
         Student 2: No, it didn't dissolve!
         Mary: What did you discover? Let me come and see [what they had noted on their charts]
         Student 1: We discovered that sugar....
         Mary: But what happened to the flour now. [...] Did it [the flour] dissolve or not?
         Student 1: It dissolved.
         Mary: Has another team noted something different? Do you agree?
         Student 4: Andy's team discovered that it didn't dissolve.
         While working within a lesson-plan free-talk frame for some time, Mary "saw" that at least two groups
of students had different results for whether the flour dissolved in the water or not. A possibility is that this
disagreement is related to how one defines solubility (e.g., something is considered dissolved if it is not visible
any more, or when one cannot identify two separate substances). While Mary did not clarify this definition, she
addressed the disagreement between the groups, because, as she indicated in the interview, students acting as
scientists need  to  reach consensus about  an experimental     result. To   do that, she shifted to the  attending-to-
student-inquiry frame. Mary also indicted that when she reverted back to following-the-lesson-plan frame, it
was specifically to move to the next activity in the lesson either guided by time restraints or believing that she
had fully addressed the children's questions. These moves back to the following-the-lesson-plan frame were
marked by abrupt changes in the discussion's direction and lesson activity.

Themes emerged across the three frames
Despite  the  differences  between  the three frames    that we described    above,   we  have identified at least two
emerging themes relevant to all the frames. These include Mary's need for "teaching security" and her role in
the classroom, which we describe below.
         Mary explained that the lesson plan offered her security by knowing "where [she was] in the lesson and
how to proceed." She indicated that "I feel secure that I know now I do this and then I do that." This had an
impact on the duration of the various activities: During the lesson implementation, Mary felt justified to allow
e.g., the questioning to last for a long time, until the children gave the `correct' answer, resulting in her paying
little attention to alternative answers offered. Conversely, she was aware of the time pressure during the frames
outside of the lesson plan stating emphatically, "the discussion flowed and the lesson progressed but it took too
long." Her view that these activities did not contribute substantially to the learning added to her need to return to
the safety and validity of the lesson plan, and was evident in her abrupt jumps from the lesson-plan free-talk
back to the implementing-the-lesson-plan frame.
         Mary also indicated that while working within the implementing-a-lesson-plan frame she "just let the
lesson plan roll and didn't respond to them [her students]", supporting our own findings that in this frame Mary
"automatically" moved from one activity to the next. She conceived her role as following an approved plan, and
thus her main concerns were to finish the activities culminating in the correct answer, though she described her
role as that of a guide, providing the stimuli with which to develop the children's knowledge and discovery in
the direction she saw as relevant. In contrast, while working within the attending-to student-inquiry-frame or the
lesson-plan free-talk frame, she indicated that the children had made comments she had not predicted and thus
responded intuitively addressing the issues raised. Likewise, when asked why she had not scripted for all the
activities in the lesson plan, she said that during these activities "I knew [what needed to be done]".

Discussion
Our purpose in this study was to describe in detail a science lesson of a senior kindergarten student-teacher in
order to gain better understanding of how she conceived her role in the class and how her behavior reflected a
struggle to balance between teaching science as implementing a lesson plan she had developed and received
approval for by her tutor, in contrast to attending to her students' scientific inquiry.
         Our   first contention is that our findings show    that the   idea of "framing"  (Goffman,   1974;  Tannen,
1993; Schank,    1990)    as a  methodological  approach     used   for  analyzing    teaching may   prove   useful in
understanding the processes that novice teachers go through during their first attempts to teach. Framing is used
to describe the idea that people are accomplished at attending to what is happening around them by searching
for signals that indicate the type of activity and making alterations to their behavior when it appears appropriate
(MacLachlan & Reid 1994), and by using past experiences to make sense of what is going on in situations they
perceive   to be similar.  This helped   us define different   ways   of teacher  acting   during teaching   and   their
characteristics and so identify several issues that caused Mary's struggles during student-teaching in science.

                                                    609  ·   © ISLS
                                                   ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

The need to follow an approved lesson plan, to feel confidence in what she was doing, the restriction of the time,
and her understanding of her role as a teacher in the classroom were some of the factors that guided Mary's
behavior during the lesson we analyzed.
          Second,   we  argue that   it is not  unrealistic  to  expect novice  teachers    to be  able   to  attend   to their
students'   inquiry during actual   teaching.   Despite  views   suggesting  that  novice   teaches  may    be  incapable   of
enacting teaching science as inquiry (e.g., McGinnis, Parker, & Graeber, 2004), our findings suggest that the
student-teacher  in  this study  was    able to attend  to  her  students'  inquiry  at times  and  successfully      integrate
aspects of teaching science as inquiry into her teaching. Of course, we do not suggest that she was expert in
teaching science as inquiry, in fact, there are several respects in which it is evident she was not. Our conclusion,
then, is  that novice   teachers come   to   their student-teaching  with   some  possibly  nascent      abilities for inquiry
teaching, that they may invoke these spontaneously, directly in line with the abilities that teacher educators have
described as important to impart.     That Mary actually shifted frames, suggests having the ability to make these
transitions. From the interview it was clear that these shifts were not always done consciously, but intuitively.
          Agreeing   with  challenges   to  stage-based   accounts  of  teacher development       (e.g., Levin,    Hammer   &
Coffey, 2009; Grossman, 1992; Davis, 2006; Sherin, 2004), we suggest that an important role of undergraduate
methods courses is to help students make clear distinctions between alternative teaching frames, understand the
different  interpretations of teaching   within    each frame   and the characteristics  of  the  teaching    resulting   from
each. At the same time it is important to help pre-service teachers develop strategies both for (a) entering the
attending-to-student-inquiry frames during early stages of their careers, and (b) working within that frame more
reliably. This will help pre-service teachers to develop "PCK readiness" (Davis & Smithey, 2008) which they
can then use for developing abilities to attend to their students' inquiry.

References
Anderson,   R.  D., &   Mitchener,   C.  P.  (1994). Research    on science  teacher    education.  In   D.  L. Gabel     (Ed.),
          Handbook of research on science teaching and learning (pp. 3­44). New York: Macmillan.
Anderson,   L.  M., Smith,  D.   C., &  Peasley,   K. (2000).    Integrating learner   and learning  concerns:Prospective
          elementary science teachers' paths and progress. Teaching and Teacher Education,16(5­6), 547­574.
Anderson,   R.D.  (2002).  Reforming     science   teaching:  What   research   says about  inquiry.     Journal   of  Science
          Teacher Education, 13, 1-12.
Barman, C.R. (2002). How do you define inquiry? Science and Children, 26, 8­9.
Borko, H. & Putnam, R.T. (1996). Learning to teach. In Berliner, D.C. & Calfee, R.C. (Eds.), Handbook of
          educational psychology (pp. 709-725). New York: Macmillan.
Calderhead, J. (1996). Teachers: Beliefs and knowledge. In Berliner, D.C. & Calfee, R.C. (Eds.), Handbook of
          educational psychology (pp. 709-725). New York: Macmillan.
Chen,  J.,  &  McNamee,    G.    D. (2007).  Bridging:    Assessment    for  teaching   and learning     in early   childhood
          classrooms, preK­3. Thousand Oaks, CA: Corwin Press
Crawford,   B.A.  (1999).  Is it realistic   to expect  a  preservice   teacher to  create  an inquiry-based       classroom?
          Journal of Science Teacher Education, 10, 175­194.
Crawford, B. A. (2006). Learning to Teach Science as Inquiry in the Rough and Tumble of Practice. Journal                   of
          Research in Science Teaching, 44, 613­642.
Crawford,   B.A.,   &   Lunetta, V.  (2002).    Promoting    the development    of   a  personal  philosophy       of teaching
          prospective secondary science teachers. Pennsylvania Teacher Educator, 1, 68­74.
Davis, E. A. (2006). Characterizing productive reflection among preservice elementary teachers: Seeing what
          matters. Teaching and Teacher Education, 22, 281-301.
Davis,   E. A., &   Smithey,  J.    (2008).   Beginning    Teachers    Moving   Toward     Effective Elementary        Science
          Teaching. Science Education, 93, 45-770.
Flick, L. (2002). Inquiry as cognitive process. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the NRST, Philadelphia.
Feiman-Nemser,      S., &  Parker,   M.  (1992).   Mentoring    in context:  A  comparison     of two    U.S.  programs    for
          beginning teachers. NCRTL Special Report. East Lansing, MI: NCRTL
Fleer, M., & Hardy, T. (2001). Science for children. Sydney, Australia: Prentice Hall.
Freese, A. R. (2006). Reframing one's teaching: Discovering our teacher selves through reflection and inquiry.
          Teaching and Teacher Education, 22, 100-119.
Goffman, E. (1974). Frame analysis: An essay on the organization of experience. New York: Harper & Row.
Goodwin, C. (1994). Professional vision. American Anthropologist, 96, 606­633.
Grossman, P. L. (1992). Why models matter: An alternate view on professional growth in teaching. Review of
          Educational Research, 62, 171-179.
Hammer, D. (1995). Student Inquiry in a Physics Class Discussion. Cognition and Instruction, 13(3): 401-430.
Hammer, D. (2004). The variability of student reasoning, lectures 1-3. In E. Redish and M. Vicentini (Eds.),
          Proceedings of the Enrico Fermi Summer School, Course CLVI (pp. 279-340): Italian Physical Society.
Harlen, W. (1996) The Teaching of Science (2nd ed.) London: David Fulton.

                                                       610  ·   © ISLS
                                              ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

Jarvis, T., McKeon, F., Coates, D., & Vause, J. (2001). Beyond generic mentoring: Helping trainee teachers to
         teach primary science. Research in Science and Technological Education, 19, 5­23.
Kagan, D. M. (1992). Professional growth among preservice and beginning teachers. Review of Educational
         Research, 62, 129-169.
Kallery, M. & Psillos D, (2002). What Happens in the Early Years Science Classroom? The Reality of Teachers'
         Curriculum Implementation Activities. European Early Childhood Education Research Journal 10(2).
Kamii, C. & DeVries, R. (1993).    Physical Knowledge in Preschool Education: implications of Piaget's theory.
         New York, NY: Teachers College Press.
Keys, C. W., & Bryan, L. A    (2001). Co-Constructing Inquiry-Based Science with Teachers: Essential Research
         for Lasting Reform. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 38, 631-645.
Kuiper,  W.   (1995)  The Implementation   of Context   -  and Activity   Based- Science  Education:Intention     and
         Reality. Paper presented at the annual meeting of NARST, San Francisco, CA
Lenton,  G.,  &  Turner,  G.  (1999). Student-teachers'   grasp   of  science concepts.  The   Journal  for   Science
         Education, 81(295), 67­72.
Levin, D. M., Hammer, D. & Coffey, J. E. (2009). Novice Teachers' Attention to Student Thinking. Journal of
         Teacher Education, 60, 142-154.
MacLachlan, G., & Reid, I. (1994). Framing and interpretation. Carlton, Canada: Melbourne University Press.
McDevitt, T. M., Troyer, R., Ambrosio, A. L., Heikinen, H. W.& Warren, E. (1995). Evaluating prospective
         elementary teachers' understanding of science and mathematics in a model preservice program. Journal
         of Research in Science Teaching, 32(7), 749-775.
McGinnis, R. Parker, P., & Graeber, A. (2004). A cultural perspective of the induction of five reform-minded
         beginning mathematics and science teachers. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 41, 720­747.
Metz,  K.  (1995).  Reassessment   of developmental    constraints   on children's science    instruction. Review  of
         Educational Research, 65, 93 ­ 127.
Minstrell, J. &   van  Zee,  E. H. (Eds.). (2000).  Inquiring    into inquiry   learning and   teaching    in science.
         Washington, DC: American Association for the Advancement of Science.
Munby, H., Russell, T. & Martin, A.K. (2001). Teachers_ knowledge and how it develops. In: Richardson, V.
         (Ed.), Handbook of research on teaching, AERA (pp. 877-904). Washington, DC.
National Research Council. (1996). National Science Education Standards. Washington DC: National Academy
         Press.
National Research Council. (2000). Inquiry and the National Science Education Standards: A guide for teaching
         and learning. Washington, DC: Com. on the Development of an Addendum to the National Science.
National Research Council. (2007). Taking science to school: Learning and teaching science in grades K-8.
         Washington, DC: Committee on Science Learning, Kindergarten Through Eighth Grade.
National   Science Education    Standards (1996).  National   Committee    on   Science  Education Standards     and
         Assessment; National Research Council. Washington DC: National Academy Press.
Newman, W., Abell, S., Hubbard, P., McDonald, J., Otaala, J., & Martini, M. (2004). Dilemnas of teaching
         inquiry in elementary methods. Journal of Science Teacher Education, 15, 257­279.
Nimmo, G. (1994). The Idiosyncratic Nature of Beginning Teaching: Reaching Clearings by Different Paths.
         Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the ATEA, Brisbane, Queensland, Australia.
Olsen,  J. K. (2007).  Preservice  Teachers'  Thinking    Within  a   Research  Based   Framework:  What      Informs
         Decisions? International Journal of Science and Mathematics Education. 5, 49-83.
Osborne, J., Erduran, S. and Simon, S. (2004). Enhancing the quality of argumentation in school science. J. of
         Research in Science Teaching, 41, 994-1020.
QCA/DfEE      (2000). Curriculum   guidance   for the  foundation   stage. London:  Qualifications  &      Curriculum
         Authority.
Schank, R. (1990). Tell me a story: A new look at real and artificial memory. New York: Scribner
Sherin, M.G.    &  Han,  S.Y. (2004).Teacher  learning    in the  context  of a video   club. Teaching     &  Teacher
         Education, 20,163­183.
Tannen, D. (1993). Framing in discourse. New York: Oxford University Press.
Tobin, K., Kahle, J., & Fraser, B. (1990). Windows into science classrooms: Problems associated with higher-
         level cognitive learning. London: Falmer Press.
Tu, T. (2006). Preschool science environment: What is available in a preschool classroom? Early Childhood
         Education Journal, 33, 245­251.
van Driel, J., De Jong, O., & Verloop, N. (2002). The development of preservice chemistry teachers'
         pedagogical content knowledge. Science Education, 86, 572 ­ 590.
Windschitl, M. (2003). Inquiry projects in science teacher education: What can investigative experiences reveal
         about teacher thinking and eventual classroom practice? Science Education, 87, 112­143.
Zeichner, K., & Gore, J. (1990). Teacher socialization. In W. R. Houston, Handbook of research on teacher
         education (pp.329-348). New York: Macmillan.

                                                   611  ·  © ISLS
