                                                 ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 2

        A Cognitive Apprenticeship for Science Literacy Based on
                                                 Journalism
   Joseph L. Polman, E. Wendy Saul, Alan Newman, Cathy Farrar, Nancy Singer, Eric Turley, Laura Pearce,
                                       Jennifer Hope, and Glenda McCarty
                   University of Missouri-St. Louis, One University Blvd., St. Louis, MO 63121
           Email: polman@umsl.edu, saulw@umsl.edu, newmanalan@umsl.edu, farrarcat@gmail.com,
singerna@umsl.edu, turleye@umsl.edu, pearcel@umsl.edu, jmghope@gmail.com, Glenda.McCarty@umsl.edu
    Cynthia Graville, 202B Xavier Hall, Saint Louis University, St. Louis, Missouri 63108, cgravill@slu.edu

         Abstract:    The  Science   Literacy  through   Science     Journalism  (SciJourn)  project  aims  to
         reframe the discussion of science literacy for citizenship, and explore how science journalism
         practices can be used to inform a cognitive apprenticeship that increases the science literacy of
         participants. This symposium features four paper presentations that report on the progress of
         the SciJourn project. We report on the development of standards for science content literacy
         based    on the  expertise exhibited  by science     journalists, assessment  measures   for  science
         literacy, and assessment measures for engagement with science and technology. Finally, we
         describe our efforts aimed at apprenticing high-school aged learners into a science journalism
         community of practice spanning multiple schools and a community-based organization.

General Introduction
Members    of the  Learning   Sciences community    engaged    in    science education   almost universally agree that
educated citizens in democracies should develop a strong disciplinary understanding of science. To date, such
efforts have  focused  primarily   on practicing  expert   scientists as   the yardstick for what  it means  to "know
science", and in the last twenty years on "coming to know science" through learning environments inspired by
apprenticeship. Knowing science has typically been seen as having conceptions consonant with those of expert
scientists (e.g., diSessa  2006);   "talking science" (Lemke,    1990);    using  reasoning  about   models (Lehrer &
Schauble, 2006) and spatial representations (Schwartz, 2006) like scientists; and knowing how to carry out the
authentic inquiry practices of scientists (e.g., Edelson & Reiser, 2006; Krajcik, et al., 1998; O'Neill & Polman,
2004). Coming to know science has frequently been encouraged by creating communities of practice carrying
out  science  inquiry  (e.g., Pea,  1993; Rosebery,   Warren,   &    Conant,   1993; Ruopp,   et al., 1993).   Learning
environments based on a community of practice model have taken inspiration from the research on traditional
apprenticeship learning (e.g., Lave & Wenger, 1991), and the related concept of cognitive apprenticeships for
learning in schools (Brown, Collins, & Duguid, 1989; Collins, Brown, & Newman, 1989).

These views of science knowing and learning have had a profoundly positive impact on education through
direct reform and by being taken up and elaborated on in influential reports (e.g., Bransford, Brown, & Cocking,
2000; Michaels, Shouse, & Schweingruber, 2008) and standards for science education (e.g., National Research
Council, 1996, 2000). The tendency to base science learning goals on analysis of the expertise of practicing
scientists is understandable, but it has important limitations relative to a broader view of "science literacy." In
the learning sciences and science education literature, "science literacy" is sometimes used synonymously with
"practice-based science literacy" (O'Neill & Polman, 2004) focused on being able to carry out the first-hand
inquiry practices of expert scientists. When this happens, the literacy in "science literacy" may become lost. But
a "science literacy" which includes reading, making sense of, writing, and communicating about contemporary
science topics as they relate to everyday life and policymaking is obviously important to life and citizenship.

The Science Literacy through Science Journalism project ("SciJourn"; Polman, Saul, Newman & Farrar, 2008)
is a National     Science Foundation   research  effort  to   better  understand  science  literacy,  and how   science
journalism practices can be used to inform a cognitive apprenticeship that increases the science literacy of
participants (see http://www.scijourn.org). The project includes team members with backgrounds in the learning
sciences, science education, literacy, science, and journalism; we draw on these diverse backgrounds to inform
our understanding of both science literacy and learning. The project began in 2008, and we are in our second of
four years of planned development and research. The 2008-09 academic year consisted of our alpha and beta
tests of a journalism model for advancing science literacy in two high schools, simultaneous to the development
of standards and discourse practices for science literacy, as well as transfer tasks and a survey of engagement. In
summer of 2009, we conducted professional development with high school science and English teachers who
are implementing various pilot instantiations of a journalism model in their classes during the 2009-2010 school
year. At the same time, a group of science news reporters and editors was established at a youth development
program at the Saint Louis Science Center (SLSC). The student reporters at schools and SLSC are publishing

                                                     61  ·  © ISLS
                                                ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 2

science   news    articles  in  an  online  and     print  newspaper      we   established    called  The    SciJourner
(http://www.scijourner.org). We are piloting our research instruments in 2009-2010 at school and SLSC sites.
The  project will conduct   further teacher professional    development    in  the  summers   of 2010    and 2011, and
continue implementation studies.

There is an extensive and ongoing discussion in the broad field of science education over what constitutes
science literacy and how it applies in schools, various other settings and life situations (e.g.; DeBoer, 2000;
Eisenhart, et al., 1996; Hurd, 1998; Shamos, 1995; Turner, 2008). Nearly all definitions include aspects aimed at
furthering civic, cultural and personal understanding (AAAS, 1989; Department of Education, n.d.; National
Research Council, 1996; Trefil, 1996). For the purposes of the SciJourn project, we embrace the ideas embodied
in terms  such as   "public understanding   of  science"   (Bodmer,  1985);    "public engagement    with  science and
technology"   (House   of  Lords,  2000); "scientific   awareness"   (Devlin,   1998;  Shamos,   1995);   "science  for
citizenship" (Fensham, 2004); etc. To whit, our goal is to educate students to:

          ·   Think, talk, and write critically about what they read, hear and see in the media;
          ·   Understand what counts as science;
          ·   Recognize the risks and benefits of scientific discoveries and technologies;
          ·   Become engaged with science and technology;
          ·   Develop the confidence and skills to tackle science/technology issues independently;
          ·   "Use" experts to answer questions and solve problems; and
          ·   Understand the nature of science as an ongoing process of exploration with varying
              opinions or general consensus on theories, different stakeholders and levels of expertise,
              and norms for claims and evidence.

In this symposium, we feature four paper presentations that will report on the progress of the SciJourn project in
developing standards and measures for science content literacy and engagement, as well as developing a set of
practices and  norms   aimed   at  apprenticing high-school    aged  learners  into science   journalism  as  means  to
increase  science literacy. Our   discussants, who  also   serve  as advisory  board   members   for  the project, will
provide critical commentary and discuss the project's implications for the learning sciences. Bill Penuel (SRI
International) will comment     on the science  education     and measurement    issues raised   by  the papers; Kevin
Leander (Vanderbilt University) will comment on the literacy and discourse practices and issues.

Symposium Presentations

Toward an Articulation of Standards for Science Literacy Based on Journalism ­
Newman, Saul, Singer, Turley, Pearce, and Polman
Authors of the Alliance for Education/Carnegie Foundation (AAE) report entitled "Literacy Instruction in the
Content Areas" call upon educators to rethink the ways in which we prepare students for college, work and
citizenship. They--and we--are especially concerned with the ability of secondary students to read and write
about academic content--specifically science content. To clarify salient features of science literacy we turned to
a set of experts who work to communicate scientific content to a public audience--science journalists and
editors.  Drawing on qualitative data from interviews, read-alouds, and editorial comments experts provided to
high school   students and   teachers  writing  science  news   articles, this paper   begins to articulate  prominent
features that characterize scientifically literate individuals. Their comments, perspectives, and priorities are then
used to articulate standards we seek to introduce to high school students and teachers. These standards are not
an attempt to impose professional journalistic standards on novice student writers, but rather to help articulate
practices of reading,  writing  and thinking   that stand  to  improve    students' science literacy. In  the SciJourn
project, we will be using these standards to inform a writing rubric as well as coding of discourse.

The five standards describe the importance of: 1) using multiple sources; 2) attending to issues of credibility and
attribution of sources; 3) contextualizing science information; 4) making the reported science relevant to readers
[high school students in our case]; and 5) presenting factually accurate, up-to-date information.

Just as science journalists report comments and ideas from multiple sources as they write and edit, we want
students to write articles based on multiple sources, and recognize the importance of corroboration of sources
when reading. Science journalists determine relevant and reliable sources with respect to a topic or issue and,
when appropriate, consult various stakeholders. It is important for students to recognize that not all sources are
equally trustworthy and even credible sources have perspectives and biases, which should be taken into account.
They also need to understand and assess the limitations of scientific information.

                                                     62  ·  © ISLS
                                                   ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 2

Identifying credible sources and attributing them properly within stories is critical to building a journalist's
and a scientifically literate individual's ethos. Science journalists name experts and organizations, qualifying
their areas of expertise and noting any biases or potential conflicts of interest. Attribution prevents a science
journalist  from  making    blanket or    false statements,   especially   by quoting   credible   sources.  For   students,
determining whether a source is credible is crucial to science literary. When students name and evaluate their
sources,   they recognize   that information    comes    from    someone   and  some    organization   (that may   have    an
agenda). Attribution provides a pathway for the reader to verify and expand on the story, develop new paths of
inquiry and creates an historical record of circumstances, opinions and concepts at the moment the story is
published.

Science journalists contextualize technical and scientific information for a broader audience by: identifying the
import of the new scientific information; indicating the status (accepted or preliminary) of those findings, data,
or   ideas;  weighing   the   importance    of     the  findings;   and   providing    sufficient  details.  For   students,
contextualization brings a greater scientific understanding to the story by helping the reader understand the
significance of the scientific information, as well as the nature, limits, and risks of the discovery, technology or
issue as it relates to science.

In science journalism it is imperative for the journalist to make the scientific information in the article relevant
to the readers. Most often science journalists accomplish this by "translating" technical language and concepts
in easier-to-understand    words,  analogies    or images.    We    have  found that   linking scientific findings   to local
concerns or considering new applications of the discovery/technology helps the student reporter produce stories
that are relevant to their reader.  Students,   then, ought to consider   their audience  and  the audience's questions in
writing about a scientific discovery, new technology or pertinent scientific issue.

Finally, a science journalist presents factually accurate information showing an understanding of the content
and explaining scientific ideas and experimental processes. Precise language is employed and scientific terms
are used appropriately. Students learning to think like expert journalists need to pay attention to details, ensuring
the science is right and names, figures, and dates are correct. Students should draw on the latest scientific
information in their reporting. This encourages students to look at publication/announcement dates as a means
to determine timeliness.

Studying the literacy practices of experts in the field of science journalism provides a language and framework
for how educators might use science journalism as a means engage students with scientific content.                   Fusing
"science content" and "science journalism" places some traditional practices of science education and general
journalism in the background, while foregrounding new ways of engaging students with literacy practices and
science content that is current and developing.

Designing Transfer Tasks to Measure Science Literacy­Farrar, Polman, Saul, Newman
This  discussion   focuses  on  the development      of tasks    to measure  changes   in  learners' scientific  literacy  as
defined  above.   Unlike   some  other attempts    at  measuring    science  literacy, our approach    is premised   on   the
notion that science literacy is not limited to an accumulation of facts and concepts, but includes the ability to
critically  consume   and  produce   science    information   in    order to make    decisions  personally,  socially,   and
politically. While there are a multitude of assessments designed to assess conceptual understandings in science,
a measure that captures such a view of scientific literacy is needed.

Research on scientific literacy stems from three broad interests; social scientists and public opinion researchers,
sociologists   and   science    educators (Laugksch,     2000).     Although    many    of these   interests  agree     on a
multidimensional nature of scientific literacy (conceptual knowledge, contextualization, and skills) rarely is
scientific literacy measured in its entirety (Laugksch & Spargo, 1996). By focusing on smaller components of
scientific  literacy separately, an  incomplete     picture   of student  scientific literacy  emerges.     Few   composite
measures of scientific literacy have been published (Laugksch, 2000).

As part of the Science Literacy through Science Journalism project, we have strived to develop a series of tasks
that will measure scientific literacy skills that enable them to be critical consumers and producers of science
information.     These tasks stem from the broader goals of educating students to think, talk, and write critically
about what they read, hear and see in the media; understand what counts as science; recognize the risks and
benefits    of  scientific  discoveries   and      technologies;    develop   the    confidence    and    skills  to  tackle
science/technology issues independently; "use" experts to answer questions and solve problems; and understand
the nature of science as an ongoing process of exploration with varying opinions or general consensus on
theories, different stakeholders and levels of expertise, and norms for claims and evidence. Korpan, Bisanz, and

                                                        63  ·  © ISLS
                                                ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 2

Bisanz (1997) posit that one of the hallmarks of scientific literacy is "the ability to make effective requests for
information or to ask good questions about scientific research" (p. 518).     We contend that in order to do this, a
student must be able to do the following: evaluate expertise; identify appropriate questions for experts; select
and use multiple credible sources to gain more information; determine coherence between text and image or
graphic; employ effective search strategies for more information.

Research on critically evaluating articles about science is limited (Mallow, 1991). Korpan et al (1997) created a
series of tasks to explore the ways in which students evaluated science information in the form of news articles,
where students were presented with a science article and asked a series of questions such as "what additional
pieces of information would you like to have about the researcher's report to decide whether the conclusion is
correct?" (Korpan et. al., 1994). It is in this vein that we have developed the transfer tasks. These tasks were
developed in the fall and spring of 2008-9.    In the fall of 2009, several teachers are piloting the tasks in their
classrooms. The completed tasks will be used to inform the revision process.       Full implementation will begin in
the fall of 2010 and continue through June of 2012.

Currently there are seven tasks, each of which provide opportunity to gain insight on multiple aspects of a
student's scientific literacy. Examples of the tasks:

    ·   Reading informational text such as a brochure on high blood pressure or the flu; followed by prompts
        such as "What are your risks associated with this?", "Who else would you consult about this to learn
        more?"; "Why would you contact that individual?", and "What questions would you want them to
        answer?".
    ·   Creating interview questions from a news article in conjunction with identifying search terms and
        additional sources.
    ·   Evaluating text and graphics for factual accuracy; suggesting other experts or sources that could help
        determine if it is accurate.

At this point in development (Fall 2009), our team is creating the coding scheme based on the standards and
frameworks for science literacy described above. In the symposium, we will present our coding scheme, results
of our pilot implementation in 2009-2010, and describe any revisions to the instruments and coding intended in
our research during the 2011-2012 academic year.

In order to comprehensively assess scientific literacy in students, a measure must assess conceptual knowledge,
contextualization of information, and   the skills necessary to consume  and produce scientific information. With
the development of these tasks, we aim to provide a more nuanced picture of student scientific literacy, to
inform both educational practice and assessment in science classrooms.

Reframing and Measuring Engagement with Science and Technology ­ Hope,
McCarty, and Polman
This paper focuses on the fourth goal of the Science Literacy through Science Journalism (SciJourn) project:
educating students to become engaged with science and technology, not just in school but throughout their lives.
We believe that the Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) fields need to follow a path
similar to that blazed by Rosenzweig and Thelen (1998) who reframed the discussion of how educated citizens
understood history by conducting research on how citizens in the United States were actually engaged with the
past. We see this as aligned with the framing of science literacy as "public understanding of and engagement
with science and technology."

Many recent studies of science education interventions focus mainly on "engagement" as indicated by student
achievement in the science  classroom (Lichtenstein   et. al, 2008; Markowitz, 2004; Martin, 2005).   Fewer studies
of organized education programs consider science engagement related to students' personal lives.         While still
focused on the outcome of academic achievement, Lau and Roeser (2002) posited that engagement involves
multiple facets, including positive feelings and focused attention during the learning activity as well as amount
of time spent  on  school  assignments    or  other science-related  tasks  during  non-school hours.  Barton  and
colleagues (Basu  &    Barton,  2007;  Furman  and  Barton,    2006) studied  urban minority youth  in after-school
programs, finding that connecting science experiences with students' own future plans, in a social learning
environment that supported student agency, led to what they considered a sustained interest in science and to
shifts in identity. Ethnographic research from the Learning in Informal and Formal Environments Center (e.g.,
Barron, 2006; Zimmerman & Bell (2007), has shown the myriad ways that youth engage with science and
technology  activities in the   out of school hours,  including    personally meaningful experiences  at home  that
school people seldom know about.

                                                     64  ·  © ISLS
                                                   ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 2

Although research shows the public does engage with science and technology, the public's engagement with
free-choice science learning is poorly understood (Falk, et al, 2007) and has not been fully researched (Falk,
et.al, 2007; Korpan, et al, 1997).    Data gathered about books being read, television programs watched, games
played, and Internet searching, could lead to insights of how people learn science and influence practices in
schools (Korpan, et al, 1997).

We believe that a coherent concept of engagement, which captures what is meaningful about the term as it is
generally used, includes three facets: Behavior, or actual involvement with science and technology ideas and
tools; Interest, or openness to and stance toward the science and technology in the moment; and Identity, or
ways that the science and technology connects to people's identity affiliations, in the past, present, and future.
These facets have been operationalized in a small research study that will result in a written survey intended for
broader use.

Following Fowler's (2009) recommendations, the Youth Exploring Science and Technology (YEST) survey
was  developed   based     on previous  surveys    and  the   literature,  utilizing interviews   and verbal  think-aloud
protocols to  refine  the   survey  instrument    with  a   subset    of the project  participant  population, and   then
administered the pilot survey to a broad audience. A select group of seven teen participants in the Saint Louis
Science Center's youth development program contributed to the development of the survey in summer 2009;
case studies  of their     engagement  with    science  and    technology    were    constructed based  on observations,
interviews, and analysis of drafts and final science news articles created by these youth. In addition to this
group, several hundred students of 13 teachers from 10 schools participating in the wider research project were
administered surveys in Fall 2009 (prior to the introduction of science journalism related activities), and will be
administered parallel surveys at the end of the school year.

At this time, the survey consists of five sections: demographics/background (8 questions), science behaviors (10
questions), technology behaviors (20questions), interest in science and technology inside and outside school (12
questions), future (5 questions). Questions relating to identity are interspersed throughout. By June 2010, at the
time of the paper presentation, pilot survey results will be collected, analyzed, and available for inclusion in the
presentation. The revised survey structure and items will be presented as well.

Preliminary results of case studies from Summer 2009 give a sense of how engagement may shift through youth
participation in the  sort    of  science   journalism  practices     taking place   in SciJourn.  Max   (all names   are
pseudonyms)   was  in  the    summer  before   his 12th grade,    and  the survey    revealed he  was highly  engaged  in
reading and consuming technology-oriented media, although he was not otherwise a big reader. He had strong
interests in science and technology, and connected his identity in the present and future with potential computer
technology or science careers. Although he did not have much initial interest in researching and writing science
news stories, and did not see himself as a writer at all, he responded to the challenges put before him, and
produced stories on the program, the health risks of tattoos, and electric cars. Thus, he expanded his engagement
in communicating with others about science and technology, and appears to have begun to refine his identity.
Khadijah was also in the summer before 12th grade, and her identity was tied more to her general interests in
reading, writing, and arguing, and her plans for becoming a lawyer and advocate for youth in foster care. Her
engagement in science news reporting allowed her to connect her identity as a writer with science, especially
social science concerns, such as the school dropout rate for children in foster care, and how social networking
affects the life of teens.

In order to understand the means by which for America's youth connect with learning opportunities, science
educators should better understand how youth are engaged with science and technology in their daily lives. The
Youth Engagement with Science and Technology survey described in this paper stands to provide a more valid
measure   of  engagement      than is presently  available.      With this tool,  programs    can pay   attention to how
individuals with different engagement profiles learn, and can measure the impacts of in-school and out-of-
school programs on engagement.

Building an Apprenticeship Community of Practice for Science Journalism ­ Polman,
Saul, Newman, Pearce, and Graville
Within the SciJourn project we are in the process of building a distributed community of practice centered on
apprenticing students and teachers into the authentic production of a science newspaper we call The SciJourner
(http://www.scijourner.org), with the support of a diverse university team. Since our goals involve fostering and
driving learning through      the  critical consumption    and   production  of  science  news   rather than  maximizing

                                                        65  ·  © ISLS
                                                ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 2

readership or ad sales, the community of practice can be seen as a cognitive apprenticeship (Brown, Collins, &
Duguid, 1989; Collins, Brown, & Newman, 1989) for science learning that is a hybrid of traditional journalism.

Wenger's   (1998) research  revealed    the importance    of  brokering  and  boundary   objects  to the   transfer and
transformation of practices across communities of practice. As described above, the SciJourn project is taking
practices from traditional science journalism, and moving them into a distributed learning environment that
encompasses teachers' classes in multiple schools as well as a youth program at the Saint Louis Science Center.
As a Ph.D. chemist who worked over 20 years as a science journalist and managing editor, Alan Newman has
been our primary agent brokering journalistic practices to our nascent community. In addition, we have a
diverse set of additional science journalism advisors who provide input. Other members of our project team
broker practices from literacy education, journalism education, and science education in formal and informal
learning environments.   Wenger's   concept   of   boundary    objects  refers to  artifacts, documents,    terms,  and
concepts around which communities of practice can organize their interactions. In this paper presentation, we
will describe the brokering and boundary objects that have emerged thus far in our project.

The development of this community thus far has been as follows. In 2008-09, the team of university-based
science educators, literacy educators, researchers and journalists began clarifying the links between science
journalism and science literacy through literature review and the research with professional journalists described
above. At the same time, we implemented what we refer to as "alpha" and "beta" models of a science journalism
curriculum and news writing units in two schools, including the classes of one of our PIs (Farrar). We shared
results of this with our advisory board, a key journalism advisor, our external evaluator, and our partners at
SLSC at two advisory board meetings, to inform our plans for expanding our implementation and research. In
the summer   of  2009,   14 teachers  from   10  high   schools  participated  in the  3-week  SciJourn    professional
development under the direction of Wendy Saul and with the help of Newman and Turley. The teachers also
wrote news  stories  and  produced   a  print edition  of  The  SciJourner   with  Newman     as  editor,  and also co-
developed pilot mini-lessons and science journalism units with us. Also during summer 2009, 8 teenage youth
from the SLSC participated in the project during their summer 5-week youth development and work program,
learning to research and write science news stories, and producing three print editions of The SciJourner with
Newman acting as managing editor, and the support of three SLSC staff including one professional novelist.
During the 2009-2010 school year, the teachers are implementing their own and others' lessons and units and
participating in the research. At the same time the development team, which includes Saul, Newman and Pearce,
visits classes with the express purpose of refining lessons so they can be used in the summer of 2010 and 2011
as  models that  can  be used  for debriefing   and  discussion.   SciJourn   curricula is being  piloted   in biology,
environmental science, physics, physical science, English, research, applied biology and chemistry, chemistry,
and advanced biology classes. The school districts vary by location and SES (rural, urban, suburban and urban
parochial). Although a goal was to implement various aspects of the project during the school year so that
teacher efforts culminated in students writing articles for The SciJourner, several of the teachers are focusing
more heavily on reading than writing. Teachers from the 2009 cohort will meet several times as a group with the
SciJourn team during the year. Individual meetings with the teacher group are also held regularly to focus on
their activities, concerns and to debrief lessons.

Key boundary objects that have emerged thus far in the project include: 1) the genre of science news articles
(beginning with a lede and moving in an "inverted triangle" structure from more important to less important
information) vs. the traditional school-based "5-paragraph essay"; 2) story pitches delivered in a "fishbowl"
activity; and 3) the related notions of sources, credibility and attribution. So far in schools and in the youth
program, teachers and facilitators found that they had to actively work to overcome students' prior experiences
with the 5-paragraph essay structure as normative for all non-fiction writing in schools. The SciJourn team and
teachers have developed ways of revealing and learning the genre, and it has become a boundary object for
moving students out of "writing as usual in school." Journalists traditionally pitch story ideas to editors and
groups before being given the go-ahead on assignments, and we have refined a model for pitches that combines
this practice from the journalism community with a fishbowl structure borrowed from schooling. In our hybrid,
students do some research on story ideas, then one pitches their story to an adult editor as they both sit in the
middle of a circle. The editor asks questions, makes suggestions, and helps the student reporter refine their idea,
and the people around the edges of the circle also chime in. At the end of the pitch, the editor and group decide
whether to move forward on that story. Afterward, the student who made the pitch moves to the editor's chair,
and another student   pitches. In  this way,  learners  experience  modeling   and  coaching     (Collins, Brown,   and
Newman,    1989)  and then  begin  to   appropriate ideas  even  further  as  they are  asked  to model    the ways  of
thinking exhibited by editors. Routinely, students quickly begin asking peers what makes their story interesting
to readers (contextualization), what or who their potential sources are, etc. Finally, the journalistic notions of
using multiple sources, concern with the credibility or reliability of sources, and attributing sources are all

                                                     66  ·  © ISLS
                                               ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 2

becoming part of the vernacular of science classes in a way that they were not previously. The science teachers
in our project have been receptive to these terms and the thinking behind them, and they are implementing them
in reading-focused activities in school that take less time than having students write and research new stories.

Several additional instances   of people  brokering  practices    and their  possible variations   within this  nascent
community of practice are worth noting. The persona and manner that Newman takes on with students both in
schools and in the youth program, as a professional editor focused on ideas and concepts in the draft and final
products, makes for different feedback norms than most students have previously experienced. In several cases,
students have been surprised at the amount of markup provided by Newman in electronic documents returned
by him using Microsoft Word's Track Changes. Early on, we began looking for ways to introduce changed
attitudes toward extensive feedback as productive rather than merely providing negative judgment, as many
traditional school papers with "a lot of red" would signify. We have also pushed the notion that "science and
technology can be connected to anything" in order to welcome individual learners' interests and story ideas, but
we know that school curricular requirements as well as the knowledge of facilitators will sometimes limit the
possibilities for transforming personal topic interests (e.g., tattoos, social networking) into science news stories.
Teachers with different backgrounds and in different subject areas (biology, chemistry, environmental science,
or English) bring varying assets and vary in what sorts of science news relates to their learning goals. Thus, we
will monitor   how   different classes,   contexts, and      facilitators deal differentially with    welcoming    and
transforming student ideas into stories.

Conclusion
This symposium will present a reframing of the notion of science literacy, exploring the projects' progress at
fostering a scientifically literate citizenry through a focus on the practices and ways of thinking developed by
journalists. Implications for research on learning and educational practice will be discussed.

References
American Association for the Advancement of Science. (1989) Science for all Americans. Washington, D.C.
Barron, B.  (2006).  Interest  and  self-sustained  learning   as catalysts   of development:    A   learning   ecology
        perspective. Human Development, 49, 193-224.
Basu, S. J., and Barton, A. C. (2007). Developing a sustained interest in science among urban minority youth.
        Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 44(3), 466-489.
Bodmer, W. (1985). The public understanding of science. Royal Society: London.
Brown, J. S., Collins, A., & Duguid, P. (1989). Situated cognition and the culture of learning. Educational
        Researcher(January-February), 32-42.
Collins, A., Brown, J. S., & Newman, S. E. (1989). Cognitive apprenticeship:          Teaching the craft of reading,
        writing, and mathematics. In L. B. Resnick (Ed.), Knowing, learning, and instruction:         Essays in honor
        of Robert Glaser (pp. 453-494). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
DeBoer, G. E. (2000). Scientific literacy: Another look at its historical and contemporary meanings and its
        relationships to science education reform. Journal of Research in Science Teaching 37(6), 582­601.
Department of Education, Institute of Education Sciences. http://nces.ed.gov/programs/coe/glossary/s.asp
Devlin, K. (1998). Rather than scientific literacy, colleges should teach scientific awareness. American Journal
        of Physics 66(7), 559­560.
diSessa, A. A. (2006). A history of conceptual change research: Threads and fault lines. In R. K. Sawyer (Ed.),
        Cambridge handbook of the learning sciences. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Edelson, D. C., & Reiser, B. J (2006). Making authentic practices accessible to learners: Design challenges and
        strategies. In R. K. Sawyer (Ed.), Cambridge handbook of the learning sciences. Cambridge, UK:
        Cambridge University Press.
Eisenhart, M., Finkel,  E.,   Marion, S.   F. (1996).   Creating   the    conditions  for scientific  literacy: A  Re-
        Examination. American Educational Research Journal 33(2), 261­295.
Falk, J.H., Storksdieck, M., & Dierking, L.D. (2007).     Investigating public science interest and understanding:
        Evidence for  the importance of free-choice learning.     Public Understanding of Science, 16, 455-469.
Fensham, P. J. (2004). Increasing the Relevance of Science and Technology Education for All Students in the
        21st Century. Science Education International 15(1), 7­26.
Fowler, F.J. (2009). Survey research methods. Thousand Oaks, California:         SAGE Publications, Inc.
Furman,  M., and   Barton, A.  C.  (2006). Capturing   urban   student    voices in  the  creation of a science  mini-
        documentary. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 43(7), 667-694.
House of Lords (2000). Science and society. Her Majesty's Stationary Office: London.
Hurd, P. D. (1998). Scientific literacy: New minds for a changing world. Science Education 82(3), 407­416.
Korpan, C. A., Bisanz, G. L., & Bisanz, J. (1997). Assessing literacy in science: Evaluation of scientific news
        briefs. Science Education, 81(5), 515-532.

                                                    67  ·  © ISLS
                                                   ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 2

Korpan, C.A., Bisanz, G.L., Boehme, C., & Lynch, M.A. (1997).              What did you learn outside of school today?
         Using   structured  interviews    to  document     home   and   community   activities  related  to science and
         technology.    Science Education, 81, 651-662.
Korpan, C. A., Bisanz, G. L., Dukewich, T., Robinson, K. M., Bisanz, J., Thibodeau, M., Hubbard, K. E., &
         Leighton,   J.  P. (1994).     Assessing    scientific  literacy: A   taxonomy  for  classifying questions  and
         knowledge about scientific research (Tech. Rep. No. 94-1). Edmonton, AB, Canada: University of
         Alberta, Center for Research in Child Development.
Krajcik, J., et al. (1998). Inquiry in project-based science classrooms: Initial attempts by middle school students.
         The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 7(3 & 4), 313-350.
Lave, J., & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning:         Legitimate peripheral participation. Cambridge: Cambridge
         University Press.
Lau, S., &   Roeser,    R. W.   (2002).  Cognitive   abilities   and  motivational  processes   in high  school  students'
         situational engagement and achievement in science. Educational Assessment, 8(2), 139-162.
Laugksch, R. (2000). Scientific literacy: A conceptual overview. Science Education, 84(1), 71-94.
Laugksch, R. & Spargo, P.       (1996). Development of a pool of scientific literacy test-items based on selected
         AAAS literacy goals.     Science Education, 80(2), 121-143
Lehrer, R., & Schauble, L. (2006). Cultivating model-based reasoning in science education. In R. K. Sawyer
         (Ed.), Cambridge handbook of the learning sciences. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Lemke,  J. L. (1990).   Talking science:   Language, learning, and values.      Norwood,   NJ: Ablex.
Lichtenstein,   M.  J., Owen,   S. V.,  Blalock,    C.  L., Liu,  Y.,  Ramirez,   K. A.,   Pruski, L. A.,  et al.  (2008).
         Psychometric reevaluation of the scientific attitude inventory-revised (SAI-II). Journal of Research in
         Science Teaching, 45(5), 600-616.
Mallow, J. V. (1991). Reading science.      Journal of Reading, 34, 324-338.
Markowitz,   D.  G.  (2004).  Evaluation    of the   long-term   impact    of a university high  school  summer    science
         program on students' interest and perceived abilities in science. Journal of Science Education and
         Technology, 13(3).
Martin,  A.  J. (2005).    Exploring   the effects   of a  youth   enrichment    program   on academic    motivation and
         engagement. Social Psychology of Education, 8(2), 179-206.
Micheals, S., Shouse, A. W., & Schweingruber, H. A. (2008). Ready, set, science! Putting research to work in
         K-8 science classrooms. Washington, DC: National Academies Press.
National Research Council. (1996). National science education standards. Washington, DC: National Academy
         Press.
National Research Council. (2000). Inquiry and the national science education standards: A guide for teaching
         and learning. Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
Norris, S. P. (1995).   Learning to live with scientific expertise: Towards a theory of intellectual communalism
         for guiding science teaching.     Science Education, 79, 201-217.
O'Neill, D. K., & Polman, J. L. (2004). Why educate "little scientists?" Examining the potential of practice-
         based scientific literacy. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 41(3), 234-266.
Pea, R. D. (1993). The collaborative visualization project. Communications of the ACM, 36(5), 60-63.
Polman, J. L., Saul, E. W., Newman, A., and Farrar, C. (2008). Science literacy through science journalism.
         Proposal to the National Science Foundation Discovery Research K12 program. Unpublished report.
Rosebery,   A.  S., Warren,   B.,  &   Conant,    F. R.  (1992).   Appropriating   scientific discourse:  Findings   from
         language minority classrooms. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 2(1), 61-94.
Rosenzweig, R., and Thelen, D. (1998). The presence of the past: Popular uses of history in American life. New
         York: Columbia University Press.
Ruopp,   R., Gal,   S., Drayton,   B., &   Pfister,  M. (Ed.).   (1993).   LabNet:   Toward   a  community    of practice.
         Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Schwartz, D. L., & Heiser, J (2006). Spatial representations and imagery in learning. In R. K. Sawyer (Ed.),
         Cambridge handbook of the learning sciences. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Shamos, M. (1995). The myth of scientific literacy. Rutgers University Press: New Brunswick, N.J.
Trefil, J. (1996). Scientific literacy. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences 775, 543­550.
Turner,  S.  (2008). School   science   and   its controversies:   or whatever    happened   to science  literacy? Public
         Understanding of Science 17, 55­72.
Zimmerman, H. T. & Bell, P. (2007, April). Seeing, doing, and describing everyday science: Mapping images of
         science across school, community, and home boundaries. Paper presented at National Association of
         Research in Science Teaching (NARST), New Orleans, LA.

Acknowledgments
We are grateful for the support of the National Science Foundation, under Grant No. DRL-0822354, which has
made this research possible. The opinions expressed are solely the responsibility of the authors.

                                                        68  ·  © ISLS
