                                              ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

                  "I study features; believe me, I should know!"
                  The mediational role of distributed expertise
                       in the development of student authority

                                Jennifer M. Langer-Osuna, University of Miami
                 222 Merrick Building, Coral Gables, FL, 33124 USA, jlangerosuna@miami.edu
                               Randi A. Engle, University of California, Berkeley
                    4641 Tolman Hall, Berkeley, CA, 94720 USA, raengle@berkeley.edu

         Abstract: This paper examines the development of student authority in a case of one student
         assigned the  role of topic   expert in  a classroom    that  utilized distributed expertise   as a
         participation structure during collaborative projects. Using video data of a heated student-led
         debate, we show how this student successfully positioned himself with greater authority than
         recognized adult experts, despite the fact that his evidence was often weak given classroom
         norms. He was able to do so for two reasons. First, he utilized his role as topic expert to
         position himself with authority and discredit others, including the recognized adult experts.
         Second, he drew on student allies that supported his position. We conclude with implications
         of this paper for  how    participation structures may   mediate   the  development   of powerful
         student identities, and function in concert with other interactional factors in the classroom.

Introduction
Many math and science classrooms have shifted toward a sociocultural view of education, in which learning
occurs through interactions among students, and between students and the teacher. A central feature of such
classrooms is to have students work collaboratively in structured ways designed to support their engagement in
disciplinary ideas and practices. Participation structures, such as using a "round robin" to share ideas (Langer-
Osuna, 2007; Saxe et al., 2005), the jigsaw method for sharing expertise (Brown & Campione, 1994), or the use
of student group roles (Cohen & Lotan, 1995; Herrenkohl & Guerra, 1998) afford students opportunities to
think through and  debate   ideas, to judge ideas   as reasonable,  and  to gain  a sense   of ownership   over their
learning. Participation structures are also designed to support more equitable engagement in collaborative tasks
(Cohen & Lotan, 1997). If each student is expected to contribute ideas in a structured fashion, then it is less
likely students will become privileged in or marginalized from group discussions.
         Recent studies, however, have shown that the goals of equitable, collaborative learning are difficult to
accomplish even with such participation structures because students tend to construct inequitable relations of
authority among themselves (Bianchini, 1999; Kurth, Anderson, & Palinscar, 2002). For instance, Esmonde and
Langer-Osuna (2009) found that relational power among students--including social authority such as friendship
and popularity, and academic authority such as being considered smart--still played a large role in how students
negotiated  group discussions  despite  classroom   norms   valuing multiple    competencies.  Engle,   McKinney  de
Royston, Langer-Osuna,   Bergan,    and Mazzei    (2007)   found  that some     students illegitimately gained  more
influence and authority over others in a discussion in part by differentially making use of tactics to gain greater
access to the discussion despite classroom norms designed to promote equitable turn-taking.
         Understanding how students become positioned with authority is important to the goal of supporting
productive student-led discussions (Engle & Conant, 2002; Gresalfi, Martin, Hand, & Greeno, 2009). Students
positioned with authority participate more frequently in small groups, are more able to gain access to and hold
the conversational floor, decide what is correct, be seen as contributing more meritorious ideas, and become
more influential than students perceived as having less social or academic authority (Cohen, 1997; Inglis &
Mejia-Ramos, 2009; Langer-Osuna, 2009). Being positioned with authority supports engagement because the
student is in a position to judge what is correct or incorrect, and to initiate or close down group discussion
(Esmonde & Langer-Osuna, 2009). Such privileged engagement and influence can occur not only in classroom
using participation structures, but even when the students positioned with authority make claims that are not as
objectively meritorious as those made by others (Engle, et al., 2007; Kurth, Anderson, & Palinscar, 2002).
         This paper focuses on how a particular participation structure, the role of being a local expert mediated
the assigned student's position of authority in coordination with his and other students' actions. The classroom
used a participation structure called distributed expertise, in which students were assigned particular topics to
research and become experts in, and then teach what they have learned to other students (Brown et al., 1993). In
particular, we explain how this student, Brian, ultimately became positioned with authority because: (a) he
utilized his role as features expert in order to position himself with greater authority than other students and
even adult professionals; and (b) he made use of potential allies who took up his position of authority.

                                                   612  ·  © ISLS
                                              ICLS 2010    ·   Volume 1

Data Collection and Analytic Strategies
In classrooms that utilize distributed expertise, students are treated like researchers who gather, analyze, and
share information about a particular topic, gradually developing expertise in that specialty area (Brown et al.,
1993). Our paper is situated in one such classroom, in which students were researching different endangered
species.  Students in this classroom established their expertise when they showed that they could provide a
legitimate answer to any reasonable question about their topics (Engle & Conant, 2002).
         We analyze a case of nine fifth graders who engaged in a student-led debate (Engle & Conant, 2002;
Engle, et al., 2007) that arose unexpectedly the day after a field trip to Marine World, then a science learning
center. During the orca (i.e., killer whale) show one of the trainers stated that orcas were not whales, but rather
the largest member of the dolphin family. Soon before going to Marine World and after a long struggle, this
particular group of fifth graders had finally proven themselves to have sufficient expertise about whales to be
allowed to create a bulletin board about their research for the rest of the school. As part of that,Brian had been
established as the local expert on the anatomical features of whales. Thus, when the Marine World trainers
mentioned the orca's large dorsal fin as being relevant to their assertion that orcas were not whales, this was
taken up as a direct challenge to the group's, and especially Brian's, hard-fought authority. In the face of what is
typically a greater source of authority ­ adult professionals ­ Brian stood firm on his position as an "expert" on
whale features. Thus he sought to position himself as more credible than the adult professionals.
         We view the case of Brian as a revelatory case (Yin, 2001) as it is more dramatic than typical student-
led discussions, thereby highlighting how issues of authority are negotiated vis-à-vis student roles in interaction.
Indeed, the student-led debate was loud and intense, and Brian successfully utilized his role as features expert to
convince all but one student that he was a more credible source of information than the Marine World trainers
and, later, the author of a science book about whales. The dramatic nature of this debate illuminates the ways in
which such participation structures as distributed expertise can mediate not only the participation of a particular
student in a given role, but also the interactions among students, and how students get positioned as a result. The
processes  of mediated  student interactions and     positioning   occur  in  collaborative discussions that utilize
participation structures. Our goal, then, is to explore the relationship between these processes, and how they
explain the development of positions of authority.
         The primary data source utilized here is a 27-minute videotape of the student-led debate.       Video was
recorded by a mostly fixed Hi-8 camcorder that captured the circularly arranged group from the side and was
connected to a radio microphone placed in the center of the group. Video data were coded and organized into an
analytical transcript that was divided into columns (Barron & Engle, 2007; Jordan & Henderson, 1995) for
words and actions relevant to: (a) making claims about whether orcas are whales or dolphins, and (b) indications
of being  influenced by particular students; (c)    type   of evidence   used to support those  claims, and  (d) the
perceived authority of sources of evidence; (e) the management of the conversational floor and interactional
space; and (e) a miscellaneous column for all other words and actions.      Multifunctional words and   actions were
included in multiple columns. This analytical transcript was originally used for previous analysis that considered
multiple factors explaining students' differential influence during this student-led debate (Engle, et al. 2007;
Engle, Langer-Osuna, & McKinney de Royston, 2008). Of the four explanatory factors, students' negotiated
levels of authority were particularly central. This, in this paper, we go beyond previous analyses to unpack
exactly how Brian developed a position of authority vis-à-vis other students during this student-led debate.
         To understand how Brian developed a position of authority, we coded for events that signaled a shift in
each student's position with respect to authority. A person was considered to be positioned with authority on a
topic to the degree that he or she was evaluated, acted, or was treated as being credible. A shift in a student's
perceived authority could be signaled by statements that contained explicit evaluations of his or her credibility
(e.g., "He's features expert, he should know"), statements or actions that evidenced that student being treated as
an authority (e.g. one student asking another to give them the correct answer and recording it without request for
justification), or the student acting like an authority without anyone contesting it (e.g., "Believe me, I should
know" with no one else objecting). For each shift in students' perceived authority, we then noted the student
interactions that preceded the shift. Patterns of interaction were compiled into categories (Guba & Lincoln,
1982), which served as a basis for characterizing the interactions that explained the development of Brian's
position of authority in this student-led debate.

Characterizing Changes in Brian's Authority During the Student-Led Debate
We begin with an analytical narrative (Angelillo, Rogoff & Chavajay, 2007) based on the coded, analytical
transcript. The narrative describes the key events of the debate relevant to characterizing how Brian's authority
developed. Because another student, Samantha, was the most vocal opponent to Brian, changes in her authority,
which increasingly became oppositionally paired with Brian's, are also described.

Early in the Debate, Both Brian and Samantha Positioned with Similar Levels of Authority

                                                    613  ·  © ISLS
                                               ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

At the start of the debate, both Brian and Samantha were generally oriented to as having higher authority than
other students in the group. Brian was recognized as the expert on whale anatomical features, his assigned role
for the project. In contrast, Samantha was often oriented to by the teacher and other students as a good student
who knew things, which was evidenced by another student's comment at one point in the debate that "we all
goin' against Samantha; we better be right." (line 420). Samantha's authority also may have been strengthened
given her recent influence in the hallway debate about whether to include orcas on their bulletin board. Early in
the debate (through line 97), Brian's authority was given additional boosts by the teacher who represented him
as having "serious points" that should be considered.

Brian's Authority Was Challenged
During the next phase of the debate (lines 97-180), Brian's authority was challenged on three occasions when
the quality of his evidence was evaluated as being low. First, Brian's and Samantha's credibility were both
challenged   when  the   teacher declared that only  one  student,  Jonah, had   thus far  presented   evidence.  His
arguments had used documentary sources (lines 50-52) while theirs had not. Brian and Samantha then argued
back and forth for opposing positions with no resolution while each implied that the other had lower credibility.
This started to put their positions of authority in opposition. Next, Brian's authority received an additional
downgrade by the teacher who required him to provide a more well-justified argument before she left the group
to attend to other groups. As the teacher left, a next student, Toscan, took up Brian's role as features expert by
asking him for key facts about whales' anatomy. However, Brian's role as expert was weakened further as
Jonah used new documentary evidence to contradict Brian's claims, which Toscan subsequently acknowledged.

Brian's Authority Steadily Increased
A transition occurred during the next episode (lines 181-379) when Samantha began defending the authority of
the trainers. Brian then began arguing for his superior authority on the topic due to his role as features expert.
Toscan defended Brian as having greater authority than the trainers, and presumably anyone else who might
wish to argue against Brian. Several other students joined Brian's side of the argument during this time. Later,
after having difficulties getting selected for turns, Samantha interrupted to argue against Brian's presumptions
that he was a scientist and that the trainers were not, but was stopped first by Brian and then Toscan.
         In the debate's climax (lines 380-435), Brian made a point against the trainers' authority that was
oriented to as high quality and in response three more students publicly declared allegiance to Brian's side while
one strengthened her commitment to it, with Brian and his allies celebrating after each success. It began with a
rolling chorus  of student  agreements   to Brian's point   about  the trainers not being  experts   as one   of them
confused how many teeth orcas have as compared to dolphins. At this point in the debate, most students had
aligned with Brian. Jonah then got the floor and argued that the book he was using as documentary evidence to
challenge Brian's credibility offered contradicting information, discrediting the book's authority. Gaining Jonah
as an ally was interpreted by Brian and Toscan as meaning they had "won" the argument. Finally, Brian got
Jonah to call on a still unaffiliated student, Sione, who also declared allegiance with Brian's side. The teacher
then called to the group to wrap up the debate, and Brian concluded, "I rest my case."

Analyzing the Development of Student Authority
Our analyses,   described  below,  show   that Brian   became  positioned  with   and  sustained   relatively greater
authority primarily because: (1) he utilized his role as "features expert" to mediate his position of authority vis-
à-vis others; and (2) he made effective use of potential allies who took up his position of authority.

The Role of Expert as a Resource that Brian Used to Position Himself with Authority
Brian engaged in particular forms of interactions that served to maintain his position as expert on whale features
and become positioned with relatively greater authority than others: (a) he highlighted the relevance of his role,
while (b) personalizing his expertise beyond the role itself; and (c) he simultaneously redefined the trainers as
non-scientists, and then (d) linked the discredited trainers with Samantha, which reduced her credibility.

The Relevance of Brian's Role as Features Expert Was Made Central to the Debate
Brian's role as features expert was germane to the debate that erupted among students after the Marine World
fieldtrip. That is, to decide whether orcas were actually whales, an understanding of the anatomical features of
whales would be critical. However, other sources of information contradicted his conclusion that, because of
similarities of anatomical  features, orcas were  indeed    whales. Students drew   on    these sources of evidence,
which   included a book   on  whales, to  argue against   Brian's conclusions.  Because    classroom   norms  valued
backing up arguments with sources of evidence, the information offered in the book became more central to the
debate. Indeed, early in the debate when the teacher was still present, she stated that only one student, who had
drawn   on   information from a   book, had  thus far  used  any  evidence  despite   the fact  that Brian had   cited

                                                   614  ·  © ISLS
                                                        ICLS 2010    ·   Volume 1

particular features of orcas that were similar to whales. In doing so, Brian's "knowledge" of anatomical features
became less central than the information gleaned from the book or even from the trainers during the field trip.
         Thus, in order for Brian to claim a position of authority, he needed to make his role as features expert
just as central a source of information as books or the trainers. In the excerpt below, Brian positioned his role as
features expert as a central source of information:
51       Brian:  Oh   . . it's   .   .     it's kinda   it seems like it's not true [that orcas are dolphins]
52               because   .   .   um in all the research
53               everything I've done on/ on killer whales .                 .   .  .
54               it points to that they are whales
                 (+ signifies Brian's gestures for emphasis)
55               the +blubber        .   . the+blowhole     .   .   the +eyes       . . the +teeth
56               it points out     .   .   that they're a whale
Brian's phrases "in all the research" and "everything I've done" (lines 52-53) emphasize that he had done a lot
of work on his route to becoming an expert and had gathered much information, such that his conclusions (lines
54, 56) ought to be considered credible.
         However, his conclusions were challenged by some of the other students who drew on other sources of
evidence that suggested that these similarities also extended to dolphins. Thus, as in the following statement,
and in many other moments (included in other sections below), Brian positioned his role as features expert itself
as making him a central authority in the debate:
199      Brian:  I study FEATURES              .   . believe me I should know           .   .   I should know   .  .
When other students, in particular Samantha, asserted that the trainers were also in positions of authority on the
topic by virtue  of their profession,        Brian      sought    to   expand      his  expertise   by     personalizing  it beyond   the
classroom role to Brian himself being an authority on the issues relevant to the debate.

Brian personalized his expertise beyond the role itself
Brian personalized his expertise so it transcended his classroom role as features expert by claiming that he as a
person was an authority on issues pertinent to the debate:
226-7    Brian:            I've known a lot about whales                 .   before I started researching .     .
...
498-9                      I::   .   know      .a lot about whales personally before I even started               researching this  .  .
500                        so nothing's that new to me               . . .     .
Brian defended his position of authority by claiming that his expertise went beyond the role of features expert to
include the contents of his individual mind (line 290), which existed prior to the assigned role (lines 498-500),
and was inaccessible for critique (line 291-2).

Brian redefined the trainers' role to that of non-scientist
At the same time, Brian simultaneously defended his position of authority by redefining the trainers' role to that
of a non-scientist. Brian's role as classroom expert on the anatomical features of whales gave him particular
tasks to complete, which included researching, documenting, and sharing information about whale features with
his group, the class as a whole, the rest of the school, and any adults who might engage with the class (seeEngle
& Conant, 2002). Brian's specific tasks were well-defined and easily defended to the other students as engaging
in "real research." Brian thus argued that the role of Marine World trainers included little more than performing
with dolphins and included little of the real work of scientists like himself.
         In the excerpts  below,         Brian     contrasted   his    and   the    trainers'     roles, asserting that   they were   not
comparable in expertise:
221-3    Brian:  I study FEATURES              .   . believe me I should know           .   .   I should know   .  .
224-5            they TRAI:N whales              .   . there's a BIG old difference           . .
...
369-70   Brian:  okay I'm    gonna change and be one of the persons who works at Marine World
371-3            for the whale training            . . [ I apply for a job       .  um    .   and then my boss tellsme
374-6            .  .   take this stick      .   .   tap [ the water   .   .   and then the whale will come up
...
387-8            and I know a        LOT about whales,          AND I've         REsearched it       .   .
...
478-9    Brian:  like they're really sci:entists          /they just apply for a job one day
480              got told a little bit about it         .
481              and they've been working with the whales ever since                        .   .
In lines 221-225, Brian directly contrasted the two roles and asserted that he, unlike the trainers, actually studied
the anatomical  features  of whales.         The     trainers,  instead,     were     simply    employees     who    were told  by their
employers what to do to make the whale come out of the water during the show, and perhaps told also a "tiny

                                                            615   ·    © ISLS
                                                  ICLS 2010   ·   Volume 1

bit" about whales (lines 224, 379-381, 480). Toward the end of the debate, Brian directly challenged their
expertise by sarcastically stating, "like they're really scientists" (line 478).
         By engaging in such interactions with the group, Brian positioned himself as a more valid source of
information than the trainers by virtue of their contrasting roles. Brian's role as features expert positioned him
as a "real scientist", while the trainers' role was redefined to include little more than following directions.

The discredited trainers became linked to Samantha's credibility
In the course of the student-led debate, Samantha became the most vocal supporter of the trainers' credibility.
She was considered to be someone who gave evidence-backed arguments. Indeed, prior analysis of this data
(see Engle, et al., 2007, Appendix A) indicated that Samantha's arguments during the focal student-led debate
were more objectively meritorious than Brian's arguments. Thus, in order to reduce Samantha's credibility as a
student with valid arguments to consider in the debate, Brian (and his allies) effectively linked Samantha's
credibility with  that of  the discredited  trainers. Because      the   trainers'  authority was,   in essence,  directly in
opposition to Brian's, Samantha's authority became oppositionally linked to Brian's.
         In the following excerpt, Samantha was positioned as knowing less than Brian, even though at the start
of debate, and throughout the year, Samantha was considered to be a student with high academic status.
410-1    Samantha:           I see (your point of view) but still   .  .   is . that [the trainers know better than us]
412-3    Jonah:              still what?  [Toscan puts hand down, Jonah's is still up]
414-5    Brian:              (to Samantha) At      first you're TOtally convinced that a killer whale is a whale      .  . .
416-7                        THEN you find out just from ONE person             . from ONE moment       .
418                          that it's a dol]phin.
...
447-8    Brian:              [the trainers know better than] you      do   .  . better than . YOU     do  . .
449                          I::: know  what I:'m   talkin' about
The excerpt above followed after Samantha asserted that the students should believe the trainers because they
likely knew  more    about   whales  and dolphins   than    the   students did.   Some  of  the  students  then pointed  out
mistakes they   recalled  the  trainers  making    during   their  performance     in order   to discredit  them. Samantha
conceded their point and had begun formulating a counter-response (lines 411-412) but was then interrupted and
criticized for believing, not an expert, but rather "one person from one moment" (lines 416-417). Brian then
shifted the nature of the criticism to be about Samantha herself, stating that the trainers, if anything, knew more
than she did (lines 447-448) but not more than he did (line 449). In doing so, Brian first linked Samantha's and
the trainers' credibility, and then demoted Samantha as knowing less than even the discredited trainers.

Allies Took Up and Supported Brian's Position of Authority
Brian's moves to position himself with greater authority than even adult professionals could not be successful
by themselves. Other students could have rejected his attempts to position himself in such ways, negotiated an
alternative positioning with him, or taken up his proposed positioning as having greater authority (Clark, 1996).
         In order to encourage the latter to occur, Brian engaged in several kinds of interactions that served to
gain and maintain allies, including taking credit for arguments stated by others, and rousing students' desires to
be his ally rather than foe. We then see evidence that students rallied in support of Brian's credibility, joining in
the criticisms of the trainers, Samantha, and even the book author, while aligning with and building on Brian's
arguments or the arguments of others that Brian had claimed as his.

Brian gained authority by taking credit for others' points that supported his side of the debate
Brian often positioned himself with authority during the debate, which was at times taken up or challenged by
the other students. Brian was able to increase uptake of his position of authority by aligning with, and taking
credit for, points made by others that had been oriented to as compelling in the debate. In the following excerpt,
Brian claimed another student's point and was later credited with that point by a third student:
213-4    Jonelle: if .  if   they're dolphins why do they call them killer whales?       .  .
215               why don't they call them      [ (killer dolphins?)
216      Brian:   My point exactly    .  .
...
234      Toscan:  ok, Brian has a very good point     .   . .   .
235-6             when     . . the killer whales,   if they're called    .
237-8             and   Jonelle, if the killer whales are called killer whales      .
239               why are they saying NOW that they're dolphins
Jonelle argued that orcas, also known as killer whales, were likely to be whales because their name includes the
term "whales," not "dolphins" (lines 213-215). Brian immediately then exclaimed, "my point exactly" (line 216)
claiming the  idea as  his.  Moments     later, Toscan    attributed   the  point  to Brian   (lines 234)   and repeated the
argument, mentioning Jonelle as linked to this point only in passing(line 237).

                                                      616   ·   © ISLS
                                                   ICLS 2010        ·  Volume 1

         During the debate Brian frequently used the phrase "my point exactly" or later simply "exactly" (lines
41, 44, 216, 620-621, 659, 695, 721) in response to others' points for the orcas-as-whales view and then got the
last word at the very end of the debate, saying, "I rest my case" (line 836).               In essence, Brian successfully took
ownership of many of the arguments offered by others that supported his side of the debate, positioning himself
as the leader of the "orcas as whales" side, and the other students as merely supporting his side of the debate.

Brian created in students a desire to align with him rather than against him
In addition to gaining allies by essentially becoming the figurehead of successful points, Brian also created in
students a desire to align with him by dramatically celebrating when students took up his position through
cheers and high-fives while also creating an intimidating climate for disagreeing.
         Brian   loudly and   excitedly    celebrated     when      students  announced     either switching  to or confirming
support  for his side  of   the student-led    debate.    For   instance,    in response    to a  claim  that supported Brian's
attempts to discredit the trainers, Brian loudly and excitedly exclaimed, "Yup, yeah you're right! You're right!
You're   hecka right!"  Moments       later, Brian  exclaimed,        "whooo!"    in support   of  another student  contributing
arguments that also positioned her on the orcas-as-whales side. Directly after this, several students shot their
hands up to speak next. From that point on, the majority of students in the group shared cheers, high-fives, and
animated talk as they contributed to the orcas-as-whales side of the argument, creating a snowball effect of
support for Brian's position of authority in the debate(Anderson, et al., 2001).
         For instance, in the excerpt below, Brian dramatically celebrated after Jonah read information from the
book Album of Whales that could be understood to support the claim that orcas are not dolphins:
647-8    Jonah:   (holding up book)       it says right here      . that   um . wha/ that .  um
649-50            that  wha/    . that um dolphins are beaked wha/            .   beaked whales    . . a family
651-2             (looks up from book)       killer whales are not even/        . don't even have have a beak
653      Brian:   A::::::::::::::::::::::H (screeches; Brian jumps up and down, in and out of chair)
654      (Brian high five's Toscan and Sione)         .   .   . .   We WON!
...
665-7  . .  we convinced him      . we convinced him we convinced him
...
672      (Brian jumps up from chair, turns around dancing in place three times, lifting right and left arms in air
         alternately, and says in sing-song voice)
673      HALLELUIA, that's the way
Jonah offered evidence that dolphins are considered "beaked whales" (lines 647-650) and noted that orcas do
not have a beak (line 651-652). This was Jonah's first contribution supporting the orcas-as-whales side; his
previous contributions, which all used high-status and high-quality documentary evidence, tended to support the
opposing view. Brian dramatically celebrated Jonah's contribution, which he interpreted as signaling that Jonah
had switched sides. Brian jumped in and out of his chair, screamed, gave high-fives to nearby students, danced
around, and even yelled out, "Halleluia" in praise of gaining a new ally in Jonah, also a high-status student.
         These celebrations were coupled with harsh responses to Samantha's challenges of Brian's position of
authority, which  may   have    dissuaded     other students        from   also challenging    him.  For instance,  Brian often
groaned in protest, or aggressively pointed or gestured to Samantha when she challenged his credibility. Over
time, other students, as examined below, even jumped on the bandwagon of trying to intimidate Samantha.

Allies tag-team in a snowballing increase of support for Brian's credibility and against others
Most of the students ultimately supported Brian's position of authority in the debate. They positioned his role as
features expert as central, discredited the trainers and the book author, and took up his arguments.
         For instance, in the excerpt below, Toscan defended the centrality of Brian's role as features expert:
253      Toscan:  if Brian is studying features     .   .
254               why didn't HE get the information before Jonah                did  .   .
255               because he was studying it a lot more and              . .
256               every book      that   he got said whales and now they're saying           . .
257               "OH yeah        they're dolphins"     .   .
Toscan challenged the credibility of Jonah's argument, based on evidence he found in a book, by drawing on
Brian's role as features expert. He claimed that Brian, as features expert (line 218) had researched far more than
Jonah (or other students) had (line 220), and had considered more than just one book (line 221). In doing so, he
took up Brian's role as features expert as central to the argument,and Brian as a credible source of information.
         Students also joined Brian's attempts to discredit the trainers. In the excerpt below, Liana built on
Brian's assertion that the trainers were not really experts and therefore not believable:
607      Liana:   [OH!    . .   oh  .  . oh    .  . (raising her hand excitedly)
608               A:::ND    .   she probably didn't even know           .
609-10            because she was probably just there, for a little whi::le            .

                                                        617      ·  © ISLS
                                               ICLS 2010    ·  Volume 1

612             and then she just made it [up
Liana contributed to Brian's effort to re-define the role of the trainers as non-scientists. She claimed that the
trainer "probably didn't even know", had been there for just "a little while", and had "made up" the information
offered at the show (lines 608-610). Finally, the other students joined Brian in trying (though unsuccessfully) to
intimidate Samantha to change her position. In this excerpt from late in the debate, Samantha was hassled in
multiple ways for continuing to disagree with Brian:
425     Samantha:          okay . so   .  well   .   I still don't believe it
426-7                      becu:z  .  I don't  think she said that, "I think"     . .  .]
428     Jonah:             [she did too]
429     Samantha:          [what I remember is     .
430-1                      her saying that   . . that "we have figured out that        .  . . .  .  .
432-3   Brian:             (holding  tape recorder to    Samantha)  Talk!      .  .  .  . talk   .    .  .   .]
434     Sione:             (holding microphone within inches of Samantha's face)                [Talk!     . .
435-6   Brian:             (to Samantha) C'mon, just forget it.
437     Samantha:          the whale/  ok   . the killer whale
441                        is a probably  .   a dolphin   becuz  .
442                        I think they know better what they're talking about than we do/]
443     Jonah:             [PRO:BABLY?
444-5   Brian:             NO!  . .    (MAKE THAT BETTER THAN                  . YO::U!     DO!    .  .]
446     Jonah:             [chuckling]   probably
Samantha   was frequently  interrupted   here  (lines  428,   432-436,  443-445)       and  earlier,  but    she successfully
reclaimed the floor (lines 419-425, 429-431, 437-442). In response, Brian and his allies sought to intimidate
Samantha by placing the researchers' microphone directly in her face, spatially crowding her, and yelling at her
to "talk!" (lines 432-434, and later), while Brian then calmly and almost dismissively urged her to "c'mon, just
forget it" (line 435-436). When Samantha persevered (lines 437-442), Jonah and Brian ridiculed her.
        As dramatic as these interactions may have been, once the students were regrouped as a class with the
teacher, opportunities to address Brian's domination arose. In the ensuing weeks of the unit as the students
continued to debate the question, the teacher continually emphasized the importance of considering evidence
and discouraged  students, including   Brian,  from    declaring   victory.   Students    found    additional    evidence for
Samantha's side. By the end of the unit when Brian wrote about the controversy in his part of the group's report,
he represented it as a stalemate with evidence for both sides. This made sense given that orcas can be considered
to be both whales and dolphins (orcas are in the "dolphin" [delphinidae] family, which is itself within the sub-
order glossed as being the "toothed whales" [odontocetes]). Thus Brian's strong position of authority, perceived
as even greater than the authority of the trainers and the book author within this one debate, did not prevent
these students from productively engaging in the issue over the long haul (see Engle & Conant, 2002 for more).

Discussion
Participation structures, such as student roles that make use of shared expertise, not only mediate students'
engagement in collaborative work, but also their positions of authority in relation to other students and beyond.
In the case of Brian, he was positioned with authority on whale features because of his assigned role, but it went
beyond simply this to afford a positional identity as not only a central and credible student, but also as a "real"
expert on par with adult professionals (Langer-Osuna, 2009; Wortham, 2004).
        This paper explored how particular participation structures, such as distributed expertise (Brown et al.
1993) can support the development of student authority, and identities of power. These identities may be critical
to support valued learning  processes,   such  as  students   becoming   authors      of  ideas, debating      and coming  to
consensus on student-authored ideas, and using sources of evidence from adult professionals to think through
the reasonableness of ideas without passively aligning to the authority of such sources (Inglis & Mejia-Ramos,
2009). However,   student  identities  as   authorities  can  also  lead to      bad   outcomes    when      students do  not
sufficiently hold themselves accountable to others and disciplinary norms (Engle & Conant, 2002), resulting in
the propagation of invalid ideas and reasoning (Brown & Campione, 1994).
        But participation structures are not the only factor to consider with respect to how student authority
becomes constructed in classroom interaction. Engle, Langer-Osuna, and McKinney de Royston (2008) offer a
model that depicts the dynamic interactions of four negotiated factors that affect how students gain influence
over others, based in part on the student-led debate discussed here. These factors include students' perceived
authority, but also the perceived merit of their arguments as well as their access to the conversational floor and
interactional space. For instance, when Brian's authority was challenged early in the discussion, he was less
frequently chosen to speak. However, Brian then worked to increase his access to interactional space through
dramatic gesturing, and otherwise spatially gaining attention. In doing so, he gained access to the discussion,
which he then used to strengthen his position of authority in the ways we have analyzed here.                We believe that
such dynamics within and between authority and other factors will also be relevantto other student discussions .

                                                     618  ·  © ISLS
                                                ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

References
Anderson, R.C., Nguyen-Jahiel, K., McNurlen, B., Archodidou, A., Kim, S., Reznitskaya, A., Tillmanns, M., &
        Gilbert, L. (2001). The snowball phenomenon: Spread of ways of talking and ways of thinking across
        groups of children. Cognition and Instruction, 19(1), 1-46.
Angelillo,  C., Rogoff,   B. &  Chavajay,  P. (2007)   Examining    shared  endeavors  by   abstracting video  coding
        schemes with fidelity to cases. In R. Goldman, R. Pea, B. Barron, & S. Derry (Eds.), Video research in
        the learning sciences.
Barron,  B. & Engle,  R. A. (2007).  Analyzing data derived from video records. In    S. J. Derry (Ed.),Guidelines
        for video research in  education: Recommendations from     an expert panel (pp. 24-43, 79-80).   Chicago:
        Data Research Development Center.     Available at: http://drdc.uchicago.edu/what/video-research.html.
Bianchini, J.A. (1999). From here to equity: The influence of status on students access to and understanding of
        science. Science Education, 83, 577-601.
Brown,   A.L.,  Ash,  D., Rutherford,  M.,  Nakagawa,     K.,   Gordon, A., &  Campione,    J.C. (1993).  Distributed
        expertise in the classroom. In G. Salomon (Ed.) Distributed cognitions: Psychological and educational
        considerations.
Brown, A.L., & Campione, J.C. (1994). Guided discovery in a community of learners. In K. McGilly (Ed.),
        Classroom lessons: Integrating cognitive theory and classroom practice (pp. 229­270). Cambridge, MA:
        MIT Press/Bradford Books.
Clark, H. H. (1996). Using language. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Cohen,   E. G.  &  Lotan,  R.  A. (1995).   Producing  equal-status    interaction in the  heterogeneous  classroom.
        American Educational Research Journal, 32(1), 99-120.
Engle, R. A. & Conant, F. C. (2002).   Guiding principles for fostering productive disciplinary engagmeent:
        Explaining an emergent argument in a community of learners classroom. Cognition and Instruction,
        20(4), 399-483.
Engle, R. A., Langer-Osuna, J. & McKinney de Royston, M. (2008).           Toward a model of differential influence
        in discussions: Negotiating quality, authority, and access within a heated classroom argument.        In B. C.
        Love, K. McRae & V. M. Sloutsky (Eds.), Proceedings of the 30th Annual Conference of the Cognitive
        Science Society (pp. 2010-2015).   Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.
Engle, R. A., McKinney de Royston, M., Langer-Osuna, J., Bergan, J. & Mazzei, P. (2007, April). From
        positioning to differential influence in a student-led argument: Students negotiating authority, the
        conversational floor, and interactional space. Paper presented at AERA, Chicago.
Esmonde, I. & Langer-Osuna, J. (2009). Power plays: How students in a small group negotiated mathematical
        discussions in hybrid spaces. Manuscript under review.
Gresalfi,  M.S., Martin,   T., Hand, V.,  Greeno,  J.  (2009).   Constructing competence:     An analysis of   student
        participation in the activity systems of mathematics.Educational Studies in Mathematics, 70(1), 49-70
Guba,   E.G.   &  Lincoln,   Y.S.(1982).  Epistemological     and  methodological     bases of   naturalistic inquiry.
        Educational communication and technology, 30(4), 233
Herrenkohl, L. R. & Guerra, M. R. (1998). Participant structures, scientific discourse, and student engagement
        in fourth grade. Cognition and Instruction, 16(4), 431-473.
Inglis, M.  &    Mejia-Ramos,   J.P. (2009).  The  effect    of authority on  the  persuasiveness  of   mathematical
        arguments. Cognition and Instruction, 27(1), 25-50.
Jordan, B. & Henderson, A. (1995). Interaction Analysis: Foundations and practice. The Journal of the Learning
        Sciences (4)1, 39-103.
Kurth, L.A., Anderson, C.W., & Palinscar, A.S. (2002). The case of Carla: Dilemmas of helping all students to
        understand science. Science Education, 86: 287-313.
Langer-Osuna,    J.M. (2009).   The  algebra  of identity: Toward   a   new framework     for understanding    the co-
        construction of identity and engagement in mathematics classrooms. Unpublished doctoral dissertation,
        University of California, Berkeley.
Langer-Osuna, J. (2007). Toward a framework for the co-construction of learning and identity in mathematics
        classrooms. Online papers of the Second Annual Socio-cultural Theory in Educational Research and
        Practice  Conference:     Theory,    Identity  and      Learning,   Manchester,     England,    available   at
        http://www.education.manchester.ac.uk/research/centres/lta/LTAResearch/SocioculturalTheoryInterestGr
        oupScTiG/SocioculturalTheoryinEducationConference2007/Conferencepapers/GroupFivePapers/
Saxe,   G. B.,  Shaughnessy,   M.  M., Shannon,   A.,  Langer-Osuna,    J.M., Chinn,   R.,  &  Gearhart,  M.   (2007).
        Learning about fractions as points on a number Line. In W. G. Martin, M. E. Strutchens, & P. C. Elliott
        (Eds.), The learning of mathematics: Sixty-ninth yearbook (pp. 221-237). Reston, VA: National Council
        of Teachers of Mathematics
Wortham, S. (2004). From good student to outcast: The emergence of classroom identity.Ethos, 32(2), 164-187.
Yin, R.K. (2003). Case study research: Design and methods (3rd ed., Vol. 5). Sage Publications.

                                                   619  ·   © ISLS
