                                              ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

                         Digital Video Tools in the Classroom:
    Empirical Studies on Constructivist Learning with Audio-visual
                              Media in the Domain of History
    Carmen Zahn, Karsten Krauskopf, Friedrich W. Hesse, Knowledge Media Research Center, Tuebingen,
                                                    Germany
                  c.zahn@iwm-kmrc.de, k.krauskopf@iwm-kmrc.de, f.hesse@iwm-kmrc.de
    Roy Pea, Stanford Center for Innovations in Learning (SCIL), Stanford, CA, USA, roypea@stanford.edu

        Abstract: This paper presents empirical evidence concerning the application of digital video
        technologies for creating design-based learning environments for middle school students. In
        three studies we show how the affordances and constraints of digital video technology can
        support  for students  their (a) cognitive  (b)   action related and   (c) socio-cognitive learning
        processes in the domain of history. We present both quantitative and qualitative data. We also
        present  initial evidence for  the  role of   complementary      support   by explicit  instructional
        guidance. Results are discussed with regard to practical implications.

Introduction
Audiovisual media provide an important resource for classroom learning. Yet, films and videos are often used in
`suboptimal' ways (Hobbs, 2006). For example, they are shown to classes in a passive, TV-like manner, without
clear-cut educational goals and without fostering students' learning activities, dialogue, knowledge construction,
or critical thinking. From a psychological perspective, this kind of usage limits the effectiveness of audiovisual
materials for learning, and promotes instead a tendency towards superficial cognitive processing (Salomon,
1984) and oversimplification (Spiro, Collins, & Ramchandran, 2007; Spiro, Feltovich, Jacobson, & Coulson,
1991). While this might be only unfortunate in some cases, it can actually be problematic in others, such as in
the complex domain of history (Spiro, et al., 2007). In history learning, media sources including historical films,
newsreels,   TV-products  and videos  can help  to reconstruct   historical  processes  and events   (e.g., Wineburg,
1991). Yet, the sources themselves - rather than merely presenting "facts" - are themselves parts and results of
the historical processes  from  which    they have  originated,   and    as such   they reflect certain perspectives
(sometimes subtley as in news shows or educational films, sometimes obviously or even deliberately as in
propaganda films). Hence, historical films and videos need to be understood by students exactly in this way: as
historical "constructs" (Wineburg, 1991).
        How can such an understanding be achieved? Educators have suggested domain-specific strategies,
such as "de-construction and re-construction" of historical films (Krammer, 2006). Taking a general theoretical
stance in his important work on cognitive flexibility, Spiro has suggested using hypermedia technology as a
supportive tool for multithematic exploration and processes of active and constructive work with video in ill-
structured domains. Likewise, in a similar cognitive-constructivist framework for the use of video in education
(Goldman, Pea, Barron, & Derry, 2007), video analysis activities with advanced digital video tools have been
acknowledged as supporting "perspectivity" (Goldman, 2004), inquiry, and specific (socio-)cognitive processes
of  students (Smith  &   Blankenship,  2001).  This advanced     category   of digital  video  tools (some    of them
originally created for professional research purposes) refers to software applications which provide a variety of
possibilities for editing, contextualizing or analyzing digital videos (cropping, annotating, commenting, tagging,
or integrating hyperlinks). Such functions could be restructured for youthful learners in classrooms so that they
could either produce their own videos or remix video contents (as, for example, from YouTube).

             Figure 1. Screenshots of a DIVERTM worksheet (left) and the video player plus text
             editor condition (right) including video feed of dyads' interactions (bottom right).
In this paper, we present empirical research on the meaningful integration of digital video tools into history
education in secondary school. We conducted a series of three empirical studies with 11th grade students in
Germany. Our research rests on two assumptions: (1) the assumption that the affordances and constraints of

                                                  620   ·  © ISLS
                                                   ICLS 2010    ·  Volume 1

digital video technologies--particularly constructive video tools allowing for annotating, editing (e.g., zooming
and cropping), and re-sequencing--have opened up new vistas for making video accessible to constructivist
learning in school-based education and beyond (Zahn et al., 2005) and (2) the general assumption that framing
such video tools in constructivist design tasks can be effective (Zahn, Krauskopf, Pea & Hesse, in press). We
worked   with  a   video tool  which     has  been     created  specifically    to  support   both   cognitive    processes  and
collaborative learning with digital videos (the DIVER/WebDIVERTM system, Pea et al., 2004, see Figure 1). It
supports cognitive processes such as focusing attention within a complex and dynamic visual array. It includes a
set of specific editing capabilities which enable users to extract, rearrange and comment on scenes or video
segments aiming at the support of important visual analytic skills of learners, such as focused observation. The
selected and commented items are called dives, based on users "diving" into a video by zooming in on scenes
and details of the video by controlling a selection frame or "virtual viewfinder". A dive consists of re-orderable
"panels", i.e., clips and corresponding comments that are shown in a separate column next to the source video.
As a result, sequences and details of a video are not only being cognitively selected, but these video selections
and interpretive annotations become new, replayable artifacts that have persistent references as URLs. This is
why  the  system   is also  considered     a  collaborative     tool: These   replayable     artifacts can   be  collaboratively
produced  and    shared  with  others    for  joint  reflection,  analysis    and   discussion      ("Guided   Noticing"TM).    In
transferring  these  design   rationales   underlying     the   DIVER/WebDIVERTM             system   or  similar   tools to the
classroom (Zahn et al., 2005), we investigate in our research both the new opportunities and the new challenges
arising for students, and ultimately teachers. From our point of view , there are many opportunities to create
better conditions for active learning with video materials and relate them to effective processes of knowledge
building (Scardamalia & Bereiter, 2006).For instance, students may work creatively with digital videos, which
are already available as audio-visual sources online. They can suggest new ways to approach these media and
thus enable subsequent users to integrate the reflections of others, which ultimately leads to the development of
core competences, such as historical reasoning, advanced expertise (Scardamalia & Bereiter, 2006) or new
media   literacies  (Jenkins,  Clinton,    Weigel,     &  Robison,     2006).   The   main    challenge    is   to  frame  these
collaborative tools with the right tasks to create powerful learning environments, in order to reach the learning
goals during classroom- based instruction.

Visual Design to Frame Learning with Digital Video Tools
To investigate   both  the  opportunities     and  the  challenges     of using    advanced   video    tools  for   constructivist
learning  in history  lessons,  we  apply     design   approaches     to  learning, i.e., concepts     of learning   by creating
artifacts (e.g., learning through design, Kafai & Resnick, 1996; learning by design, Kolodner et al., 2003). We
consider  the design  approaches    especially     suitable in    our case, because     they  call   for  activity- and project-
oriented learning with media. In this process, students can autonomously create something that seems authentic,
meaningful    and  consequential    for  them,    which   gives   them    the   opportunity      to experience    themselves    as
competent and intrinsically motivated learners (Beichner, 1994). In addition, from a cognitive perspective, a
deeper  understanding    of the   complex     topic area  and     video   content   can   be  expected:   Acting    as designers,
students are creating a new video-based information structure. This requires them to select, compare and reflect
on the content they wish to present and on how to present it, which results in a positive influence on knowledge
acquisition  for a  complex   topic, as    in writing    (Hayes,   1996).   Based   on    the work     of Lehrer    and Erickson
(Erickson & Lehrer, 1998; Lehrer, Erickson, & Connell, 1994), the ideal structure of a design process includes
planning, transformation,   evaluation     and revision.    Design     projects thus    should   support   the  development     of
general problem solving skills as well as specific skills related to media competence. Learners not only need to
plan the  information   structure   they are  going    to create,  they   also  must    creatively   integrate  different  media
formats in order to combine them effectively for a sensible form of the information presented. In an attempt to
integrate the cognitive models of writing and design with constructionist perspectives, and in order to apply
them to the case of video-based design, we proposed elsewhere a tentative model of collaborative visual design
as a process of joint dual space problem solving (Zahn, Krauskopf, Hesse, & Pea, 2009). In this model, we
hypothesize   visual  design   to be  a  collaborative     problem     solving  process      involving    intensive  interactions
between video content and form (audience-related goals), in a rhetorical problem space. Based on this model,
we shaped our research around the following research questions:
     ·   How do the affordances of advanced digital video tools impact (a) cognitive (b) action related and (c)
         socio-cognitive processes of students learning a historical topic?
     ·   How do students approach visual design tasks in a real history class?
     ·   When    and  how   can   explicit instructional    processes     optimize  the   implementation     and    utilization of
         digital video technologies?
For the purpose of our empirical research, we developed a prototypic visual design task for German history
lessons, where students were asked to rework a video source showing an historical newsreel on the 1948 Berlin
blockade. With     varying  digital video    tools  at hand,    learners  elaborated  on     the video    source by    integrating
additional information provided, with the goal of creating an artifact that could be published online for future

                                                       621    ·  © ISLS
                                                   ICLS 2010    ·   Volume 1

(peer-)learners. The    task   included  critical reflection    and comments      on  the  historical  content  as well  as on
newsreels as a means of propaganda in former times, based on examples from the source video. Whether the
affordances of digital video tools used in the context of our creative task would clearly have a positive effect on
student understanding in a real history class was an open empirical question. It was also an open question
whether the affordances and constraints of different digital video tools differentially influence student learning
and if so, whether they would affect specific task elements. In general, we assumed the visual design task and
the affordances    of  digital video   tools  would   have an     impact   on   three levels:  (a) the cognitive   impact was
assessed by multiple choice items tapping historical knowledge and transfer tasks for critical film analysis. We
investigated the design products of participants as indicators of (b) action-related outcomes by considering their
number of selected scenes and sequences, precision (length of sequence and size of detail), and structuring
(deviations  from   the   source  video's    chronology).     Finally,  we    analyzed    the  dyads'  taped   interactions  as
indicators  of  (c) socio-cognitive    effects by  using   a  coding    scheme    that   captures  students' problem     solving
behaviors   (planning,    executing,   evaluation,  revision),    collaborative   behaviors,    and   content  discussed    (the
original  newsreel-video,    the  historical  events,  or their   design   task). In   addition,   we analyzed   selected   case
examples of dyads' interactions to provide empirical evidence for the impact of the affordancesof the advanced
digital tools on collaboration.
          The visual design task was tested in a lab-experiment (see Zahn, Pea, Hesse, & Rosen,in press) under
controlled conditions to investigate its general effectiveness. Also, the specific effects of the affordances of the
digital video tool WebDIVERTM, in contrast to a control condition using "simpler" technology (video-player &
text-editor) had    to be proven   before    we   took the   procedure     into studies   with  high  school   students  in the
classroom. The sample of this first study consisted of 24 dyads of psychology students (mean age = 22.2, SD=
4.8, 68.8% female). Generally the results revealed high appraisal of the task and significant positive mediating
effects of the WebDIVERTM video tool on all three levels of outcomes described above: Dyads supported by
WebDIVERTM showed higher factual knowledge and film analysis skills, design products of higher quality, and
more communication time devoted to task relevant content (historical context and design decisions). In sum, the
results showed that the influence of the video tools extended to the learners' socio-cognitive processes and
focused their interactions on the task. Qualitative case analysis provided evidence for direct effects of the video
tools on conversations, i.e., tool affordances implicitly guided learners' elaboration on the source video.

Field Study in Class
Following    up on   the  results from   this  preliminary    laboratory   study,  we    took  the  experimental   design   into
German    secondary    classrooms.   The    experimental   sessions     were    conducted   in  schools  spanning    over   two
subsequent 45 minute units using a portable "notebook classroom" we provided for the study. The students were
alerted  by  teachers   that our  task  would   be integrated     into the current    history  curriculum.   In this study  we
manipulated     two    experimental  between-subject      factors   in   a two-way       factorial design.   The   first factor
(technology)   was   the  digital video   tool provided    to   the students    (digital video  tool  DIVERTM      vs.   simpler
software solution, i.e. video player combined with text-editor). The first factor was chosen to test the ecological
validity of the results found in the prior lab experiment on the specific effects of the affordances of the digital
video tool WebDIVERTM. By investigating effects of tool affordances, we wanted to address the important issue
of whether or not an editing tool originally designed for researchers and educators, when reapplied as a tool for
learning  in the classroom,    would     be beneficial for   students   in comparison     to  a  common    (and  maybe    more
familiar)  technology.    The   second   factor   (metaphor)    was    the appeal     to students'   media-related   rhetorical
concepts ­their rhetorical concepts were either in line with or different from the system architecture of the
digital video tool). By introducing this second factor, we wanted to tap into the question of explicit instructional
support of the complex design task as opposed to the implicit guidance by the digital tools. We based this factor
of metaphor on the work of Stahl and Bromme (2004), who investigated students designing hypertexts and
reported that, due to the novelty of the medium hypertext, student designers cannot be assumed to have firmly
established media-related rhetorical concepts which form a design goal. Therefore, in the first condition we
prompted students with a metaphor of "video dives" epitomizing the concept of a medium for selecting ("diving
into") visual information. In the second condition we prompted students with a metaphor of "annotated movies"
epitomizing the concept of a medium for integrating information elements.
          Altogether 234 students from 8 classes in 4 German secondary schools participated. Due to technical
problems, data of 24 participants (12 dyads) could not be saved and were not included in the analyses. In the
end, data from 111 dyads of students were analyzed (mean age =15.9, SD=0.78, 60.9% female). We are aware
that our data has a multilevel structure; however, due to the sample size and small number of classes, we based
our analyses    on  the  dyadic   level. Gender   composition       of the dyads   was    equally  distributed  over   the four
conditions. Furthermore, experimental groups did not differ with regard to their experiences with digital media,
personal computers, or prior knowledge of post-war German history. However, the groups using the DIVERTM
tool reported higher initial interest in post-war German history. Thus, all reported analyses were additionally run
with interest as covariate without changing the results.

                                                       622    ·  © ISLS
                                                ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

In general, the design task was rated by participants as being interesting in general and proved applicable in the
classroom. Also, with regard to cognitive outcomes, all students improved in their factual knowledge of the
historical content, measured by a multiple-choice test before (M= 45.20% correct, SD =15.50) and after the
design task (M= 65.00% correct, SD=8.20), F(1, 107)=230.83, p<.05, partial !2= .68. However, there were no
differential effects of the independent variables. The manipulation tapping students' media concepts showed no
effects on either outcome variable, nor were there any significant interactions (F<1).
          With regard   to the  action-related outcomes,    students using    the advanced  digital   video technology
(DIVERTM)   created   more   sophisticated  design products.   They  selected    significantly more   scenes  and  more
details within these scenes compared to the control group. Furthermore, the DIVERTM tool increased the number
of deviations  from  the   chronological  order of   the source  video   when  students  made   the   selections, which
indicates more  autonomous      design in  the experimental    compared   to  the  control condition.   Altogether,  this
indicates that the advanced digital video tool fostered a higher quality of the design products.
          In line with these findings, dyads using the DIVERTM tool seem to have acted more autonomously
during collaboration: In order to analyze the socio-cognitive impact of the affordances of digital video tools on
collaborative  design, the   interactions of a random    subsample   (N=14    dyads)  were  coded   for (a)  content of
collaborative  talk and  (b) problem   solving  behavior.   20%  of  the videos   were coded   by  a  second  rater and
according to Asendorpf and Wallbott (1979) we computed Cronbach's " for ratio scales (here the aggregated
time of students spent on the different activities) as the agreement measure. Overall, high inter-rater reliability
was found, all "s > .81.
          The proportions of content discussed during the design task, relative to overall collaboration time,
show a beneficial influence of the advanced technology. Dyads working with DIVERTM discussed the historical
content more substantially (M=14.22% of time, SD=7.37) and their actual design task (M=16.45%, SD=5.96),
than did  dyads  in  the   control condition   (M=5.33%,      SD=6.56),  F(1,  107)=6.42,   p<   .05, partial !2=   .39,
respectively (M=7.23%, SD=6.55) F(1, 107)= 7.78, p< .05, partial !2= .44. In contrast, students working with
the less sophisticated video player and text-editor showed a tendency to discuss the source video itself more
(M=18.64%,     SD=8.36)    than did students   using DIVERTM     (M=3.49%,     SD=18.03),   F(1,   107)=3.37,  p<   .10,
partial !2= .25. Overall, this indicates that the affordances of the advanced digital video tool influenced the
dyads' collaboration on a socio-cognitive level and may have fostered task-relevant discussion about historical
content and design.
          Students' general problem-solving behavior, however, was influenced neither by the design tools nor
the prompted metaphors. All dyads directly engaged in executing the task (80.5% in general) and devoted less
than 4% of their time to planning and evaluation. Analyses revealed a tendency for students to request help less
often when using DIVERTM (1.63% time working on task, SD= 2.13) than in the control condition (M=5.32%,
SD=  4.04), F(1, 10)=    4.21,  p<.10, partial !2= .26).  We   interpret this as  an indicator for a  stronger implicit
guidance of the advanced digital tool in situations when a task is not explained step by step but determined by
the goal. The coding of the video interactions also showed that overall "other" activities of learning dyads made
up less than 5% of the time on task. These activities included off-task behavior, such as chatting (M=3.90%,
SD=3.58) and problems concerning the technology (M=3.67%, SD=2.82) and did not differ between the four
conditions, all Fs < 1, ns. Therefore, any differences in students' learning behaviors cannot be attributed to
differences in the difficulty of operating the two technologies.
          However, especially taking into account the limited time that students could spend on the design task,
the quantitative indicators for learning outcomes document effects, not processes. In order to provide evidence
windows to substantiate our assumptions (see above: advanced digital video tools may support collaboration on
a socio-cognitive level), we conducted additional case analyses focusing on giving what Barron (2003) calls a
"localized account" on how the dyads integrated technology affordances in their conversations for their design-
related interactions. Such evidence was already found in the prior laboratory study (Zahn et al., in press), where
we identified processes of "guided noticing" (Pea, 2006), which emerged as interactional patterns in dyads
elaborating on a newsreel with WebDIVERTM. In the present paper, we provide evidence for similar findings
under the conditions of the real "noisy" classroom setting. We compare two exemplary episodes for processes in
two dyads working with either DIVERTM (see Table 1) or the simpler technology of the control condition (see
Table 2). These dyads performed similarly well on the task and the post-tests. The episodes illustrate how the
students from each dyad collaboratively work on the same scene in the historical newsreel video, but with
different orientations: Dyad 1 (Students A and B working with DIVERTM) discusses a design problem thereby
elaborating on historical content, while dyad 2 (Students C and D working with a video player combined with a
text-editor) discusses descriptive features of the source video while also sticking to its chronology.
          In dyad 1, during most of the episode the two students skim through the dive panels they had created
earlier, which results in several cycles of "guided noticing" (Pea, 2006). The transcript provided in Table 1
illustrates how A guides attention to a previously selected picture. The jointattention of students A and B is also
implicitly guided by the technology's affordances: In the beginning of the episode (lines 1-9) the students seek a
picture as a focus of their joint attention and select it for their design product (while deleting another prior

                                                    623   ·  © ISLS
                                                 ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

  selection). In the middle of the episode the question of student B about a necessary design decision (where to
  assign the caption "Air Lift", line 11), initiates a short discussion (lines 12-16), which ultimately leads to
  meaning-making about what "Air Lift" means (line 12) and what "Candy Bombers" are (lines 14-16). In other
  words: understanding of the historic event (the aim of supplying the population separate from the planes as a
  means of reaching this aim and their name "Candy Bombers") results from a simple question (line 11), which
  resulted from the necessity to write and place a caption. This provides an example of how the tool's affordance
  impacts socio-cognitive processes, joint meaning-making and the establishment of common ground, finally
  leading to creating a design product. There is an additional factor suggested by the excerpt presented here:
  While the dyad diverges from the central goal in this episode--specifying what is meant by the term Air Lift--
  the dive panels created earlier repeatedly guide joint attention back on this goal. Students A and B finally record
  the different ideas emerging during their conversation, in other words,they arrive at closure, manifested in their
  design product as a replayable artifact.
  Table 1: Exemplary Episode of Dyad 1 (Working with DIVERTM)
Timestamp 00:13:27
Line      Student   Utterance                                            Actions and written comments

1         A         Where is the picture?                                B scrolls up to the specified dive
                    There it is.
2         B         Yes. ...
3         A         What's that?
4         B         That`s ... [inaudible] ... write "Air Lift"
5         A         I would leave that the way it is.
6         B         What is that?
7         A         Yes, that is a good picture. ...                     A refers to a selected detail of an image
                                                                         showing a group of men carrying bags of
                    But you can delete the one below.                    supplies
8         B         Too bad, actually.                                   B deletes the indicated image
9         B         Um ... (verbalizes while typing) Supplies            B selects a dive showing two men unloading a
                    provided by the Allied Forces?                       truck with supplies and types "Supplies
                                                                         provided by the Allied Forces"
10        A         Mmhmm
11        B         And where do we write "Air Lift"?
12        A         Well, Air Lift means the supply with ... carried
                    out by the airplanes.
13        B         But it has to be mentioned somewhere.
14        A         Well no. ... Because everything is about the
                    Air Lift ... Nee! ... Well, or we add "Candy
                    Bomber" to a picture of a plane.
15        B         Were they all named like that?                       Screens through the selection
16        A         Well no, but this is what they were called ...
                    well, colloquially.
17        B         All of them, really?
                                                                         A selects a dive of a still showing a group of
                                                                         airplanes on the ground.
18        A         Yes. ...
19        A         Ah ... I thought you had deleted that.
20        B         I did.
21        A         Ah, you it is not possible to go down here like
                    this.
                    What is that? ... people ...
                    That one, we can also delete.                        A deletes a dive
Timestamp           Experimenter announces that everybody should write their final comments and prepare to
15:53 ­ 16:09       proceed to the following tasks.

  In comparison, as can be seen in Table 2, the conversation of dyad 2 is focused on describing the source video's
  surface features instead  of dealing  with design   issues   and the historical content. The episode  starts   with C
  guiding D's attention to the music on the audio track (line 1). After an initial affirmative reaction (line 2), D
  draws the joint attention away from the music towards the pictures, and states that the airplanes are shown from

                                                     624  ·  © ISLS
                                                 ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

different camera   angles (line 2).  C   writes  down    this discovery    and continues D's initiation of a deeper
interpretation (lines 4-6), which D incorporates in the written comment (line 5). Next, D focuses their discussion
on the word choice (lines 10-12), draws the focus away from interpretation back to the observable surface level
(line 6), and C corrects his former writing. They then return to the issue of the music (line 8) with which they
started out, and they describe the accompanying video images (lines 9-11). Continuing to refer to the music
accompanying the final scene, D suggests an interpretation (line 14), yet C objects. In sum, while the two
students from dyad 2 initiate meaning-making twice in this episode, they do not succeed in achieving true
common ground or finally in recording the ideas that emerged during their conversation. In other words, the
dyad does not arrive at agreed-upon meanings to be manifested in their design product. Furthermore, they do not
elaborate on content or design, but their discussions remains on a descriptive level with a strong orientation
towards the surface features of the original source video. This is in line with the quantitative findings reported
above (proportions of content discussed during the design task). Moreover, with regard to the socio-cognitive
effects of the control condition technology, we found another aspect. As suggested by this excerpt of this dyad's
conversation, the technology affords the students to proceed according to the chronology of the source video.
This contrasts with  the  conversation   of   dyad 1, in   which  the  students  skimmed   through the  source    video
following an idea.

Table 2: Exemplary Episode of Dyad 2 (Working with Video Player combined with Text Editor)
Timestamp 00:20:29
Line      Student     Utterance                                        Actions and written comments
1         C           Military marches.                                C stops the video
2         D           Mhm [affirmative]                                C starts to type "planes are shown from many
                      Let's write that the planes are being            different angles"
                      shown from many different angles
                      [incomprehensible] concentrate
3         D           Now you typed perp. [laughs]                     C corrects the typing error perp. to pers.
4         D           ,,in order to" ..., come on, say something
5         C           ,,in order to ...                                C continues to type "in order to make people"
                      make people concentrate on them"
6         D           Yes ...                                          C changes the comment into "in order to
                      ,,in order to highlight them" is better.         highlight them."
7         C           An what do we write here?
8         D           ,,military marches"                              C types "military marches"
9         C           "while ..." do you get that?
10        D           Yes, I do. Do you see that?                      D points to the monitor.
                      There [incomprehensible] are being               C starts to type "while supplies are being
                      distributed.                                     distributed"
11        C           "while [incomprehensible] are being
                      distributed"
12        D           [incomprehensible] Oh, crap!                     C is struggling with positioning the cursor at
                      [incomprehensible] No, no, it does not           the word that needs to be corrected
                      work somehow. How embarrassing.
                      What's happening? You are clicking               They continue to watch the video to the end
                      correctly, aren't you?
13        D           "Joyful music, because the supply with           D moves the head in the rhythm of the music.
                      food is ensured."
14        C           No, that's crap.
15        D           So, what do you wanna write? ,,because           C types "Freudenmusik" [joyful music]
                      [incomprehensible]"?
Timestamp             Experimenter announces that everybody should write their final comments and prepare to
00:25:12              proceed to the following tasks.

In conclusion, the  results indicate    that the digital video  tools   as "collaborative" tools supported  students'
understanding of historical sources in different ways during the visual design task.

Discussion
Taken together, our quantitative and qualitative results indicate that advanced digital video technologies applied
to classroom learning can be useful in supporting the socio-cognitive processes of student dyads performing

                                                    625  ·    © ISLS
                                                     ICLS 2010  ·   Volume 1

complex visual design tasks in the history domain. The findings suggest, when explicit instructional guidance is
limited, technological affordances and constraints can implicitly guide and support students' task-related and
socio-cognitive     activities. We    found     indications  that  the  implicit  instructional  support  of specific  tools
constitutes an important complement for learning with design tasks. However, students focused on applying the
different technologies,   but    spent   little time on   planning  and   evaluation   during task  completion.  This  latter
finding might explain why using instructional metaphors did not prove to be salient enough when combined
with  different  digital video    tools   on    students' learning:  Metaphors     are  important  during planning.   When
planning is limited, metaphors have limited impacts on design and learning.
          The results of this field study are in line with the earlier findings from the lab study (Zahn, et al., in
press), where the affordances of the advanced digital video tool impacted the quality of participants' design
activities and extended to learning outcomes and learners' socio-cognitive processes focusing their discussions
in very similar ways. Thus, we conclude that the effects of implicit guidance by technological affordances and
constraints may constitute an important factor in computer-supported learning that needs to be considered with
regard to   educational  goals    and    possible   instructional  strategies. Affordances    and  constraints of  advanced
technologies already in use can be seen as potentially supportive to implicit instructional aspects. Studying them
means providing valuable information for effective integration in the classroom. However, explicit instructional
aspects need to be considered, too, during learning with digital video. This is especially true when addressing
issues such as optimizing learners' problem solving within the joint problem space of a complex visual design
task, and successful integration of these tasks into instruction for a whole classroom. Further research is needed
into these issues. In an initial step to look further into the role of explicit instructional support, we went back to
a more controlled environment by inviting 201 students from 9 school classes to our research lab. In this study
we manipulated two between-subjects factors: The first factor was the instructional support of either the design
problem or the collaborative aspects of the task, which was derived from the theoretical model of design as
problem solving. At the beginning of the collaboration phase, students were either prompted to consider the
future audience of their design product and to make clear the main messages they wished to convey with their
reworking of the source video (support of design), or they were asked to write down rules to ensure good
communication within their dyad and to think about how to divide the task into sub-tasks and how to distribute
these  among    them  (support    of  collaboration).     For  the second   factor, we    manipulated the  video   tools, by
contrasting     two  web-based       applications:   WebDIVERTM         and    Asterpix   (http://www.asterpix.com).   This
manipulation was based on our considerations that we had found different technological systems to differ on a
generic level in enabling users to acquire different cognitive skills (Zahn, et al., 2005): Some digital video
technologies    focus on  integrating     associated    information,   like the   Asterpix system.  Others   focus more   on
observation  and    analysis,   like WebDIVERTM.        We    were especially   interested in whether  the   specific socio-
cognitive functions of the two prototypic tools would differentially influence student learning on the three levels
described above (cognitive impact, action-related outcomes, socio-cognitive effect). Furthermore, we wanted to
investigate whether    our      explicit instructions   fostered   students'   planning   behavior, and,  indirectly,  other
important   sub-processes   of   our  model.    Finally,  we  wanted   to   learn more  about the  interaction between    the
instructions and the tool-specific affordances, in order to provide more evidence for the need to frame digital
video tools when integrating them into classroom instruction. Results from this study indicate significant effects
for explicit instructional support, as well as the interaction with implicit guidance by the tools' affordances.
          Taken together, such results provide initial evidence for the importance of instructional framing of
visual design tasks. With our research we hope to deepen our understanding of how to foster students' video-
related learning activities, dialogue, knowledge construction, or critical thinking when working with historical
sources.  We    hope, too,  to   pave    the    way for  constructivist  approaches    to  using audiovisual   media  in  the
classroom.

References
Barron, B. (2003). When Smart Groups Fail. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 12, 307-59.
Beichner, R. J. (1994). Multimedia Editing to Promote Science Learning. Journal of Computers in Mathematics
          and Science Teaching, 13, 147-62.
Erickson,   J., &   Lehrer, R.    (1998).    The  Evolution    of  Critical  Standards  As  Students  Design   Hypermedia
          Documents. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 7, 351-386.
Goldman, R. (2004). Video perspectivity meets wild and crazy teens: a design ethnography. Cambridge Journal
          of Education, 34, 157 - 178.
Goldman, R., Pea, R., Barron, B., & Derry, S. J. (2007). Video Research in the Learning Sciences. Lawrence
          Erlbaum.
Hayes, J. R. (1996). A new framework for understanding cognition and affect in writing. In C. M. Levy & S.
          Ransdell (Eds.), The science of writing: Theories, methods, individual differences, and applications.
          (pp. 1-28). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erbaum Associates.
Hobbs, R. (2006). Non-optimal uses of video in the classroom. Learning, Media and Technology, 31, 35-50.

                                                         626  ·   © ISLS
                                                ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

Jenkins, H., Clinton, K., Weigel, M., & Robison, A. J. (2006). Confronting the Challenges of Participatory
         Culture:   Media    Education      For  the    21st    Century.    Retrieved   March   19,    2009,   from
         http://www.newmedialiteracies.org/files/working/NMLWhitePaper.pdf.
Kafai, Y. B., & Resnick, M. (Eds.). (1996). Constructionism in practice : designing, thinking, and learning in a
         digital world (pp. XII, 339 S.). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Kolodner, J. L., Camp, P. J., Crismond, D., Fasse, B., Gray, J., Holbrook, J., et al. (2003). Problem-Based
         Learning Meets Case-Based Reasoning in the Middle-School Science Classroom: Putting Learning by
         Design-super(TM) Into Practice. Journal of the Learning Sciences , 12, 495-547.
Krammer,    R.  (2006). Filme   im Geschichtsunterricht    - Analysieren-Interpretieren-Dekonstruieren.  [Films   in
         history classes - analyzing, interpreting, deconstructing.] Historische Sozialkunde, 3, 26-33.
Lehrer, R., Erickson, J., & Connell, T. (1994). Learning by designing hypermedia documents. Computers in the
         Schools, 10, 227-254.
Pea,   R.   (2006).  Video-as-Data      and    Digital    Video     Manipulation    Techniques  for   Transforming
         Learning Sciences Research, Education, and Other Cultural Practices. In The International Handbook
         of Virtual Learning Environments (pp. 1321­1393). Springer.
Pea, R. D., Mills, M. I., Rosen, J., Dauber, K., Effelsberg, W., & Hoffert, E. (2004). The DIVERTM Project:
         Interactive Digital Video Repurposing. IEEE Multimedia, 11, 54-61.
Salomon, G. (1984). Television is "easy" and print is "tough": The differential investment of mental effort in
         learning as a function of perceptions and attributions.Journal of Educational Psychology, 76, 647-658.
Scardamalia, M., & Bereiter, C. (2006). Knowledge Building: Theory, Pedagogy, and Technology. In R. K.
         Sawyer (Ed.), The Cambridge Handbook of the Learning Sciences (pp. 97-118). New York: Cambridge
         University Press.
Smith,  B.  K.,  &  Blankenship,   E.   (2001). Justifying   imagery:    Multimedia   support  for learning  through
         explanation. IBM Systems, 39, 749-767.
Spiro, R. J., Collins, B. P., & Ramchandran, A. (2007). Reflections on a Post-Gutenberg epistemology for video
         use in ill-structured domains: Fostering complex learning and cognitive flexibility. In R. Goldman, R.
         Pea, B. Barron, & S. Derry (Eds.), Video research in the learning sciences (pp. 93-100). Mahwah:
         Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Spiro, R. J., Feltovich, P. J., Jacobson, M. J., & Coulson, R. L. (1991). Cognitive flexibility, constructivism, and
         hypertext: Random access instruction for advanced knowledge acquisition in ill-structured domains.
         Educational Technology, 31, 24-32.
Stahl, E., &   Bromme,   R. (2004).  Learning   by Writing   Hypertext:   A Research   Based  Design  of University
         Courses in Writing Hypertext. In Effective Learning and Teaching of Writing (pp. 547-559). Retrieved
         July 10, 2009, from http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4020-2739-0_37.
Wineburg, S. (2001). Historical thinking and other unnatural acts: Charting the future of teaching the past.
         Philadelphia, PA: Temple University Press.
Zahn, C., Krauskopf, K., Hesse, F. W., & Pea, R. (in press). Digital video tools in the classroom: How to
         support meaningful collaboration and reflective thinking of students. In M. S. Khine & I. M. Saleh
         (Eds.), New    science of learning:  Cognition,   computers   and  collaboration in  education. New  York:
         Springer.
Zahn,  C., Krauskopf,   K., Hesse,   F. W.,  &  Pea, R.   (2009). Participation  in knowledge  building  "revisited":
         Reflective discussion and information design with advanced digital video technology. In C. O'Malley,
         D. Suthers, &   A.  Dimitracopoulou     (Eds.),   Computer   Supported  Collaborative  Learning  Practices:
         CSCL2009    Conference    Proceedings   (pp.   596-600).   Brunswick,   NJ:  International  Society of  the
         Learning Sciences (ISLS).
Zahn, C., Pea, R., Hesse, F. W., Mills, M., Finke, M., & Rosen, J. (2005). Advanced video technologies to
         support collaborative learning in school education and beyond. In T. Koschmann, D. Suthers, & T. -.
         W. Chan (Eds.), Computer supported collaborative learning 2005: The next 10 years (pp. 737-742).
         Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Zahn, C., Pea, R., Hesse, F. W., & Rosen, J. (in press). Comparing simple and advanced video tools as supports
         for complex collaborative design processes. Journal of the Learning Sciences.

Acknowledgments
This work   was  partly  supported   by  grants from   the Deutsche    Forschungsgemeinschaft   [German     Research
Foundation]  (DFG   ZA   524/1-1)  and   the National  Science  Foundation   (NSF    REC  0354453).  Thanks   to Joe
Rosen  and  Benjamin    Klages   for helping   during  conducting    the experiment   and analyzing   data. DIVER,
WebDIVER, and Guided Noticing are trademarks of Stanford University for DIVER software and services with
patents awarded and pending.

                                                   627   ·   © ISLS
