                                              ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

 Free, open, online, mathematics help forums: The good, the bad,
                                              and the ugly

                   Carla van de Sande, Arizona State University, carla.vandesande@asu.edu

         Abstract: Free, open, online, help forums link students with volunteer helpers who have the
         time, knowledge,  and    willingness  to  provide    assistance  with   specific  problems    from
         coursework. Some forums endorse a select learning theory, whereas others do not espouse any
         one  approach.  This study  shows    how  student   activity  differs in   a forum   that  supports
         Cognitive  Load Theory   (CLT)   and one   that  does   not embrace   the  practice  of any  single
         learning theory. A sample of 100 exchanges on the calculus concept of limit were collected
         from the archives of a forum of each type and compared for student contributions to the
         construction of the solution and student initiative in expressing resolution. The results show
         that the forum supporting CLT evidences lower levels of student activity (both initially and
         following helper intervention), and favors weak over strong expressions of resolution. The
         designation of the good, bad, and ugly depends on the reader's epistemological stance.

Today's students are using the Internet as a resource for completing their assignments through participation in
open, online help forums. Many such forums, covering a wide variety of school subject areas, are found on
websites that  are accessible to the general  public  (open)     and allow  students   everywhere   to communicate
anonymously    and asynchronously   with  volunteers  around     the world  who   have   the  time, willingness,  and
experience to help them. Students post queries (usually problem-specific questions from assignments) on these
forums when they are seeking help constructing a solution to a problem or when they are seeking verification of
a solution that has been constructed. In order to help students construct solutions to their problems, some forums
allow any member to respond to the student (e.g., as a helper) and participate in ongoing exchanges. Help is this
case is a spontaneous activity, and we refer to these sites as Spontaneous Online Help (SOH). In short, these
forums afford convenient, accessible, efficient help to thousands of students, while, at the same time, they
transform help seeking and helping from a private, one-on-one activity bounded by physical walls into a public,
communal endeavor that spans geo-political boundaries (2007). This contribution to the democratization of
education is part of "the good" (Larreamendy-Joerns & Leinhardt, 2006); what constitutes "the bad" and "the
ugly" depends on the epistemological stance of the reader.
         These  forums  exist primarily  for the  purpose    of  helping  students.   How  do they   then  tackle the
monumental and ill-defined task of defining what it means to help within their community, especially given the
diversity of the members? The answer is that some forums explicitly endorse a select learning theory, whereas
others do not espouse any one approach. The purpose of this paper is to explore the nature of student activity in
a mathematics forum that uses Cognitive Load Theory (CLT) as its modus operandi (Cramster) versus another
forum that does not advocate any particular theory of learning (FreeMathHelp). In both cases, the community of
helpers is not required to adhere to any mandated pedagogical practices, but rather the corps of helpers has self-
selected a forum in which to volunteer. Regardless of enforcement, however, the position taken by the forum
administration and helpers on theories of learning and instruction is expected to show up in the manner in which
students use the forum as they seek help completing assignments.

Conceptual Framework

Help seeking
These problem   statements that  students   post on   the   help forums   generally   stem   from  routine exercises,
commonly referred to as closed tasks. However, if a student is unable to solve such a task without assistance,
then the "exercise" has become a "problem" from the student's perspective (Selden, Selden, Hauk, & Mason,
2000). In this way, the forums are instantiations of help seeking, an activity that no longer carries the stigma of
incompetence or stupidity (Nelson-Le Gall, 1981). In fact, quite the opposite may be true, as students engaged
in help seeking can be proactively taking responsibility for acquiring new knowledge and skills (Resnick &
Nelson-Le Gall, 1997, p. 150). Help seeking, with appropriate performance goals, has strategic value in the
learning process.  Nelson-Le  Gall   (1985)  distinguished   between   "executive"    or   dependency-oriented    help
seeking that is associated with performance goals ("Just tell me the answer") and "instrumental" or mastery-
oriented help  seeking ("Give  me  a clue!"). Now,    given  that  students are  seeking   help  using open,  online,
homework help forums to construct solutions to routine exercises, the question is: In what ways are students
acquiring the knowledge and skills that allows them to complete their assignments?
         Alternative learning theories  advocate  different   definitions of   what   type of help  is conducive   to
learning. I now turn to one learning theory that has a lot to say about how students learn.

                                                  643  ·  © ISLS
                                               ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

Cognitive Load Theory (CLT)
CLT is a theory of learning developed by Sweller (1988) that is based on the limited capacity of working
memory    and emphasizes     the   need for  instructional   design to  minimize  cognitive    processing  or  load.
Determining pedagogical practices that are consistent with this theory has therefore been a central part of the
research agenda (Kirschner, 2002). The use of worked examples is one such practice that has been extensively
researched (Atkinson, Derry, Renkl, & Wortham, 2000). The provision of worked examples as a study tool has
been shown to facilitate near transfer, require less acquisition and performance time, and require less mental
effort than engaging in problem solving or exploration (Paas & Van Merriënboer, 1993; Sweller & Cooper,
1985; Tuovinen & Sweller, 1999; Van Merriënboer, Schuurman, De Croock, & Paas, 2002), at least for students
who are really unfamiliar with the material (Kalyuga, Chandler, Tuovinen, & Sweller, 2001).
          Of course, no self-respecting cognitive load theorist would claim that worked examples are, in and of
themselves, a magic bullet. It is the way in which students engage with worked examples that determines how
much   help they provide.  For   instance, students who   self-explain  worked  examples   learn more   deeply than
students who simply read through them (Chi, Bassok, Lewis, Riemann, & Glaser, 1989) or copy them (Chi,
2009).
          The Cramster forum advocates providing worked examples as an effective means of providing help.
Drawing explicitly on CLT, they claim that this is the best and most efficient way of helping students with their
homework assignments.

Methods
The objective of this project was to investigate the nature of student activity on sites with differing adherence to
theories of learning. Two open, online, mathematics help forums were chosen, one that espouses CLT and one
that does not endorse any given learning theory. In addition, Cramster.com has a reputation system (Dellarocas,
2003)  in place  that allows students   to rate the  contributions  of helpers, whereas   FreeMathHelp    does not.
Associated with this distinction is the fact that Cramster offers subscription levels that increase the weight of
ratings for others' contributions.
          Because of the exploratory nature of this work, an observational methodology was adopted (Goodyear,
Jones, Asensio, Hodgson, & Steeples, 2005). In order to draw comparisons across the two sites, I gathered 100
exchanges from the archives of each forum on a single calculus concept, the limit, by conducting a search on
"lim*." Although there are arguably many concepts in calculus instruction that surface on the help forums and
that could have served my purpose, the limit concept took precedence, being both foundational and poorly
understood by students (Cornu & Tall, 1991; Szydlik, 2000; Tall & Vinner, 1981). The Cramster postings were
first gathered in December, 2008 and the search was performed on exchanges dating back from November,
2008. These dated back to September, 2008 and were compared with a set of analogous exchanges from the
archives of FreeMathHelp that had been gathered for previous research. The FreeMathHelp corpus dated from
April, 2008 to January, 2007. The differing time spans covered by the searches (3 months for Cramster versus
15 months for FreeMathHelp) reflects the relative popularity of the two sites; Cramster receives much more
traffic than FreeMathHelp. Because Cramster offers subscription and FreeMathHelp operates strictly gratis, the
Cramster search specified that only exchanges initiated by nonpaying Cramster members be included. However,
the Cramster sample may include some students whose status changed between the time of posting and the time
of data collection.

Site Descriptions

Cramster
www.cramster.com (Cramster) is a global study community for help in many subjects, including physics, math,
science, and engineering. The site was launched in 2003 by Cramster, Inc., a private company headquartered in
Pasadena,   California. The site   advocates CLT    and  has  been  recently endorsed by   well-known   educational
theorist, John Sweller, who is also a member of the Cramster Academic Advisory Board: "Cramster provides an
effective learning environment for difficult and complex concepts. I strongly recommend to any student."
          In addition to the discussion forum or Q&A board, the site provides access to study materials such as
textbook solutions, topic notes, sample problems, and practice exams that were created by the administration,
indexed from the web, or contributed by members. Although general membership is free, participants can elect
to subscribe  monthly   ($9.95/month)   or annually  ($49.95/year)  to  enjoy  additional site benefits and access.
Members have access to user profiles that include self-volunteered information on school, major, and expertise.
In each   contribution, members    are characterized by   a  self-selected username, an   optional avatar (static or
animated picture that represents the user), board level (ranging from Rookie to Oracle), and "karma."
          Karma is acquired through participation in site activities (such as answering queries on the Q&A board,
submitting solutions to textbook problems, challenging others' solutions, providing notes, quizzes, outlines, etc.,
and referring friends to become members) and is based on an intricate point system. For the Q&A board that is

                                                   644  ·   © ISLS
                                                ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

the focus of this study, karma points depend on the rating awarded by the member who asked the question
(Lifesaver, Helpful, Somewhat Helpful and Not Helpful), their membership status, and the difficulty level of the
board. Karma points can be redeemed for gift certificates and prizes. On the part of students, rating responses is
voluntary but does affect the student's "respect score" (the number of answers the student has rated divided by
the number of answers provided to that student).
         In addition to standard Terms of Use for activity on the Internet, Cramster has an Anti-Cheating policy
posted: "Copying   solutions  or  posting   unexplained  final answers     on the Q&A     Board  promotes   completion
without comprehension, and that's something we don't support on this site."

FreeMathHelp
www.FreeMathHelp.com (FreeMathHelp) is an advertisement-supported mathematics help portal established in
2002 by Ted Wilcox, who was, at the time, an enterprising high school junior. The site contains 10 homework
help forums organized by subject area (ranging from arithmetic and pre-algebra to calculus and differential
equations). The sole requirement for becoming a forum member is registration (which entails agreeing to abide
by terms for permissible content and/or conduct, providing a username and e-mail address, and selecting a
password). Forum members can initiate threads in a discussion forum (e.g., as students posting mathematics
questions) and can respond to others' posts (e.g., as helpers). Forum members also have access to user profiles
that include self-volunteered information on occupation, residence, contact information, as well as statistics on
discussion board activity.
         This site does not espouse any one pedagogical approach. At one time, a lengthy and passionate debate
was held in the community forum by prominent helpers concerning the nature of the assistance that helpers
should be allowed to provide. The suggestions covered a wide range of possibilities, from banning helpers who
provided "copy-ready" solutions to creating a separate forum for those who wished to provide worked solutions.
The final  decision, made    by  Ted    as forum  administrator,  was   to  allow  helpers   to practice any  form  of
pedagogical   assistance, with  a request   for helpers  to   respect and  not  interfere with  the helping   strategies
employed by others in the community.
         Forum "netiquette" (Shea, 1994) is located in a "sticky" that is the lead posting within each help forum.
Although the forum does not ascribe to any particular learning theory, students are encouraged to show all of
their work. The rationale is that, by doing so, helpers are more able to detect the source of student difficulty and
the forum can operate efficiently. If, for instance, no work is shown, then helpers may assume that the student
only needs help getting started, or, if only partial work is shown, then helpers will not be privy to errors in
undisclosed portions of the solution.

Analyses
The objective was to illuminate differences in student behavior depending on the forum. Analyses of student
activity were designed to capture the trajectory of understanding from the perspective of the student over the
course  of a given exchange:    initial and  post-intervention  (during),  and  final.  Each exchange    was  therefore
examined   for the presence   of  student  assertions and   proposals   of mathematical   actions,  both in the initial
posting in which a query was presented as well as following helper intervention during the ensuing thread.
Examples   of  actions  that were  taken    as  evidence  of  student  activity included   suggestions   of a solution
procedure, proposals of solution steps, and follow-throughs on others' proposals. In order to be inclusive in this
analysis of help-seeking activity, even instances that were hedged or offered in a hesitant manner, were counted.
The last   contribution made   by the   student in each   exchange    and  the  ratings provided   by students  on the
Cramster forum were used as indicators of the final state of understanding, that is, as an expression of how the
student felt about the resolution of the problem.  The strength of resolution was further characterized as "weak"
(expressions of gratitude) or "strong" (reflection on why or how interaction was helpful). These overt activities
(contributing to the construction of the solution and initiative for expressing resolution) reflect student agency
(Greeno, 2006) and characterize interactive activities (Chi, 2009).

Results

Contributing to the construction of solution
Figure 1a shows the percentage of threads in each forum according to the presence of student suggestions and
proposals for action in the initial posting and subsequent thread: [0 0] (no student activity), [1 0] (student
activity only in the initial posting), [0 1] (student activity only after the initial posting), and [1 1] (student
activity in both initial and subsequent postings in the thread).

                                                    645  ·   © ISLS
                                                ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

    Figure 1. a) Student contributions to construction of solution; b) Student expressions of resolution by type

There are two noteworthy results here: first, Cramster contained no threads in which student activity increased
following helper intervention ([0 1]) or in which student activity was present throughout the exchange ([1 1]),
and second, virtually all (95%) of this site's exchanges were completely devoid of any student mathematical
activity ([0 0]). On   this site, students  pose  their  queries   without  showing    work    and the helpers   almost
exclusively contribute worked solutions (see Figure 2). In contrast, the majority of the exchanges (69%) in
FreeMathHelp contained evidence that students were actively contributing to the construction of the solution,
either in the initial post or in response to helper assistance (see Figure 3).
         The most sensible explanation for these results can be found in the differential nature of the help
provided on the two forums. On Cramster, 98% of the helpers' first interventions (the first response received by
the student)  consisted of  a  full  worked   solution; not   surprisngly, there was    no  need then  for   students to
contribute to the construction of the solution. On FreeMathHelp, however, only 23% of the first interventions
could be classified as a worked solution. Thus, in many cases, a worked solution was not provided by a helper,
and students could still contribute to the construction, if they chose to do so.

Initiative for expressing resolution
There are several ways that a participant can indicate that an issue has (or has not) been resolved. First of all,
participants can  be silent and   opt not  to further   contribute  to an  exchange.   Silence  in computer-mediated
exchanges may indicate acceptance or rejection of another's contributions and does not offer evidence for (or
against) the achievement    of resolution. Thus,  in  the   forum  discussions,  if  a student  does  not return to   the
exchange following helper interventions, it is not clear whether the student feels that the issue has been settled
or not. I refer to exchanges of this type as "hangers" since other forum participants are, in some sense, left
hanging regarding the helpfulness of their contributions. On the other hand, when a student does explicitly
acknowledge   helpers'  contributions,   they can  do   so  in either  a weak   or   strong  manner.  For  instance,  an
expression of appreciation, such as "Thank you," indicates a weak level of resolution on the part of the student
since this may simply be a residual of polite manners, that is, a customary response to receiving assistance.
Also, if a student simply rates the quality of received help, then this rating is indicative of weak resolution since
it does not signify how the interaction was helpful. In contrast, the contribution of mathematical actions (e.g.,
the presentation  of a  solution  to the problem)  and   assessments    (e.g., reflections  on the ways   in which    the
intervention helped) are stronger indications that the issue has been resolved to the satisfaction of the student.
Finally, an exchange can evince a lack of resolution or be unresolved, when a student receives no response to a
query or receives a refusal from forum tutors to provide further assistance.
          Figure  1b shows    the percentage   of exchanges    for  each   forum   in  which   resolution could  not  be
determined (hangers), in which resolution was evident and the strength of the expression (weak versus strong),
and in which the issue was unresolved.
         Given the informal and transitory nature of these interactions, it is not surprising that the majority of
exchanges  were   characterized   as hangers  in  both  forums.  However,      those  that did evince  some  degree   of
resolution showed a different pattern in Cramster versus FreeMathHelp. First of all, in Cramster 11% of the
exchanges were unresolved, with 4% demonstratively unresolved following helper intervention. In contrast, in
FreeMathHelp, only 3% of the exchanges were unresolved, which is the worst outcome of forum participation
from a student's perspective. Also, although the expression of resolution is promoted in Cramster because of the
"respect score," there was a higher percentage of expressions of resolution on FreeMathHelp (33% versus 21%),
as seen by collapsing over resolution strength. A distinction between strong and weak resolution showed an
additional difference in this aspect of student activity across the two forums. In Cramster, expressions of weak
resolution (18%) were more prevalent than strong (3%), whereas this trend was reversed in FreeMathHelp, in
which strong  resolution was   indicated   in 23%  of   the  exchanges,   whereas    10%   showed  weak   resolution. It
appears that Cramster favors the demonstration of weak resolution (if any), in which students either provide a

                                                    646   ·  © ISLS
                                               ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

rating or express thankfulness, but fall short of remarking on the way in which they received useful help and
gained understanding (see Figure 2). In contrast, something about the interaction in FreeMathHelp encourages
students to express resolution, with no incentive, reflect publicly on the way that the help received contributed
to their understanding of the mathematics in question (see Figure 3).

Examples

Cramster
Figure 2 shows a prototypical example of a Cramster exchange derived from the in-depth analyses of student
activity. The student, Ali, did not contribute in any way to the construction of the solution ([0 0]) and gave the
helper, fatbuddha, a lifesaver rating (weak resolution) following the provision of a (sparsely) annotated worked
solution. Ali typed in the text of the exercise, fatbuddha constructed the solution, and Ali evaluated the reply.
The entire transaction took only 11 minutes, where the median length of time until a student received a first
reply in the Cramster sample of 100 exchanges was 26 minutes. The exchange is remarkably impersonal and
devoid of social interaction.

          Figure 2. Cramster exchange showing absence of student activity and weak resolution.

FreeMathHelp
Figure 3 contains an example of an exchange from FreeMathHelp. Although not prototypical in the sense that
the student, jerry, contributes to the construction of the solution throughout the exchange ([1 1]), this example
captures the flavor of many interactions that take place on this help forum. When jerry poses the query, he
includes a suggestion, albeit hedged, for constructing the solution, namely substitution. Jerry suggests that the

                                                   647  ·  © ISLS
                                              ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

goal to the solution is finding the right substitution, but does not specify the substitutions that he has tried but
which "didn't seem to lead anywhere." The first helper, pastel, provides the substitution, requisite trigonometric
identities and outlines the rest of the solution, but stops shy of providing a worked solution. Shortly after this
help is received, jerry, returns to the exchange, comments on the insight he has gained because pastel showed
him the rearrangement of terms, and contributes the rest of the solution. Although jerry has indicated that the
issue has been resolved from his perspective, a second      helper,  skooter, comes on the scene and suggests
through hinting that the limit can also be framed alternatively as the definition of a derivative. In response,
jerry, returns once again, expresses appreciation, and comments on how he has gained new insight on this
problem, thanks to skooter. The exchange gives a definite sense that jerry has experienced "Aha!" moment(s)
and an almost tangible feeling of excitement that is expressed through jerry's use of [very happy] emoticons.

                                                 648  ·   © ISLS
                                                ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

               Figure 3. FreeMathHelp exchange showing student activity and strong resolution.

Discussion
The message of this paper is that student activity looks dramatically different on two open, online, calculus, help
forums.   On Cramster,   the forum   in which   CLT  is   the modus    operandi, students do  not  contribute   to the
construction of the solutions, and favor weak over strong expressions of resolution. A typical dialogue frame
(Graesser, Person, & Magliano, 1995) for interaction on Cramster consists of a student presenting a problem
statement, a helper contributing a worked solution, and, perhaps, the student rating the help received. In fact, the
primary instructional sequence is the traditional IR/E pattern from classroom discourse (Mehan, 1982), but with
an monumental twist ­ the role of instructor and student is reversed. It is the student who initiates the interaction
by asking a question (I), the helper who replies with the answer (R), and the student who evaluates the response
(E). In contrast, on FreeMathHelp, the forum in which helpers to not adhere to any particular learning theory,
students often initiate or follow-up on the construction of the solutions and favor strong over weak resolution by
sharing how    the interaction was   helpful. Here, there  is evidence  of extended    dialogue  frames that   include
student contributions and reflections. Evidence for computer-supported collaborative learning (such as the joint
construction of solutions) can be seen in interactions in FreeMathHelp.
          However, the observational methodology employed by this project prohibits making stronger claims
than the existence of these differences. First, only published contributions were part of the analysis. Private
messaging is a feature of both forums, and may be more frequently used in Cramster since helpers can only
receive karma for their initial response to a student. This policy may well encourage students and helpers to
communicate off-line. Anonymity adds another layer of complexity to interpreting results, since participants
could have multiple usernames linked to different accounts. Fortunately, however, multiple participants cannot
have  the same  username.    Finally and more    importantly,  the measures  cannot    speak to  the  effect of forum
participation on student performance in the classroom. The dramatic difference in the nature of student activity
across the two forums raises the question whether student learning also dramatically differs. This is a question
that must be answered in the context of an experimental study.
          Open, online, help forums are being used by students throughout the world and have become part of
their learning experience.   As an   emergent   resource,  we  must determine    their potential for  instruction  and
learning. In particular, there is a pressing need to delve into what constitutes the good, the bad, and the ugly for
this resource that students and helpers are frequenting. Returning to the title of this paper, what can we say at
this point?

·   The   Good: Open,    online forums   are  a means   of connecting  students  seeking  help   with those  who   can
    provide it in an efficient, cost-effective manner. Students who might not otherwise have access to help are
    able to ask for help in a non-threatening environment. The forums also present an opportunity for educators
    and researchers to reach students beyond the walls of the classroom.
·   The Bad: What counts as "bad" depends on the epistemological stance of the reader. Different forums offer
    different definitions for what it means to help students. From the perspective of a cognitive load theorist,
    providing worked examples is not bad. However, a constructivist would rather have students construct their
    own solutions and would probably consider Cramster to be an anathema.
·   The Ugly: Given the open nature of the forums, official forum policies and educational philosophies can be
    abused or ignored. Things can get "ugly" in any forum, regardless of its ideals. Students can abuse the
    forums by asking for too much help, by mindlessly copying solutions, and by trying to use the forum to
    replace instruction.

John Sweller's recent endorsement of Cramster is evidence that education researchers are becoming aware of
(even associated with) open, online, homework help forums. This paper intends to start a discussion on the
design, use, and analysis of these learning activities that are happening "in the wild." One of the most important
questions that this exploration has raised but admittedly danced around is whether worked solutions are an
effective choice for helping students in the forums, and, if they are, then why forums, such as FreeMathHelp,

                                                    649  ·  © ISLS
                                              ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

that offer alternative approaches thrive. I will say that Cramster paints a picture of mathematics as an activity in
which the goal is to reach answers, and the faster this is accomplished, the better. Even if students are using the
solutions they get on Cramster as worked examples to help them complete additional exercises on their own,
these students are still being sent a message about the nature of mathematics that seems problematic for those
who love the subject and want students to share this passion.

References
Atkinson, R.  K.,   Derry, S. J., Renkl, A.,  &  Wortham,    D.  (2000). Learning  from   examples: Instructional
         principles from the worked examples research. Review of Educational Research, 70, 181-214.
Chi, M.   T. (2009).  Active-constructive-interactive:   A  conceptual   framework  for   differentiating learning
         activities Topics in Cognitive Science, 1, 73-105.
Chi, M. T., Bassok, M., Lewis, M. W., Riemann, P., & Glaser, R. (1989). Self-explanations: how students study
         and use examples in learning how to solve problems. Cognitive Science, 13, 145-182.
Cornu, B., & Tall, D. (1991). Limits Advanced Mathematical Teaching. (pp. 153-166). Boston: Kluwer.
Dellarocas,  C. (2003).   The digitization of  word   of mouth:  Promises    and  challenges of online    feedback
         mechanisms. Management Science, 49(10), 1407-1424.
Goodyear, P., Jones, C., Asensio, M., Hodgson, V., & Steeples, C. (2005). Networked Learning in Higher
         Education: Students' Expectations and Experiences. Higher Education, 50(3), 473-508.
Graesser, A. C., Person, N. K., & Magliano, J. P. (1995). Collaborative dialogue patterns in naturalistic one-to-
         one tutoring. Applied Cognitive Psychology, 9, 495-522.
Greeno, J. G. (2006). Learning in activity. In R. K. Sawyer (Ed.), The Cambridge Handbook of the Learning
         Sciences (pp. 79-96). New York: Cambridge University Press.
Kalyuga, S., Chandler, P., Tuovinen, J., & Sweller, J. (2001). When problem solving is superior to studying
         worked examples. Applied Educational Psychology, 93, 579-588.
Kirschner, P. A. (2002). Cognitive load theory: implications of cognitive load theory on the design of learning.
         Learning and Instruction, 12, 1-10.
Larreamendy-Joerns,   J.,  &  Leinhardt,   G. (2006).   Going the   distance with  online education.  Review     of
         Educational Research, 76(4), 567-605.
Mehan, H. (1982). The structure of classroom events and their consequences for student performance. In P.
         Gilmore & A. A. Glatthorn (Eds.), Children In and Out of School (pp. 59-87). Washington, D.C.:
         Center for Applied Linguistics.
Nelson-Le Gall, S. (1981). Help-seeking: An understudied problem-solving skill in children. Developmental
         Review, 1, 224-246.
Nelson-Le Gall, S. (1985). Help-seeking behavior in learning. Review of Research in Education, 12, 55-90.
Paas, F. G. W. C., & Van Merriënboer, J. J. G. (1993). The efficiency of instructional conditions: an approach to
         combine mental effort and performance measures. Human Factors, 35, 737-743.
Resnick, L. B., & Nelson-Le Gall, S. (1997). Socializing intelligence. In L. Smith, J. Dockrell & P. Tomlinson
         (Eds.), Piaget, Vygotsky and beyond (pp. 145-148). London: Routledge.
Selden, A., Selden, J., Hauk, S., & Mason, A. (2000). Why can't calculus students access their knowledge to
         solve non-routine problems? In E. Dubinsky, A. Schoenfeld & J. Kaput (Eds.), Research in Collegiate
         Mathematics Education (pp. 128-153): American Mathematical Society.
Shea, V. (1994). Netiquette. San Francisco: Albion.
Sweller, J. (1988). Cognitive load during problem solving: Effects on learning. Science, 12, 257-285.
Sweller, J., & Cooper, G. A. (1985). The use of worked examples as substitute for problem solving in learning
         algebra. Cognition and Instruction, 2, 59-89.
Szydlik, J. E. (2000). Mathematical beliefs and conceptual understanding of the limit of a function. Journal of
         Research in Mathematics Education, 31, 258-276.
Tall, D., & Vinner, S. (1981). Concept Image and Concept Definition in Mathematics with Particular Reference
         to Limits and Continuity. Educational Studies in Mathematics, 12(2), 151-169.
Tuovinen, J. E., & Sweller, J. (1999). A comparison of cognitive load associated with discovery learning and
         worked examples. Journal of Educational Psychology, 91, 334-341.
van  de Sande,  C., & Leinhardt,   G. (2007).  Online  tutoring  in the Calculus: Beyond  the limit of    the limit.
         Éducation et Didactique, 1(2), 115-154.
Van Merriënboer, J. J. G., Schuurman, J. G., De Croock, M. B. M., & Paas, F. G. W. C. (2002). Redirecting
         learners' attention during training: effects on cognitive load, transfer test performance and efficiency.
         Learning and Instruction, 12, 11-37.

                                                  650  ·  © ISLS
