                                                ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

Stressed yet Motivated: Web-Based Peer Assessed Competition as
                  an Instructional Approach in Higher Education

        Abstract:      The   study explores  peer  assessed   artifact competitions   conducted     in a college
        setting.  The     competitions utilized  a  web-based     environment    for  designing   and   enacting
        collaborative online activities. Since peer assessed team competitions are extremely effective
        in  promoting     learning yet  are  rarely conducted     in   higher education   the   study  aimed   at
        disclosing students' feelings about such potentially stressful circumstances. The peer assessed
        competitions were favorably accepted by most of the students who claimed that it improved
        their performance. Moreover, students level of stress was correlated with putting more efforts
        into the    products   and  feeling  that  as a    result its' quality   improved.   In  addition, peer
        assessments were highly correlated with the instructor's assessments and students reported
        they trusted them regardless the rating received. Finally, Fear of Failure, as a personality trait,
        predicted which students would report being anxious about the competition. Implications for
        supporting such students are discussed.

Introduction
Research indicates that team competition as an instructional approach produces higher learning performances
than cooperative learning or competition among individuals (Slavin, 1980; Slavin et al., 1984; Fu et al., 2009;
Ke & Grabowski, 2007). In team competitions a certain number of individuals cooperate as a group to compete
against other groups. Such competitions are reported to be designed and successfully applied across various
higher education  programs     such as  Business   Management      (Corner    et al. 2006; Casile,   &   Wheeler,  2005),
Engineering (Cramer & Curten, 2005; Sansalone, 1990), Computing (Fu et al. 2009), and Instructional Design
(Kinzie et al. 1998; Rowland, 1994). For instance, Corner et al. (2006) describe a case team competition that
takes place every year where business management students analyze real-world complex case faculty members
produced with the help of local businesses. Students give excellent evaluations to this activity and faculty
members   believe   it is a  wonderful  experience.   Cramer  &    Kurten   (2005)   too, describe  a  team  competition
occurring each year - where engineering students design , develop and test a Canoe made of concrete - as a peak
experience in the program. However, all these studies ignore one of the most important pedagogical resources
relevant to team competition ­ peer assessments; typically, students' teams are assessed and ranked by juries or
faculty member, but not by the students themselves.
        In higher education, peers have almost no input regarding their friends' projects flaws and merits, ways
to improve it, etc. Yet, socio-constructivists theories argue that peers are one of the most influential factors in
knowledge construction (Cole, 1996; Lave & Wenger, 1991).           Peer assessment, in particular, has been shown to
have many advantages. Studies have indicated that peer assessment assists students to create higher quality
artifacts, as a consequence of better understanding of assessment criteria which they use when they play the role
of assessors (Falchikov, 2003; Smith et al. 2002; Kali & Ronen, 2008). Since peer assessments are rarely used
in competitive settings in higher education there is hardly any study that explored how students feel about
exposing their work to peers under such circumstances. One of the purposes of this study is to answer this
question.
        Assuming       that peer assessed   competitions    might    have   pedagogical   advantages,    orchestrating it
(assigning artifacts for peer assessments, calculating and publishing the results, etc.) is logistically complex,
hence, decrease faculties' incentive to embrace such an initiative.     Recent e-leaning environments may provides
an efficient solution to this challenge, by facilitating the design, orchestration and enactment of peer assessed
competition activities, especially when dealing with artifacts that are produced in digital formats.
        The CeLS (Collaborative e-Learning Structures), a web-based environment for designing and enacting
collaborative online activities (Ronen et. al., 2006), provides an efficient solution to such a challenge. Using a
friendly and intuitive interface lecturers use the CeLS to plan the competition and afterwards the successive
stages are automatically handled by the system, e.g., students submit their product (the environment is designed
to absorb multimedia artifacts), then, the environment randomly assigns a predetermined number of anonymous
artifacts for each student to assess, then, the students submit their assessments. Finally, each artifact is publicly
presented with   peers'   mean score   plus anonymous      verbal comments,      adjacent to it. Typically  each  student
receives scores and verbal comments form about 10-20 peers - depending on number of students in the class and
number of artifacts each student is required to assess. Such a process allows for each artifact to be analyzed
from multiple   perspectives   and   gives  each   student  a rich     and multifaceted   feedback.      Since the  CeLS
environment supports the lecturer in structuring the activity and automates its enactment - using peer assessed
competition  as  an instructional  strategy  hardly   puts extra  demands     on  the lecturer.  In our  study the  CeLS
environment was used to handle peer assessed competition activities in college level courses.

                                                     65  ·   © ISLS
                                               ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

The study
This study explores the pedagogical aspects of a peer assessed competition as an instructional approach in
higher education. Our aim was to assess the quality and perceived value of the feedbacks students give their
peers, and to figure out some of the motivational factors related to the fact that students know that their products
will be assessed and ranked by their peers, and eventually will be publicly discussed in front of the whole class.
How do students feel about such circumstances? Do they feel intimidated? Does it energize them? Do they put
more effort into the project then they would normally do? Are personality traits, such as fear of failure, related
to the ways they deal with the knowledge their products will be 'exposed' and assessed by their peers? Does fear
of failure inhibit competitiveness?  Do they appreciate their peers' feedback?    In particular the study addresses
three issues:
 ! How reliable are peer assessments? Do they correlate with the instructor's assessments? Do students trust
   peer judges?
 ! To what extent students feel that the web-based competition motivated them and encouraged them to submit
   better artifacts or, on the contrary, inhibited them and harmed their performance?
 ! Is Fear of Failure, as a personality trait, related to students' attitudes toward web-based competitions? Better
   understanding of the psychological dynamics related to such competitions might help us support students
   who dislike such activities and experience excessive stress related to them.

Participants & Activities
Participants were 1st and 2nd year undergraduate students in an Instructional Technology B.A. program in a
technological college.   The program's curriculum is fully dedicated to instructional technologies (there are no
other majors or minors) and students are involved in many team projects during their 3 years study. In the first
two years all students take the same compulsory courses, while elective courses are offered only in the 3rd year.
As a result of these circumstances students' cohorts form very cohesive groups. This fact may have implications
on the ways    students' experienced  different aspects  of  the  activity, such as the need to assess peers, the
experience of being assessed by peers, and the experience of overt competition, as will be demonstrated in
students' quotes reported later on.
        41 1st first year students participated in an Introduction to Psychology course. As part of the social
psychology unit students were asked to apply attitude-change theories and design a poster and a brochure that
encourage parents to consider sending their children to schools that adopt constructivists' principles. Peers'
assessment and competition in this group dealt with the poster and its efficacy and potential impact for raising
awareness and attitude-change.
        44 2nd year students participated in a Web based Inquiry Learning course. As part of the course the
students were asked to design and develop a prototype of a WebQuest (Dodge, 1995) dealing with an historical
dilemma (related to world war II) the lecturer provided.    Peers' assessment and competition in this group dealt
with the WebQuest design. Students were encouraged to use a rubric (Dodge, 2001) to support the design and
the assessments process. The rubric contained assessment dimensions such as the effectiveness of motivational
strategies used to provide an engaging webquest, the appropriate use of collaborative learning strategies, the
sophistication of the task design in terms of encouraging higher-order thinking, etc.

Method & Tools
At the beginning of the semester students completed a Fear of Failure personality questionnaire (Performance
Failure Appraisal Inventory, Conroy, Willow & Metzler, 2002). The questionnaire measures the strength of
individuals' beliefs in five aversive consequences of    failing: fear of experiencing shame and embarrassment,
fear of devaluing one's self-esteem, fear of having an uncertain future, fear of important others losing interest
and fear of upsetting important others. The scores obtained from these five consequences are moderately- to
strongly-correlated with each other and their common variance can be modeled with a single higher-order factor
representing a general fear of failure. The breakdown of Fear of Failure to such 5 scales enables one to better
understand the exact cause of fear and properly address it (Conroy, Willow & Metzler, 2002). Fear of failure,
general, is believed to intimidate need for achievement and compositeness (McClelland, 1961).
        During the semester students participated in the competition activity and were asked to assess their
peers' projects and grade the artifacts. The specific activities and their web-based implementation are detailed in
the next section. The competition activities were an integral part of the courses; participation as assessors was
credited while the actual grades for the artifacts were given only by the instructor and students' assessments and
ranking did not influence it.
        Following the experience students answered a questionnaire (14 multiple selection items and one open
question) reflecting on their feelings and attitudes related to participating in the web-based competition and their
preferences regarding such projects. The questionnaire asked students to provide Likert type ratings to items
such as: "the fact that my artifact was rated by my peers: stressed me, made me put more effort into the project,
made me conduct more improvement trials, ended up improving my artifact", "peers' assessments seem valid to
me", "I would like to have more such competitive-like activities". The open question asked for students' opinion
about the competitive activity.

                                                   66  ·  © ISLS
                                                     ICLS 2010    ·  Volume 1

Web-Based Competition: Instructional Design and Implementation
The  competition    activities  were  performed       with   CeLS   (Collaborative    e-Learning Structures),  a  web-based
environment for designing and enacting collaborative online activities (Ronen et. al., 2006). The system offers
content free templates and a searchable repository of sample activities that were implemented with students.
Teachers can explore these resources and adapt them to suit their needs or create new activities from basic
building blocks.   CeLS unique feature is the ability to design activities that use learners' artifacts from previous
stages according to various Social Settings (e.g., one team accesses another team's project, a whole class gives
improvement ideas to one team, etc.). The Social Settings determine which and how many artifacts would be
presented to each participant for further interaction. This feature is exploited in order to design the competition
activities and  to  facilitate their enactment      in  a real   setting.! The general structure of  a  competition   activity
consists of three stages (Figure 1):
         Stage   1  presents   the   activity    and    provides  a  dedicated   place for  the  artifacts submission.   The
submission interface is adapted by the teacher to suit the artifact's requirements: in the posters competition, in
our study,  the interface  invited students      to summit   JPG    files up to 300kB  and in the WebQuest competition    a
the interface provided a location for submitting a proper link to a website. The artifacts submitted can be
individual or group products, as defined by the Social Settings.              In our case the artifacts were group products.
This definition  would    enable   either     of the  group    members     to  submit the artifact  then ensure  that in the
assessment stage a student would not be presented with her own group's artifact.

                Figure 1. The general structure of a competition activity implemented with CeLS.

         Stage 2: The Assessment stage starts with relevant instructions, then (some or all) peer artifacts are
presented  for  voting (see    Figure    2a). The    artifacts are  presented   anonymously   to   the peers. If the  activity
involves   assessing many      artifacts (as  in    the Poster   competition)   or if the artifacts are  complex   and their
assessment requires considerable effort (as in the WebQuest competition), it would be advisable to restrict the
load and present each judge with a limited number of artifacts.            Therefore, each judge in the Poster competition
was asked to assess 8 artifacts (Figure 2a) while in the WebQuest competition only 5 artifacts were assessed by
each student. Students were allowed a couple of days for these assessments.               The Assessment interface in our
competition    activities was   adjusted      so  that  each   assessor    had  to provide  an   overall   grade and  verbal
justifications  and explanations.    If  an   activity  would    require   a  more detailed evaluation   addressing   various
criteria, the Assessment interface could be a questionnaire or a rubric.
         Stage 3 presents the competition overall results (see example Figure 2b). The teacher can show the
assessment details (grades and justifications) for all artifacts (presented anonymously) to all students or to
present each participant only with the details for his own product.
         Figure 2 presents partial sample screens from Stage 2 and Stage 3 of the poster competition.

                                                          67   ·  © ISLS
                                                ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

                  Figure 2. Sample screens from the poster competition. (a) Stage 2 (b) Stage 3.

Results
First we will present data regarding the quality and worth trustfulness of peers' assessments and to what extent
they feel their peers judged their artifact fairly. Then we will present students' attitudes toward competing and
being assessed by peers and their perception of the impact of the competition approach on the quality of the
artifacts.  Finally, we will report about the relationships between Fear of Failure as a personality trait and
students' attitudes toward web-based competition activities.

Students as Assessors
Table 1 presents the correlations between students' mean ratings of artifacts and the lecturer's independent
ratings. Similar to Kali & Ronen (2008) findings, students' mean ratings seem to be valid and correlate nicely
with the instructor's grades.

   Table 1: Correlations between students' mean ratings of artifacts and the lecturer's independent ratings.

                               Activity                      # of Artifacts       r         p
                 Year 1: Poster Competition                       20            0.82     0.000004
                 Year 2: WebQuest Competition                     24            0.68      0.0001

           There is  a noticeable difference  between   the  two  correlations presented in Table 1. The higher
correlation between students and instructor in the Poster competition is probably due to the fact that the artifact
is less complex and less multi dimensional then the WebQuest one. In the WebQuest activity the assessment
process was much more demanding. As a result some students were biased by salient features (such as interface
and visual design) rather than assessing factors such as the pedagogical value of the WebQuest, resulting in a
lower correlation between students' and instructor's assessments.
           Students' comments   to artifacts were interesting,    non-repetitive, and provided an enriching  and
insightful analysis of the artifacts. It seems that a feedback given only by the instructor could not provide the
intellectual and emotional impact of such a multiple perspectives feedback to many artifacts (see examples in
Figure 3).

                                                    68  ·  © ISLS
                                                ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

                       Figure 3. Examples of posters and few sample peers' assessments.

Most students in both classes (about 80%) felt that peer assessments to their own artifacts were valid and fair.
No significant correlation was found between the appreciation of peer grades' validity and the actual grades
granted by the peers, meaning that this view was shared also by students whose artifacts were judged less
favorably by their peers.

Competition as an Instructional Strategy ­ Student's Views
The analysis of 1st and 2nd year students' responses to the reflective questionnaire and interviews revealed very
similar distributions, therefore we shall refer to both groups as a whole (N=85).
       Most students felt that the awareness to the fact that their artifacts would be exposed and assessed by
peers resulted in a better product (Table 2).

Table 2 : Perceived impact of the awareness that the artifacts would be assessed by peers on artifacts' quality.

                                    Perceived impact on artifacts' quality (%)
                             None       Little         Some         Large      Very large
                              14         20               40           22          4

Only few students (4%) reported that the competition was somewhat "paralyzing" resulting in a detrimental
effect upon their artifacts.
       As could be expected, self reported motivation caused by the competition (items such as "the fact that
my artifact was rated by my peers: made me put more effort into the project") was significantly correlated with
the perception of positive effect on products' quality (r=0.72 p<0.000001). The more interesting finding is
related to the perception of stress caused by the competition activity (based on the item: "the fact that my artifact
was graded by my peers stressed me"). Even if no correlation was found between the degree of stress caused by
the activity and the perceived impact on products' quality, the estimation of stress was significantly correlated
with the perception of effort devoted to the creation of the artifacts (r=0.33 p<0.001), meaning that students who

                                                    69  ·  © ISLS
                                                   ICLS 2010    ·  Volume 1

admitted  to being   more   stressed also  felt   that they  have    devoted  more    time and   effort to   the  activity. The
beneficial effect of "some stress" is demonstrated in Table 3 that presents the student's perceptions of the
competition activity as motivating and as stressing.

      Table 3: Student's perceptions of the competition as a motivating and as a stressing activity (N=85).

                                                                Motivation (%)
                                                     none             some             much           Total
                                  none                 4                23               23             50
                 Stress (%)      some                  2                20               24             46
                                 much                  1                                  3             4
                                   Total               7                43                50            100

        Even if most (#$%" would favor using competition activities in academic courses, in their detailed
comments many recommended not to "overuse" this strategy and to restrict it to once in a semester in order not
to impose an "exaggerated" workload. The quantitative aspects were supported by students' written comments.
Following    are few  examples  of   students'    opinions     regarding  peer   judged    competition  as   an   instructional
method:
Positive opinions:
- It is very motivating. It made me put      lots of effort. I think that without    the competitive  factor  I  wouldn't   have
  achieved such a success in this WebQuest activity. In addition the CeLS environment allowed us all to see
  each others' products, which is very nice for comparing and learning.
- The  number    of WebQuests   we   had to  assess    (5) was  just right. I would   not ask  students to   assess more    then
  that. I believe competition is always a good idea. The fact that the leading products were presented and
  discussed in class made me feel really good after all the effort I have put in it.
- I am  a competitive  type so this  method     really helped   me   to achieve  a meaningful    product.  I was  enriched   by
  viewing the elaborated products of my peers. To summarize, it was fun and educative.
Ambivalent opinions:
- I think the  competitive  activity is  useful,  efficient  and   contributing    as long as  a rubric is provided   and   the
  grading process is led by it. In this WebQuest activity we were encouraged to use a rubric. According to the
  competition results, it seems that not everyone used it - so there isn't enough uniformity in the grades given by
  peers and in some cases there weren't sufficient explanations to support assigned grades.
- I think that   to some extent the  competition       did stimulate    interest and  encouraged   teams   to produce   better
  WebQuests ­ yet, personally I believe that it is not always good to conduct such competitions since it might
  create tensions between class members, create uncomfortable situations, or unreliable results.
- I don't like so much competitive activities. Working in a primary school I saw cases where students               gave up in
  advance, since they thought they don't have a chance. On the other hand ­ I think that from time to time, such
  an experience could be a fun and refreshing.
- Competition    could paralyze  people   with    low  self-confidence    ­   yet, with  right team   work   such   a problem
  might be less dominant. I believe in competition, believe it motivates, and produces higher quality products.
  Of course one shouldn't exaggerate and put people into too much pressure.
- Competition is a   good yet problematic method.       It was difficult  for me to   assess close friends from our class. In
  addition, competitive students would not want to give high grade to others that might surpass them.               In a small
  and cohesive class as ours - it is hard to critique others.
Negative opinions:
- Some people need to learn how to provide feedback to others ­ and              the lecturer needs to stress it.
- After reading the   feedback given    to our  WebQuest I was     pissed   off. I realized that people drastically punished
  us for criteria that weren't relevant. It seems that people didn't realize what the purpose of the activity was.
  Some groups created a fully functioning web site rather then a prototype. As a result feedback focused on
  usability and visual design aspects rather then the criteria defined by the rubric provided.
- The problem    with competition    is that it puts pressure   on those  who    are  highly anxious. I am   sorry  that in our
  class (1st year, poster project) anxiety is more salient then healthy competition. But maybe it is only our class
  and when time passes it will change.
          One can see the competitive activity raised some intense emotions. Some students loved it while others
were skeptical about their peers' feedback and worried about augmenting the anxiety level in class. It seems that
most of the students felt that activity was refreshing and fruitful yet shouldn't be implemented too often.

Fear of failure and students' attitudes toward Web-based competition
Fear of failure was found to be related to participants' negative attitudes towards web-based competition. There
was a considerable correlation (r=.47 p<.01) between Fear of Failure (sub-scale related to devaluing one's self-
esteem) and participants' reporting that the competition paralyzed them.              Similarly, Fear of failure (sub-scale
related fear of upsetting important others) was correlated to students' preference to have peers assessments

                                                        70   ·  © ISLS
                                                ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

without numeric grades and competitive aspects (r=.4 p<.01).         On the other hand, Fear of Failure (sub-scale
related to fear of experiencing shame and embarrassment) was correlated with reporting about conducting more
improvement trials (r=.32 p<.01).
          It seems,  thus, that fear  of failure has   different dimensions    and  is not   a holistic psychological
phenomenon      with uniform  consequences.    Some    dimensions   (e.g., devaluing   one's self esteem,  or  fear of
upsetting important others) might inhibit students and consequently cause a decline in performance,            whereas
others   (such  as fear of  experiencing   shame  and  embarrassment),      on  the contrary,  might   boost students'
motivation and make them invest more effort in their artifacts. Such fine differentiations might give instructors a
clue regarding ways to support students who experience excessive stress related to peer-assessed competitions.
For instance, instructors could encourage anxious students to try and diminish the direct, and at times painful,
connection between their products and their self-esteem. Alternatively, an instructor could gently suggest that as
grownups, important others might perceive such students more favorably then dominant persons related to their
past.

Discussion
The findings support previous reports which provide evidence that peer assessments are trust worthy, reliable,
and   in many   cases highly  correlate  with  instructors' assessments    (Kali &  Ronen,   2008).  Students'  verbal
comments     in our  study  demonstrate  the   emotional  and  intellectual advantage   of   feedback   provided from
multiple perspectives as compared to feedback provided exclusively from the instructor.         Students' comment to
peers' artifacts seem to be enriching, interesting, stimulating and honest. Despite the concerns of few, most
students reported they trusted their friends' feedback, and this was true also for students who did not do so well.
          Most students believe that the awareness to the fact that their products would be assessed by their peers
boosted their motivation and as a result they submitted better artifacts. The fact that the experience of stress was
positively correlated with effort invested supports the famous inverted U theory (e.g., Muse et al., 2003) which
claims that   moderate amounts of    stress improves performance. However, our data suggests that some students
might    experience  intense stress related  to  peer  ranking  and  competition;    Students  who   tend to   devalue
themselves as a result of failure, and students who tend to fear they upset important others when they fail ­ seem
to have experienced the competition as paralyzing and would prefer not be ranked by their peers. On the other
hand students who tend to feel embarrassed as a result of failure seem to put more effort and improve their
performance. These findings shed some light on the possible dynamics causing some students to be paralyzed
by competitive-like activities and provide some clues on how an instructor might support them.
          The   academic   grading  system  is based  on  competitive   sorting. Many   believe   that  competition is
detrimental to learning and to intrinsic motivation and call for the minimization of its effects by means of
educational strategies such as collaborative learning (Kohn, 1992). Do competitive learning activities augment
the harmful effects of grading and competitive sorting? Our quantitative and qualitative data supports studies
that claim the team competition is and effective and engaging experience (Slavin, 1980; Slavin et al., 1984; Fu
et al., 2009; Ke & Grabowski, 2007). Recent motivation theories (Covington & Wiedenhaupt, 1997) argue that
intrinsic and extrinsic motivations are two independent dimensions (they suggest a quadripolar model rather
than a bipolar one). Thus, despite the fact that competition factors might increase extrinsic motivation, one
might still be intrinsically involved in a task, as long as it is intriguing, fun, and more similar to 'play' rather then
'work' (Covington & Wiedenhaupt, 1997). One can be stressed yet intrinsically motivated at the same time.
Nemerow (1996) reached similar conclusions: In a study applying both competitive and noncompetitive games,
students were surveyed to find out how they felt about the games and what they learned from them. Results
indicated that competitive games helped students improve self-esteem, peer relationships, and learning, yet, the
students described the competition as motivating but also producing pressure.
          The   competitive  learning experience   in  our    study seemed   to  endorse a   playful   climate and  to
intrinsically engage most of our students and caused many of them to believe they improved their performance.
Other higher education studies which experimented with similar, fun, team competition activities support this
notion (e.g., Corner et al. 2006; Casile, & Wheeler, 2005; Cramer & Curten, 2005; Kinzie et al. 1998).

Summary & Concluding Remarks
The fact that the team competition activities energized students in our study and made them believe that it
improved their products might indicate that when a favorable social climate is created most learners might enjoy
and benefit from the 'public' exposure and competitive situation involved with peer ranking and assessments.
The rich and divers nature of multiple perspective feedback seems to have a good potential of augmenting
learning processes and meta-cognitive self-assessment abilities (White & Frederiksen, 2000). Teachers in higher
education should consider using more often such strategies in any discipline where the creation of original
artifacts is relevant. As long as they succeed to create a playful, psychologically safe learning environment,
chances are most students will get intrinsically involved, enjoy the experience, and as a result of assessing
others' work, become more reflective about their own learning. Using a web-based environment such as CeLS
takes care of the logistic hassles and increases the chances that faculty members will enjoy the experience as
well.

                                                    71  ·   © ISLS
                                                ICLS 2010    ·  Volume 1

References
Cramer, S., Kurten, J. (2005). Inspire Future Engineers with the Concrete Canoe Competition. Tech Directions,
         65 (4), 17-19.
Casile, M.   &    Wheeler,  J. V.   (2005).  The  Magnetic     Sentences  Industry    Game:    A Competitive                                                                               In-Class
         Experience of Business-Level Strategy. Journal of Management Education, 29(5), 696-713.
Cole, M. (1996). Culture in mind. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Conroy   D.  E., Willow  J.  P., Metzler  J.   N. (2002).   Multidimensional     Fear  of Failure   Measurement:                                                                               The
         Performance Failure Appraisal Inventory. Journal of Applied Sport Psychology, 14 (2), 76-90.
Corner, P. D.,    Bowden, S.,   Clark, D., Collins, E.,     Gibb, J., Kearins,   K.,  Pavlovich, K.  (2006). Grounded
         Learning from a Strategy Case Competition. Journal of Management Education, 30(3), 431-454.
Covington, M. V., & Wiedenhaupt, S. (1997). Turning work into play: The nature and nurturing of                                                                                            intrinsic
         task engagement.    In R.   P. Perry   &  J. C.  Smart,  (Eds.),  Effective   teaching  in higher   education:
         Research and practice, (pp. 101-114). Agathon Press, New York.
Dodge, Dodge, B.B. ! (1995). WebQuests: A technique (2001). A Rubric for Evaluatingfor Internet-based learning. Distance Educator, WebQuests. Retrieved October 12, 2009 from 1(2), 10-13.
         http://webquest.sdsu.edu/webquestrubric.html
Falchikov, N. (2003). Involving students in assessment. Psychology Learning and Teaching, 3(2), 102-108.
Falchikov,  N.,   & Goldfinch,   J.  (2000).   Student   Peer  Assessment     in Higher   Education: A   meta-analysis
         comparing peer and teacher marks. Review of Educational Researc, 70(3), 287-322.
Fu, F.L., Wu, Y.L., Ho, H.C. (2009). An Investigation of       CoOpetitive Pedagogic Design      for Knowledge
         Creation in Web-Based Learning.       Computers & Education, 53( 3), 550-562.
Kali, Y., & Ronen M.    (2008). Assessing the assessors: Added value in web-based multi-cycle peer assessment
         in higher education, Research and Practice in Technology Enhanced Learning, 3(1), 3-32.
Ke, F., & Grabowski, B. (2007). Game playing for Math learning: Cooperative or not? British Journal of
         Educational Technology, 38(2), 249­259.
Kinzie, M.B.,   Hrabe, M.E., Larsen, V. A. (1998). An Instructional Design Case Event: Exploring Issues in
         Professional Practice. Educational Technology Research and Development, 46(1), 53-71.
Kohn, A. (1992). Resistance to Cooperative Learning: Making Sense of Its Deletion and Dilution. Journal of
         Education, (174)2, 38-56.
Lave, J. & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning. Legitimate peripheral participation. Cambridge: Cambridge
         University Press.
McClelland, D. C. (1961). Methods of Measuring Human Motivation, in J.W. Atkinson, (ed.), The Achieving
         Society, pp. 41-43. Princeton, N.J.
Muse, L. A., Harris, S. G., & Feild, S. H. (2003). Has the Inverted-U Theory of Stress and Job Performance Had
         a Fair Test? Human Performance, 16(4), 349­364.
Nemerow, L.G. (1996). Do Classroom Games Improve Motivation and Learning? Teaching and Change, 3 (4),
         356-566.
Ronen,  M.,   Kohen-Vacs,   D.  &   Raz-Fogel,    N.  (2006).  Adopt  &   Adapt:   Structuring,  Sharing  and                                                                              Reusing
         Asynchronous Collaborative Pedagogy.         In Barab, S., Hay, K., &     Hickey., D. (Eds), Proceedings of
         the  7th international  conference    on Learning     sciences  (pp. 599-606).   International Society                                                                             of the
         Learning Sciences (ISLS).
Rowland, G. (1994). Educating Instructional Designers: Different Methods for Different Outcomes. Educational
         Technology, 34(6), 5-11.
Sansalone,  M.  (1990).  Teaching    Structural   Concepts   through  Case    Studies and Competitions.   Engineering
         Education, 80(4), 472-475.
Slavin, R. E. (1980). Cooperative learning. Review of Educational Research, 50(2), 315­342.
Slavin, R. E., Leavey, M. B., & Madden, N. A. (1984). Combining cooperative learning and individualized
         instruction: Effects on student mathematics achievement, attitudes, and behaviors. The Elementary
         School Journal, 84(4), 408­422.
Smith, H., Cooper, A., & Lancaster, L. (2002). Improving the quality of undergraduate peer assessment: A case
         for student and staff development. Innovations in Education and Teaching International, 39(1), 71-81.
White,  B.  Y., &   Frederiksen,  J. R.  (2000).   Technological    tools and    instructional approaches  for                                                                             making
         scientific inquiry accessible to all. In M. J. Jacobson & R. B. Kozma (Eds.), Innovation in science and
         mathematics education (pp. 321-35). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.

                                                      72  ·  © ISLS
