                                                    ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

  Activity-Theoretical Research on Science Teachers' Expertise and
                                                       Learning

   Cory T. Forbes, University of Iowa, N252 Lindquist Center, Iowa City, IA, 52242, cory-forbes@uiowa.edu
Cheryl Ann Madeira, University of Toronto, 252 Bloor St. W., Toronto, ON, M5S 2V6, cmadeira@oise.utoronto.ca
   James D. Slotta, University of Toronto, 252 Bloor St. W., Toronto, ON, M5S 2V6, jslotta@oise.utoronto.ca

          Abstract:   Teachers serve as critical mediators of student learning.     As such, teachers' expertise
          and learning remain important foci for theoretical development and empirical research.          Cultural-
          historical activity theory (CHAT) has been forwarded as an underutilized but potentially powerful
          tool for educational research, including teachers' expertise, practice, and learning.      However, as
          yet, little CHAT-based research has been undertaken focused on science teachers and teaching. In
          this paper, we draw upon two such empirical studies in which CHAT was used as an explicit
          theoretical and analytical   framework    to  explore  CHAT-based     perspectives  on  science  teacher
          learning.   We present findings from these studies to highlight important themes in CHAT-based
          research on science teachers' learning in and from practice.        These findings can not only inform
          programmatic efforts to better promote teachers' learning, but also theoretical perspectives on
          science teachers'  expertise,   practice, and   learning  across  the science    education and   learning
          sciences communities.

Background and Theoretical Framework
In this paper, we present results from two CHAT-based studies of science teacher learning and practice to discuss
theoretical contributions of CHAT to perspectives on science teacher learning and practice. In Study A, Forbes uses
CHAT to investigate preservice elementary teachers' curriculum design and development of pedagogical design
capacity for inquiry during the final year of their formal teacher education.        In Study B, Madeira and Slotta use
CHAT to investigate how lesson planning, enactment, reflection and peer exchange influence experienced secondary
science teachers' development of pedagogical content knowledge (PCK) in a professional development context.
Full findings from each of these studies have been presented previously.          We therefore summarize here the study
populations and designs, their explicit theoretical and analytical grounding in CHAT, the CHAT-based models we
employed, methods of data collection and analyses, and main findings from each study.          The primary purpose of this
paper is to instead synthesize findings across these two studies to highlight and explore implications they hold for
CHAT-based    perspectives   on  teachers'  learning   and  practice.  These   new theoretical   insights can inform  future
research on science teachers and teaching.

Situated Perspectives on Teachers' Knowledge and Expertise
Teaching is a complex and dynamic activity that requires teachers to develop robust expertise in order to best
promote and facilitate student learning of science through inquiry.      Teachers' expertise, and the manner in which it
develops over time (i.e., learning), is fundamentally situated and embedded in contexts of practice.        Participation in
these communities of practice (Wenger, 1998), activity systems (Engeström, 1987), or ecosocial systems (Lemke,
2000) is one characterized by the process of semiosis, or meaning-making.           Regular patterns of semiotic activity
within such  contexts,  which   develop   over time    and  therefore  have   histories of their own, are  characterized  as
practices.  Through    participation   in existing  practices,   participants become    more established   participants and
practitioners by aligning their own skill sets to conditions afforded in the setting where the activity occurs (Barab &
Roth, 2006).  However, by working to reconfigure constituent elements of existing practices, individuals can also
fundamentally  alter   them.    Learning,   then,   is defined   as engaging   in fundamentally    new    forms of  practice
(Engeström, 1987; Lemke, 2000).
          This perspective has important implications for understanding teacher learning.         Teachers derive socially-
constructed and culturally-mediated principles of teaching from practice and reinstantiate these principles in future
practice.  Teachers first reify their past experiences as principles of practice that take the   form of knowledge,  beliefs,
identities, and general orientations.  These constructs do not exist as extant entities ­ rather, they are constructed and
negotiated through activity and mobilized as tools in activity in light of norms and conditions of the contexts in
which activities occur.   Over time, their practice becomes more routinized. In teaching, it is routinized action that
characterizes teachers' knowledge, demarcating the transitions from novice to expert teachers along the teacher

                                                        651  ·  © ISLS
                                                     ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

professional  continuum.    This  routinization   is evidenced    in a  developed   alignment    between   teachers'  personal
characteristics and features of their contexts, both material and symbolic (Barab & Roth, 2006; Brown, 2009).              This
developed alignment represents teaching expertise.
          Questions  surrounding   teachers'    knowledge,      expertise, and   learning  have   held  a  prominent    role in
education scholarship   for many years  (e.g., Putnam & Borko, 2000; Shulman, 1986).          While such   research has   made
invaluable contributions our understanding of teachers' knowledge, beliefs, identities, and orientations, a great deal
remains   uncertain about   the nature of teachers'   expertise   and  learning.    Like many practitioners, teachers often
struggle  to articulate and  represent  the  principles   and   rationales underlying   their professional    practice.   There
remains little to no consensus as to what exactly constitutes teacher expertise and how to differentiate between
expert and   novice  teachers.   We  suggest    that  there exists   a strong rationale   for exploring   the utility of  novel
theoretical and analytical perspectives in subsequent research on teachers' expertise and learning.

Cultural-Historical Activity Theory (CHAT)
To better operationalize, capture, and describe expertise for teaching, cultural-historical activity theory (CHAT -
Engeström,    1987)  has  been   forwarded     as a   potentially  useful   tool  for educational    researchers   (Grossman,
Smagorinsky, & Valencia, 1999; Roth & Lee, 2007).           Cultural-historical activity theory is a psychological, activity-
based  perspective  on  human    activity and   development.      Consistent  with  situated  perspectives  on  knowing    and
learning, CHAT affords a perspective on consciousness as an emergent property of interactions between groups of
people in certain cultural contexts rather than an entity `in the head'.     As Engeström (1987) notes, it is a "concept of
activity based on material production, mediated by technical and psychological tools as well as by other human
beings" (pg. 25).   In this way, CHAT is fundamentally concerned with socially- and culturally-mediated, as well as
object-oriented, activity and the evolution of established practices over time.
          The fundamental    unit of   analysis   in activity   theory is  human  social  activity itself, driven  by   a goal-
orientation relevant to a particular need or motive as defined by members of the community.            Activity undertaken by
an individual  (subject)  whose   particular   motive  or need    impels   action oriented toward    a  particular problem   or
purpose (object).   Consistent with the foundations of cognitive science laid by Vygotsky, such activity is also
mediated by tools and artifacts (instruments) and by other human beings (community) within the activity system.
The nature   of  activity as it  develops   is also   structured  and   shaped   by norms     of the community     (rules) and
specialization or social stratification (division of labor).    These complex relationships are embodied in the CHAT
activity triangle, a generalized model for analyzing social activity, which is shown in Figure 1.

       Figure 1. Cultural-historical Activity Theory Model of Human Activity (Engeström, 1987)

Activities are driven by their objects and motives.       Activities are, however, also composed of composite actions
which,  in turn, are constituted  by   conditioned    operations.    Operations   are best characterized   as  the kinesthetic
foundation upon which sets of actions and, ultimately, activities, are based.          These operations are the product of
direct response  to  environmental   stimuli,   typically   unconscious,   routinized  behaviors.    In contrast,  actions   are
consciously-driven by goals.     Both actions and the goals toward which they are oriented are given meaning by the
activities in which they are situated while, at the same time, constitute the achievement of the collective motive of
activity.

                                                        652   ·  © ISLS
                                                   ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

          The  mediating   influence of   tools is a  key  assumption    of activity theory.  Vygotsky      (1978)  noted  the
importance of tools in transforming human activity from a direct to an indirect, or mediated, relationship to the
environment.    This is shown in the `production' triangle in Figure 1, which illustrates the iconic triadic relationship
between   the  individual,  the  environment,   and   mediating   influence   of available   tools.  Production    processes,
however, do not occur in the abstract.    Rather, they are embedded in particular social and cultural contexts that serve
to mediate and shape the relationships between individuals, their tools, and the particular focus of their efforts.
Cultural and social influences on activity include three elements: rules, community, and divisions of labor.
          The CHAT model in Figure 1 provides a complete account for the structure of a given activity system, or
the central activity.   However, third-generation activity theory assumes that the constitutive elements of a given
central activity (i.e., nodes of the triangle) are themselves the products of related, interconnected activities. As such,
a  particular activity system is itself embedded   in networks   of  activity systems.   While these activities  may   appear
stable, there  exist ever-present   tensions within   and  between   nodes  of  activity systems and   neighboring     activity
systems.   These     contradictions arise as  "the   clash   between  individual  actions  and  the  total  activity   system"
(Engeström, 1987, pg. 30) and are the motor for and harbinger of change in activity.          Contradictions are important
because   they lie at  the heart of learning  in   practice.   These contradictions,  which  develop   within    and between
bounded activity systems or practices, like at the heart of learning in practice in that they must be negotiated and
addressed  to  engage   in culturally-more   advanced   forms    of an  existing practice.   The goal    of such  learning  is
expansive development of new, more culturally-advanced and articulated forms of activity.
          CHAT can serve as a useful tool to study teachers, teaching, and teacher learning (Grossman, Smagorinsky,
& Valencia, 1999).      CHAT centralizes activity itself as the fundamental unit of analysis, emphasizing goal- and
object-oriented material production, the cultural mediation of these processes, and how a particular activity is nested
within broader networks of systems.     As such, it highlights the importance of learning in context (Putnam & Borko,
2000).  Teachers learn from classroom practice but these are not the only settings in which they go about their work.
Especially in respect to preservice teachers, who traverse multiple activity settings on their way to becoming full-
time, practicing   teachers, accounting   for   these unique   settings  in which  learning  occurs   is essential.    Such a
perspective also prioritizes the importance of tools, whether curriculum materials or others, that teachers use to
structure and  guide   classroom  practice.  In  this way,   the CHAT    model   provides  a mechanism      through  which  to
attend to both individuals and the worlds in which they learn and develop.
          However, CHAT-based research on science teachers, teaching, and teacher learning is limited.                 In this
paper, we present methods and findings from two parallel CHAT-based studies on science teachers (elementary and
secondary) in professional learning contexts (formal teacher education and professional development).            The specific
purpose of this paper is twofold.     First, we describe two studies that use CHAT to investigate science teacher
learning through iterative cycles of instructional planning, lesson enactment, and reflection on practice.        Second, we
identify and discuss important theoretical contributions to perspectives on teacher learning and expertise that have
emerged from these studies. Research methods, findings, and research-related issues discussed in this paper will not
only help other researchers employ CHAT in research on science teachers, teaching, and teacher learning, but also
inform theoretical discussions of the nature of teachers' expertise and learning.

Methods and Main Findings

Study A ­Preservice Elementary Teachers' Development of Pedagogical Design Capacity
for Inquiry-Based Science Teaching and Learning
Science curriculum materials remain one of the most widespread and important tools for teachers.            However, rather
than enacting them `as-is', teachers actively mobilize, evaluate, critique, and adapt curriculum materials (Remillard,
2005).  The curriculum design process is a function of teachers' personal characteristics (knowledge, beliefs, and
identity, etc.), features of the curriculum materials, and features of their professional contexts (e.g., Roehrig, Kruse,
& Kern, 2007).     Together, these three factors, as well as the goals toward which classroom activity is oriented,
constitute the pedagogical design capacity a classroom activity system affords a particular teacher (Brown, 2009). In
order to leverage and maximize the capacity for pedagogical design afforded them, teachers need to learn to use
curriculum materials effectively (Remillard, 2005).       This is particularly important for preservice teachers who tend
to rely   heavily  on   curriculum  materials   as   beginning   teachers   and  who   struggle  to  translate   their reified
understandings of inquiry-oriented teaching and learning into classroom practice. This study extends recent research
on the use of curriculum materials in science teacher education (e.g., Forbes & Davis, 2008; Schwarz et al., 2008) by
focusing  on   how   preservice  elementary  teachers  translate  their  espoused  inquiry   frameworks     into planned and

                                                       653   ·   © ISLS
                                                    ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

enacted science lessons, as well as how the curriculum design process is socially- and culturally-mediated across
contexts.
          This mixed-methods study involves 46 preservice elementary teachers in an elementary science teaching
methods course and in-depth case studies of four elementary preservice teachers during the final year of their teacher
education program.     The focal point for data collection and analyses were science lessons the preservice teachers
planned and enacted in elementary classrooms during the methods and student teaching semesters.                   Drawing on
activity-theoretical  frameworks,   two interacting   activity   systems   are articulated  that are relevant  to this study.
Curriculum planning (central activity) and curriculum enactment (object-activity) are foregrounded as constituting
curriculum design for inquiry, consistent with existing descriptions of teachers' practice (e.g., Remillard, 2005).
This model provides a number of specific affordances.          First, it highlights the use of both symbolic and material
tools (preservice teachers' espoused inquiry frameworks and science curriculum materials), what Engeström (2007)
refers to as `tool constellations', with which they engage in    curriculum design.   Second, the    model affords the ability
to map the construction of science lesson plans as boundary objects between curriculum planning and enactment
domains.   Third, by identifying contradictions that the preservice teachers articulate within and across settings, it is
possible to link their curriculum design decisions to underlying contradiction-specific rationales.          Ultimately, this
model,  in   addition to other representational   tools described    in  the next  section, affords  the ability  to trace the
emergence and resolution of contradictions in curriculum design activity over time.
          Data   were  collected throughout  the    academic   year and    included  interviews,  lesson plans,   instructional
artifacts, reflective journals, and observations of enacted science lessons.      To code this data, a series of coding keys
were developed that are explicitly aligned with the CHAT-based model used in this study.                 These coding keys
afforded the ability to identify the preservice teachers' curriculum design decisions, assess the inquiry-orientations
of their planned and enacted science lessons, and identify contradictions that emerged in their curriculum design
activity.  Using   coded  data   from the total  population    of preservice   teachers in  the   methods   semester   (n=46),
quantitative analyses were performed to describe patterns in their curriculum design decision-making and to assess
how inquiry-based their planned science lessons were.         A regression model was also constructed to provide causal
explanations for why their lessons were or were not highly inquiry-based.         Qualitative methods were used to analyze
data  from   the four preservice teachers studied    over the  year.    These  analyses were  characterized    by an  iterative
process of coding, reduction, displaying, and verification of data (Miles & Huberman, 1994) that were directed
towards the development of case studies.     The primary goal     of these analyses was to identify    contradictions  within
and across curriculum design contexts that explained the preservice teachers' curriculum design decisions. Multiple
coding    matrices  were  used   to  display these   relationships,   one    that was   lesson-specific  and   one   that  was
contradiction-specific.  The latter was necessary to trace the resolution of particular, pervasive contradictions over
time and characterize preservice teachers' evolving inquiry frameworks and curriculum design practices.
          Results  from  Study   A   illustrate how   extant,  reified  models    of classroom   inquiry   served  as  crucial
instruments in the preservice teachers' curriculum design for inquiry.        They developed their capacities to transform
their professed models of inquiry into classroom practice by delimiting particular aspects of inquiry as the object of
their curriculum planning activity.   However, their curriculum design efforts led to emergent contradictions within
their placement    classrooms.   The  preservice    teachers   worked   to resolve   these  contradictions  in various  ways,
including constructing specialized, interim instructional plans; restructuring and reordering time; and reprioritizing
particular facets of inquiry in ways that reflected these   constraints. While the curriculum materials they used      largely
defined the material and conceptual space in which their curriculum design efforts occurred, it was the influence of
their placement classroom contexts that ultimately determined how they were able to translate the abstract into the
concrete.    The preservice teachers ultimately represented the challenges they experienced enacting their science
lessons as a fundamental contradiction between two object-motives of curriculum enactment focused on student
learning.  All were still struggling to reconcile this contradiction at the end of the study.

Study B ­ How Pedagogical Content Knowledge Develops: The Impact of Reflection and
Community
While  many      researchers have   advanced    the notion  of   pedagogical   content  knowledge    (e.g., Shulman,   1986;
Loughran et al., 2001), there remains a gap in our understanding of how this knowledge develops over the course of
a teacher's career. There are many factors that likely influence the development of PCK, including the teacher's
content knowledge within a subject domain, the students' prior knowledge, the pedagogical approaches employed,
interactions between students and teacher, student assessments, and how the teacher reflects on these experiences
before, during, and after the instruction (Morine-Dershimer & Kent, 1999; Magnusson, Krajcik, & Borko, 1999).
Many scholars comment on the complex and cognitive nature of teacher planning, and the influence of the teaching
of any  subject   area on teacher   knowledge    (Magnusson,     Krajcik,  &   Borko,  1999;  Leinhardt   &  Greeno,   1986).

                                                        654  ·  © ISLS
                                                    ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

Teachers'  knowledge     growth   can occur  through     professional  development,   which   can  "help    teachers develop
cohesive   understanding  about    inquiry instruction   by   building   on their existing ideas   about  student   learning,
technology and the role of the instructor" (Slotta, 2004, pg. 203). However, most teacher professional development
is decontextualized.    This study  examines    the role of   reflection and peer-exchange    in  helping   science  teachers
develop PCK though their design, enactment, and revision of a technology-enhanced, project-based lesson. An
intervention is introduced where teachers reflect on their planning, enactment, and revisions, as well as with their
peers in a community.    CHAT is employed to analyze the connections among the activities in which teachers are
engaged, the context in which these interactions are occurring, and the teachers' development of PCK.
          This three-year    longitudinal  study    uses an   iterative  design-based  methodology       to investigate  the
development    of pedagogical   content knowledge     of nine    science teachers (n=9) in  relation to  their  instructional
practices  (e.g., lesson  design,   preparations,   classroom    interactions, assessment     and feedback),    and  student
understanding. The focus is on two specific interventions that serve to promote professional development: reflection,
and peer-exchange. Teachers co-design and then enact a project-based, technology-enriched science lesson. Four
main phases of teacher activities were captured by this study: (1) Prior teacher knowledge and experience; (2)
Lesson design; (3) Classroom enactment; (4) Revision of lesson design.
          Data sources include teacher surveys, interview questions, lesson plans, reflections (captured in a wiki),
videotaped classroom enactments, field notes, student artifacts and responses, and peer exchanges (on wiki, and in
group meetings).    Following Koehler and Mishura (2005), all wiki documentation, interviews and field notes were
coded for different categories of teacher knowledge, including pedagogical content knowledge.               For each coded
knowledge element, a qualitative score of 0-3 was assigned. For PCK, 0 represented the absence of that knowledge,
while 3 represented a very clear understanding of students' prior knowledge and appropriate teaching strategies.
These coded knowledge elements when combined with other enactment coding measures were used as data for
subsequent CHAT analysis.
          The  activity and  action patterns from    the   teachers' classroom    enactments  were   identified from   video
documentation and field notes, and these were coded for types of action: Small group interactions (SGI); Large
group interactions (LGI); Logistic actions (Log); and Isolated actions (Iso). Both SGI and LGI were subdivided into
management (M) and pedagogical actions (Ped). Each type of action became its own segment. A qualitative score of
1-3 was assigned   for the content of interaction.  A score of 3 represented   strong engagement   and strongly addressing
student learning needs.   A score of 1 represented poor engagement or poor interaction. Students' activities were
coded as either SGI or LGI and given a qualitative score of 1-3 based on the engagement, either with student peers
or with teacher.   A score of 3 represented high quality of engagement such as being on task and asking relevant
questions.   A score of 1 represents a weaker level of engagement.       The SGI and LGI qualitative score was multiplied
by the time frame of that segment and this value was then graphically represented. These codes were then cross-
referenced to the nodes on an activity triangle for teacher enactment of project-based lessons, providing an iterative
activity-based analysis.  A within case and cross-case analysis of actions and operations (Miles & Huberman, 1994)
provided evidence of challenges, contradictions and tensions that resulted in emerging knowledge or new learning
opportunities for teachers.
          Results in this study indicate that tools such as scaffolded wiki-reflections and lesson designs offered a
mechanism    for  participants to  make   their actions  visible  to  themselves   and to  their  peers. The   CHAT-based
framework    used  in   Study  B   helped  expose   tensions   between    subject-tool-object and  community-tool-object
relationships, which in turn affected the next iteration of the lesson design and teacher knowledge development,
while also identifying the tensions within activity systems and the emergence of new rules. For example, during the
lesson revision phase of the teachers' activities, participants were able to see specific flaws in the lesson design. All
teachers had a pattern of lesson revision, which identified the student wiki-templates in the project-based lesson as
underutilized.  Through   the   reflective practices,    teachers  (subject)   acted differently  in their   lesson   design
incorporating more scaffolding (rules) within the re-design of the lesson and, subsequently, enacted the lesson
differently. In addition, teachers participating in the peer-exchange activities began to emphasize the structured use
of wiki-templates as part of their lesson design. Tensions in the community-tool-object relationship caused dynamic
shifts in the activity systems from one iteration to the next. Thus, the generative knowledge construction was not
limited to self-reflections but also occurred through community exchanges and community reflections.

Implications for Perspectives on Science Teachers' Expertise and Learning
There have been recent calls for increased use of CHAT in education research (Roth & Lee, 2007), including
research on teachers' practice, expertise, and learning (Grossman, Smagorinsky, & Valencia, 1999).           However, there
remains little CHAT-based research focused on teachers and teachers' learning, particularly in science.              The two
parallel studies presented in previous sections are unique in that they draw explicitly upon CHAT as both theoretical

                                                       655  ·   © ISLS
                                                  ICLS 2010  ·   Volume 1

and analytical frameworks to investigate science teacher learning. Findings from these studies reinforce the context-
dependent nature of teachers' learning and expertise assumed in sociocultural theory (Putman & Borko, 2000).
However, they also advance the field's theoretical understanding of how and why teachers' learning is situated by
illustrating underlying contradictions that explain change over time in particular cultural contexts.          In this section,
we highlight important theoretical and practical implications for CHAT-based perspectives on teachers' expertise
and learning that have emerged from these two studies.
          A crucial element of CHAT is the break it makes with cognitivist psychology.           Rather than characterizing
learning as an internalization of mental schema or concepts, it assumes instead that learning is evidenced in changes
in activity, emerging from the synergistic interaction between the symbolic (cognitive and cultural) and physical
environment.   CHAT foregrounds the translation of the abstract to the concrete, or realization of the symbolic in
action through    activity.  However,  the origins  of expansive    learning   lie in  the initial recognition  of   emergent
contradictions and questions about the object and motive of a given activity.          So, in effect, the beginning of the
process of moving from the abstract to the concrete is spurred by the objectification of activity, or the articulation of
ideas, principles, and truths from experience.   Because activity also involves deriving the abstract from the concrete,
they are therefore temporal, and the symbolic is already a product of the history of the activity in which it is
mobilized and used.     Ultimately, then, networked practices, as illustrated here in both studies with curriculum
planning and curriculum enactment, rely not just on moving from the abstract to the concrete, but also from the
concrete  to  the abstract   through a  cyclical process   of  internalization  and   externalization   (Engeström,    2008),
participation and reification (Wenger, 1998), and circulating reference between form and matter (Latour, 1999).
What this suggests is that while practice-specific representations take many forms, they are both used in activity and
developed through activity.
          As a process of internalization and externalization (Engeström, 2008), activity systems appear twice to the
subject, in this case the teacher; once in material form and once in symbolic form.      Semiosisis an emergent property
of both.  For teachers, this highlights the dialectic by which they have, through activity, arrived ata particular point
in their own learning, and has clear implications for perspectives on teacher learning.      Most clearly, it highlights the
need for teachers' to be engaged in teaching practice and for that practice to be foregrounded in programs designed
to promote teacher learning.    This is crucial not only for teachers to identify the contradictions and tensions that
pervade classroom activity systems, but also for them to attempt to resolve those contradictions through activity.        In
Study A, for example, the preservice teachers articulated a fundamental contradiction in curriculum enactment for
inquiry between two objects and motives of curriculum enactment.             This tertiary contradiction emerged between
positioning students as objects of activity who appropriate predetermined learning goals and as community members
and co-collaborators  involved    in the co-construction   of  both  the   object  and explanations    of phenomena.    This
contradiction only emerged after engaging in multiple iterations of curriculum design for inquiry and was thus
derived and objectified from activity. In Study B, teacher tools (such as online reflection notes, and lesson designs),
highlighted  teacher actions   in classroom  activities,  and    identified critical  moments    (tensions)    where  teachers
recognized that a change in patterns of practice were required. The object in this study, PCK development, is
connected to these tensions and contradictions.   Through iterative activity-based analysis, these actions and changes
in actions allowed the object in this study, PCK development, to be traced.        These findings reinforce the importance
of teachers' engagement in rigorous processes of self-reflection and analysis of practice.
          From CHAT-based perspective, learning is defined as the evolution of an existing activity or practice to
more culturally-advanced form of that activity.    However, in addition to emphasizing teachers' learning as changes
in practice, CHAT foregrounds the fundamental motives that drive activity and the physical and symbolic objects
through which they are pursued.      All activity, including science teaching and learning in the classroom, is situated.
However, when cultural layers are removed from activities, they are left composed of the essentials of collaborative
work ­ groups of individuals working together on a particular task that possesses shared meaning (Engeström,
1987).   As a result, it is impossible to understanding teachers' learning without accounting for object-motives of
their professional practice.   In Study A, the preservice teachers' curriculum design for inquiry was punctuated by
episodes of lesson-specificity determined by the curriculum materials they employed.          While the episodic nature of
their curriculum planning and enactment cycles resulted in lesson-specific tools and physical objects, their symbolic
objects and motives largely remained constant ­ to promote students' construction of explanations from evidence
through collaborative classroom inquiry.     In  Study B,    the activity  system  occurs  embedded    in   authentic teacher
practice. The  teachers design,   enact  and revise an    innovative science    lesson  as  part   of their normal    activity.
However, active teacher learning requires collaboration with peers, as teacher knowledge development is demarked
as a social process. The development of community and the role of reflection within the community are powerful
elements  for "expansive     knowledge"  (Engeström,   2007).    Emerging    teacher   knowledge    (object  in Study  B) is
amplified  through  community     exchange   and community       activity. As evidenced    in both    studies, to understand

                                                      656  ·  © ISLS
                                                  ICLS 2010    ·  Volume 1

teachers' learning, it is critical to identify the object-motives that orient the activities through which their learning is
manifested.
          CHAT also emphasizes the material basis of activity, meaning that the products of activity are not just
abstract concepts or ideas, but physical, tangible objects.      Here, in both studies, the teachers' learning was made
manifest in the curriculum materials they produced through iterative cycles of curriculum design.           As boundary
objects (Wenger, 1998) between curriculum planning and curriculum enactment, the teachers' lesson plansand other
curricular artifacts served a dual purpose as a working problem space for curriculum planning and an instrument to
support curriculum enactment.    As such, they were representations of their learning, as others have argued before
(Ball & Lampert, 1999; Loughran et al., 2001; Shulman, 1986).         However, they also served as vehicles and conduits
for the transport and application of expertise in novel contexts. For the preservice teachers in Study A, they were not
only crucial instruments for translating inquiry frameworks into classroom practice, but also the contextualization
and specification of those inquiry frameworks over time.         In Study B, teacher lesson designs and student artifacts,
manifested as evidence for teachers and for the peer-community.         The teacher could comment on their learning in
practice with these artifacts, and were able to articulate their meaning and their understanding of project-based
learning. Given the challenges of promoting transfer, or learning across contexts, the focus on the physical and
material basis of transfer inherent to CHAT is an important element of perspectives on teacher learning.
          Finally, rather than emphasizing institutional stability, CHAT assumes that activity systems are inherently
contradictory, full of tensions, and always subject to change.        If such dynamicism exists as an integral feature of
activity systems,   including science  classrooms,  and     it   demands   changes  in practice to respond   to emergent
contradictions, then teacher learning from a CHAT-based perspective is a foregone conclusion.              But this does,
perhaps,  speak more   specifically to perspectives  on  teachers'     expertise.  Teachers' expertise must  not only   be
marked by their ability to operate within particular activity systems, but also to effectively respond to changes to
those activity systems and   emergent  contradictions.   For     the preservice teachers in  Study A,  the introduction of
inquiry as an extant framework necessitated changes in their teaching practice, though likely made less contradictory
by their lack of experience and participation in a mature,  preexisting form of teaching practice.  What came to define
their expertise for inquiry-based science, however, was the ability to respond to unpredictable schedules (rules) and
curricular resources (instruments) to engage students in inquiry practices. In Study B, teachers activity systems are
dynamic, fluid and in constant flux as they are dependant on the enactment of the lesson. This enactment addressed
school schedules, student learning and content-discipline.       The revision in lesson design (artifacts) and rules that
were set up for the next iteration of enactment occurred as a response to the tensions within the original activity
system. Often these shifts or changes were first recognized within the classroom (or on the fly), prompting a quick
adjust during the enactment which became more formalized in the revision of lesson design for the next iteration.

Conclusion
The two    studies presented  here  contribute to a limited      but growing body   of CHAT-based     education  research.
Specifically, the two studies described in this paper illustrate how CHAT can be employed in research on science
teachers' expertise, practice, and learning. As shown in the discussion of these two studies, such research can and,
we believe, will continue to yield novel insights into science teachers and teaching, both empirical and theoretical,
which possess the capacity to inform a multitude of design efforts focused on supporting science teachers' practice
and development of expertise.      However, the fusion of the CHAT framework with the material and conceptual
spaces in which teacher learning and practice takes place is not without its struggles.         As an emergent research
domain, it presents many questions to yet be addressed, particularly methodological ones.       We believe that these are
important issues that should be further explored for the promise of CHAT to be more fully realized in educational
research.

References
Ball, D.L. & Lampert, M. (1999). Multiples of evidence, time, and perspective: Revisiting the study of teaching and
         learning. In E.C. Lagemann & L.S. Shulman (Eds.), Issues in education research: Problems and
         possibilities (pp. 371-398). San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Barab, S.A. & Roth, W-M. (2006). Curriculum-based ecosystems: Supporting knowing from an ecological
         perspective. Educational Researcher, 35(5), 3-13.
Brown, M. (2009). Toward a theory of curriculum design and use: Understanding the teacher-tool relationship. In J.
         Remillard, B. Herbel-Eisenman, and G. Lloyd (Eds.), Mathematics teachers at work: Connecting
         curriculum materials and classroom instruction (pp. 17-37). New York: Routledge.

                                                     657  ·    © ISLS
                                                 ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

Engeström, Y. (1987). Learning by expanding: An activity-theoretical approach to developmental research.
       Helsinki: Orienta-Konsultit.
Engeström, Y. (2007). Enriching the theory of expansive learning: Lessons from journeys toward coconfiguration.
       Mind, Culture, and Activity, 14(1-2), 23-39.
Engeström, Y. (2008). From design experiments to formative interventions. In Proceedings of the 8th International
       Conference of the Learning Sciences (pg. 3-24). Utrecht, the Netherlands: ISLS.
Forbes, C.T. & Davis, E. A. (2008). The development of preservice elementary teachers' curricular role identity for
       science teaching. Science Education, 92(5), 909-940.
Grossman, P., Smagorinsky, P., & Valencia, S. (1999). Appropriating tools for teaching English: A theoretical
       framework for research on learning to teach. American Journal of Education, 108(1), 1-29.
Koehler, M. J., & Mishra, P. (2005). What happens when teachers design educational technology? The development
       of technological pedagogical content knowledge. Journal of Educational Computing Research, 32(2), 131­
       152.
Latour, B. (1999). Pandora's hope: Essays on the reality of science studies. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
       Press.
Lienhardt, G. & Greeno, J. (1986). The cognitive skill of teaching. Journal of Educational Psychology, 78(2), 75-
       95.
Lemke, J.L. (2000). Across the scales of time: Artifacts, activities, and meanings in ecosocial systems.Mind,
       Culture, and Activity, 7(4), 273-290.
Loughran, J.,  Milroy, P., Berry, A., Gunstone, R., Mulhall,  P. (2001). Documenting science teachers' pedagogical
       content knowledge through PaP-eRs. Research in Science Education, 31, 289-307.
Magnusson, S., Krajcik, J., & Borko, H. (1999). Nature, sources, and development of pedagogical content
       knowledge for science teaching. In J. Gess-Newsome & N. Lederman (Eds.), Examining pedagogical
       content knowledge: The construct and its implications for science education (pp. 95-132). The Netherlands:
       Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Miles, M.B. & Huberman, A.M. (1994). Qualitative data analysis. Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Morine-Dershimer, G. & Kent, T. (1999). The complex nature and sources of teachers' pedagogical knowledge. In J.
       Gess-Newsome & N.G. Lederman (Eds.), Examining pedagogical content knowledge: The construct and its
       implications for science education (pp. 215-234). The Netherlands: Kluwer Academic Publishing.
Putnam, R.T. & Borko, H. (2000). What do new views of knowledge and thinking have to say about research on
       teacher learning? Educational Researcher, 29(1), 4-15.
Remillard, J.T. (2005). Examining key concepts in research on teachers' use of mathematics curricula.Review of
       Educational Research, 75(2), 211-246.
Roehrig, G.H., Kruse, R.A., & Kern, A. (2007). Teacher and school characteristics and their influence on curriculum
       implementation. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 44(7), 883-907.
Roth, W-M & Lee, Y-J. (2007). "Vygotsky's neglected legacy": Cultural-historical activity theory. Review of
       Educational Research, 77(2), 186-232.
Schwarz, C., Gunckel, K., Smith, E., Covitt, B., Enfield, M., Bae, M., & Tsurusaki, B. (2008). Helping elementary
       pre-service teachers learn to use science curriculum materials for effective science teaching. Science
       Education, 92(2), 345-377.
Shulman, L. (1986). Those who understand: Knowledge growth in teaching. Educational Researcher, 15(2), 4-14.
Slotta, J. D. (2004). The Web-based Inquiry Science   Environment (WISE):     Scaffolding knowledge integration in
       the science classroom. In  M.C. Linn, P. Bell, and E.A. Davis (Eds.),    Internet environments for science
       education (pp. 203-232). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Vygotsky, L.S. (1978). Mind in society: The development of higher psychological processes. London, England:
       Cambridge University Press.
Wenger, E. (1998). Communities of practice: Learning, meaning, and identity. New York: Cambridge University
       Press.

Acknowledgements
This research is supported by the National Science Foundation (grant numbers REC-0092610, CLT-0227557, and
DRL-0733299), the University of Michigan Rackham School of Graduate Studies, and the Ontario Institute for
Studies in Education at the University of Toronto. Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations
expressed in this material are those of the authors.

                                                     658  ·  © ISLS
