                                                    ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

         Adapting Workflow Technology to Design-Based Research:
Development of a Method for Organizing the "Messiness" of Research
                in Technology-Rich Online Learning Environments

     Alan J. Hackbarth, Sharon J. Derry, Brendan R. Eagan, Julia Gressick, University of Wisconsin ­ Madison,
                      Educational Sciences Building, 1025 W. Johnson St., Madison, WI 53706
         E-mail: ajhackbarth@wisc.edu, derry@education.wisc.edu, beagan@wisc.edu, gressick@wisc.edu

         Abstract: A fundamental challenge of design-based research is that there are many variables that
         affect success of a design. Designers collect large amounts of data, but limited time and resources
         make analysis difficult and conclusions uncertain. Workflow technology is utilized in business and
         applied science environments to automate work processes and reveal "know-how," often tacit in
         scientific processes,   which   facilitate multiple   levels  of  reuse.  We   developed    a method    for
         representing   activity  in  an experimental    online   course  as  workflow   expressions.   Bielaczyc's
         (2006)   Social Infrastructure   Framework     (SIF)  is utilized to  identify  important   variables,  and
         comprehensive    data   mining  (CDM)      techniques   are used  to recover   data  from  course  session
         modules    and  activity logs.  In   this paper  we   review  the   literature related  to our theoretical
         framework, describe the CDM-based methodology, and give an example of how we are using it to
         support design-based research within an online college course.

Introduction
This contribution reports a new design research methodology based on workflow technology (Georgakopoulos,
Hornick, and Sheth, 1995; Ludäscher et al., 2005) and the Social Infrastructure Framework (SIF) (Bielaczyc, 2006)
that is especially  appropriate   for online  learning  environments.    The  context   for  our work   is HAL   Online,  an
innovative experimental section of "Human Abilities and Learning," a required course for teacher education and
other education-oriented   majors     offered through   the  Educational   Psychology    Department    at  the University  of
Wisconsin-Madison. HAL Online includes reading assignments, online exams, and meets in person occasionally,
but the primary instructional method is online argumentative discourse in small group discussion forums. Small
groups comprise 5-7 students who are grouped by the instructional staff based on their similar majors and career
interests and who work as a team throughout the semester. There are about 5 groups and 30 students in each course
offering. The broad goal for HAL Online students is to acquire foundational understanding of human learning and
thinking  that is  grounded  in   current  research   and   theory   from  cognitive    science, socio-cultural  theory, and
neuroscience. Students must demonstrate such understanding by using course ideas to: A. construct and justify well-
formed arguments about a range of important topics; B. articulate and evaluate the reasoning and arguments of
others, including peers and school children; C. participate effectively in argumentative small-group discourse online;
and D. work collaboratively to design, justify, and critique instruction that aims to promote good thinking in areas
related to their disciplinary majors.
         The course is divided into 4 units: Language and Reasoning; Brain-Based Education; The Mathematical
Basis of  Reasoning;  and  Instructional   Design    (a small-group    project). Each   unit comprises  3  or  4 interrelated
modules, each lasting one week. There is a required face-to-face (FTF) class for each unit. In FTF classes students
hear lectures, discuss readings, solve and discuss reasoning tasks with their group, and build community and rapport
with their peers. In a typical week students are given a reading assignment from a text that they complete over a 2-
day period. During this period they may also participate in a warmup activity online which often involves viewing a
video. Following this individual preparation they are required to go online and participate with their small groups in
a discussion activity. A typical discussion activity is "Brain Gym," part of the Brain-Based Education unit, in which
students are asked to play the roles of parents and educators trying to decide whether either of two brain-based
curriculum proposals should be offered by their school. Another is "Math Wars" in the mathematical reasoning unit,
a discussion of whether a school should adopt a progressive mathematics curriculum and approach exemplified in
videos viewed online.
         In this paper we illustrate our proposed workflow methodology with "Adventures in Argument," a one-
week module within the Language and Reasoning unit. In this activity students are required to observe and evaluate
arguments made in the popular media about current issues in the news. For example, in one semester students

                                                        667  ·  © ISLS
                                                 ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

evaluated arguments made in political debates. In a recent semester students evaluated arguments about different
health reform bills. Students' participation in small-group discussions is graded in accordance with a rubric (see
Table 1).

Table 1. Criteria for evaluating students' forum contributions

1.   Do you make a sufficient number of contributions? There is no set limit or number required, but a good rule of
     thumb is at least 4 thoughtful posts per forum (not per discussion topic).
2.   Are your arguments thoughtful, intelligent, mature, and justified with reasons and evidence (rather than just
     expressing personal opinion)?
3.   Do your posts specifically connect the forum discussion topics to the readings, providing evidence that you are
     thoughtfully connecting ideas from the course to the forum issues?
4.   Do you participate in a discourse (versus post at the last minute)? Forum discussions usually start on a day a
     little before the previous topic closes and they wrap up before the beginning of the next topic. Engaging in the
     forum discourse throughout the period rather than just throwing up a few posts at the end will improve your
     grade.
5.   Have you been a good group citizen, taken on some leadership -- starting discussions, serving as chair or
     summarizer, helping keep the group on task, contributing positive and encouraging words to others?

        At the end of each unit each student is required to submit a reflection on what they have experienced and
learned in that unit. These submissions are "published" through the blog facility provided in the Moodle course
management system (CMS) through which we offer the course online. At the end of each unit students individually
complete an online quiz assessing their mastery of the material in the unit. A typical quiz question provides students
with a link to a video and asks the students to analyze the video in some way. For example, in the mathematical
reasoning unit, a video of a child solving a mathematical task is provided and students are asked to use course ideas
to describe and analyze the child's reasoning and problem solving strategies.

Design-Based Research (DBR)
Design-based   research  is grounded  in  the  systematic   design and  study  of   instructional strategies and   tools in
authentic contexts (Barab and Squire, 2004); as such, there is no one accepted definition or methodology. The
Design-Based Research Group (2003, p. 5) identifies characteristics of "good" design-based research. The critical
characteristic is that the  central goals of  designing  learning  environments     and developing   theories  or  "proto-
theories" of learning are intertwined. Development and research takes place through continuous cycles of design,
enactment, analysis, and redesign, and research must account for how designs function in authentic settings ­ not
only in terms of success or failure, but also in terms of understanding the learning issues involved.
          One purpose of our research is to improve the effectiveness of our course through an iterative process in
which we make deliberate design changes. Another purpose is to assess the effects of design changes that are made
out of necessity, often due to constraints over which the instructional staff has little control. For example, when the
course is taught in summer it must be squeezed into a four-week intensive time period, which is very different from
the full semester course that is stretched out over a 16-week period. Because the primary instructional method is
online argumentative discourse in small groups, a third purpose of our research is to propose, test, and develop
"proto-theories" about how small groups in online environments collaborate to produce successful outcomes.
        Collins,   Joseph,  and Bielaczyc    (2004) describe   challenges  that   a design-research   team    faces when
implementing    design  experiments.  Foremost  is  that research   is usually  conducted  in the   "blooming,     buzzing
confusion" of classroom learning environments (Brown, 1992). There are many variables that influence the success
of a design,   and many    of those  variables cannot be    controlled  (Collins, Joseph, &   Bielaczyc,     2004,  p. 19).
Furthermore, each variable is part of a systemic whole; it is impossible to change one aspect of the system without
creating perturbations in others (Brown, 1992). Yet it is important to identify the critical variables of a design and
how they fit and work together in practice (Collins, Joseph, & Bielaczyc, 2004, p. 34). One needs a well developed
profile of an implementation in order to analyze a design in terms of its key elements and their interactions, and to
determine how exactly one design differs from another in ways that might impact outcome. Because of the number
of variables to account for, design researchers usually end up collecting large amounts of data, more data than they
have time or resources to analyze (Brown, 1992; Collins, Joseph, & Bielaczyc, 2004, p. 19). To ensure that design
researchers maximize their use of the collected data, analytical procedures that organize and document data in an
easily accessible format that facilitates more efficient, deeper analyses are needed.

                                                     668  ·  © ISLS
                                                  ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

          Barron (2007, p. 178) discusses the emergence and value of intermediate representations as a response to
this need. Focusing her discussion on video research, she argues that intermediate representations are important for
identifying what  to   analyze and   for understanding   patterns  within and across   segments   of video.  Macro-level
intermediate   representations may   also be  the appropriate  level for  sharing the  details of a  successful  designed
intervention with practitioners. This would satisfy a core characteristic of DBR; that the goal of developing sharable,
adaptable learning interventions of practical use to practitioners is intertwined with the goal of developing theories
or "proto-theories" of learning (Collins, 1992). Inspired by a suggestion from Rutgers colleague Grace Agnew
(personal communication, 2007),    we explored the potential of   workflow technology to provide   such representations.

Workflow Technology
The core features of workflow technology ­ organizing the data, tools, participants, activities, and flow of a system
­ are well suited to the challenges of design-based-research (DBR). DBR researchers must attend to a large number
and range   of variables  and  their interrelationships, and  they must   control or at least  be aware   of the variable
manipulations that occur either intentionally or unintentionally, during each iteration of the design research process.
Workflow    technology  is especially  useful in  online  learning environments   such  as ours   because many   variable
values and their relationships can be recovered post hoc from activity logs and other data created in the online
course management      system  (CMS).    Workflow   expressions   derived  from   such data can   provide diagrammatic,
annotated representations of a targeted part of a course as a system. Strauss
          In the following sections we will review the literature that contributed to the theoretical framework for our
workflow expressions approach and provide an example of how the visual models are used to support analysis in
design-based research.

Theoretical Framework
Core concepts of our workflow expressions model come from the Social Infrastructure Framework (Bielaczyc,
2006), the  literature on  business  and  applied  science   workflows   (Georgakopoulos,   Hornick,  and    Sheth, 1995;
Ludäscher   et al., 2005),  and  adaptation   of  a comprehensive     data  mining   (CDM)     model  developed     by the
Collaborative Technology Research Group (CTRG) at the University of Colorado-Boulder (Rembert, 2006).

The Social Infrastructure Framework (SIF)
The SIF identifies critical design elements to be aware of and accounted for when designing socio-techno learning
environments, and articulates them in terms of four dimensions (Bielaczyc, 2006). These are summarized in Table 2:

Table 2. Critical design elements of socio-techno learning environments.

    Dimension                                                     Characteristics
Cultural beliefs         Cultural beliefs are not designed per se but cultivated over time, and influence such things
                         as: how learning and knowledge are conceptualized, goals, how identities of students are
                         shaped, how the identity of the teacher is understood, and how technology use is viewed.
Practices                Concerns the ways in which teachers and students engage in activities with tools, how
                         students work on activities, how groupings of students are organized, what roles students
                         play within groups, modes of interaction supported or constrained within and between
                         groupings, and the role the teacher plays.
Socio-techno-spatial     Concerns the organization of physical space and technology workspaces as they relate to
relations                teacher and student interactions. Considerations include the physical organization of
                         classrooms, how groups incorporate technology, the affordances and constraints of the
                         technology, how pervasive technology use is in the intervention, how access is provided.
Interactions with the    Refers to the online and offline ways students are able to interact with people and be
"outside world"          influenced by their engagement in events outside their immediate classroom environment.
                         Aspects to consider include issues of authenticity: How is knowledge brought in from and
                         extended to the outside world?

                                                      669  ·  © ISLS
                                                  ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

          Consideration of what variables can capture the characteristics of these dimensions informs the design of
data collection from online modules, highlights what should be mined from available activity logs, and influences
the look of a resulting workflow expression by identifying what information needs to be represented

Workflows in Business and Science
Workflow   is a  concept   closely related to  the design,   or reengineering,  of  business  and  information  processes
(Ludäscher et al., 2005). In a broad and multi-leveled sense a workflow expression is the diagrammatic result of
"capturing" the workings of a system from beginning to end.
          Within  the  literature two  broad  versions  of  a   standard definition of   workflow emerge:   business  and
scientific. Georgakopoulos, Hornick, and Sheth, (1995) describe a business-oriented workflow as a collection of
tasks organized to accomplish some business process, performed by one or more software systems, one or a team of
humans, or a combination of these. A workflow defines the order of task invocation, task synchronization, and
dataflow. Scientific   workflows   are valuable   knowledge     assets in their own    right because they   are graphical
representations of scientific "know-how" that is often tacit. A key feature in the development of scientific workflows
is the notion of reuse (De Roure, Goble, and Stevens, 2008). Reuse can occur at multiple levels. With different
parameters and data, fragments and patterns of workflows can be reused to support science outside their initial
application, or they can provide a means of codifying, sharing, and spreading the workflow designer's practice.
          Both business and scientific workflow expressions attempt to define processes of a system in terms of the
tasks performed, order, resources consumed and produced, and relationships between person and machine. Both
account   for control  of  events  and flow   of  data. However,    when   analyzing   the   underlying principles of the
approaches, Ludäscher et al. (2005) found a focus on control flow patterns and events ­ what was done, and in what
order ­ in business-oriented systems, while scientific workflow systems tended to have execution models that were
more dataflow-oriented ­ interest in how data gets passed through, transformed, and used by the system (p. 1046).
          The concepts of reuse, control flow, and data flow are all important to account for in an educational
workflow model; they facilitate sharing and analysis of adaptable interventions. However,the unpredictability of
educational interventions noted by Brown (1992) suggests that educational workflows cannot be preprogrammed in
the way that many business or scientific-oriented workflows are (e.g., loan applications or mineral identification
systems). The important functions of educational workflows, then, include capturing and representing: 1) the
intended, adaptable aspects of interventions that can be shared and reused across diverse educational and research
settings; and 2) the actual and detailed data flow within interventions, which supports scientific analysis. This
suggests two kinds of educational workflows; the former, which we will call macro-flows, may be roughly equated
with educational macro-scripts­ general pedagogical models, often representing intentions, that aim to create
learning situations in which productive interactions and outcomes      will hopefully occur  (Dillenbourg and Hong,
2008). The latter are micro-flows, which are like "micro-scripts," although they may emerge during practice and are
determined post-hoc. Micro-flows represent more detailed models of actual individual and group activity. In online
environments, data for both types of workflow representations can be mined post hoc from activity logs and other
data found in the course management system (CMS). We hypothesized that both would be useful in design-based
research.

Comprehensive Workflow Mining
Much of the literature on workflow modeling focuses on the use of Petri-Nets to automate and analyze business
processes  (e.g. van   der Aalst,  and van   Hee,  2004),  a  highly   structured, mathematics-based    methodology   that
describes processes in terms of weighted nodal relationships among places and transitions. This workflow method's
focus on control flow makes it too narrow to describe the relevant dimensions of a learning environment. However,
the Collaboration Technology Research Group (CTRG) at the University of Colorado-Boulder has developed a
comprehensive workflow modeling language called Information Control Nets (ICN) that is graphical and intuitive
and broadens the scope of workflow mining to include a wider range of perspectives (Rembert, 2006). Briefly, the
primary perspectives focused on by this modeling methodology include: the functional ­ what tasks or activity
takes place; the control flow     ­ when tasks are done; the informational ­ which data are processed and the data
flow of the   process; the  resource   or organizational    ­   who or   what performs   a task; and the  operational  or
application perspective ­ how a task gets done.
          The ICN workflow modeling language has a mathematical and graphical representation; for the purpose of
the present   paper we  focus  only   on  the graphical   elements  of   representation. These   elements are shown   and
described in Table 3:

                                                      670  ·  © ISLS
                                               ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

Table 3. Graphical elements of the ICN workflow modeling language.

        Tasks (represented by labeled circles) are             Data repositories (represented by labeled squares)
        a unit of work carried out by one or more              have production/consumption relationships with
        people.                                                tasks - they provide data that is consumed by a task
                                                               or collect and hold data produced by a task.
        Roles (rounded rectangles) can represent               Participants   are   represented   as   labeled  stick
        individuals or groups, specified in terms              figures.  An   organizational     population  specifies
        of features such as responsibilities,                  which   participants belong   to  which role/group,  as
        authority, and availability.                           well as relationships amongst participants.
        If a task requires a certain application               There   are four control   tasks; two branch   tasks ­
        type (hexagon), to be completed, then that             parallel (closed circle) and conditional (open), and
        task might be accomplished by any                      two join tasks ­ synchronization (closed circle) and
        application instance (monitor).                        merge (open).

Example of Analysis using CDM-based Workflow Expressions

Mining Data and Constructing Workflow Expressionsfrom Adventures in Argument
The Moodle session module shown in Figure 1(a) provides information to students about what activities to do, in
what order, and provides links to online resources and tools that are needed for activities. (The link to the discussion
provides further instructions to students, and hence workflow information, that is not shown here).

                       (a)                                                              (b)
             Figure 1. HAL Online module seen by students (left) and partial activity log (right).

       Such information is used to construct the macro-workflow expression shown in Figure 2. Each activity is
represented in a circle and the flow from one activity to the next is shown with arrows. Closed dots before the `View
Video' activities indicate that both activities must be done, but order doesn't matter. Open dots after indicate that
activity can proceed even if a student only views, for example, one of the two videos. Percentages by each circle
indicate the level of compliance for two groups that were examined in this example. These data were "discovered"
by mining the activity logs (see Figure 1(b)). Information about tools, roles and data repositories are represented
using ICN graphical elements (Table 3). We added new icons for special data repositories unique to educational
work: a book for textbook-type information, and a silhouette for representing students' activated prior knowledge.

                                                   671  ·  © ISLS
                                                  ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

                 Water        Argumentation?Wars I                      Potter                     DiscussionArgument
                                                   Halpern
                       View                       Chapter 5              View    100%                Moodle
                       Video  84%                                       Video
                                                                                                   92%
            Open                   Compare         Read                                 Discussion         Close
                                    Cases
                       View                                              View   67%
                       Video  75%                                       Video       Small Group        Analyze
            Video                         Individual     Video                                         Potter's
                              Water                                   Bill Moyer                      Argument
                              Wars II                                   Journal    Student Teacher
         Quick Time                       Student      Quick Time
                       Figure 2. Macro-workflow expression for "Adventures in Argument".

       Figure 3 illustrates how logs specific to Moodle tools (i.e., the discussion tool) and resources (i.e., videos)
were used to construct micro-workflows for the discussion activity (part of the macro-flow) for students in two
contrasting groups in our course. Micro-flows were organized in two musical-type "scores" above and below a
master timeline that allowed us to see the flow of data for individual students in each group as they engaged in the
discussion activity. In the diagrams, small open squares indicate when students viewed videos. The numbers inside
the circles indicate thread number (left) and post-in-thread (right). Closed squares on the circles indicate that the
post connects to a video or the assigned reading (which one can be seen specifically in the discussion log).

     Figure 3. "Adventures in Arguments" micro-workflow expression for forum discussion of two groups.

                                                     672    ·  © ISLS
                                                ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

Analysis
When analyzed by the instructional development team, both the macro- and micro-flow representations helped the
research team  generate many     ideas regarding how    well  the  Adventures    in Argument  module  worked   and in
suggesting design changes for the next iteration. Even a cursory glance at the micro-workflows for the two groups
(Figure 3) revealed stark differences in two groups. Group 1 generated a greater number of threads, postings, made
more references to course readings and videos, and referenced one another's postings. Three different members
started threads over the course of the discussion. By comparison, Group 2's postings were contained in one thread,
postings were disconnected, no student posted more than three times, and four members made only one post. A
closer examination shows that most members of Group 1 accessed all of the supporting videos early and often and
even re-viewed certain videos during the discussion forum. In contrast, only members of Group 2 viewed all four
videos before beginning the forum discussion; the majority of members viewed some videos right before making
their posting. (In light of this, the compliance statistics in the macro-workflow are a little misleading; Group 1
actually had 100% compliance viewing the videos where Group 2's overall compliance was less than average for the
class.) As well as Group 1 appears to do in comparison to Group 2, there is room for improvement. One member
(OB) viewed the videos very late in the work process and did not participate in the discussion. In her reflection on
the experience with the unit she reported that she had trouble viewing the videos and felt she was too late to make a
contribution to the discussion by the time she fixed the problem.
         The interpretive power of workflows is illustrated in reflections by the professor-researcher in charge of the
course, who made the following observation:

         "I noticed some things that are possibly important. One thing was the similarity of Group 1 to a
         strong group in a study of five online groups that Mary and I did awhile back. The strongest group
         in that study had a strong leader who organized the discussion space, breaking the discussion
         down  into  sub-topics, starting some topics   in a  certain direction, sometimes  giving particular
         assignments. In Group 1, CC takes a leadership role and does something similar that turns out to
         be important: He wrote `I would propose that we start a separate thread for each of the main
         areas of   analyzing the  argument,   such  as    conclusion(s), premises    and  omitted premises,
         counterarguments, assumptions, etc. I have started one on Conclusions. This organization will
         help us get a lot of material in an organized way which will hopefully make it easier to summarize
         in a couple of days.' Also, Group 1 was far from perfect; there were non-participants. Students
         who were left out expressed frustration in their blogs with their inability to interact with the
         technology. These "weaker"     students seem   intellectually  capable, but  the technology may be
         putting them on overload."

         Additional analysis of the macro-workflow expression (Figure 2) revealed that there were two activities ­
comparing cases and reading the text chapter ­ for which we could not verify compliance. Both activities relied to
some extent on data repositories that were located outside the Moodle logging system. Students' compliance with
reading of the text could be inferred from a closer examination of the students' postings, but the comparing cases
activity, which had a theoretical rationale, could not be evaluated due to insufficient data. One role of the workflow
expressions in DBR is to focus attention on design flaws that exist because an activity fails to generate log data that
can be mined.

Conclusions
Our team was able to use the macro- and micro-flow expressions to guide us in making design changes to be
implemented in the next iteration of our course. Examples under consideration include: 1) Create more explicit
scaffolding on collaboration to be incorporated into the instructions for the discussion task ­ i.e., choose a leader,
break discussion down into sub-topics, start discussion threads for each sub-topic, distribute tasks; 2) Emphasize in
the discussion-task instructions that a post needs to include explicit references/connections to videos, readings,
and/or other postings; 3) Mandate that students access resources early in the session (perhaps tying a grade to when
they access or comment on resources). At the process level we decided to include logable tasks for all activities, e.g.,
write a brief summary of the case comparison in the warmup activity, or complete a short questionnaire about a
reading.

                                                    673  ·  © ISLS
                                                ICLS 2010  ·   Volume 1

Discussion
The example above illustrates how workflow expressions derived from data mined from the online session modules
and activity logs of an online course can help facilitate the analysis of a complex environment by presenting visual
representations that incorporate design variables of interest.
         Both workflow expressions served a valuable purpose. The micro-workflow expression allowed us to see
when and how individual students engaged in activities ­ their control flow ­ and how group members interacted
with one another during collaborative activities, how they used course resources, and how they took up and used
data created by one another ­ their data flow. The micro-workflow expressions facilitated hypothesis generation
about success in group argumentative activities ­ that students need to organize their discussion space by breaking
down arguments into sub-topics, starting some topics in a certain direction, and distributing tasks. This hypothesis
amounts to a proto-theory about successful online argument as pedagogy, supporting a dual focus on theory-building
and instructional design. Finally, micro-workflow expressions help identify problems that may be related to course
tools or processes, e.g., inability to access videos. These kinds of insights also lead to instructional design changes.
         Macro-workflow expressions provide a means for researchers to see all design elements of an intervention
and their relationships to one another. This is important because it allows researchers some sense of control as they
contemplate design changes. As Ann Brown (1992) pointed out, it is impossible to change one aspect of the system
without creating perturbations in others. Macro-workflow expressions allow the researcher to focus design changes
on specific areas of macro-flow while striving to monitor activities and achieve some level of control within others.
An important goal of design-based research is to continually adapt an instructional design given new insights about
the design, but an equally important question to ask is, "How much adaptation is taking place?" We believe the
workflow expressions derived from course session modules and activity logs has been a valuable asset as we strive
to answer this question.

References
Barab, S.A., & Squire, K. (2004). Design-based research: Design-based research: Putting a stake in the ground.
         Journal of the Learning Sciences, 13, 1-14.
Barron, B. (2007). Video as a tool to advance understanding of learning and development in peer, family and other
         informal learning contexts. In R. Goldman, R. Pea, B. Barron, & S. Derry (Eds.) Video research in the
         learning sciences. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Bielaczyc, K.  (2006).   Designing social  infrastructure: Critical  issues  in creating learning  environments  with
         technology. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 15(3), 301-329.
Brown,   A.L.  (1992).   Design experiments:  Theoretical      and methodological    challenges in creating complex
         interventions in classroom settings. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 2(2), 141-178.
Collins, A., Joseph, D.,  &  Bielaczyc, K. (2004).   Design    research: Theoretical and  methodological issues. The
         Journal of the Learning Sciences, 13(1), 15-42.
De Roure, D., Goble, C., & Stevens, R. (2009) The design and realization of the myexperiment virtual research
         environment for social sharing of workflows. Future Generation Computer Systems, 25(5), 561-567.
Dillenbourg, P. & Hong, F. (2008). The mechanics of CSCL macro scripts. International Journal of Computer-
         Supported Collaborative Learning, 3, 5-23.
Georgakopoulos, D., Hornick, M., and Sheth, A. (1995). An overview of workflow management: From process
         modeling to workflow automation infrastructure. Distributed and Parallel Databases, 3, 119-153.
Ludäscher, B., Altintas, I., Berkley, C., Higgins, D., Jaeger, E., Jones, E.A., Tao, J., and Zao, Y. (2005). Scientific
         workflow management and the Kepler system. Concurrency and Computation: Practice and Experience,
         18(10), 1039-1065.
Rembert, A.J. (2006). Comprehensive workflow mining. ACM Southeast Regional Conference: Proceedings of the
         44th Annual Southeast Regional Conference, March 10-12, Melbourne, FL.
The Design-Based   Research   Collective. (2003). Design-based     research: An  emerging  paradigm  for educational
         inquiry. Educational Researcher, 32(1), 5-8.
van der Aalst, W.M.P., & van Hee, K. (2004). Workflow management: Models, methods and systems. Cooperative
         Information Systems Series. MIT Press.

Acknowledgement
This material is based upon work supported by the National Science Foundation under Grant No. 0822189. Any
opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the author(s) and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Science Foundation.

                                                    674  ·  © ISLS
