                                               ICLS 2010     ·  Volume 1

Writing and commenting on professional procedures: In search of
    learning designs promoting articulation between school and
                                         workplace learning.

         M. Gavota, M. Betrancourt, D. Schneider, University of Geneva, 1211 Genève 4, Switzerland
         Email: Monica.Gavota@unige.ch, Mireille.Betrancourt@unige.ch, Daniel.Schneider@unige.ch

         Abstract: The present study investigated the effect of scaffolding in a learning design in
         which apprentices were asked to reuse workplace experience to comment on peers' written
         productions. Apprentices were asked to perform an authentic workplace task, to explain how
         they got  to   the solution and  then     to comment    on   a peer's  solution.  Two    conditions   of
         scaffolding were compared: In the high scaffold condition, guiding questions were provided
         both  for explanation    and commenting,       while   in the   low    scaffold  condition,    a general
         instruction was given. The findings showed that, for the first tasks, the high scaffold group
         outperformed   the   low scaffold  one       with regard  to   the quality of    the quotes      and self
         explanations, but that the pattern reversed by the end of the activity. These results show that
         scaffolding is a useful tool for supporting reflection and learning, but that it should be adapted
         to the different steps of the activities.

Theoretical background
According to Tynjala (2008), "the development of vocational and professional expertise requires the integration
of different types of   knowledge    and interaction    between   theory  and   practice, and    the development    of the
workplace as a learning environment both for employees and students is important to ensure the continuous
development of competence. This requires close collaboration and partnership between education and work"
(p.131).
In the case of vocational training, professional procedure acquisition represents a key issue in apprentices'
professional development. Learning theories (e.g., Taatgen, Huss & Anderson 2008, Anderson, 1982) generally
support  the idea  that direct teaching  alone     is not  sufficient for   the acquisition   of procedural    knowledge.
Although largely untested, these theories suggest that teaching can only provide declarative knowledge, and that
procedural knowledge should be acquired by the compilation of declarative knowledge through practice and
feedback.
Nevertheless, learning  theories  focusing  on     procedure   acquisition  emphasize    the  role   of direct instruction.
Procedural knowledge development typically involves three steps (Weill-Fassina & Pastré, 2004). First, novices
learn to apply a definite set of rules according to typical situations. In the second stage, workers learn to
distinguish between classes of situations, particularly critical situations, and to behave accordingly. They form
pragmatic "concepts", in the sense that they are oriented toward an improvement of the action performed, and
not towards a better comprehension of the situation. Ochanine (1981) found that experts formed "operative
images", which are simplified and biased representations of the objective situation, but are more relevant for the
practice. For example, experts air traffic controllers typically under-estimate the distance between planes, which
result in taking a larger security margin than strictly necessary (Bisseret, 1995). In the third stage, with the
development of expertise, several operative concepts are formed and articulated, resulting in a more abstract
representation of the task, which enables workers to handle efficiently a larger number of situations.
The main recent cognitive research in procedure acquisition still follows the central model ACT-R proposed and
revised by Anderson (1993). In his revised model, ACT-R, Anderson (1993) focuses on the declarative memory
of the examples demonstrating how the procedures should be performed. The first use of examples represents an
analogy. Then, the production rules are compiled on the basis of this analogy. Moreover, it is assumed that the
individual works on a declarative representation of the example. In other words, procedure acquisition would
require a declarative representation of an example (but not necessarily in its long-term memory) because the
procedure acquisition is done by learning from declarative traces of previous problem solving. This model
emphasizes the importance of having a well developed declarative representation of the procedure in order to
support the "compilation phase" meaning the passage from this declarative representation to the actual shortcut
mastery of the procedure. In addition, according to Pirolli and Bielaczyc (1989), understanding the procedure's
steps as well as the context to which the procedure is linked are essential elements for the procedure acquisition.
It appears that the transferability of procedural knowledge is determined by a process of rules understanding
(Kieras and Bovair, 1986). The initial acquisition of a procedure represents a process of understanding and not
just a mimetic reproduction of the procedure's steps. The procedure acquisition is fostered by representing the
procedure in its context, and understanding the different procedural steps in their own context (Broudy, 1977;

                                                      683  ·  © ISLS
                                                ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

Bonner and Walker, 1994). Considering all those aspects of procedure acquisition, this study aims at finding
means to support the construction of a strong declarative representation of a procedure as well as supporting the
comprehension of its steps and the context in which it takes place.
Deeper processing of prior knowledge and examples represents a facilitating factor for supporting procedure
comprehension and transfer (Chi, Bassok, Lewis, Reimann and Glaser, 1989). One effective way of avoiding
superficial knowledge processing (King, 1992) and supporting deeper cognitive and metacognitive treatments -
that students are likely to naturally avoid in the process of learning ­ is using external guiding under the form of
prompts. These prompts are questions or hints supporting for efficient learning processes.
Metacognitive theories (e.g., Ge and Land, 2004) support the assumption hat becoming aware of oneself as a
learner allows the student to reflect, monitor, and revise the process and products of his or her own learning. It
was found that helping students develop abilities to monitor and revise their own strategies and to use resources
may enable them to improve general learning expertise that can be used in a wide variety of settings (Kauffman,
2004). On the basis of this theoretical frame we designed and implemented learning tasks involving prompted
self-explanations about the procedure, its steps and rationales.
Moreover, it has been shown (Hausmann and Chi, 2002; Chi, Bassok, Lewis, Reimann and Glaser, 1989) that
both good  students and  prompted      students tend to  give   more self explanations  that  refine and    expand  the
conditions of an action, explain the consequences of an action, provide a goal for a set of actions, relate the
consequences of one action to another and explain the meaning of actions.
Writing   self-explanations about    a  procedure   can    thus be   a  suitable manner    of supporting     procedure
comprehension as well as improving the organization of the declarative phase of procedure acquisition. In
addition, the production of  written   text per  se  may   be seen   as a learning activity because     it involves the
production of a message based on domain knowledge and therefore domain knowledge should be "recovered",
reorganized and incorporated into a linear form, a message understandable to someone else. Collaborative and
peer writing/commenting     activities represent an  appropriate   mean   for reinforcing reflection and    knowledge
organization by the means of confrontation and hindsight taking in the reflection (Dillenbourg & Self 1994).
Nevertheless, up to now,    little research has  investigated   the  effects of peer tutoring for "writing    to learn"
activities (Gielen, Dochy, Tops, Peeters, 2007). One critical issue is the level of scaffolding of such peer-
commenting activity. As for self-explanation, it was assumed that peer commenting would benefit from guiding
questions that orient towards argumentative and reflective writing, rather than on shallow and detail statements.

The experiment

This paper reports a quasi-experimental study in which apprentices were asked to perform a task similar to a
workplace situation (i.e. filling in a quote) and then describe how they got to the solution. Depending on the
condition, self-explanation was either triggered by a general question (low scaffolding) or by guiding prompts
(high scaffolding). They then were asked to comment on a peer's explanation, in the same scaffolding condition
as their self explanation. Finally, they revised their quote taking into account the peer's comments.

We expected that prompted students would give more self-explanation statements (process measure) thus
realizing deeper cognitive treatment than apprentices in low scaffolding condition, both for their own and for
their peer's production. As a consequence, we expected that the "«high scaffold»" group would profit from
deeper reflection activity and perform better in the two phases of the learning task (outcome measure).

Methods

Participants and context
This activity took place in Geneva dental care vocational training school. It was designed in collaboration with
the dentistry course teacher and was implemented during the school hours. The topic "filling in an insurance
quote" was part of the curricula. Participants were 3rd year apprentices from two classes of the dental care
assistant school in Geneva, all women1. Overall 26 students aged of 18-23 years participated in the experiment
and were randomly allocated in one of the two experimental conditions (low or high scaffolding) according to a
one by 2 between-subject design. The activity took two consecutive school hours.

Material and apparatus
A wiki-based   environment   was    used in order   to  support  the apprentices'  writing  activities. An   electronic
equivalent of the quote form containing 4 tables (below, referred to as "table 3", "table 5", "table 7" and "table
9", see Figure 1) was proposed, each one referring to different aspects of the patient's dental problems, the
medical treatment and the financial dimension. The "table 3" had to be filled in with information about the

1 There were no men in this dental care assistant school.

                                                    684  ·  © ISLS
                                               ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

damages caused by the accident (type of damage, teeth involved), the "table 5" referred to the diagnostic and
treatment measures to be taken, the "table 7" enumerated the measures to be taken as a definitive treatment and
finally "table 9" concerned  the financial aspects (medical     treatment, points, price and some other specific
details).

 Figure 1. Screen capture of the wiki-based learning environment used in this study. From left to right: student
                  A's answer, her self-explanation, student B's comment and A's final decision.

They were    preceded by  a yes/no question  asking      the apprentices about their  previous familiarity at the
workplace with this task.
Each table had two extra columns: one for students' explanations and the other one for the peers' comments. All
apprentices were already familiarized with the use of the wiki tool since they already had used it for previous
school activities. Depending on the condition, two versions of the material were designed, differing only on the
content of the two extra columns of the quote: explanation and commenting. The "«high scaffold»" condition
provided, for each of the tables, in the explanation column, a set of five questions guiding their answers. The
questions were built on the 5W criteria (why, when, who, where, how) and used the Lin and Lehman's (1999)
"reason justification", "rule based" types of prompts. In the «low scaffold» condition, there was only the general
prompt: "Explain".

Procedure

                                                  685  ·   © ISLS
                                                ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

The apprentices were welcomed by the teacher, as for a normal class. In the first phase, starting from an
authentic case study proposed by the teacher, the apprentices had to fill in an electronic quote and explain how
they did it. In the high scaffolding condition, the apprentices had to explain why they had filled in that way, how
they did to fill in, on which material/knowledge they based themselves and finally in which order they filled in
the table and why. The «low scaffold» group had the same task but for the explanation column they didn't have
any scaffolding questions, they only had the instruction to "Explain". In a second phase, a colleague had the task
to correct a peer's quote and also comment about the changes she had done and explain, using the same level of
scaffolding as for the first phase. The "high scaffold" group had a list of specific questions aiming to see if they
agreed with the way the table had been filled in, if they had changed/corrected anything and why and if they
considered the explanations given by the peer satisfying, while the "«low scaffold»«low scaffold»" group had
only the instruction to "Comment".

Data analysis
For each of the quote's tables we analyzed the percentage of filling in the quote, the explanations and the
comments, as well as the quality for each of these three writing tasks.
For the percentage of filling in, we coded with 0 when there was nothing written, 1 when the table was filled in
at 30%, 2 when it was at 50%, 3 at 75% and finally 4 representing a completely filled in table, by taking into
account the number of fields to be filled in. These codes concerned only the fact of having filled in the table
regardless of the entries' correctness.
When coding the quality of the quotes, we counted, in each table, the number of correct answers, the number of
acceptable answers (representing neither correct nor incorrect answers) and the number of incorrect answers.
We also calculated the sum of correct/acceptable/wrong answers for the entire quote, in its first and second
version. With regard to the quality of the explanations, we counted the number of valid arguments, the number
of details mentioned, as well as the number of incorrect explanations for each one of the four tables. Comments
we classified into two categories, informative and non-informative. The comments classified as informative
were those providing useful information to the author for improving the quote while the non-informative ones
were the social ones (containing support, acknowledgement etc.)

Results
In the first place, we checked out if there was any influence of the apprentices' declared familiarity with the task
at the workplace and their performances at the quote activity in the classroom. We conducted an ANOVA,
which showed no significant differences between the quality of the "familiarized" apprentices' quotes and the
quotes of the ones declaring not being familiarized with this procedure (F(1,23) = 4.85, MSE = 21.33; p < .05).
Following our hypotheses, we looked for the differences between the two experimental groups with respect to 1)
the proportion of filling in each of the quote's tables; 2) the quality of the entire quote as well as table by table;
3) the quality of the explanations; 4) the quality of the comments.

Percentage of information entered in the quote
We looked at the number of information completed in the entire quote in its first and second version, as well as
each of the four tables separately, regardless of their accuracy.
The proportion of completion of the entire quote was computed as the ratio of the number of information
entered against the total number of answers required for each apprentice. An ANOVA analysis did not reveal
any significant differences between the two experimental groups (p > .05), neither in the first, nor in the second
versions.
Considering each table separately in the first and second version, the ANOVA analysis revealed one significant
difference ­ the high scaffold group filled in more in the first version of Table 3 than the low scaffold group
(F(1,24) = 8; MSE = 22.15; p < .05). Nevertheless, this difference faded away in the second version of the quote
where no significant difference between the groups was found anymore.

Correctness of the quotes
The quality of the quotes was evaluated through the number of correct answers to the first and second version of
the quote for each apprentice. ANOVA test revealed that the low scaffold group produced better quality quotes
than the high scaffold group in the first version (F(1,24) = 4.82; MSE = 36.9: p < .05) as well as in the second
version of the quote (F(1,19) = 5.82; MSE = 35.9: p < .05).
A deeper analysis concerning the differences between the two groups with regard to the correct and wrong
answers in each of the quote's four tables revealed interesting information.
In the first draft, the high scaffold group produced significantly better answers for the table 3 than the low
scaffold group (F(1,24) = 6.54; MSE = 0; p < .05). Howver, we did not find any significant difference between

                                                   686  ·   © ISLS
                                                 ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

the groups in the second version of the table 3 ­ meaning that the «low scaffold» group compensated the
difference after the revision of the quote.
Significant differences were also found in the quality of table 9. In the first as well as in the second version of
this table, the low scaffold group gave significantly more correct answers than the high scaffold group (first
version:   F(1,24) = 7.14;  MSE = 30.15;       p < .05  second  version:  F(1,19) = 4.58;   MSE = 24.31;    p < .05).
Moreover, the high scaffold group gave more incorrect answers in both versions of the table 9 (first version:
F(1,24) = 11.53; MSE = 3.84; p < .01, second version: F(1,19) = 7.13; MSE = 4.86; p < 0.5). These results mean
that participants in the high scaffold group did not take advantage of the comments on their first version to
improve enough in the second draft in the extent that they would equalize or outperform the answers of the low
scaffold group.

Differences between the first and second versions of the quotes
To evaluate the evolution of the quotes from the first to the second version, the difference between the number
of correct answers over the two versions of the quote was computed for each condition. Neither the high nor the
low scaffold group significantly improved the quality of their quotes from their first to their second versions.
Nevertheless, if we look at the observed results, both the low scaffold and the high scaffold group improved the
quality of the quotes between the first and the second version (Low scaffold: Mfirst = 9.08, Msecond = 9.82; High
scaffold, Mfirst = 6.69, Msecond = 7.2).

Quality and quantity of the self-explanations
In terms   of  percentage  of completing    the   explanations, ANOVA     analysis  did  not reveal  any  significant
difference between the two groups, meaning that the two groups produced more or less the same amount of
explanations.
Nevertheless, there were significant differences between the two groups in the quality of the explanations. The
high scaffold group gave significantly more arguments for the table 3 than the low scaffold group (F(1,24) = 6;
MSE = 6.5; p < .05), but it also gave significantly more "details" (F(1,24) = 7.38; MSE = 2.46; p < 0.5). For the
table 9,   the situation was  the exact    opposite: the low   scaffold group  gave    marginally significantly  more
arguments   than  the high   scaffold    group (F(1,24) = 3.64;  MSE = 26;    p = .06) but significantly less details
(F(1,24) = 4.52; MSE = 1.88; p < .05).
Regression analysis performed on the entire data, without regard to the experimental condition, showed that
more   argumentative     explanations    given in table  3    (Rsquare = .23; F(1,25) = 7.3; p < 0.5)  and    table 9
(Rsquare = .31; F(1,25) = 10.76; p < .01), was related to better accuracy of these tables.

Type of Comments
For each group, comments were simply classified into two categories, according whether they were superficial
or essential. The number of comments in each category was used to evaluate the quality of the comments. On
the entire quote, we found a marginal significant difference in the favor of the low scaffold group, who made
more essential comments than the high scaffold group (F(1,20) = 4.26; MSE = 10.8; p = .053). Analyzing table
by table, we notice that the low scaffold group systematically gave more essential and less superficial comments
than the high scaffold group, but none of these differences was statistically significant. We can only consider
them as tendencies.
Regression analyses did not reveal any statistical significant relations between the quality of the explanations
and the quality of the comments or between the quality of the quote and the quality of the comments.

Discussion
Apprentices' declared familiarity with the procedure did not seem to account for their actual performance, tested
with the class activity. This might be explained by the apprentices' low self-evaluation competencies but also by
the very heterogeneous workplace training they get. These conjectures reinforce the need to implement school
activities based  on  apprentice's    professional   experience  as  well  as  supporting  knowledge     sharing and
collaborative reflection.
With regard to the effect of the scaffolding, the results partly contradicted our hypothesis by showing that for
some tasks, the group with low scaffolding outperformed the group with high scaffolding. Having a synthetic
look at the results, we noticed that the high scaffold group outperformed the low scaffold group at all levels
(quality of the table, percentage of filling in the table, quality of explanations) in the starting task (table 3). The
two groups have similar performances on the middle tasks (table 5 and 7, not reported here). When analyzing
the final task (table 9), the low scaffold group has significantly better results (at all levels) than the high scaffold
group.
Considering the quality of the self-explanations proposed by the two groups, we notice that even though they
seem to produce the same amount of information, the high scaffold group produced more valid arguments in the
explanations in the first table but ended up by proposing more superficial ones in the final table. The low

                                                     687  ·  © ISLS
                                                  ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

scaffold group had exactly the opposite behavior. Statistical analysis also confirmed that the quality of the
explanations was a predictor for the quality of the quote.
These results support the idea that high scaffolding may have helped in the beginning of the activity in order to
support   good  explanations   and    reflection (King,   1992), generates   more   correct  answers,  and  orients  the
apprentices towards appropriated task solving approaches. Nevertheless, by the end of the activity, the low
scaffold group caught up with the high scaffold one and even outperformed it. One could argue that high
scaffolds can be useful in the beginning of the task, in order to orient the apprentices' cognitive strategies and
give indications about how the task should be dealt with, but, shortly after becomes superfluous or even too
burdening.    This study   underlines the  idea  that  scaffolding  is a  powerful  tool for fostering   deep  cognitive
treatment of knowledge in self-explanation task on procedures. Nevertheless, it identifies the need of conceiving
and implementing adaptive designs in which these prompts fade out along the task in order to give place at the
adaptive and learning skills of the student to take the place.
However, it should be noted that the low scaffold group started with better performance in terms of global
accuracy of the first version of the quote. No data in our study can disentangle the effect of scaffolded self-
explanation and initial level of each group.
Regarding the effect of peer commenting, the results could not confirm the positive effect of this instructional
methods through statistical analysis, though the observed results showed an improvement in performance in
both scaffolding condition. It may be that self-explanation in itself has such a great instructional effect that the
effect of peer-commenting could not be easily demonstrated using few measures with few students.
Last but not least, we have to take into account that this study took place in real class settings, and that other
factors may have interfered. Students were not very familiar with self-explaining activities nor commenting
ones. They might not have fully benefited by the instructional device (e.g., Ainsworth & Burcham, 2007). It is
nevertheless a real situation, valuable for conceiving and implementing these types of designs in real vocational
training classes. Future long term studies will investigate further this issue as well as the relation between the
computer support and the commenting instruction.

References
Ainsworth, S., & Burcham, S. (2007). Impact of text coherence on learning by self-explanation. Learning and
          instruction, 17(3), 286-303
Anderson, J. R. (1982). Acquisition of cognitive skill. Psychological Review, 89, 369-406.
Anderson, J. R. (1993). Rules of the Mind. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Bisseret, A.   (1995).  Représentation    et  décision  experte  -  Psychologie   cognitive  de  la décision   chez  les
          aiguilleurs du ciel. Toulouse : Octares.
Bonner,   S., Walker,   P.  (1994). The   Effects  of  Instruction  and   Experience on  the  Acquisition   of Auditing
          Knowledge, The Accounting Review, 69(1), 157-179.
Broudy, H. (1977). Types of knowledge and purposes of education. In R. C. Anderson, R. J. Spiro, & W. E.
          Montague (Eds.), Schooling and the acquisition of knowledge (pp. 1­17). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence
          Erlbaum.
Chi, M.T.H., Bassok M., Lewis M.W., Reimann, P., & Glaser, R. (1989). Self-explanations: how students study
          and use examples in learning to solve problems. Cognitive Science, 13, 145-182.
Dillenbourg,   P., &  Self, J. (1992).   People   Power:  A  human-computer       collaborative learning system.  In C.
          Frasson, G. Gauthier, and G. McCalla (Eds.) The 2nd International Conference on Intelligent Tutoring
          Systems, Lecture Notes in Computer Science (pp 651-660). Berlin: Springer-Verlag.
Ge, X., & Land, S. M. (2004). A conceptual framework for scaffolding ill-structured problem-solving processes
          using question prompts and peer interactions. Educational Technology Research and Development,
          52(2), 5-22.
Gielen,   S., Dochy.   F.,  Tops,   lL., Peeters,  E., (2007).   Effects  of  formative  peer   assessment  on   writing
          performance:   What   is  the  most beneficial  role  of the  assessee. in Proceedings    of the  12th EARLI
          biennal conference on Research on Learning and Instruction, Aug. 28 - Sept. 1, Budapest (Hungary).
Hausmann, R., & Chi, M., (2002). Can a computer interface support self-explaining? The International Journal
          of Cognitive Technology, 7(1), 4-14.
Kauffman, D. F. (2004). Self-regulated learning in Web-based environments. Instructional tools designed to
          facilitate cognitive  strategy   use,  metacognitive   processing   and    motivational  beliefs. Journal  of
          Educational Computing Research, 30(1&2), 139-161.
Kieras, D. E., & Bovair, S. (1986). The acquisition of procedures from text: A production-system analysis of
          transfer of training. Journal of Memory and Language, 25, 507­524.
King, A. (1992). Facilitating Elaborative Learning through Guided Student-Generated Questioning, Educational
          Psychologist, 27 (1), 111-126.
Lin, X.D.,    &  Lehman,    J. (1999).   Supporting    learning  of  variable control  in  a  computer-based     biology
          environment:   Effects   of prompting    college   students  to reflect on their  own   thinking. Journal  of
          Research in Science Teaching, 36(7), 1­22.
Ochanine, D. (1981). L'image opérative, Actes du séminaire et recueil d'articles. Paris : Université Paris 1.

                                                      688  ·  © ISLS
                                               ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

Pirolli, P. and Bielaczyc, K.  (1989).  Empirical Analyses    of  Self-Explanation and Transfer in Learning  to
          Program. In Proceedings of the Eleventh Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 450­
          457). Ann Arbor: MI.
Taatgen, N.A., Huss, D. & Anderson, J.R. (2008). The Acquisition of Robust and Flexible Cognitive Skills.
          Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 137(3), 548-565.
Tynjala, P., (2008). Perspectives into learning at the workplace, Educational Research Review, 3, 130­154.
Weill-Fassina, A., & Pastré, P. (2004). Les compétences professionnelles et leur développement. In P. Falzon
          (Ed.), Ergonomie. Paris: PUF.

Acknowledgments
This study was conducted within the Dualt leading house (Technologies for dual vocational education) funded
by the Swiss Federal Office for Professional Education and Technology.

                                                   689  ·  © ISLS
