                                              ICLS 2010    ·   Volume 2

                           "Wherever You Go, There You Are:"
      Examining the Development and Integration of Individual
                Identity Across Multiple Domains and Contexts

 Chair:   Cynthia Carter Ching, University of California, Davis. One Shields Avenue, Davis, CA. 95616,
                                             ccching@ucdavis.edu
          Emily Evans, University of California, Davis.        One Shields Avenue, Davis, CA. 95616,
                                             erevans@ucdavis.edu
          Elizabeth Faber, Humboldt State University, SBS 295, 1 Harpst St., Arcata, CA. 95521,
                                              eif4@humboldt.edu
 Deborah Fields, UCLA.        Moore Hall Box 951521, 405 Hilgard Avenue, Los Angeles, CA. 90095-1521,
                                              stareyes@gmail.com
Discussant:     Na'ilah Suad Nasir, University of California, Berkeley.        5461 Tolman, Berkeley,    CA. 94720,
                                             nailahs@berkeley.edu

          Abstract:   This symposium brings together researchers focused on issues of learning and
          identity   development.   We   examine   how    the   development     of   identity relative  to  a
          particular domain-specific learning environment--such as a leadership seminar, a nature
          trail guide   program, a  writing  class project,     or  a teacher   professional   development
          course--can be better understood by looking at learners as whole persons, relative to
          their other experiences and identities.    In other words, we investigate evolving identity
          within  contexts  by looking   more   broadly   at   participant identity  across   contexts.  The
          session will present findings from this research, share methods for accomplishing this
          difficult work and making it manageable, discuss implications for further theory-building
          about identity, and provide recommendations for designing learning environments with
          identity development in mind.

Introduction
Identity  has   only recently begun   to emerge   as  a   focal point   in educational   research, as   educators and
scholars now struggle with not only the constructivist idea that learners' shape their own meanings of
domains,  content,   and   contexts (Palincsar, 1998),    but  also the  more   thorny   and  difficult assertion that
learners shape their own subjectivity toward, attitudes about, and affinity or hostility for all aspects of their
educational endeavors (Sfard & Prusak, 2005).      Further, researchers of cultural identity have articulated the
phenomenon that aspects of learners' identities may be positioned by institutions and cultures such that
they conflict in various ways with success in school or success in particular academic domains (Davidson,
1996; Nasir & Saxe, 2003).     Clearly, as educators and   researchers, we ignore identity at our peril.
          Yet identity is a slippery concept and difficult to pin down.      Individual identity has been described
by research and theory as a constant sense of self, or a fluid and ever-changing performance (Buckingham,
2008; Goffman,     1959).  Identity development    has    likewise  been   framed   as a consistent trajectory,   or a
rapidly  shifting  current (Erickson, 1968;  Gee,  2001).      Nowhere     are these paradoxes   more   obvious   than
when we follow the same individuals across multiple contexts and domains, as in connective ethnography
(Leander,  2008),    or when   we   hear the coherent     life narratives  that  emerge  from   a  host  of disparate
experiences   (Bruner, 1991).  Thus when research focuses       on solely one context in the lives of learners, we
leave great gaps in our understanding and insight.
          The papers on this panel represent research that attempts to bridge these gaps. We examine how
the development of identity relative to a particular learning environment--such as a leadership seminar, a
nature trail guide program, a writing class project, or a teacher professional development course--can be
better understood by looking at learners as whole persons, relative to their other experiences and identities.
In other words, we investigate evolving identity within contexts by looking more broadly at participant
identity across contexts. Our methods for these studies vary.           Some actively follow participants through
different contexts   they  inhabit, while  others  rely   on   the participants  to  make those    boundary-crossing
connections via interviews, essays, life maps, or other narrative means.          In all cases, however, participant
voices and participant stories are key, since our work is founded on the idea that identities and selves are

                                                   69   ·  © ISLS
                                              ICLS 2010    ·  Volume 2

constructed  and  reconstructed   through  narrative   (Ochs     &  Capps,   1996).    In the  abstracts  that follow,
representing those voices and narratives is difficult given length restrictions, but participant stories and
cases will be a vital part of the conference session.

Trail guide self-perception and domain-expert identity at an environmental
reserve.     Emily Evans (University of California, Davis)
Non-formal   education   programs   in  outdoor  settings    are common     methods    to impart  land   management
messages and promote environmental stewardship (Ham, 1992; Widner & Roggenbuck, 2000). For many
of these programs, with low budgets and limited staffing, their ability to recruit and retain volunteer guides
and educators has a direct impact on the quantity and quality of programs available to the general public.
This study sought to find out why volunteers choose to become involved with a guided educational hike
program and how their perceptions and past experiences shaped their interest in guiding and in the Reserve.
          When   social  interactions,  such  as   teaching   and  learning,   take place   in  natural  settings, the
environmental context of those interactions directly impacts the meanings ascribed to the environment and
the nature of the social interaction. (Anderson, 2004; Clayton, Clayton, & Opotow, 2003; Neilson, 2009).
The case of the volunteer guide program is a means to explore these issues of identity at the intersection of
social and natural environments. This study explores how guides think of themselves in relation to the
social and environmental context of the Reserve and how these perceptions influence their practice as a
guide.
          To answer these questions, the researcher interviewed guides and observed them in training and
leading walks.   The researcher also had a participant-observer role in guide training, by enrolling in and
going through  the guide training  program   with a cohort of    guide volunteers.   Participants for the  study were
recruited  from this  cohort  of  volunteers.   Guides    were   interviewed    either in-person  or  on   the phone;
interviews were audio recorded and transcribed.        Fieldnotes were taken during guided walks, which were
then matched to interview transcripts from guides (although not all participants had both interviews and
walk observations).   In interviews, guides were asked about their initial motivations, experiences leading
the outings, and   their interest and   past experiences     with  non-formal   teaching   and  learning   in  outdoor
settings. Analysis of interviews and observations of the guided outings revealed three main characteristics
of active guides:  guides were motivated by an interest in teaching and learning, had a previous relationship
to the place, and held an image of themselves that matched their perceived image of a guide.
          This issue of  image   compatibility  is critical  to  a focus  on identity.    Guides with some domain
background such as plant biology or ecology, and who viewed their responsibility as educating visitors in
the science of the reserve, made use of their existing expertise in their volunteer teaching.            Yet on guide
walks,  the  researcher  observed   that visitors  to  the   reserve   were    not always   engaged    by  taxonomic
terminology  and   technical  explanations   of  the  reserve   ecosystem,   a  phenomenon     that   some  expertise-
focused guides   were   aware  of and   frustrated by.    Guide    walks  also revealed   that some   volunteers   who
lacked domain   expertise,   and  who   considered   domain     expertise important,   were    flustered on walks   by
visitors asking scientific or environmental questions that they could not answer. Yet image compatibility
was not always related to domain expertise.        Included in the participant pool were successful guides who
identified more   as artists  or nature lovers,  and   thus  lacked  a   background    in environmental    science  or
biology, but who viewed their responsibility more in terms of generating visitor enthusiasm and connection
to the reserve. One example was an artist who led walks focused on finding spectrums of color in the
reserve in different seasons; her walks contained virtually no scientific information at all yet still managed
to engage visitors and create a positive walk experience.          Retention in the guide program was the least
successful for those who had a perceived image of a guide (as expert, inspiring, charismatic, educational,
etc) that they could not match with their own identities and strengths.
          This case study demonstrates that guides have different perspectives on what it means to be a non-
formal  educator,  and   that their perceptions    of  the   guide  identity   are related  to  their motivations   to
participate. A prescribed identity of what it means to be a volunteer educator, such as domain expertise,
may dissuade a potential volunteer from participating, if that image does not match their own self image.
For land   managers  and  education    program   coordinators    interested  in attracting  and  retaining  volunteer
leaders, carefully outlining the expectations of a guide and allowing for diverse perspectives on the role of
volunteer educators may encourage a broader population of volunteers to participate and, in turn, a broader
audience of visiting participants.

                                                    70  ·  © ISLS
                                               ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 2

Life maps and the multi-contextual development of undergraduate leadership
identity.    Elizabeth Faber (Humboldt State University)
American    institutions of  higher   education  are   working    to develop     relevant and  meaningful     learning
experiences that prepare young people for leadership in a knowledge-dense, adaptive, and multicultural
society (The Boyer Commission, 1998). But how does a college student learn to become a leader? This
study  explores the  process   of learning  leadership    across  multiple  contexts through    the   lens of identity
development theory (Baxter Magolda & King, 2004; Erikson, 1968; Lord & Hall, 2005; Marcia, 1994;
Rangell, 1994).
         Existing theories of college student leadership development fall short in that they either focus
primarily on one college context such as student government or athletics (Dugan, 2006; Hall, Forrester &
Borsz, 2008) or lack specifics about the importance of reflective practices in the identity development in
young, aspiring leaders (Logue, Hutchens & Hector, 2005; Posner & Brodsky, 1992). This qualitative study
explores the learning outcomes and leadership narratives of undergraduate student leaders at a large public
university. Six student leaders were recruited from the past participants of a leadership seminar on campus
taught by the author, as well as through the social networks of those participants.           Through narrative and
artifact-driven interviews ranging from one to two hours in length, the student participants reflected deeply
on their learning and development in college. They mapped their leadership experiences through lifelines--
timelines  showcasing    their  many   involvements       across  curricular, co-curricular,    extracurricular,   and
community-based    contexts    in college.   The  interviews    revealed that  these college   students    lead across
multiple aspects of their identities: ethnic, social, academic, professional, etc.
         The study also explores three new areas not described by existing literature in which young adults
develop a leadership identity: identifying and committing to a core personal mission, developing emotional
intelligence, and  experimenting     with   peer teaching    of  leadership.  Regarding      core personal    mission,
interviews  revealed  that  students  were  highly   reflective  about  making    connections   across  their   various
leadership  experiences  and   finding common     themes.    One   example    is a Native    student  who  was  also a
Cultural Studies major and led across social and academic groups on campus as well as in community
service.  This  student   articulated  that across all  these   areas,  her  focus  was   on  teaching   others about
connection to the land and repatriation of artifacts.      Given that students themselves are generating these
across-context missions, it is all the more crucial, then, that research on leadership development move
beyond a focus on singular contexts for study.
         Regarding emotional intelligence, students articulated that they struggled with handling frustration
appropriately and dealing with difficult people, and that part of their growth as student leaders involved
developing concrete strategies for these kinds of personal and interpersonal challenges that could transfer
across situations.  While   existing  research   has examined     emotional   aspects     of leadership   in terms   of
enthusiasm for leadership and one's own motivation to lead, dealing with negative emotions in leadership
has not been a focus of inquiry yet in the broader field and is recommended as an implication of this study.
In terms of peer teaching, one of the hallmarks of college student leadership contexts, and one that has yet
to be  dealt  with in  existing   research, is a continuous     turnover of   participant    leaders.  Undergraduate
students are on campus for four to five years, and they may attain significant leadership positions only in
their last two or three years of their enrollment at the university.     Thus by the time students have learned
how to lead effectively in any given context, they are already on the verge of graduating and being replaced
by other  students  in   those positions.   The   student    leaders in this  study reflected   on    how  they might
effectively pass on what they had learned to the next group of student leaders in their various contexts, but
they described that they were given little support for this peer teaching process.            This is clearly another
area for research and development on college student leadership.
         In closing, this study's focus on learning leadership through identity development is unique in the
literature on college student leadership development and both complements and complicates the primary
Leadership Identity Development model (Komives, Longerbeam, Owen, Mainella, & Osteen, 2006). The
use of lifelines to promote reflection and guide narrative-based interviews is also a new and effective
method both for research and practice.      Other recommendations for college student leadership development
include active opportunities for reflecting and connecting across leadership contexts to articulate a core
personal mission, and an explicit emotional intelligence focus in both research and training on dealing with
negative emotions and difficult people.     In terms of peer teaching, this study suggests the practical need for
leadership development programs, as well as individual leadership contexts, to build in acknowledgement
of and support for the high turnover of student leaders, and to create opportunities for peer teaching of
leadership.   Research    on   peer teaching   could   effectively   examine  leadership     identity  from   the new

                                                    71  ·  © ISLS
                                              ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 2

perspective of how students think about their "legacy" as they graduate, and also investigate students'
implicit theories of learning leadership through research observations of how they instruct their peers.

Identity tensions among teachers as online professional development participants
and novice bloggers.          Cynthia Carter Ching (University of California, Davis)
More and more teachers are turning to reading blogs in order to find web resources for education, and using
blogs as pedagogical tools to encourage their students to write for a "real" audience (Martindale & Wiley,
2005; Williams     & Jacobs,   2004).    Yet  research   on  teachers-as-bloggers    is  relatively  rare.    While  a
pioneering  study  by   Luehmann    (2008)  examined     the  case of  a  highly competent     and   prolific teacher
blogger, this study takes on a group of teachers as novice bloggers and uses Gee's identity theory (2001), to
address the questions of what factors affect teachers' attitudes toward blogging, experiences with creating
blogs, and meanings they make out of blogging as a social, educational, professional, and personal activity.
         Blogging    is a  highly  productive context    for examining    questions  of  identity for  a   number   of
reasons.  Nardi and  colleagues   argue that most personal blogs fall into at least one of  a  few categories:   blog
as documentation, blog as muse, blog as confessional, blog as commentary, blog as catharsis, and blog as
community   resource    (Nardi,   Schiano, Gumbrecht,    &   Swartz,  2004).     In each    of these  functions,  and
sometimes   in several   different functions  within  the   same blog,   writers work    to position   themselves   in
complex ways in relation to their audience, their topics, and, in many cases, in relation to the hosting
technology itself. While most naturalistic studies of blogging end up examining a self-selected population,
those who have already internalized the value of blogging and decided to create an online identity and
voice for themselves, this study examined the case of a cohort of practicing teachers in an online program
who were given the task of short-term blogging as a course assignment.
         The   context  for  this study  was  an  online  cohort   of thirty-seven   teachers   enrolled   in an  MA
program for practicing teachers with a focus on global issues in education. In addition to participating in
live online meetings, teacher participants posted conversations asynchronously on a CMS discussion board
and worked throughout six weeks on their major assignment for the third course, taught by the author,
which   was to  develop    a blog  and   make  at least   three  entries  reviewing   educational    websites    about
globalization. Teachers were encouraged to think of their blogs as both an opportunity to use the lens of
the course readings to analyze educational websites (blog as commentary) and as a resource for other
teachers  who  might    be looking  for  similar web-based     tools  for teaching   about  globalization     (blog as
community resource).      Out of the thirty-seven teachers, only three had prior experience with blogging in a
personal  context, involving    sharing  pictures and    anecdotes    from travel   and  family   life (blogging    as
documentation).    No participating teachers had ever blogged before from their professional perspective and
voice as teachers. Data for this   study include the archived feeds   from all live meetings (12     course meetings
for two hours each) wherein participants regularly talked about and referenced their career experiences at
their schools sites, teachers' discussion board postings about their developing blogs and ensuing threads of
responses and replies, and the teachers' blogs themselves.
         Using  Gee's    identity  framework  (2001),    data were    analyzed using    axial  coding  to  determine
various  different identities   teachers were    displaying   throughout   the   course, in    their blogs,   in their
discussions of themselves as teachers and bloggers, and tensions that occurred between these identities.
Even aside from blogging, some participants experienced tensions between their reported institutional and
discourse identities as expert and/or gifted teachers within their schools, versus their emerging institutional
and discourse identities as "problem" students in the online program (i.e., those who often needed help with
troubleshooting their online access, difficulties uploading work to the College of Education server, etc).
These "problem" identities, both in the online program in general and in the blog assignment, were often
associated with teachers' assertions about their nature identities, which they had also adopted as discourse
identities--that of being "a dinosaur" (i.e., too old to be fully comfortable with online technologies) or
somehow being inherently "hopeless" with computers.          Additionally, those teachers who initially displayed
an affinity identity as technology enthusiasts had little trouble setting up their blogs and personalizing their
blog aesthetic, but some of these teachers still had difficulty writing in their blogs, as they struggled with
how to establish and convey their discourse identities online and find voices for evaluating educational
websites. In most cases, teachers who had never blogged before and teachers who had family blogs before
the course both experienced some social anxiety regarding the public nature of blogs (Nardi, Schiano, &
Gumbrecht, 2004).       Thus there emerged an additional tension between their discourse and institutional
identities as authorities within their schools, or their affinity identities as previous family bloggers, versus

                                                   72  ·  © ISLS
                                               ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 2

taking on a discourse identity as a blogging educational authority to the online public-at-large.
        This study demonstrates the importance of examining teachers' use of and meaning making with
technology from an identity perspective, rather than an exclusive focus on training, since teachers in this
study were daunted not primarily by the technical task of setting up and maintaining a blog, but by the
tensions this requirement provoked in their ideas of skill, voice, authority, and self.

From   Home     to  School      and   Back      Again:   Intersecting     Trajectories    of    Identification
in a Student's Development as a Writer.                  Deborah Fields (UCLA)
How can students build on their experiences, knowledge, and values from different parts of their lives (i.e.,
their identities) to develop an "academic identity," or a sense of self as interested in, good at, and having a
future in some academic discipline such as science or writing (e.g., Barton, Tan & Rivet, 2008; Carlone &
Johnson, 2007)?    In this paper I use boundary objects and narrative analysis to unpack how one student
developed a trajectory of identification as a writer, particularly as a writer that had a positive influence on
other people.
        This presentation represents part of a larger connective ethnography (Leander, 2008) following
two 11 year-old children in many places of their lives during their sixth grade year, from October 2008 to
August 2009.   Data collection was theoretically driven to study how youth acted in different social spaces
(their "identities-in-practice" ­ e.g. Barton et al, 2008), how the youth thought about themselves (what I
call their "identities-in-narrative")  and   how others   thought  about them   (others "identities-in-narrative"
about the youth). To this end data include over 200 hours of observation of different subjects at school,
sports practices, music   lessons,    performances,   play   with peers, and  time with   family  (to focus    on
"identities-in-practice") and more than 50 interviews with the two youth and important adults in their lives
(to focus on self- and others- "identities-in-narrative"). In analysis I constructed narratives (Clandinin &
Connelly, 2000) of trajectories of intersections based on events and narratives in the data to understand the
consequences of youths' intersecting trajectories of identification. Then using grounded theory (Charmaz,
2000), I identified common themes across the different trajectories of intersections that might account for
either productive connections or unresolved conflicts between identities.
        In this presentation I discuss one trajectory of intersections across the life of an 11 year-old boy
named Wynn. The instigating artifact that stimulated this trajectory was a letter he wrote to Dr. Seuss as
part of an everyday classroom assignment, a letter for which he subsequently won a significant award. In
his letter Wynn drew together personal conflicts about his bi-racial heritage; a beloved book from his
childhood, The Sneetches; and his current social studies project in civil rights, which he described as "what
all of my ancestors have done to each other." In itself, the letter acted as a powerful connecting artifact
between different areas of his life that helped him to resolve conflicts in how he saw himself and how
others treated him. A first place award for the letter further led to ripple effects across social spaces of his
life: classmates began listening more carefully to his writing in class, extended family cited his award and
the letter as evidence that Wynn was "smart," and African-American and bi-racial members of his church
expressed how he had touched their hearts and that his writing was powerful. Eventually Wynn himself
took up this narrative of himself as a good writer and at the same time began to change his daily practices
to include more writing during his free time.
        I  argue  that multiple   things   supported  the   development   of Wynn's     identity-in-narrative and
identity-in-practice as a writer. Both the letter and the award acted as boundary objects (Star & Griesemer,
1989) that signified Wynn as an accomplished writer to different groups of people.       The certification of the
letter through the award he won magnified the impact of the letter. Both the certification and his mother's
brokering  of the letter to   family, church  members,      and peers supported others  talking about Wynn     as
"smart" and a good writer, and about his writing as touching their lives. Finally, the ways that Wynn was
characterized as a writer tapped into values of different communities: academic achievement (particularly
at school and home), leadership and diversity (at church), and creativity (at home). Boundary objects,
certification, brokering, and shared values are themes found not only in the case of Wynn and his trajectory
of identification as a writer but across other trajectories of intersections found in the larger study. I will
discuss the implications of these findings for supporting productive intersections of identities.

Doing Cross-Contextual Work:                 On Method
While  the  papers on    this panel   differ in terms    of their basic  methodological  approach--interviews,
observations, connective ethnography, discourse analysis of texts and online conversations--there are some

                                                   73  ·  © ISLS
                                              ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 2

critical intersections that are worth noting. First, all the studies are qualitative in nature, and they all have
engaged meaningfully with presentation of findings and also hermeneutic interpretation through theoretical
and critical lenses. Related to the qualitative nature of inquiry is a post-positivist approach wherein we are
not so much concerned with the objective validity or accuracy of the narratives we hear from participants.
Instead we argue that the stories participants carry with them from experience are more important and more
powerful for shaping identity than the actual events themselves (Bruner, 1991; Ochs & Capps, 1996).       Thus
our boundary-crossing work to examine identity in multiple contexts is not for the purpose of somehow
"triangulating" data or validating participant reports from one location to another, but rather to fully trace
the terrain of participants' narratives through the worlds they inhabit, on their terms.
        Second, in all the studies on the panel, the researchers are co-participants in at least one context
under study, thus having some already-existing connection to the participants and the contexts they inhabit
(Atkinson & Hammersley, 1994). This not only facilitates subject recruitment and data collection, as well
as  conversation during   interviews, such  that researchers    can  ask informed   questions  about the shared
context and participants can respond with abbreviated insider language without explaining every detail, but
it also seems to push participants to do more identity-positioning and boundary-crossing rhetorical work in
interviews, reflections, etc, almost as if they are thinking, "You know me in this context, but let me explain
myself in that context."
        Finally,   third, in three out  of four  of  the   studies on the   panel, written texts are of  critical
importance.  Participants construct written artifacts--a lifeline, a blog, an essay--and then that artifact
becomes a focal point for reflection, a fulcrum for personal change or revelation, and the crux of research
inquiry. Writing is an artifact of practice that is authentic, crystallizing, and useful for research as an anchor
for further analysis, but it is also a valuable kind of data in and of itself, particularly when examining
identity. As described by Bazerman and Prior, the aim is to perform discourse analysis on written texts and
their surrounding narratives, "so as to uncover signs of social identities, institutions, and norms as well as
the means  by which    these  social formations  are established,    negotiated, enacted,  and changed  through
communicative practice," (Bazerman & Prior, 2004).

Symposium Structure
The session will take the form of a traditional 90-minute paper session, with brief opening chair's remarks
and approximately twelve minutes per paper, followed by discussant comments and audience question-and-
answer. Our discussant, Na'ilah Suad Nasir, from UC Berkeley, is an authority on cultural identity, culture
and mathematics practices, and the sociocultural and practice-related shaping of identities across contexts.
Her work represents one of the earliest attempts to connect learning practices in and out of school among
African American mathematics students, situate these practices within institutional and cultural contexts,
and elucidate important tensions among these phenomena (e.g., Nasir, 2002).         Her comments will speak to
common themes among the papers, provide suggestions for future research, and frame some productive
topics for discussion with the audience during question-and-answer.

References
Anderson, J. (2004). The ties that bind? Self and place identity in environmental direct action. Ethics, Place
        & Environment, 7(1-2), 45-57.
Atkinson, P. & Hammersley, M. (1994).         Ethnography and participant observation.      In N. Denzin & Y.
        Lincoln (Eds.), Handbook of Qualitative Research. Newbury Park, CA:               Sage Publications, pp.
        248-261.
Barton, A., Tan, E., & Rivet, A. (2008). Creating hybrid spaces for engaging school science: How urban
        girls position themselves with authority by merging their social worlds with the world of school
        science. American Educational Research Journal, 45, 68-103.
Baxter Magolda, M., & King, P. (2004). Learning partnerships: Theory and models of practice to educate
        for self-authorship. Sterling, Virginia: Stylus Publishing, LLC.
Bazerman, C. & Prior, P. (2004).     Introduction.  In C. Bazerman & P. Prior (Eds.), What writing does and
        how it does it:   An introduction to analyzing texts and textual practices.     Mahwah, NJ:   Lawrence
        Erlbaum, pp. 1-10.
The  Boyer  Commission       Report  on Educating    Undergraduates      in the  Research   University.  (1998).
        Reinventing undergraduate education: A blueprint for America's research universities. Retrieved
        from http://naples.cc.sunysb.edu/Pres/boyer.nsf/
Bruner, J. (1991).   The narrative construction of reality. Critical Inquiry, 18, 1-21.

                                                  74  ·  © ISLS
                                              ICLS 2010    ·  Volume 2

Buckingham, D. (2008).    Introducing identity.    In D. Buckingham (Ed.), Youth, identity, and digital media.
        The    John  T.  and Catherine D.    MacArthur       Foundation  Series  on Digital Media  and  Learning.
        Cambridge, MA:       The MIT Press, 1-24.
Carlone, H. & Johnson, A. (2007). Understanding the science experiences of successful women of color:
        Science identity as an analytic lens. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 44, 1187-1218.
Charmaz, K. (2000). Grounded theory: Objectivist and constructivist methods. In N. K. Denzin & Y. S.
        Lincoln (Eds.), Handbook of Qualitative Research. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications, 509-
        535.
Clandinin, D. J. & Connelly, F. M. (2000). Narrative inquiry: Experience and story in qualitative inquiry.
        San Francisco: Jossey-Bass Publishers.
Clayton, L. W., Clayton, S., & Opotow, S. (2003). Identity and the natural environment: The psychological
        significance of nature: MIT Press.
Davidson, A. (1996). Making and molding identities in schools: Student narratives on race, gender, and
        academic engagement. Albany, NY: State University of New York.
Dugan, J. (2006). Explorations using the social change model: Leadership development among college men
        and women. Journal of College Student Development, 47(2), 217-225.
Erickson, E.H. (1968). Identity: Youth and crisis. New York: Norton.
Gee, J. (2001). Identity as an analytic lens for research in education.     Review of Research in Education, 25,
        99-125.
Goffman, E. (1959).   The presentation of self in everyday life.     New York:     Doubleday.
Hall, S.,  Forrester, S., &   Borsz,  M.   (2008).     A  constructivist   case  study examining   the leadership
        development of undergraduate students in campus recreational sports. Journal of College Student
        Development, 49(2), 125-140.
Ham, S. H. (1992). Environmental interpretation: A practical guide for people with big ideas and small
        budgets. Golden, CO: North American Press.
Komives,   S.,  Longerbeam,    S., Owen,     J., Mainella,    F., &  Osteen,    L. (2006).  A  leadership identity
        development      model:    Applications    from      grounded    theory.   Journal  of  College   Student
        Development, 47(4), 401-418.
Leander, K. M. (2008). Toward a connective ethnography of online/offline literacy networks. In D. Leu, J.
        Cairo, M. Knobel, & C. Lankshear (Eds.) Handbook of research on new literacies. New York:
        Erlbaum, 33-65.
Logue, C., Hutchens, T., & Hector, M. (2005). Student leadership: A phenomenological exploration of
        postsecondary experiences. Journal of College Student Development, 46(4), 393-408.
Lord,  R., &   Hall,  R.  (2005).  Identity, deep   structure   and  the   development   of leadership skill. The
        Leadership Quarterly, 16, 591-615.
Luehmann, A. L. (2008).      Using blogging in support of teacher professional identity development:       A case
        study.  Journal of the Learning Sciences, 17, 287-337.
Marcia, J. E. (1994). The empirical study of ego identity. In H. A. Bosma, T. L. G. Graafsma, H. D.
        Grotevant & D. J. de Levita (Eds.), Identity and Development: an interdisciplinary approach (pp
        67-79). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.
Nardi, B., Schiano, D. J., & Gumbrecht, M. (2004). Blogging as social activity, or, would you let 900
        million  people   read  your  diary?     Paper    presented  at the Computer     Supported Collaborative
        Learning    Conference, Chicago, IL, November.
Nardi, B., Schiano, D. J., Gumbrecht, M., & Swartz, L (2004).            Why we blog.      Communications of the
        ACM, 47 (12), 41-46.
Nasir, N. (2002). Identity, goals, and learning: Mathematics in cultural practice. Mathematical Thinking
        and Learning, 4, 211-245.
Nasir, N. S. & Saxe, G. B. (2003).     Ethnic and academic identities:          A cultural practice perspective on
        emerging     tensions and   their management         in the  lives  of  minority students.   Educational
        Researcher, 32(5), 1-14.
Neilson, A. L. (2009). The power of nature and the nature of power. Canadian Journal of Environmental
        Education, 14, 136-148.
Martindale, T., &Wiley, D. (2005). Using weblogs in scholarship and teaching. Tech Trends, 49(2), 55­61.
Ochs, E. & Capps, L. (1996).    Narrating the self.  Annual Review of Anthropology, 25, 19-43.
Palincsar, A.  (1998).   Social constructivist    perspectives    on teaching   and learning.  Annual  Review   of
        Psychology, 49, 345-375.

                                                    75  ·  © ISLS
                                           ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 2

Posner, B., & Brodsky, B. (1992). A leadership development instrument for college students. Journal of
       College Student Development, 33(4), 231-237.
Rangell, L. (1994). Identity and the human core: The view from psychoanalytic theory. In H. A. Bosma, T.
       L. G. Graafsma,   H.    D. Grotevant  &     D. J.  de  Levita (Eds.), Identity and development:   An
       interdisciplinary approach (pp. 25-40). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.
Sfard, A. & Prusak, A. (2005). Telling identities: In search of an analytic tool for investigating learning as
       a culturally shaped activity. Educational Researcher, 34(4), 14-22.
Star, S. L. & Griesemer, J. R. (1989). Institutional ecology, `translations' and boundary objects: Amateurs
       and professionals in    Berkeley's Museum      of  Vertebrate  Zoology,  1907-39.  Social Studies of
       Science, 19(3), 387-420
Widner, C. J., & Roggenbuck, J. W. (2000). Reducing theft of petrified wood at Petrified Forest National
       Park. Journal of Interpretation Research, 5(1), 1-18.
Williams, J. B. & Jacobs, J. (2004). Exploring the use of blogs as learning spaces in the higher education
       sector. Australasian Journal of Educational Technology, 20(2), 232­247.

                                                76  ·  © ISLS
