                                              ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

Complexity, Robustness, and Trade-Offs in Evaluating Large Scale
                               STEM Education Programs
          Susan A. Yoon, University of Pennsylvania, 3700 Walnut Street, Philadelphia, PA 19104
                                            yoonsa@gse.upenn.edu
              Lei Liu, University of Pennsylvania, 3700 Walnut Street, Philadelphia, PA 19104
                                             leil@gse.upenn.edu

        Abstract: This study explores the application of the complex systems lenses of robustness
        and trade-offs to evaluate the success of a STEM education program in terms of sustainability.
        A mixed methods approach is used to document contextual constraints, trade-offs considered
        such as modularity vs. one-size-fits-all, and actions taken by the project team to build toward
        adaptive capacities.

Introduction
The issue of declining participation of America's youth in science, technology, engineering and math (STEM)
education and careers has received a great deal of attention over the last few years from industry, government,
and education sectors  (Business  Roundtable,   2005;    Domestic  Policy   Council,  2006; U.S. Department   of
Education, 2007). As STEM jobs continue to grow, by 2012 the number of positions in science and engineering
is estimated to outpace the number of qualified people to fill them by 26% and 15% respectively (NSF, 2006).
From a citizenship science perspective, there is a broader issue of a general lack of STEM literacy in society
associated with such declining participation. When fewer students are interested in and aware of emerging
STEM research such as nanotechnology, the likelihood that they are able to contribute to intelligent decision
making about applications that can affect their daily lives decreases (Yoon, 2008). Additional pressures on
workforce development exist with the emphasis on developing 21st century and cyberinfrastructure-enabled
scientific skills in which learning from and using digital technologies both for developing conceptual knowledge
and process skills must now figure prominently in education (NSF, 2007; Partnership for 21st Century Skills,
2007). To respond to these needs researchers in the Learning Sciences and STEM education have focused
attention on understanding how to develop, sustain and scale innovative science and technology reform-oriented
programs. Investigation and discussion have centered on what mechanisms and variables are required to create
the conditions for success and how success may be evaluated (Dede, Honan & Peters, 2005; Yoon & Klopfer,
2006; Yoon et al., 2009). One theme that resonates through much of this research is the challenge reformers face
in adapting their programs to specific contexts (Datnow, 2005; Dede & Honan, 2005; Hargreaves & Fink,
2000). Elmore (1996) writes about the difficulties experienced by nested clusters of innovation in educational
settings. He states that failures, historically, in generating successful large-scale reforms can be attributed to an
"absence of practical theory that takes account of the institutional complexities that operate on changes in
practice" (p. 21). Similarly, Goldman (2005) and Fishman et al. (2004) identify the need to account for multiple
embedded levels of stakeholders when designing for improvement, who must actively support the reform if it is
to succeed. Coburn (2003)    reinforces the  idea that   educational  reform  and  improvement   are  matters of
complexity highlighting the inability of research to address the inherent multidimensionality between and within
educational constituents. Building from this reform literature and the calls for research methods and practical
theories that take a systems approach, in this paper we introduce the principle of robustness, both as a lens and a
tool for understanding issues of sustainability and scale of innovative STEM education programs. We suggest
that achieving a robust programmatic state is arguably the sine qua non of success with respect to sustainability,
which in turn provides  the  rationale  for going to    scale. As  we  will argue, one  of  the core measurable
mechanisms operating in the service of robustness is trade-offs. We present data, analyses, and results of the
first year of a three-year STEM program in which we document the trade-offs experienced and then undertaken
in the redesign process to create a more robust program.

Theoretical Framework
Complex Systems
Multidimensionality, nested clusters, and multiple constituents and levels are all characteristics of complex
systems. The study of complexity has been a focus of research in many academic disciplines such as biology
(Kaufmann, 1995), physical science (Bak, 1996; Prigogine & Stengers, 1984), psychology (Arrow et al., 2000),
anthropology (Lansing, 2006),   and economics   (Stacey,    1996).   The ubiquity  of complex   systems research
appears to extend from the commonalities that exist between structures or contexts and behaviors in that they
comprise multiple elements that adapt or react to patterns that they create (Arthur, 1999). By studying the
patterns that emerge and the interactional dynamics that lead to these patterns, researchers can better understand
among other things, how systems adapt, self-organize, fluctuate and either achieve or do not achieve steady

                                                  690  ·  © ISLS
                                                 ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

states. For example, in the simple dilemma of the Tragedy of the Commons, one individual may choose to act
selfishly and use up resources with no real impact on supplies. However, if many individuals decide to behave
in the same way soon the resources will be depleted and the individuals along with the collective community
will suffer. Thus the culture or the collective that exists must be considered. It requires one to know the limits of
the culture and to adjust behaviors in order to sustain a robust system, which is also in the best interest of
individual survival.

Robustness in Complex Systems
Related to understanding the limits of the culture, robustness researchers study the contextual parameters that
enable systems to persist or deteriorate in the face of negative often, unpredictable impacts such as the spread of
viruses in  an   ecosystem,   continual military conflict  between   countries, or the collapse of  stock markets     in
economies. As a central complex systems mechanism, various problems across biological and social situations
can be investigated through the lens of robustness which has led leading complex systems organizations like the
Santa   Fe  Institute to devote    whole  research  tracks    to its study (http://www.santafe.edu/research/topics-
innovation-evolutionary-systems.php#4). One of the unifying characteristics that enable its multidisciplinary
application   is that perturbations  impact   natural, cultural,  and engineered   systems. It  is hypothesized    that
studying varying system's responses to these perturbations can provide general rules or principles that can be
used to solve long-standing questions such as how evolution that requires variation supports the emergence of
phenotypes from genotypes (Wagner, 2005). Others have used notions of robustness to understand how the
structure of social networks enables information flow and resource management (Webb & Bodin, 2008). For
example, as individual nodes, actors or elements are removed from the network key connections may be broken
which may isolate subgroups and thus limit how information gets distributed. Elsewhere we have used social
network theories, analyses, and tools to help students and teachers develop better information-seeking strategies
to construct knowledge and to gain social capital (Yoon, accepted; Baker-Doyle & Yoon, 2009). In all these
studies, creating robust systems requires ease of information flow in order to give and receive resources. Where
constraints exist due to cultural or contextual barriers, trade-offs are needed to build adaptive capacities.

Trade-Offs
Perhaps the most well known example of a general application of the idea of trade-offs is the situation of the
Prisoner's Dilemma that falls under the general topic of Game Theory. This is a hypothetical case where two
prisoners  are   interrogated separately  for having   together  committed  a   crime. In the  classic scenario,   it is
assumed that the base prison sentence is 5 years. The pay-offs or decrease of prison time will depend on
whether the individuals choose to cooperate with each other or defect. In the context of the game, defecting
(claiming innocence and implicating your partner), while your partner cooperates (confesses to the crime), will
always provide the largest pay-off to the defector in that no prison time will be served. Similar to the Tragedy of
the Commons example, using this simple algorithm, researchers have studied how it is possible that cooperation
might have emerged as an evolutionarily adaptive strategy (Axelrod, 1984). While a full blown discussion of the
mechanisms that lead to cooperation cannot be made here, one of the key ideas related to trade-offs for our
research pertains to the fact that much of the study of strategies that allow populations rather than individuals
within systems to benefit are underpinned by the fact that the success of someone or something that includes
activities and resources may come at the expense or sacrifice of another person or another thing. For example,
Janssen and Anderies (2007) write with respect to the trade-offs that organizations must make in choosing to
satisfy short-term or long-term goals, "when all `low-hanging fruit' is taken to increase robustness cheaply,
[systems] will eventually reach a point at which it is no longer possible to generate additional robustness
without a cost to performance and/or decreased robustness somewhere else in the system" (p. 44).

Complexity, Robustness, and Trade-Offs in Evaluating STEM Education Programs
Understanding the educational system as a complex system is not new in educational research. In his Change
Forces series focused on reform, Fullan (1993, 1999, 2003) uses complex systems theory as an organizing
framework     to reveal core  concepts   such as  non-linearity,  unpredictability and  multi-level  agency   that are
important issues to contend with in real-world educational systems. However, where states of existence like
robustness become goals that drive the reform efforts rather than for description, and where mechanisms like
trade-offs become actions, educational research takes a step closer to a "practical theory" that accounts for
institutional complexities    that Elmore  (1996)  searches    for.  The following   study  documents   the   multiple
constituents, contextual limits, and important trade-offs made toward increasing robustness in a large-scale
STEM education reform effort.

Methodology
Context

                                                    691   ·  © ISLS
                                              ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

This work is funded under the National Science Foundation program "Innovative Technology Experiences for
Students and Teachers (ITEST)". The ITEST program is designed to increase opportunities for students and
teachers in underserved schools to learn and apply information technology concepts and skills in the STEM
content areas. Our project is a school district-university partnership between one of the largest school districts in
the U.S., a school of education and a leading university nanoscale research center. It aims to achieve the broader
ITEST goals by updating standard high school science curricula and training teachers through a curriculum and
instruction framework built on five component variables addressing content knowledge, pedagogical content
knowledge, and workforce development goals. These variables are: 1) Real world science and engineering
applications such as current nanotechnology research and ethical considerations of this research; 2) Educational
Technologies  to   develop  content  knowledge     such   as  NetLogo      computer   simulations; 3)  Information
Technologies for communication, community-building and dissemination such as Google Groups and wikis; 4)
Cognitively-rich  pedagogical   approaches    such    as  problem-based     learning;  and   5)  Investigation  and
consideration of STEM education and careers.
         There are two parts to the scope and sequence of project activities. The first part entails a three-week,
75-hour professional development summer workshop for science teachers, in which they learn to construct and
pilot curricular units based on the five component variables. These curricular units are intended to be aligned
with school district standards for high school biology and physical science. The summer workshop is followed
by the school-year implementation of these units in teachers' classrooms and 5 follow-up Saturday professional
development workshops. In addition to the central curriculum and instruction goals, another major goal of the
project is to build teaching capacities and self-directed interests through communities of practice structures
which include working with groups of teachers from the same school, implementing an online comprehensive
professional development database for peer-to-peer interaction, and requiring teachers from different schools to
construct units collaboratively. For this study, we focus on the activities and program developments of the first
cohort of teachers who participated on the project between August 2008 and May 2009.

Participants
Ten male and six female teachers participated in the workshop from 10 high schools and 1 middle school in the
district. The group was racially/ethnically diverse: seven teachers were White, six were African American, and
three were Asian. Courses taught ranged from grades 8 to 12 in the content areas of physical science, biology,
chemistry, and physics. The average amount of teaching experience was 15.8 years, with a range of 1 to 39
years of experience.  Data  from 128   students taught   by  a sample   of  six teachers   were collected with  the
following racial/ethnic breakdown: 23.4% White, 48.4% African American, 7.8% Hispanic, 14.1% Asian, and
3.9% other races. The study also investigated perceptions and actions of the project team, as the goal was to
document and understand the kinds of trade-offs we experienced in the development and implementation of the
program. Thus, we include the project team as participants who comprised: a professor, a post-doc and two
doctoral students from the school of education; and a professor, two post-docs, and the educational outreach
director from the nanoscale research center.

Data Sources and Analyses
Eight data sources were collected for the study and analyzed through a mixed methods approach.
1.  A 64-item 5-point Likert-scale survey administered to teachers to measure teacher's self-perceptions of
    pedagogical practices, beliefs, student participation, and teacher confidence levels with particular emphasis
    on  the project's five  variable curriculum  and     instruction framework.   A   pre-intervention survey  was
    collected in August 2008 and a post-intervention survey was collected in May 2009. Complete data sets
    were obtained from 8 participating teachers due to various data collection challenges. A paired-samples t-
    test was conducted to determine if teachers had statistically significant change in their self-perceptions from
    the beginning to the end of the 2008-2009 academic year.
2.  An 82-item 5-point Likert-scale survey administered to students to measure self-perceptions of attitudes
    toward science and use of classroom resources and strategies with particular emphasis on the project's five
    variable curriculum and instruction framework. Pre- and post-intervention surveys were collected from 5
    participating teacher's classrooms  immediately   before   and   after the ITEST   implementation.  Times   for
    survey collection were different due to the variability of implementation in the school-year curriculum. For
    example, some teachers chose to develop units in physical science on the topic of properties of matter,
    which corresponded with delivery of the standard curriculum at the beginning of the year. Others chose
    units that corresponded with latter times. A paired-samples t-test on 128 survey responses was conducted to
    determine if students had statistically significant change in their self-perceptions.
3.  An 11-item open-ended research survey administered to teachers that probed in-depth understanding of
    nanoscale content and STEM education pedagogical beliefs related to the 5 variable project framework. A
    pre-intervention survey was collected in August 2008 and a post-intervention survey was collected in May
    2009. Complete data sets were obtained from 8 participating teachers.

                                                  692  ·   © ISLS
                                               ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

4.  Qualitative case studies of 5 project teachers were conducted by the project's external evaluator. Case study
    classrooms   were  selected to obtain  information     from as  diverse   a sample as  possible. The    case-study
    implementation was guided by the following 4 questions: What does the ITEST curriculum look like as it is
    implemented   in  case-study  classrooms?;   To    what  extent   do teachers  implement   the   key elements  of
    ITEST?; To what extent is each enacted unit similar or different from the intended unit?; What supports and
    challenges are observed and reported in the implementation of the ITEST curricular units? Data collection
    included: field notes from three classroom observations, informal conversations with teachers, informal
    conversations and/or focus groups with students, and a formal end-of-unit interview with each teacher.
5.  Focus group interview for the entire cohort of teachers conducted during the Saturday workshop held at the
    end  of  February  2009. Focus   group  questions    probed   for details  about affordances  and  constraints to
    implementation and suggestions for program redesign for the next cohort of teachers and schools. The
    cohort  was  divided into   3 smaller  groups.  Interviews   were    transcribed and  compared   by  the  external
    evaluator and the project team in order to identify common themes.
6.  Weekly 1.5 hour project management meetings audio-recorded and transcribed.
7.  Written and informal verbal reflections of the 4 scientists from the nanoscale science center after specific
    nano-content  meetings   and  after content modules      were  implemented    during  the summer   and   Saturday
    professional development workshops.
8.  Field notes and informal verbal reflections of the 4 school of education researchers documented throughout
    the year  of implementation    as  facilitators in  participant   teachers' classrooms.   There  were   33 formal
    classroom observation field notes collected.
For data sources 3, 5-8, data were reviewed systematically by the 4 school of education researchers through a
qualitative grounded theory approach (Strauss & Corbin, 1998) in which all open-ended surveys, transcribed
meetings, observation notes, and reflections were mined for evidence illustrating various trade-offs that emerged
throughout the project year.

Results
With respect to increasing robustness and revealing and using trade-offs that are specific to our ITEST project,
we were interested in documenting the emerging themes as they pertained to the 5 variable framework as well
as impacts on the goal of building a practitioner community focused on the framework. In this paper, the results
of two variables (i.e., real world science and engineering applications and educational technology) are presented
and organized into the three sub-categories of: i) Contextual Constraints; ii) Trade-offs; and iii) Actions. We
continue to work toward identifying more general categories of constraints and trade-offs that may be applied
across similar STEM education programs, however, in this section we list them individually and attempt to
apply a meta-level categorization later in the Discussion section.

Real world science and engineering applications
Research   in nanotechnology    refers  to the  interdisciplinary    study  of  physical, chemical,   and   biological
phenomena in the 1 ­ 100 nanometer range. Manipulation of atoms and molecules at this scale have given
scientists unprecedented abilities to engineer materials, products and processes in, medicine, the environment,
cosmetics, clothing, and computer and automotive technologies (Roco, 2003). Nanotechnology research has
undergone rapid growth over the past decade with an estimated annual global research expenditure of $13.9
billion (PCAST, 2008). The pervasiveness of these applications is also immense. The Woodrow Wilson Project
on Emerging Nanotechnologies states that there are over 800 products currently on the market produced by over
400 companies in 21 countries. Therefore, in our project, incorporating current and cutting edge nanotechnology
research and applications including nanoscale content and real world problem solving into the standard science
curriculum was a central design element of the teacher constructed PBL units.

Contextual Constraints
Several contextual constraints limited the success of this variable. First from the case studies and focus group
interviews, the most widely reported challenge teachers faced was the mismatch in PBL pedagogy and the
school district's system of managed instruction, i.e., core curriculum and benchmarks. Due to time challenges,
delivering a  complete unit  was  not  possible for  some    teachers  choosing  instead  to deliver discrete  lessons
throughout the year. Despite significant increases in teacher confidence levels in their ability to use problem-
based instructional practices (t(7)=2.546, p=.038), teacher effectiveness in helping students identify multiple
solutions to a problem (t(7)=2.121, p=.078), and perceptions of increased use of real world applications in the
curriculum (t(7)=3.667, p=.008),   no significant differences were found in student perceptions of learning about
real world issues, new science innovations or discoveries, teacher's demonstrations of science problems, and
student problem-solving.  Moreover,    while teaching    aspects  of  PBL  units  was  found  to occur   in classroom
observations, even in the best example of one of the case-studies, student final projects had low fidelity with the

                                                    693  ·  © ISLS
                                              ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

original curriculum, which included plans for students to gather, synthesize, and evaluate the various types of
information used throughout the unit in order to assess the ethical issues related to their nano-application.

Difficulties also existed in aligning curricular content levels and school contexts with nanoscale applications.
Despite significant increases in teacher's perceptions of their ability to incorporate nanoscale science content
(t(7)= 3.130, p=.017), scientists frequently expressed concerns about finding the appropriate connections to the
topics covered in the high school curriculum. Issues for the scientists also surfaced with respect to empowering
teachers to "own" the presented concepts so that they felt compelled to shape it into instruction relevant for their
classrooms.  From  a content  knowledge   perspective,   responses    from  teachers  that probed   understanding  of
nanoscale  concepts  showed  misconceptions   at the  fundamental     level  of size  and  scale as well as  in their
perceptions of nanoscale science requiring an entirely new understanding of canonical scientific domains. For
example, the majority of teachers believed that nanotechnology is a distinctively new science (with its own set
of laws), instead of an addition to existing sciences, like biology, chemistry, and physics.

Trade-Offs
The trade-offs we would like to highlight here deal with structural and behavioral factors of social and human
systems, which we have discussed elsewhere to be among the most difficult constraints to contend with in the
educational system (Yoon & Klopfer, 2006; Yoon et al., 2009). In the first case regarding the implementation of
PBL, the   expectation  was  for teachers to develop    a coherent    unit with  the  higher-order  inquiry skills of
evaluation  and  synthesis however,  given district  testing pressures,    the  actualized curriculum  looked   much
different. This is akin to the trade-off of robustness to performance. Essentially, the trade-off parameter can be
described in terms of some benefits are better than none in the face of highly uncompromising intransigent
constraints. In the second case in aligning curricular content and the existence of fundamental misconceptions, if
we were to follow the research on how people learn or knowledge-building theory (Bransford et al. 2000;
Scardamalia, 2002), providing scaffolds for teachers to construct their own knowledge would stand a better
chance in helping them make curricular connections on their own, promote self-efficacy and self-regulation, and
remediate misconceptions. However, the major constraints here are lack of time and resources to undertake the
knowledge-building process. A logical trade-off parameter then, given that teachers felt positive about their
ability to incorporate nanoscale content into their regular curricula, might be to meet the teachers half-way, i.e.,
providing instructional support and curricular resources to seed interest and a solid leverage point to explore
research and application avenues other than the ones that are directly taught to them.

Actions
Based on the trade-off parameters, a number of changes in project expectations and program delivery occurred
for cohort 2 teacher professional development. Instead of mandating a coherent sequential unit, curricula could
be constructed drawing on content connections in multiple topics throughout the school year. We identified a
teacher from cohort 1 who developed particular expertise in working with project goals in this way and we
enlisted her to teach a two-hour module on what we called semi-coherent curricular units where she modeled the
process and  provided   to teachers her own    tried and    true unit with   detailed explanation   of the  important
modifications she made in practice. Actions spawned by the trade-off of meeting the teachers half-way, included
constructing   a  comprehensive     curriculum   alignment       inventory   in  which     11  nanotechnology    and
concepts/applications were identified in addition to how they interface with the State Standards and the School
District's Core Curriculum for grade 9 Physical Science and grade 10 Biology. Table 1 depicts a sample of the
inventory  the  project team developed.   This was    used  in   instruction for  teachers  when   new  content  was
introduced and given to them as a general heuristic to use when building their standards-aligned PBL units.

Table 1: Sample of Curriculum Alignment Inventory.

                                                  694  ·  © ISLS
                                                 ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

Educational Technologies to develop content knowledge
Educational   technologies  (ET)  were  presented   to  teachers  as distinct    in  our framework     from  information
technologies (IT) in that ET comprises imaging, simulations, and visualization tools that help scientists and
students  learn about   science content and   processes     whereas  IT  is primarily    used  for communication     and
interaction.  Teachers   were   instructed    on  the   emerging    importance      of   being  able   to  navigate  the
cyberinfrastructure  for   STEM    careers,   which   includes   using     computational    tools  for data   collection,
manipulation, visualization, and prediction. Several digital tools used with teachers included simulations found
on  the   Internet such  as  The   Nano    Journey,   http://www.nanoreisen.de/english/index.html         and   NetLogo
(Wilensky & Reisman, 2008) software in which a drug delivery system for nanotechnology and cancer was
constructed and used with teachers to learn about how to conduct scientific experiments with such simulations.

Contextual Constraints
In comparison to using information technologies, this variable was much less prevalent in teacher's instructional
practices. Classroom observation field notes indicated that only 2 out of the total cohort of 16 teachers used
NetLogo in their instruction. Where as teachers surveys showed significant increases in the perception of their
ability to incorporate IT into their lessons (t(7)=2.198, p=.064), no differences were found with ET. In student
surveys,  although  the item  investigating   science or   other ideas  through   simulations,  images,   or animations
(t(125)=2.594, p=.011) was found to have positive gains, actual observed practice showed no use of these tools
for higher order scientific inquiry skills. Rather, they were used mainly to illustrate or demonstrate a concept. In
the case studies, similar results were found along with other contextual constraints. One major challenge was
that the teachers did not have administrative privileges to download NetLogo onto their school computers. One
teacher did download NetLogo onto his laptop and students individually came up to his computer and tried the
simulation for short periods of time. Another teacher said that she was interested in NetLogo, but didn't have a
laptop that she could load it onto. Of the other three, one said that he didn't have enough facility to use it, and
the other two did not think it would have been feasible to use in their classes due to classroom management
issues. All teachers did use other educational technology, the most common application being visualization
software that allowed students to move between visualizations of the same item or location at different scales.

Trade-offs
The  lack of   educational  technology  use   triggered several   in-depth  discussions    during  project  management
meetings about how to facilitate greater applications as well as applications that resembled more closely how
scientists really used such software for scientific discovery. NetLogo and similarly StarLogo were simulation
tools used by the principal investigator in previous projects with some success in developing computational
literacies and 21st century skills (Klopfer & Yoon, 2005; Klopfer et al., 2005). Particularly with respect to the
potential  for  manipulating    variables,  changing    initial  conditions,     and   running  multiple    experiments,
NetLogo/StarLogo modeling software could be extremely useful tools in the science classroom. However, given
the difficulties in downloading the software, differences in teachers facility and comfort levels, and the fact that
some ET was being used in instruction, the project team explored the trade-off of modularity vs. one size does
not fit all. This trade-off is similar to the use and benefits of differentiated instruction. Although it was believed
that more focused practice on a few ET applications for all teacher participants would work toward successful
ET implementation, again, structural and behavioral realities posed seemingly insurmountable constraints and
we needed to differentiate this component.

Actions
Several   actions  were taken according    to the identified    trade-off. First, with   the easily  accessible Internet
visualization programs, we developed exemplar lessons to show generically how experimentation could be done
with any similar tool. Next, we devoted a good deal of time collecting and vetting ET sites on the Internet that
would be appropriate for our project which culminated in a comprehensive Educational Technology Inventory
with clickable links. We also planned to deliver parallel sessions that demonstrated different ET applications
and associated pedagogies for which teachers could choose to sign up according to their interests and comfort
levels. We   would   offer  these iteratively  so  that   when   teachers   felt  that they  had   developed  particular
competencies, they could choose to attend increasingly more challenging ET modules to improve their skills.

We have documented and used several more trade-offs as a response to contextual constraints. For example,
after realizing how little access we had to guidance counselors in schools and coming to the understanding that
they were no longer assigned to just one school, plans to work on a comprehensive nanotechnology education
and career package in which teachers and guidance counselors would collaborate to disseminate on a large scale
needed to change. Instead we opted for different STEM education and career experiences, one of which was a
short, real-world internship where teams of two high school students worked in a modestly paid after school job
for two   hours a  week  in the  nanoscale    professor's  research lab.   The   trade-off and  extensive   project team

                                                    695   ·  © ISLS
                                                ICLS 2010  ·   Volume 1

discussions centered around project impact on individual vs. many students. With the variable of cognitively-
rich pedagogies, a trade-off that we continually face is how much is enough theory vs. practice. In working
toward our goal of building a community of practice one of the major trade-offs we grapple with is whether,
how, and how much to build technological, human and/or social capital.
Discussion
With all of these trade-offs, one common theme that organizes around building sustainable or robust programs
appears to be negotiating the middle ground. When working with systems with high complexity, that is, many
often competing factors that operate under unpredictable conditions, finding the compromise between ideal
project fidelity and real-world constraints may be the key to ensuring that at least some parts of the vision
survives. From this platform, we can create opportunities for continued growth of activities that have taken a
hold in the education system to continue to grow. Another meta-level theme that clearly impacts the project
team's  decision-making   practices   is the disposition   of flexibility. The adaptive   process that these   STEM
education programs necessarily undergo can work if there is an expectation of flexibility and a willingness to
carefully document and analyze the constraints in order to choose another path that may be more successful.
Likewise, adopting an ideological stance of pragmatism may be a prudent choice. If we apply from the start, the
expectation that ideas or theories such as how people learn best can only be measured or deemed successful in
practice, we  are  forced to  take account   of the institutional complexities  that can  exert heavy  influence on
program success.

There are at least three potential contributions that this study can make. At the level of theory understanding
sustainability of innovative STEM education programs through the lenses of complexity, robustness and trade-
offs is a   promising   framework  to evaluate  the complexity     of educational reform.  The  study  also  informs
practice, operationalizing the framework in terms of documenting contextual constraints, trade-offs considered,
and then actions taken. Finally, looking across the trade-offs and identifying the common themes of finding the
middle ground, developing dispositions of flexibility, and adopting a pragmatic stance, can be used by other
like-minded educational reformers in the design of future STEM education programs.

References
Arrow, H., McGrath, J. & Berhahl, J. (2000). Small Groups as Complex Systems. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage
          Publications, Inc.
Arthur, W.B. (1999). Complexity and the economy. Science (284), 107­109.
Axelrod, R. (1984). The Evolution of Cooperation. New York: Basic Books.
Bak, P. (1996). How Nature Works: The Science of Self-Organized Criticality. New York: Copernicus.
Baker-Doyle, K. & Yoon, S. (2009, August). In search of practitioner-based social capital: A social network
          analysis tool for understanding and facilitating teacher collaboration in a professional development
          program. Paper to be presented at the annual meeting of the European Association for Research on
          Learning and Instruction, Amsterdam, Netherlands.
Bransford, J., Brown, A., & Cocking, R. (Eds.) (1999). How people learn: Brain, mind, experience, and school.
          Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
Business    Roundtable  (2005). Tapping    America's  Potential:   The  Education  for Innovation  Initiative. [Web
          Resource] Available online. www.businessroundtable.org/publications.
Coburn,   C.  (2003).   Rethinking scale:   Moving  beyond    numbers    to deep  and  lasting change.  Educational
          Researcher, 32(6), 3-12.
Datnow, A. (2005). The sustainability of comprehensive school reform models in changing district and state
          contexts. Educational Administration Quarterly, 41(1), 121-153.
Dede,   C.,  Honan,  J. &  Peters, L. (2005).   Scaling   Up  Success:  Lessons   Learned  from   Technology-Based
          Educational Improvement. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Dede, C.    & Honan, J. (2005). Scaling up success: A synthesis of themes and insights. In, C. Dede, J. Honan &
          L.  Peters  (Eds.)  Scaling    Up  Success:   Lessons    Learned   from  Technology-Based     Educational
          Improvement (pp. 227-239). San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Domestic    Policy Council   (2006).  American   Competitiveness   Initiative. Office  of Science  and  Technology
          Policy: Washington D.C.
Fishman, B., Marx, R., Blumenfeld, P., Krajcik, J. & Soloway, E. (2004). Creating a framework for research on
          systemic technology innovations. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 13(1): 43-76.
Goldman, S. (2005). Designing for scalable educational improvement. In, C. Dede, J. Honan & L. Peters (Eds.)
          Scaling Up Success: Lessons Learned from Technology-Based Educational Improvement (pp. 67-96).
          San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Hargreaves, A. & Fink, D. (2000). Three dimensions of educational reform. Educational Leadership, 57(7), 30-
          34.

                                                    696  ·  © ISLS
                                              ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

Janssen, M & Anderies, J. (2007). Robustness trade-offs in social-ecological systems. International Journal of
         the Commons, 1(1), 43-65.
Johnson,  S. (2001).  Emergence:   The Connected   Lives   of  Ants,  Brains, Cities, and Software.  New  York:
         Touchstone.
Kauffman, S. (1995). At Home in the Universe. New York: Oxford University Press.
Klopfer, E. & Yoon, S. (2005). Developing games and simulations for today and tomorrow's tech savvy youth.
         Tech Trends, 49(3), 33-41.
Klopfer, E., Yoon, S. & Um, T. (2005). Teaching complex dynamic systems to young students with StarLogo.
         Journal of Computers in Mathematics and Science Teaching, 24(2), 157-178.
Lansing,  S. &  Miller J.  (2005).  Cooperation Games      and Ecological Feedback:    Some Insights from   Bali.
         Current Anthropology 46(2): 328-334.
National Science Foundation. (2007). Cyberinfrastructure Vision for 21st Century Discovery. Arlington, VA:
         Author.
President's Council of Advisors on Science and Technology (PCAST). (2008). The National Nanotechnology
         Initiative: Second Assessment and Recommendations of the National Nanotechnology Advisory Panel.
         Washington, D.C.: Executive Office of the President.
Prigogine, I. & Stengers, I. (1984). Order Out of Chaos. New York: Bantam Books.
Roco, M. (2003). Converging science and technology at the nanoscale: Opportunities for education and training.
         Nature Biotechnology, 21(10), 1247-1249.
Scardamalia, M. (2002). Collective cognitive responsibility for the advancement of knowledge. In B. Smith
         (Ed.), Liberal Education in a Knowledge Society (pp. 67-98). Chicago: Open Court.
Strauss, A.  L. &  Corbin,  J. M.   (1998). Basics of    Qualitative Research:  Techniques  and  Procedures  for
         Developing Grounded Theory (2nd edition), Sage, Newbury Park, CA.
U.S. Department of Education (2007). Report of the Academic Competitiveness Council.
         Washington, DC: Author.
Wagner, A. (2005). Robustness and Evolvability in Living Systems. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Webb, C. & Bodin, O. (2008). A network perspective on modularity and control of flow in robust systems (pp.
         85-118) . In, J. Norberg and G. Cumming (Eds.) Complexity Theory for a Sustainable Future. New
         York: Columbia University Press.
Wilensky, U., & Reisman, K. (2006). Thinking like a wolf, a sheep or a firefly: Learning biology through
         constructing  and testing computational   theories--an  embodied  modeling    approach. Cognition  and
         Instruction, 24(2), 171­209.
Yoon, S. (accepted). Using social network graphs as visualization tools to influence peer selection decision-
         making strategies to access information about socioscientific issues. Journal of the Learning Sciences.
Yoon, S.  (2008).  An  evolutionary   approach to  harnessing    complex  systems  thinking in the  science and
         technology classroom. International Journal of Science Education. 30(1), 1-32.
Yoon, S., Chessler, M., Kumar, R., Williams, D., Flicker, J. & Dunham, S. (2009, April). Understanding
         emergent challenges and adaptations in the design of an OST STEM project through a Structure,
         Behavior and Function (SBF) Complexity Lens. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the National
         Association for Research in Science Teaching, Orange County, CA.
Yoon, S. Liu, L. & Goh, S. (2009). Exploring the process of convergent adaptation in technology-based science
         curriculum construction. In the proceedings of the Computer Supported Collaborative Learning annual
         conference, Rhodes, Greece.
Yoon, S.   &  Klopfer, E.  (2006).  Feedback   (F) Fueling    Adaptation  (A)  Network    Growth (N)  and   Self-
         Organization (S): A Complex Systems Design and Evaluation Approach to Professional Development.
         Journal of Science Education and Technology, 15(5-6), 353-366.

Acknowledgments
This research is supported by a National Science Foundation Grant: ESI 0737437.

                                                  697  ·  © ISLS
