                                                     ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

                   Exploring Convergence of Science Ideas through
                                   Collaborative Concept Mapping
                Dana Gnesdilow, Anushree Bopardikar, Sarah A. Sullivan, & Sadhana Puntambekar
                                             University of Wisconsin-Madison
      gnesdilow@wisc.edu, bopardikar@wisc.edu, sasullivan2@wisc.edu, puntambekar@education.wisc.edu

        Abstract: This exploratory study examined how groups of sixth grade students worked together to
        create a collaborative concept map. We selected two contrasting cases based on their initial maps,
        one heterogeneous group with divergent maps and one homogeneous group with convergent maps.
        We analyzed group dialogue and collaborative and individual concept maps to understand: 1) if
        convergence     of  science    ideas     occurs during    collaborative concept   mapping     and   2)  how
        convergence or divergence during collaboration influences individual map construction. We found
        that collaborative concept maps facilitated greater convergence of ideas in groups with initially
        divergent   pre  individual    maps.     Further, the   negotiation of    divergent science   ideas  during
        collaboration led to gains in individual students' science understanding. Implications of findings
        and directions for future research are discussed.

Concept maps have been used in a variety of educational settings to support meaningful learning (e.g., Daley, et al.
2008)  in  contexts such    as reading    (e.g., Nesbit   &  Adesope,   2006),  writing  (Sharples,   1994),  and  measuring
conceptual  change   (e.g., Edmondson,     2000).   Concept     maps  represent  knowledge   by  focusing    on relationships
between ideas. They consist of concepts delimited by circles and arrows linking two concepts (Novak & Cañas,
2008). Words placed on the arrow explain relationships between concepts.
        The use of concept maps has been mainly informed by the cognitivist premise that learning occurs within
the individual through the assimilation of new concepts and relationships within existing propositional frameworks.
A concept map represents an individual's knowledge structure at a given point in time (Fisher, 2000). However,
Roth and Roychoudhury (1994) point out that "the theoretical framework in which concept mapping is grounded is
not much   concerned   with    the social construction    of knowledge"    (p.438).  They   describe  concept  mapping   as a
conscriptional device for social thinking through engaging in discourse, and an inscriptional representation of the
groups' shared understanding of concepts and their relations. Further, they assert that new knowledge is constructed
in collaborative peer groups, and refer to prior research to claim that this knowledge is taken up by the individual
participants through engagement in this social interaction.
        Several other researchers have explored collaborative concept mapping activities from a socioconstructivist
perspective, and have reported that collaborative concept mapping has potential to support student learning (see
Basque & Lavoie, 2006, for a review). In particular, van Boxtel, van der Linden, Roelofs, and Erkens (2002) found
in an experimental study that students involved in collaborative concept mapping engaged in elaborate conceptual
discourse  and  co-constructed     meaning.  They   also  found   that  elaborate student   discourse influenced   individual
learning outcomes. Although collaborative mapping research suggests learning benefits, Teasley and Fischer (2008)
contend that collaborative activities do not always facilitate individual learning or ensure equivalent learning gains
for all individuals. They further state that few studies have explored how collaborative convergence of ideas relates
to individual learning outcomes. This issue of convergence and divergence in thinking is critical in collaborative
learning. For instance, Stahl (2004) stresses the importance of initially divergent ideas during collaboration. Further,
Schwartz   (1999)   argues  that   individuals   create unique   understandings   as they   attempt  to co-construct  shared
meaning during collaboration.
        There is limited research that has investigated what a group map as an inscription represents; that is,
whether   there is  convergence     (the  construction    of shared  understanding)   in  ideas between    students  as  they
collaboratively construct   a  concept   map   in a classroom,    and  the effect of collaborative   mapping    on individual
understanding of concepts. In this exploratory study, we examined the level of convergence during collaborative
concept mapping. From a socioconstructivist perspective, we also explored if a concept map represents the ideas of
an entire group and how collaborative concept mapping relates to individual student understanding. Our premise is
that a movement from shared understanding to construction is seen when students generate their own understanding
in a new individual context based on previous interactions with others. To document this premise, we employed
individual and   group  concept    maps   as inscriptional    products, and  student  audio  during   collaborative  concept
mapping as a conscriptional process. We first examined the group and individual concept mapping scores of five
groups  from    one science    class. We    then   selected   two  contrasting  cases  based  on    their initial  maps, one

                                                         698  ·  © ISLS
                                                     ICLS 2010      ·  Volume 1

heterogeneous group with divergent         maps and one homogeneous group with similar maps, to explore how the two
groups worked together to create a collaborative concept map. Our research questions were: 1) Is there convergence
toward   a shared     understanding of   science concepts      during   a collaborative  concept  map      activity? 2) How       does
convergence or divergence during the collaborative concept map influence individual map construction?

Methods
Participants and Instructional Context
The study was conducted in a sixth grade science class in a private Midwestern school. Students engaged in a
design-based science curriculum to learn about simple machines using the CoMPASS hypertext system to complete
a set of design challenges (Puntambekar, Stylianou, & Goldstein, 2007). In this six week curriculum, students
brainstormed predictions and questions, conducted research on the CoMPASS hypertext system, and conducted
hands on investigations to test their ideas in the same small groups throughout the unit. Students completed five mini
design challenges pertaining to simple machines. Students also engaged in several individual and collaborative
concept map activities throughout the unit. Practice individual and collaborative maps were constructed during the
first half of the unit followed by the pre map in the middle of the unit. Students then constructed post individual
maps at the end of the unit. Collaborative concept maps were created at the end of each mini design challenge.
         For this study, we used data from the pre and post individual concept maps and students' collaborative
maps.  Students    worked  for   approximately      45 minutes      to construct   paper and   pencil     individual concept      maps
involving simple machines physics concepts. Students were instructed to draw a concept map with at least nine (on
pre map) or 14 (on post map) physics concepts with a description of how the concepts were related. A focus on how
the machines work was emphasized in these instructions. In contrast, the collaborative concept map served both as a
conscriptional device to aid students in their physics learning and as a group product or inscription of their learning
for assessment. For the collaborative concept map, constructed between the pre and post individual concept maps,
students were instructed to create a paper and pencil concept map incorporating physics ideas related to pulleys.
They worked face-to-face on these maps for approximately 15-20 minutes during their regular science class.

Data Sources and Analysis
We calculated concept map depth ratios to capture the sophistication of science ideas of students in all five groups.
Further,   we   examined   the   map   layout   and    coded   group      dialogue   captured  while      students generated      their
collaborative maps for two contrasting groups, selected on the basis of their initial individual maps.

Individual and Group Concept Map Depth Ratios
For this   part of the  analysis,  we  focused   on    sophistication    of concept   map   propositions.   A  proposition   is    two
concepts connected by a linking word to form a semantic unit. Modified from prior work (Puntambekar, Stylianou,
& Goldstein,     2007),  we  scored   all  concept     maps    based   on   1)   the number   of accurately    described  concept
propositions and 2) the sophistication of science ideas expressed in the propositions. We assigned proposition scores
according to a five point scale. This scale ranged from: -1 to 3 (see Table 1). We then calculated a depth ratio for
each concept map. The depth ratio was calculated by dividing the sum of the scores for each of the propositions on a
map   by the    total number of   propositions   on    the  map.  A    higher  depth  ratio value signifies    more   sophisticated
understanding of the relationships between concepts. We chose to use the depth ratio to measure student progress
because it considers the depth of the propositions regardless of the number of propositions on the map, and gives an
average score of the sophistication of all propositions. Two researchers coded 15% of all individual and group
concept maps and achieved approximately 90% interrater reliability. One researcher scored the remaining maps.

Table 1: Concept Maps Scoring Rubric.

 Score     Description                                                                 Example
  -1       Incorrect                                                                   levers are inclined planes
    0      Ambiguous     language  (has, gives,  uses,  needs)    in   reference  to   screw has effort force
           concepts (MA, force, friction, distance)
    1      Fact, type of, is a, example, overgeneralization                            third class is one of three kinds of lever
    2      Definition, affects, intuitive language, increases, decreases               friction reduces MA
    3      Scientific  language, elaborate explanations,    specify   conditions for   levers increase the MA when the fulcrum is
           increase or decrease                                                        closer to the load

                                                           699  ·   © ISLS
                                                    ICLS 2010    ·  Volume 1

Individual and Group Concept Map Layout
We compared the map layout of both individual and group maps. We examined the chosen root word and structural
organization (relational vs. hierarchical) between individual pre and post maps, and group maps. The chosen root
word, or most central concept on a map, could be a machine or a physics concept. A relational concept map differs
from a hierarchical map because relationships could be vertical as well as lateral, whereas in a hierarchical map
relationships are primarily vertical.

Group Dialogue
We transcribed the audio of student dialogue that occurred during the collaborative concept mapping activity. Total
audio data consisted of approximately 35 minutes of audio and seven pages of transcripts. We inductively developed
a set of nine codes after a preliminary examination of transcripts to capture the convergent and divergent exchanges
between group members as they talked about science to construct their group map (see Table 2). Our codes also
align with the transactive knowledge convergence process described by Weinberger, Stegmann, and Fischer (2007).
We coded the transcripts at the utterance level. Each utterance could be assigned multiple codes.
        We examined percentages of group dialogue to understand both the patterns of overall interactions in each
group and the contributions offered by individual students. We calculated percentages by dividing the number of
utterances  categorized    into a  particular code   by  the total  number   of   utterances coded  during the  collaborative
activity. Similarly, the percentages for types of individual talk were calculated by dividing the number of utterances
coded into a category by the total number of coded utterances of a particular student. Two authors independently
coded  70%   of the   transcripts   and  established    an interrater reliability of approximately   83%.  The   first author
subsequently coded the remaining transcripts.

Table 2: Coding Rubric for Examining Collaborative Concept Mapping Audio Data.

 Code:                                   Description
 Initiation of Ideas (II)                bringing up a new science idea
 Simple Sharing (SS)                     stating a science idea not taken up by other group members
 Agreement of Ideas (AI)                 explicit agreement between at least two group members
 Contention of Ideas (CI)                explicit disagreement between group members in the form of questions or statements
 Resolution of Disagreement (RD)         explicit consensus after a disagreement
 Raising Questions (RQ)                  asking group members questions about science concepts
 Extending Ideas (EI)                    refining or elaborating upon other group member's ideas
 Restating Ideas (RI)                    student restates idea or summarizes many group exchanges
 Negotiation of  Map       Construction  dialogue pertaining to what ideas to include on the map and how to position and
 (NMC)                                   connect them

Results
We report our findings based on three types of data: 1) individual and group map depth ratios, 2) individual and
group map layout, and 3) individual contributions and group interactions, to understand if convergence of ideas
occurred and how convergence was related to students' performance on the post individual concept maps.

Depth Ratio Comparisons between Individual and Group Concept Maps
In this section, we discuss concept map depth ratio scores on students' pre and post individual maps and group map
scores. We also discuss learning gains made by students as seen in the difference between pre and post map depth
ratio scores. We calculated learning gains by dividing the actual gain by the total possible gain from pre to post
maps.  As  we discuss      the depth ratio scores,   it is important  to understand   what    small differences in the  ratios
represent. The depth ratio gives an average score of all the propositions on a map. A depth ratio of 1.1 can be best
understood as consisting of mostly propositions falling into a level one score (see Table 1). Since the depth ratio has
a small range from negative one to three, small changes in scores are meaningful in terms of student learning gains
and differences in scores.
        In Group A, the pre individual map depth ratios suggested convergence in their, with a difference of only
.09 between the highest and lowest scores in the group. Their collaborative map, with a depth ratio of 1.0, reflected a
level of understanding similar to what students showed on their individual pre maps. We also found that Rose's
depth ratio  decreased     on  her post  individual  map   and   she  exhibited  no  learning gain. Both Alex   and Lincoln

                                                         700   ·  © ISLS
                                                  ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

performed slightly better on their post individual maps, with learning gains of 21% and 13% respectively. Group A's
average learning gain was 8.6%.
       The difference in pre individual map scores in Group B was most divergent at 0.85. In contrast with Group
A, their collaborative concept map showed a modest improvement in their depth of understanding (1.39) over their
individual pre map scores. Unlike Group A, all students in Group B made substantial gains in their depth ratio scores
on the post individual maps with learning gains ranging from 36% to 51%. The average learning gain for Group B at
41% was much higher than any other of the four groups.
       The second most divergent group was Group C with a difference of .73 between students' pre individual
depth ratio scores. Like Group B, Group C had a higher collaborative map depth ratio score at 1.4 than the other
groups. Group C also had the second highest average learning gains at 16% out of all five groups, with all students
in the group showing learning gains. Although their average learning gain is smaller than that of Group B's, it is
twice the gain than that of Groups A, D, and E.
       Overall,  Group D   and  E had  depth      ratio differences  and learning gains similar  to those of Group   A,
including lower depth ratio scores on their collaborative concept maps (at .93 for Group D and .64 for Group E).
Like Group A, Groups D and E were relatively more convergent on their pre individual map scores with a difference
in scores of .32 and .28 respectively. The average learning gains of Group D at 6.6% and of Group E at 5.8% were
slightly lower than that of Group A at 8.6%. Like Rose in Group A, Jesse in Group D exhibited no learning gain and
Brian in Group E made a small learning gain.
       Thus out of the five groups, Group A had the most convergent initial maps, and Group B had the most
divergent map levels before the collaborative concept mapping activity. We therefore examined student dialogue in
these two contrasting groups to better understand how students created a collaborative concept map, and how their
collaboration affected their individual learning.

Table 3: Depth Ratio Scores and Percent Learning Gains of Students' Pre and Post Individual and Group Maps.

Group   Student       Pre       Difference      Group           Post         Percent Learning     Average Group Percent
                   Individual     on Pre          Map        Individual        Gain or Loss:          Learning Gain:
                     Map                                        Map          Individual Maps         Individual Maps
         Alex        1.00                                       1.41              21%
 A       Rose        1.09                                       .94                -8%
        Lincoln      1.06          .09            1.0           1.35              13%                     8.6%
         Betty       0.44                                       1.29              36%
  B     Keesha       1.08                                       1.77              37%
          Jake       1.29          .85            1.39          1.60              51%                     41%
        Kristen      1.46                                       1.60               7%
  C      Jerry       1.10                                       1.33              13%
         Mary        1.08                                       1.39              15%
         Collin       .73          .73            1.4           1.17              20%                     16%
         Naomi       1.12                                       1.30              10.5%
 D       Jesse       1.29                                       1.16              -5.8%
         Amy         1.00                                       1.24              10%
        Armando      1.32          .32            .93           1.50              11.8%                   6.6%
        Allison      1.22                                       1.32              5.6%
  E      Brian       1.05                                       1.10              0.03%
         Gage        1.33          .28            .64           1.48              11.8%                   5.8%

Map Layout Comparisons between Individual and Group Maps for Groups A and B
Examining contrasting cases   shows potential     for   understanding   how collaborative processes  influence learning
outcomes (Rummel & Hmelo-Silver, 2008). Alex, Rose and Lincoln were the students in the more convergent
group, Group A. While Betty, Keesha, and Jake were the students in the more divergent group, Group B. In Group
A, Alex drew the collaborative concept map and in Group B, Betty drew the group map.
       Groups A and B present interesting contrasts in their group and individual map layouts (see Table 4). We
first examined the root word choices on pre individual, collaborative, and post individual concept maps. We found
that all students used a machine as a root word on their pre individual map. Group A chose a machine root word,
whereas Group B used a physics concept. Rose and Lincoln in Group A continued to use a machine as a root word
on their post individual map, but Alex chose a physics concept. In contrast, all students in Group B changed from

                                                      701  ·  © ISLS
                                                  ICLS 2010   ·   Volume 1

using a machine root word to using a physics concept root word on their post map, consistent with what had taken
place in the collaborative mapping activity.
         Second, we examined the structural organization of individual and group maps. Our analysis revealed that
both groups drew relational group maps. Rose and Lincoln from Group A, and all students from Group B, had
constructed   hierarchical individual  pre maps.   Rose   and   Lincoln  continued  to  draw  a    hierarchical  map,   but all
students in Group B used a relational structure on the post individual map.

Table 4: Map Layout of Individual Students' in Group A and B's Pre and Post Individual and Group Maps.

                                         Root Word of Map: Machine (M) vs.           Map Structure: Hierarchical (H) vs.
                                                Physics Concept (PC)                              Relational (R)
    Group              Student             Pre       Group Map           Post         Pre          Group Map           Post
       A                Alex               M                              PC           R                                R
       A                Rose               M              M                M           H                 R              H
       A               Lincoln             M                               M           H                                H
       B               Betty               M                              PC           H                                R
       B               Keesha              M              PC              PC           H                 R              R
       B                Jake               M                              PC           H                                R

Patterns of Group Dialogue and Individual Contributions in Groups A and B
We analyzed group dialogue to further understand the convergence or divergence that may have occurred when
students engaged   in  collaborative  concept  mapping.   This    analysis  was  done   to a)  examine     if students'   ideas
converged through engaging in collaborative interactions, and b) to see how convergence or divergence during the
collaborative  concept map    activity related  to individual     map construction.  These    findings     will  enable  us  to
understand  how   aspects  of group   dialogue  may    possibly   explain  the  changes  between      students'  pre  and post
individual concept maps. First, we will report on general discourse patterns for each group and compare the two
groups   (see Figure  1).  Subsequently,   we   will present    a  more   detailed analysis   of   each    individual's  major
contribution to the group dialogue (see Figure 2).

                                                                             Code Legend
                                                                                     Negotiation of Map
                                                                             NMC     construction
                                                                             RI      Restating Ideas
                                                                             EI      Extending Ideas
                                                                             RQ      Raising Questions
                                                                                     Resolution of
                                                                             RD      Disagreements
                                                                             CI      Contention of Ideas
                                                                             AI      Agreement of Ideas
                                                                             SS      Simple Sharing
                                                                             II      Initiating Ideas

                           Figure 1. Collaborative Concept Map Dialogue in Groups A and B.

         In Group A, the most prominent pattern was initiating ideas (12.5%), agreement of ideas (8.75%), and
extending ideas (7.5%). The percentage of talk related to the negotiation of map construction, was 11.25%. In
looking  at individual contributions   to  the  collaboration,    Alex's   main  contributions    were   agreement    of  ideas
(20.69%) and extending ideas (13.79%). Rose's major contributions were initiating ideas (25%) and negotiating map
construction  and restating  ideas (16.7%).    Lincoln made     a limited  contribution to  concept     related  talk (12.5%).
Overall, the percentage of science related talk in this group during the collaborative concept mapping activity was
relatively low, because a good portion of Group A's utterances were off task or not applicable to the study.
         In contrast, Group B engaged in relatively more science talk during the collaborative concept mapping
activity than Group A. Their dialogue mainly involved agreement of ideas (23.9%), extending ideas (23.1%), and
the contention of ideas (21.7%). The percentage of talk related to negotiation of map construction was 23.9%. When
examining individual contributions to the discourse, we find that Betty's talk focused on the contention of ideas
(25.6%) and extending ideas (25.6%). Similarly, Keesha engaged in the group discourse through agreement of ideas
(32.5%) and contending ideas (20%). Jake's principal involvement in the group process was mainly extending ideas
(31%), but he also emphasized the negotiation of map construction (29.1%).

                                                      702  ·  © ISLS
                                                   ICLS 2010  ·   Volume 1

        We found clear differences between the two groups' patterns of talk. Group A focused less on science,
whereas Group B was focused on negotiating science ideas and negotiating map construction. Furthermore, the
individual contributions from students in the two groups were also different. In Group A, students engaged less with
the collaborative concept mapping and engaged in more talk unrelated to the activity and science. Students in Group
B talked more about science concepts and contributed in diverse ways to their group map. Finally, a large proportion
of talk in Group B was spent in contending ideas, unlike in Group A.

                   Figure 2. Individual Contribution to Collaborative Dialogue in Groups A and B.

Discussion
Our  exploratory   study  contributes to  the literature   on concept   mapping   and   collaborative learning  because  it
examines group maps both as conscriptional processes and inscriptional products. Our study is consistent with
Daley et al's. (2008) call for research to understand how groups construct knowledge, and how this knowledge
construction  aids in  group performance.     It also aligns  with   Basque  and  Lavoie's   (2006) emphasis   for  further
investigation of the  relationship  between   collaborative   learning and   concept   mapping,  particularly the types  of
interactions that promote learning.
        In investigating whether a collaborative concept map serves as a conscriptional device in the classroom, we
found differences between both the product and the process of collaborative concept mapping in the two contrasting
groups. Our results indicate that there was less convergence between students in Group A than in Group B during
the collaborative process. Roth and Roychoudhury (1994), as well as van Boxtel, van der Linden, Roelofs, and
Erkens (2002), claim that collaborative concept mapping promotes shared understanding among students. However,
our findings  show   that whereas   a collaborative   concept    map   may   act as  a conscriptional device   to facilitate
convergence of ideas, not all groups benefit equally from this activity when used in the classroom.
        Students   in  Group A  had   pre individual   maps   that initially showed    convergence.   The negotiation and
contention of science ideas and map construction between these students during collaborative concept mapping was
relatively lower than Group B, resulting in a less sophisticated group concept map product, as evidenced by a lower
depth ratio score and simple machines root word choice. Derbentseva, Safayeni, and Cañas (as cited in Novak &
Cañas, 2008) found that root word choice affects the quality of a concept map. A physics concept root word may
promote  the  creation of propositions   focused   on relationships,   resulting  in more   sophisticated maps.   Having a
simple machine as a root word may lead to shallower, fact-based links. Further, Alex drew the map and was the only
student in the group   who   made   a relational  map  on    the pre and   post  individual map. Despite   having  made  a
relational group map, Rose and Lincoln created hierarchical individual post maps. Ruiz-Primo and Shavelson (1996)
have emphasized that relational maps provide a richer representation than a hierarchy, indicating more sophisticated
maps. Group A's group map may reflect Alex's thinking more than that of the whole group, which could explain the
low convergence in map layouts on the individual post maps.
        The dialogue in Group A provides further evidence of a low level of convergence. We found that students
in Group A did not participate equally in this process. Alex and Rose engaged in some negotiation of the science
concepts, but there was little convergence on science ideas between group members. For example, of the ideas that
Rose initiated many    were  also  categorized   as simple    sharing, because   they  were  not extended   by the  group,
indicating limited mutual engagement as they discussed the science. Furthermore, Lincoln made little contribution to
the science discourse. Thus, our findings suggest low convergence of science ideas in Group A.
        Conversely, there was more convergence of science ideas among students in Group B. They created a more
sophisticated group map than Group A, as measured by a higher depth ratio score, a physics concept root word and a
relational organization. Students converged on their post individual map layouts, because all of them changed from

                                                       703  ·  © ISLS
                                                    ICLS 2010    ·  Volume 1

using a machine-based root word to using a physics concept root word, and from a hierarchical to a relational
structure, consistent with their group map.
         Group B's dialogue provides further evidence for convergence. Group B had about twice as much dialogue
about negotiation of map construction as Group A. These students contributed in diverse ways to the dialogue,
which was more varied and involved more contention and negotiation of science concepts than Group A. Perhaps
this dialogue contributed to both the changes and convergence of the map layout on individual post maps.
         Our findings suggest that the level of convergence achieved during collaborative concept mapping could
have influenced  students'   performance    on  the    post individual  maps.  The    students  in Group A    engaged less  in
constructing a shared understanding of the science ideas. Unlike van Boxtel et al. (2002), we found that students
who actively contributed to the discourse did not always exhibit high learning gains. The post map depth ratios
showed that Alex and Lincoln had greater learning gains than Rose's, whose depth ratio decreased. While Rose did
engage  in  the science    discourse, many   of    her contributions    were not   taken up,   perhaps resulting  in  her  less
sophisticated post individual map and negative learning gain. Thus, the divergence in the level of engagement of
ideas during the collaborative mapping activity in Group A could have played a role in their learning, resulting in
differences in individual map layouts and learning gains on their post maps.
         In Group B, the higher level of convergence during collaboration might have contributed to post map
learning gains for all students and to more sophisticated map layouts by all three students in the group. For example,
all of the students in Group B changed their root word to a physics concept and changed to creating a relational post
individual map after having worked on a relational group map, suggesting greater convergence and sophistication.
The higher level of convergence in Group B could explain the substantial learning gains of all individual students in
the group. We contend that the remarkable growth of these students collectively and individually can be understood
in light of Stahl (2004) and Schwartz's (1999) argument. First, Stahl (2004) suggests that divergent ideas between
group members have a significant impact on collaboration. Because Group B started with more divergent individual
maps,   each  student brought     divergent  ideas  to  the  collaboration.   The   students   also negotiated  their diverse
perspectives to construct a shared understanding. Individuals construct novel understandings as they attempt to
create  shared  meaning    during collaboration    (Schwartz,   1999).  Students   in Group    B constructed  a sophisticated
individual understanding after their collaboration, as seen in their substantial individual learning gains. This notion
is further substantiated by examining data from the other three groups. Like Group A, Groups D and E, who were
initially more convergent, made the least learning gains out of the five groups and created less sophisticated group
maps. Alternately, like Group B, Group C, the second most initially divergent group, had twice as much average
learning gain and made a more sophisticated group map than the three more convergent groups. These trends lend
further credence  to  the   notion    that initial divergence      between   group  members     is  important for  productive
collaborations and positive individual outcomes.
         These results have important implications for the classroom, because the role that collaborative concept
mapping plays as a conscriptional and inscriptional activity becomes complex in a classroom setting. For example,
in this study, students did not contribute equally to the group activity, unlike in the experimental studies of van
Boxtel et al. (2002). Also, students made unequal gains in their post depth ratio scores, a finding that is consistent
with Teasley and Fischer's (2008) argument that collaborative activities do not ensure equal learning gains for all
students. One area of concern is that the overall depth ratios are relatively low on individual post maps for students
in all five groups. This indicates that there is room for improvement in the depth of science talk and learning gains.
Further, our results question the validity of using collaborative concept maps to assess group understanding, because
they may not reflect the ideas of the whole group. Specifically, these findings speak to the importance of the teacher
carefully structuring and facilitating students' collaborative concept mapping. For example, our examination of
transcripts revealed  that  the   teacher  focused     more  on    the procedural  aspects   of  map   construction,  than on
emphasizing    deep   conceptual   connections.    This     may    have  affected  students'   engagement  with    their  map
construction. Perhaps map quality might improve if teachers explicitly emphasize the importance of making deep
conceptual connections in student discourse related to their maps, help students to establish group collaboration
norms,  and  promote   metacognitive    reflection.    Finally, our  study   sheds light on  forming   groups  for classroom
collaborative  activities. Our findings    lend support  for    the effectiveness  of heterogeneous    group  composition   to
promote negotiation of divergent perspectives towards a shared understanding.

Directions for Future Research
Future research could systematically investigate collaborative concept mapping with more groups in the classroom.
Utilizing both audio and video to match student dialogue to the shared map referent may assist in this kind of
analysis. Novak & Cañas, (2008) argue for presenting a focus question to facilitate richer map construction. Future
research could explore both the effectiveness of focus questions in generating student negotiation towards shared

                                                        704   ·  © ISLS
                                                 ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

knowledge  construction   and    their impact  during    collaborative  concept   mapping.  The  growing     interest in
collaborative concept mapping and other collaborative activities in the classroom emphasizes the need for more
research to understand the interactions occurring during collaboration and how these impact student learning.

References
Basque, J., & Lavoie, M.C. (2006). Collaborative concept mapping in education: Major research trends. In A.J.
       Cañas & J.D. Novak (Eds.), Concept Maps: Theory, Methodology, Technology. Proceedings of the Second
       International Conference on Concept Mapping. San José, Costa Rica.
Daley, B.J., Conceição, S., Mina, L., Altman, B.A., Baldor, M., & Brown, J. (2008). Advancing concept amp
       research: A review of the 2004 and 2006 CMC research. In A.J. Cañas, P. Reiska, M. Åhlberg, & J.D.
       Novak     (Eds.), Concept   Mapping:     Connecting    Educators.   Proceedings   of  the   Third   International
       Conference on Concept Mapping. Tallinn, Estonia, & Helsinki, Finland.
Edmondson,    K.M.   (2000).   Assessing     science understanding   through    concept  maps.  In   J.J. Mintzes, J.H.
       Wandersee, & J.D. Novak (Eds.) Assessing science understanding: a human constructivist view (pp. 19-
       40). San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Fischer, K.M. (2000). Overview of knowledge mapping. In K.M. Fischer, J.H. Wandersee, & D.E. Moody             (Eds.)
       Mapping     Biology     Knowledge      (pp.   5-23).   Dorderecht,     The  Netherlands:    Kluwer     Academic
       Publishers.
Nesbit, J. C., & Adesope, O. O. (2006). Learning with concept and knowledge maps: A meta-analysis. Review of
       Educational Research, 76(3), 413-448.
Novak, J. D. & A. J. Cañas, The theory underlying concept maps and how to construct and use them, Technical
       Report IHMC CmapTools 2006-01 Rev 01-2008, Florida Institute for Human and Machine Cognition,
       2008, available at: http://cmap.ihmc.us/Publications/ResearchPapers/TheoryUnderlyingConceptMaps.pdf
Puntambekar, S., Stylianou, A., & Goldstein, J. (2007). Comparing classroom enactments of an inquiry curriculum:
       Lessons learned from two teachers. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 16(1), 81-130.
Roth, W. M., & Roychoudhury, A. (1994). Physics students' epistemologies and views about knowing and learning.
       Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 31(1), 5-30.
Ruiz Primo,   M. A., &   Shavelson,    R. J. (1996).  Problems   and   issues in the use of  concept  maps   in science
       assessment. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 33, 569­600.
Rummel, N., & Hmelo-Silver, C. (2008). Using contrasting cases to relate collaborative processes and outcomes in
       CSCL. In G. Kanselaar, V. Jonker, P.A. Kirschner, & F. Prins, (Eds.), International perspectives of the
       learning sciences: Cre8ing a learning world. Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference of the
       Learning Sciences (ICLS 2008), Vol 3 (pp. 346-353). International Society of the Learning Sciences, Inc.
Schwartz, D.  L. (1999).   The   productive  agency   that  drives  collaborative learning. In: P.   Dillenbourg (Ed.),
       Collaborative learning: Cognitive and computational approaches. (pp. 197­219). Amsterdam.
Stahl, G. (2004) Building Collaborative Knowing- Elements of a Social Theory of Learning, in Strijbos, Kirschner,
       and Martens (eds.) What We Know About CSCL in Higher Education, Dordrecht: Kluwer, 53-86.
Sharples, M. (1994). Computer support for the rhythms of writing. Computers and Composition, 11, 217­226.
Teasley, S.D., & Fischer, F. (2008) Cognitive Convergence in Collaborative Learning. In G. Kanselaar, V. Jonker,
       P.A. Kirschner, & F. Prins, (Eds.), International perspectives of      the learning sciences: Cre8ing a learning
       world. Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference of the Learning Sciences (ICLS 2008), Vol 3
       (pp. 354-359). International Society of the Learning Sciences, Inc.
Weinberger, A., Stegmann, K., & Fischer, F. (2007). Knowledge convergence in collaborative learning: Concepts
       and assessment. Learning & Instruction, 17(4), 416-426.
van Boxtel, C., van der Linden, J., Roelofs, E., & Erkens, G. (2002). Collaborative concept mapping: Provoking and
       supporting meaningful discourse. Theory into Practice, 41(1), 40-46.

Acknowledgements
The  research described   in this paper   is supported   by   an IERI   grant (#0437660)  from   the National   Science
Foundation to the fourth author.

                                                     705  ·  © ISLS
