                                              ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

        Embodied Experiences within an Engineering Curriculum

    Molly Bolger, Marta Kobiela, Paul Weinberg, Rich Lehrer, Vanderbilt University,
                              Department of Teaching and Learning
                  0230 GPC, 230 Appleton Place, Nashville, TN 37203-5721
                       Email: molly.bolger@vanderbilt.edu, rich.lehrer@vanderbilt.edu

         Abstract: Although simple mechanisms are commonplace, reasoning about how they work--
         mechanistic reasoning--is often challenging. To foster mechanistic reasoning, we engaged
         students in the third- and sixth-grades in the design of kinetic toys that consisted of systems of
         linked levers. To make the workings of these systems more visible, students participated in
         forms of activity that we conjectured would afford bodily experience of some of the properties
         of these mechanisms: constraint and rotary motion. Students progressively re-described and
         inscribed these embodied experiences as mathematical systems. We report a microgenetic
         study of one case study student, tracing how embodying and mathematizing motion supported
         the development of reasoning about how levered systems work.

Introduction
Reasoning about mechanisms (i.e., mechanistic reasoning) is a key to understanding the designed world. Yet,
despite the ubiquity of machines  in our culture, and    concerted   efforts to support mechanistic   reasoning  in
schooling (e.g., simple machine curricula in elementary grades), most students continue to find this form of
explanation challenging  (Lehrer &   Schauble,   1998;   Metz,   1991). To   support the  growth   of mechanistic
reasoning,  we engaged  elementary   students in the    design and   construction of kinetic toys. However,     our
approach to learning by design included efforts to embody and mathematize (Kline, 1980) mechanical systems,
such as the simple levered machines depicted in Figure 1. Though mathematical ideas are an intricate part of
explanations for mechanical systems, engineering curricula for children often neglect mathematics as a resource
(Prevost & Nathan, 2009). Our guiding conjecture was that mathematical description of levered systems would
help children reason causally about objects and relations within the system. Our approach was anchored in a
body-syntonic (Papert, 1980) wherein initial mathematization emerged from bodily activity, which was then re-
expressed with the operation of the simple machine. The instructional design was informed by a prior study of
children's naïve reasoning about these simple machines, in which children predicted and explained the direction
and amount of output motion.

Children's naïve mechanistic reasoning
Children in our previous study (Bolger, Kobiela, Weinberg, & Lehrer, 2009) exhibited a wide range of ability in
predicting and explaining machine  motion.    Mechanistic   explanations  existed, but  more commonly       children
explained machine motion by describing pattern regularities that they noticed (ie they related a cause and effect
without explaining the mechanism for the relationship) or they provided fragmented explanations with some of
the elements necessary for a mechanistic explanation.   Some aspects of levered machine's mechanisms seemed
particularly problematic for most children. First, most did not seem to "see" rotation in ways consistent with the

                                                 706  ·   © ISLS
                                                ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

operation of the machines. For example, children's gestures often indicated impossible motions that preserved
the shape of the machines (Figure 1C). Talk or gesture to indicate rotation of links was not common in most
children's explanations. Among the 9 children interviewed, 3 never indicated rotation and 4 did so only in one
or two instances. In 22 instances where children drew paths with their fingers to predict output motion that
should  have been    arced, 17 drew    straight lines.  Even  after  children moved   a   machine, they    infrequently
described rotary paths, seemingly focusing on starting and ending points rather than intermediate motion, as
described by Piaget, Inhelder & Szeminska (1960). Second, most children rarely if ever suggested that fixing a
link to the board would constrain its motion (4 children never did so and 3 did so on one occasion). Out of 72
total machines explained, there were only 6 instances in which a child recognized both constraint of the fixed
pivot and  rotation, emphasizing   the  difficulty of   coordinating    these two  ideas.  Third,  children  also had
difficulty reasoning about relative amounts of input and output motion (which is important to understanding the
concept of leverage).   Children rarely paid attention to how far links moved, even when a paired contrast was
used to draw their attention to this feature.

Theoretical framework for designing instructional supports
In summary, students had difficulties with: 1) Recognizing an output link's rotation and causally ascribing that
rotation to the constraint of the fixed pivot; and 2) Noticing and reasoning about the amount of motion traveled
by an output link. In an effort to support these foundations of mechanistic reasoning we designed instruction to
support  development    of  reasoning  about  constraint,   rotation and  amount  of relative motion    of inputs and
outputs.
         Our instructional design is centered on embodied experiences that support student understandings of
the mechanisms of the physical system and that provide a prospective pathway for mathematization of the
system. Figure 2 suggests that mechanistic reasoning emerges from coordination of embodied experience and
mathematization,  a   perspective consistent    with   Papert's  (1980)   conjecture  about   the  role of  embodied
experience in mathematical development and the more recent work of Lakoff and Nunez (2001) and Barsalou
(2008).

Coordination between embodied experiences and mathematics is consistent with Freudenthal's (1973) notion of
"progressive mathematization." Freudenthal states that to implement a program of progressive mathematization
successfully, students have to use their experience (e.g., embodied experiences) and invent mathematics through
well-developed instructional   activities. We   drew   upon   several  decades  of work   leveraging experiences   of
walking (e.g., a path perspective) as grounds for developing a mathematics of space (e.g., Jordan & Henderson,
1995; Lehrer, Randle, & Sancilio, 1989). In this study, we capitalized on the students' embodied experiences
through instruction that supported incorporation of experiential relations into more formal mathematics. These
experiences allowed for students to take a path perspective of a moving part within the levered system. Further,
we sought to help students integrate these mathematical ideas into their developing explanations for the function
of the levered machines.

Disruption of "Straight": The Embodiment of Rotation
This section describes one embodied task designed to take advantage of the relations in our theoretical model
(another task was also designed, but we do not describe it here). We unpack task features that could directly
contribute to multi-modal conceptual development (Barsalou, 2008) and highlight the relevant mathematical
features of the system as potentially experienced by a student. This task was framed around an apparent tension
or disruption, thereby problematizing the construction of an explanation for the experienced phenomenon.
         The embodied task (illustrated in Figure 3A) was designed to address two qualities of the mechanisms:
1) fixing a link in one place generates a circular path and 2) the length of this circular path is related to the
distance from the pivot to the output. We first engaged students in a conception of "straight" from a path
perspective as no turns--a constant heading while walking. We then paired students - one held one end of the
rope  and remained   in place  (acting as  the  fixed  pivot) while   the other held the  other end of  the  rope and
attempted to walk in a straight path perpendicular to the rope's orientation (See Figure 3A). The student walking

                                                    707   ·  © ISLS
                                                 ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

literally experienced the effect of constraint on path, while the student in the "center" experienced the force
required to accelerate (constantly changing direction) the walker. The task was experienced twice with different
lengths of rope. The   constraint disrupted    straightness   and produced  a circular   (i.e., rotary) path, turning a
constant amount as the student continued to walk at about the same rate. Ideally, this disrupted straight path, and
its description as a mathematical object, could serve as a resource for explaining the operation of a system of
levers.

         A                    ImpossibleStraight Path    B
                                                                Impossible Straight Path
                              Impossible                                    Impossible Straight Path
                             Straight Path

                                                                             r2          Fixed

                                                                  r1

             Figure 3. Disrupting "Straight" through Embodied Circular Walks with Rope.

          Table 1 elaborates the task's embodied experiences, the mathematics involved in those experiences,
and their relations to the physical levered system. During the embodied task, the student walking experienced
the disrupted straight path: as he tried to walk straight, the constraint of the rope forced him to turn. Later when
the student would be asked to reason about actual levered machines, the system's constraints would be made
real by the experience of feeling the rope's pull. To help bridge between the embodied experiences and the
physical system "little men" figurines were placed on the links to resemble walkers within the system (Figure
3B). The student who stood in the center, holding the rope, experienced standing in place, feeling "stuck," while
pulling the other student toward a circular path. For her, the role of the fixed pivot was magnified as important
in resisting the other student's pull to move straight, a resource as she later reasoned about the role of the fixed
pivot in the physical system. The different perspectives taken by the two students could influence how the
experience served as a resource for reasoning about the physical system. The perspective of the first student was
that of a circular path, seeing himself move around the student holding the other end of the rope. As he walked,
he may have also felt his body constantly turning. When the rope was shortened, this turning accelerated and he
may have felt himself going around faster (that is greater angular rotation in the same amount of time) because
of the decreased path length. The perspective of the second student did not include a circular walk, but seeing
the walker move around her, furthered her experience as "center." When the rope was shortened, the she may
have seen the other student moving around her at a faster rate. We conjecture these perspectives are significant
in helping students mentally animate the operation of the pegboard machine.
          The mathematization of the embodied experience is intended to help highlight relevant features of the
experience and the relations between those features that can then be used to reason about the physical system.
The stationary student may be thought of as a center of a circle, where the circle is created by the person
walking along the constrained path caused by the fixed length of the rope. The rope gives significance to the
(otherwise invisible) constant radius of the circle. In this sense, the mathematical features of the experience map
directly onto the physical system: the person in center of the circle becomes the fixed pivot, the walking student
becomes an output on a link traveling in a circular path. Additionally, the mathematical features can be used to
help explain the "unable to walk straight" phenomenon (the path must be circular because there is a constant
radius, - r1 and r2 in  Figure 3B).      Because a radius     exists between  the fixed   pivot   and   the output, this
mathematical relationship causally connects the constraint of the fixed pivot with the rotary motion of the link.
The shorter rope may be then thought of as a shorter radius (r2). In this sense, the path walked is shorter because
the circle created is smaller. Mathematically, this occurs because of the proportional relation between the radius
and the circumference. Later, when students are asked to reason about the amount of motion of an output as it
relates to the distance between output and fixed pivot (i.e., radius), they can take the perspective of walking a
smaller or larger circle using the longer or shorter rope.

                                                     708  ·  © ISLS
                                                   ICLS 2010    ·   Volume 1

Table 1: Embodied Experiences, Mathematics and the Physical System Related to the Rope Walk.

      Embodied Experience                             Mathematics                                Physical System
                                            A point (center) is drawn with a line      A link is attached to a pegboard at
 A person holds one end of a rope.          (radius) (r1) extending out from it.       the end with a fixed pivot. The other
 Another person holds the other end.        Another point is drawn at the other        end is marked as the output (with a
                                            end.                                       figurine).
 One person tries to walk straight
 while the other rotates in place. His      One end of the radius cannot be swept      The output cannot be moved in a
 straight path is quickly disrupted by      in a straight path without moving both     straight line without removing the
 the constraining force of the rope held    ends of the line.                          fixed pivot.
 by the other person.
 The person walking is forced by therope onto a path going around theA circle is created by sweeping theperson rotating in place. The walkerradius (constant length) around theis always the same distance from thecenter point.center person.The output rotates around the fixedpivot. At any point in the rotation,the output always remains the samedistance from the fixed pivot.
 The rope is now exchanged for ashorter rope and the person walkingagain attempts to walk straight.The new, shorter, radius (r2) iscreated. Again, the radius cannot beswept in a straight path without movingboth ends of the line.The output (figurine) is now movedin closer to the fixed pivot. Again,the output cannot be moved in astraight line without removing thefixed pivot.
 The walker is again forced onto a          A new smaller circle (with smallerpath going around the person rotatingcircumference) is created when thein place. This time, the path is shortershorter radius is swept around theand the walker goes around faster.center point.The output again rotates around thefixed pivot. This time, the pathlooks smaller.

Methods
A microgenetic method was employed, featuring one child and one teacher, lasting an average of approximately
7.2 hours over 8 days. The rope embodiment activity, described above, took place on the first day of instruction.
Around the fourth day of instruction, most students participated in a second embodiment activity designed to
highlight relative input and output motions. Most instruction was centered around simple design challenges (for
example, `Can you make something that moves using these 3 links?' or `Can you change this machine so that
the output moves in the opposite direction?'). Students also designed and constructed a MechAnimation (a
decorated toy driven by levers). Participants (n=11, 5 male) (5 third graders, 6 sixth graders) attended two urban
schools in the southeastern United States.       Sixty-percent of students at the middle school and ninety-percent at
the elementary qualified for free or reduced lunch. The children were ethnically diverse and represented a wide
spectrum of achievement in school. To assess gains in predicting and explaining machine motion, children were
interviewed before and after instruction.
       We chose to carefully study the learning of one child, Sarah. We chose Sarah primarily because of her
willingness to express her thinking to us. Though she was a fairly successful student in school, she did not
demonstrate a strong naïve ability to predict or explain levered machines in her pre-interview. Analysis of
Sarah's learning included coding of her interviews (using the framework from our first study), group video
noticings (Jordan & Henderson, 1995) of each day of instruction, and microgenetic analysis of the transcript and
video to trace prospective relations between embodiment experiences and other instructional activities.

One Student's Use of Embodied Activity in Reasoning about Pegboard
Machines
We follow Sarah as she engaged in the embodiment task, represented her experience through drawing, and
considered the  operation  of a    single  link  connected      to a pegboard.   We    highlight  ways that the experience
seemed to  be   a resource for    reasoning   about  difficult     concepts--that  is, how constraint   of  the fixed    pivot
necessitates rotary motion, mental animation of the system and relations influencing amount of lever motion.

Sarah's Embodied Experience
As Sarah performed the embodiment task, described earlier, the teacher took hold of one end of the rope and
asked Sarah to hold another part of the rope several feet away. The teacher then asked Sarah to "try walking in a
straight line that way" (pointing to indicate direction) while keeping the rope taut. Sarah immediately sensed
difficulty, at first hesitating ("but uh") and then asked whether she should "turn." The teacher repeated the
request to "try to walk in a straight line." As Sarah walked, she described feeling constrained and then having to

                                                       709    ·  © ISLS
                                                ICLS 2010     ·  Volume 1

turn. Note that italics in transcript represent ideas that we wish to emphasize; student's or teacher's emphasis is
denoted by all caps.

         S: The um-I can't move any more...Like the rope can't (?) you have to turn.
         T: And then if you kept on just moving (Sarah continues the rotary walk)...what would start
         to happen?
         S: I would go in like (gestures in a circle with her arm) a circle.

Feeling the force of the rope constraining her, Sarah acknowledged that her path was circular. By taking this
perspective, she seemed to experience a causal relation between the constraint of the rope and the rotary path.
The teacher then highlighted the constant rope length of the walk. She asked Sarah to approximate the amount
of rope between    them, first  standing  at one position     ("a fourth  of the   rope") and then   standing at another
position ("still a fourth"). The teacher asked about all possible positions: "And then so anywhere we turn?"
Sarah completed the generalization by concluding that "it's still a fourth," By highlighting this feature of their
experience, the teacher attempted to help Sarah relate the circular path of her walk to the unchanging distance
between her and the teacher.
         Finally, Sarah was asked to walk the circular path again, but with a shorter rope length. This time,
Sarah was not directed to walk straight but instead immediately asked to "turn." While walking, Sarah initially
observed that the path was again a circle and when the teacher asked her for more details, she noticed that "it'd
be smaller." The teacher again scaffolded a generalization of the experience, this time emphasizing the relation
between  rope  length  and   circle size. Moving    her hand     along the   rope, she asked,  "so   when this  becomes
smaller?" Sarah completed the generalization, "the circle gets smaller." Thus, through the contrasting walks, a
sense of magnitude as "smaller circle" emerged, as well as a relation between the rope length and the distance of
the circular path.

Inscribing the Embodied Experience: Moving towards Mathematization
Immediately following the embodied activity, the teacher requested that the student draw two pictures to show
the two different rotations: with the long and the short rope. Her drawing (see top of Figure 4A) showed two
circles, one smaller than the other, each with a line extending from it with a point at each end. As Sarah began to
explain the drawing, it was evident that she had mathematized all of the relevant components of the experience
(that is, the people as points, the rope as a line and the walk as a circle), but not all of the relations between
them. Although her drawing accurately depicted relative differences in circle size and radius (smaller rope,
smaller circle), it did not represent radius as moving around a center and the circular path as emerging from that
interaction. However,    Sarah  realized  this problem    when     attempting   to  reenact the experience    within  the
drawing.

         S: I drew me (points to top dot in her drawing) and then you (points to bottom dot in her
         drawing) and then (moves finger back to top dot) I was holding the rope and (moves finger
         back to the bottom dot) then when, no but that's wrong.

Sarah's inability  to animate   her  drawing   motivated    a   new one   (see bottom  of   Figure 4A).  This   time, she
animated the static representation as she drew and explained. As the static components of the drawing were
made dynamic, relations among them emerged. While explaining her drawing, she not only imparted agency
within it, but also re-enacted the experience (via gesture) through it: "This one (points to the dot inside the
rightmost circle) would be you. And me (points to the dot on the circle) holding the rope going around (moving
her finger around the circle)."
         Sarah's first drawing suggests that while she related "rope length" to circle circumference, this length
had not  yet  been    fully mapped    to  "radius". As   she    reasoned   about   the embodied      experience  and  the
representation together, her mathematization of the system showed structural relations of the circle--the rope
became radius and the teacher (precursor for the fixed pivot) moved inside the circle. Her final drawing also
symbolized three ideas that became important later in the session ­ fixed pivot as the center of the circle, the
constant radius of the circle, and the relationship between radius and circumference.

Reasoning about Rotation around a Pivot: Mapping to the Physical System
Within  the  pegboard   system,  Sarah's   notion   of  "center"    began  to  take on    functional significance. After
inscribing the embodied experience, the teacher gave Sarah a pegboard, a link, and a brad fastener and asked her
to attach the link to the pegboard any way she wanted. Sarah placed the pivot at the very end of the link, a
structure resembling the teacher standing and holding the end of the rope. Interestingly, when asked to describe
her machine, Sarah spontaneously mapped the link's movement to this experience: "it [the link] can move
around but, yeah like it can move around like rotating how we did." Moreover, as she continued describing the

                                                    710   ·   © ISLS
                                               ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

machine, she noted new relations among the parts of the system. We suspect that the literal resemblance of the
machine's structure to the embodied experience perhaps afforded a "bird's eye" perspective of her previous
experience that made these relations salient.

        S: ...it can only rotate in like this spot (points to the fixed pivot) and no other (waves hand
        over the mechanism) spot...Like the starting point (touches fixed pivot) you can only start
        here (touches pivot again) and not start (points to the left of the fixed pivot) somewhere else
        because this (points to the fixed pivot multiple times) is stuck to THAT (points to pivot again)
        place.

                            Figure 4. Sarah's use of her embodied experience.

Sarah's notion of "stuckness" attributed to the fixed pivot illustrates an important notion of constraint: that it is
unable to move. Furthermore, by describing the rotation as only occurring "in like this spot," she indicated some
sense of the source of rotation originating from the fixed pivot.
        These ideas of coordinating the rotation of the link to the constraint of the fixed pivot resurfaced again
a little later in the session. The teacher had moved the fixed pivot in towards the center of the link and had
placed a little man figurine on the left end. She asked Sarah to predict the motion of the little man supposing
they were to push the link, pointing to a particular place to the right of the fixed pivot. Sarah correctly predicted
the direction of the man, invoking her knowledge of the link's rotary motion. She explained that, "this [the link]
will spin," gesturing with her hand in a circular motion (Figure 4B). During her pre-interview, Sarah didn't talk
about turning or spinning and didn't make rotary hand gestures (with the exception of her noticing the rotary
motion of a round-shaped  piece of pegboard),     suggesting   a  different way of thinking       that may have been
supported by the tasks that proceeded this episode.
        After testing Sarah's prediction, the teacher asked her how she had known that the path would be
curved. In her explanation, Sarah again invoked the importance of the fixed pivot's immobility, but this time
indirectly referencing the experience of trying to walk straight: "...it's not going up, it's just ... on one brad and
when you hit it (gestures pushing link), it will go, that way (gestures rotation) cause it (points near the fixed
pivot) can't always go straight. Yeah cause it can't move up. It's in its place." Here, unlike in her earlier talk, the
rotation of the link and the "stuckness" of the fixed pivot are more than simply related. Rather, Sarah now
attributes the rotation to the constraint of the fixed pivot, giving it functional significance.

Using Mathematics of the Circle to Reason about Magnitude of Link Motion
The final task undertaken on the first day of instruction was to focus on the relationship between two distances -
the distance from a point on the link to the fixed pivot (radius) and the distance traveled by that point (arc length
or circumference). This relationship forms     the  precursor  for  understanding  the relationship       between the
magnitude of input and output motions. For this task, the teacher stipulated that the link would be rotated !
turn, marking the starting and stopping points. She then asked Sarah to choose 3 places on the link to put
colored stickers to correspond with where the "little men" would be placed (Figure 4C, top image).When asked
to predict how each sticker would move, Sarah understood that all stickers would rotate, but their paths would
have different lengths: "I think that. They will move different-No they won't move differently but they're um
(points to the board and then moves finger in a circle) lengths I think will be different." When the teacher talked
further to Sarah about her prediction, Sarah spontaneously referred to her embodied experience "So they'll like
(gestures finger in circles again) turn the same way but like our rope was different lengths and their shape is
going to be smaller or bigger." Hence, Sarah seemed to use her experiences to reason that the rope length

                                                  711  ·   © ISLS
                                               ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

(radius) would affect the size of path walked (circumference) in this simple physical system. However, her
specific mapping of the "rope length" onto the link was less clear as she went on to incorrectly predict the
relative distances that each sticker would travel.

         Sarah was guided by her teacher to find a generalization that would allow her to accurately predict the
relative amounts of motion for points along the link, but she eventually came to an impasse. She explained her
first prediction (blue>green>red) this way: "So yeah like the outer it is the bigger it's gonna be so this (points to
blue sticker) is outer". Here, Sarah would be correct, if the link rotated around its center rather than the fixed
pivot. After measuring the relative amounts traveled by the stickers (green>red>blue), Sarah created a new
incorrect explanation to fit the observations at hand, "I think that the closer it is to (points to green sticker) this
end, it will go the most and the farthest it is to that end (points to the right end of the link), it will go the least."
When the teacher offered a counter example to disprove this new theory (the distance traveled by a point at the
far left end is greater than the distance traveled by the blue sticker), Sarah was unable to pose a new explanation.
At this point, it seemed that the fixed pivot was invisible when Sarah reasoned about these relative distances.
         Finally, the teacher helped Sarah draw the full circles traveled by the stickers and by the point at the far
left end of the link (Figure 4C, bottom image). This far left point, which began as an unexplainable counter
example, was repurposed to provoke an explanation that involved the radius and the fixed pivot as center of the
circle:

         T: So why do you think the [point at the left end] and the red went the same? Are on the same
         circle?...
         S: (gasps) Oh:: Maybe because like uh this one is (points to the far left end) one two three four
         (counting the holes) five six and that one's (points to the red sticker) one two three four five
         six. It's the same distance close to the brad.

The relevant mathematical relationship seemed to appear when the circles were drawn. This teacher move
served a dual purpose ­ drawing the visual focus to the fixed pivot as center and bringing the task closer to the
embodied   experience.   In the preceding  section,  we    saw  that Sarah  seemed  to draw from   her embodied
experience as she reasoned about the direction of turn for this same machine. However, when she moved to a
slightly more complex task, seemingly small details (i.e. locating the pivot away from the end of the link and
drawing arcs instead of complete circles) may have been enough to disrupt a literal mapping to the embodied
experience. This speaks to the importance of teacher sensitivity about appropriate scaffolds that will allow for
best use of embodied experiences. Interestingly, on later days of instruction, Sarah spontaneously invoked the
embodied experience when asked to reason again about the radius-circumference relationship, suggesting that
the experience was a useful support beyond its immediate context. For example, in the third day of instruction,
when Sarah was asked again to explain the same phenomenon (also with a single link mechanism), she provided
the following explanation.

         T: Why is it when it's really far it's making a big circle, like what MAKES the circle?
         S: Cause us like when we were doing the rope. There is only like, pretend this is me (points to
         green sticker) and that was you (points to pivot). There was only like this much distance
         between us.
         T: You can only like (turns her body in constrained manner)
         S: Yeah, like move that much.

Sarah's  difficulty with reasoning   about magnitude     of  link   motion prompted the  development   of  another
embodied experience used later in instruction.

Conclusion
We designed embodied experiences (Papert, 1980; Abelson & diSessa, 1980) to support "mathematization"
(Kline, 1980) of mechanical systems, namely those containing simple levered machines. Drawing from our
previous studies, we targeted particular naïve student conceptual difficulties that were seen in most students,
even when working with the machines. These were: viewing rotary motion in the machines, attending to the
amount of output link motion, and reasoning about the constraint resultant from fixing a link to the pegboard.
Embodied   experiences   served  as a resource for      progressive mathematization of the system   (Kline,  1980;
Freudenthal, 1973), aided by strategic teaching supports, such as: asking the student to represent the literal
embodied experience on paper, asking the student to reason about a physical system that closely resembled the
embodied experience and frequently revisiting how relevant features of the embodied experience mapped to the
physical system.

                                                    712  ·  © ISLS
                                                ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

         With our case study student, Sarah, the embodied rope experience and subsequent teaching supports
seemed to help her reason about each of our target concepts. Though Sarah did not address the rotation of links
in her pre-interview, this idea flowed readily from the embodiment experience. Within the experience, she
noticed  herself  going "around,"   an   idea later resurfacing  in  her  drawings,   talk and  gesture. Though   this
experience helped Sarah readily see circular paths, she required additional supports to see other mathematical
features of circles. Reasoning around her representation seemed to help Sarah map the "rope" to radius. As
Sarah revised her drawing, she appeared to reenact the experience, imparting agency and replaying motion
through  gesture.  Further,   the relationship  between     radius  and  circumference,    a  necessary  precursor to
understanding the amount of output motion, was not obvious to Sarah. By helping Sarah work with the physical
system (and adjusting it to visually cue the embodied experience), the teacher was able to guide her to discover
this relationship and map it in a lasting way to the embodied experience.
         Sarah's   process of  reasoning   about  how   the   fixed pivot  served to  constrain motion   was  refined
throughout the first day of instruction. During the embodied experience, she talked about how her walk was
constrained  to  a circular   path, but  the  source  of   this constraint  was   not evident.  As  she   refined  her
representation, the fixed pivot (teacher) was moved inside the circle. When she built the simple physical system
and mapped it back to the embodied rope experience, she noted for the first time that the fixed pivot was "stuck"
and assigned it significance as the source of rotation. When directed to reason about the path of a "little man" on
the link she causally connected his circular motion with the fixed pivot as constraint. However, as instruction
continued Sarah had difficulty locating the fixed pivot as the circles' center as well as maintaining a notion of
fixed pivot as the source of the disruption of straight. We conjecture that Sarah's lack of experience acting as
the fixed pivot in the embodied experience may have made her less aware of its role as a constraint.
         Our results suggest that integrating mathematics into an engineering curriculum can support students as
they begin to construct explanations for simple machines.        However, many questions remain as to how best
integrate mathematics in ways that will be accessible and meaningful to students and that will best support
mechanistic reasoning.   Current research is focused on answering these questions through further microgenetic
analysis as  well  as analysis of   data from  intact classrooms.    Classroom    instruction used similar embodied
activities, but was able to capitalize on the variety of student ideas.   Comparison of ideas was used to motivate
student reasoning.

References
Abelson, H. & diSessa, A.A. (1980). Turtle Geometry: The Computer as a Medium for Exploring Mathematics.
         Cambridge, MA: The M.I.T. Press.
Barsalou, L.W. (2008). Grounded cognition. The Annual Review of Psychology, 59, 617-645.
Bolger, M. Kobiela, M., Weinberg, P., Lehrer, R. (2009). Analysis of Children's Mechanistic Reasoning about
         Linkages  and Levers in the Context   of Engineering    Design. 2009   Conference Proceedings, American
         Society for Engineering Education, AC 2009-1279.
Freudenthal,  H.   (1973). Mathematics    as  an  Educational    Task.   Dordrecht, Holland:   D.  Reidel  Publishing
         Company.
Jordan, B. and Henderson, A. (1995) Interaction analysis: Foundations and practice. Journal of the Learning
         Sciences 4(1), 39­103.
Kline, M. (1980). Mathematics. The loss of certainty. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Lakoff,  G.,  &   Nunez,   R.  (2001).   Where   Mathematics     Comes    from: How    the   Embodied    Mind Brings
         Mathematics into being. New York, NY: Basic Books.
Lehrer,  R., &   Schauble, L.  (2004).   Modeling   natural   variation through distribution.  American  Educational
         Research Journal, 41(3), 635-679.
Lehrer,  R., Randle,   L., &   Sancilio,  L.  (1989). Learning   preproof   geometry   with   LOGO,   Cognition   and
         Instruction, 6(2), 159-184.
Lehrer, R. & Schauble, L. (1998). Reasoning about structure and function: Children's conceptions of gears.
         Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 35(1), 3-25.
Lehrer, R., Schauble, L., Strom, D., & Pigge, M. (2001). Similarity of form and substance: Modeling material
         kind. In Sharon M. Carver and David Klahr (Eds.), Cognition and Instruction: Twenty-five years of
         progress. (pp. 39-74). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Metz, K.E. (1991). Development of explanation: Incremental and fundamental change in children's physics
         knowledge, Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 28(9), 785-797.
Papert, S. (1980). Mindstorms: Children, Computers, and Powerful Ideas. New York, NY: Basic Books.
         Piaget, J. Inhelder, B., & Szeminska, S. (1960). The Child's Conception of Geometry. New York, NY:
         Basic Books.
Prevost, A., Nathan, M. (2009).     The Integration of Mathematics into Precollege Engineering:      The Search for
         Explicit Connections. 2009 Conference Proceedings, American Society for Engineering Education, AC
         2009-1790.

                                                    713  ·  © ISLS
