                                                   ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

       Teacher Learning about Teacher-Parent Engagement: Shifting
                             Narratives and a Proposed Trajectory

        Corey Drake, Iowa State University, E115 Lagomarcino Hall, Ames, IA, 50011, cdrake@iastate.edu
    Angela Calabrese Barton, Michigan State University, Erickson Hall, East Lansing, MI, 48824, acb@msu.edu

        Abstract: In this paper, we examine teacher learning about teacher-parent engagement in mathematics and
        science   education.  Using   data from   three   different  schools  participating  in  TE-PAC2     (Teacher-Parent
        Collaborative Communities), we find evidence of teacher learning in the stories teachers tell about the
        meanings of ­ and possibilities for - teacher-parent engagement in the context of broader cultural narratives
        about the teaching and learning of mathematics and science in their schools and districts. In particular,
        teacher learning was reflected in changes in teacher narratives over time and in the new understandings of
        parent resources incorporated into these shifting narratives. We conclude with a proposed trajectory of
        teacher learning about teacher-parent engagement.

Introduction
National policies (e.g., No Child Left Behind) emphasize parental involvement in schooling, but little research has
been done to establish how teachers might engage with parents in content-based instruction, particularly in ways that
acknowledge   the  diversity  of backgrounds    and  resources    parents  bring  to  the classroom.   This  is the   issue we
investigated  through   our  work  in  three  schools  with    teachers  and  parents  engaging     together in  science    and
mathematics education. As part of this effort, our research questions included:

        How and what do teachers learn about teacher-parent engagement in support of mathematics and
        science   instruction  when    engaged    with  parents   in   the  collaborative   study   of science   and
        mathematics     education  reform  policies,  documents,     and  curriculum   materials?   How   is teacher
        learning reflected in teachers' narratives about parent engagement in their particular schools and
        districts?

We investigated this question through the design and implementation of a teacher-parent collaborative experience,
TE-PAC2   (Teacher-Parent    Collaborative   Communities).     At each   of  the three schools,   this experience   took on  a
different structure and focus, but common elements included multiple sessions of teachers and parents (along with a
researcher/facilitator) working  together  to  discuss  goals    for mathematics     and/or  science   education,   investigate
mathematics   and/or  science  curriculum,    and jointly  planning   classroom   or  school events    that  engaged  parents,
teachers, and children together in learning and teaching mathematics and/or science.

Theoretical Framing
In our own work, we, like others, have observed that while the rhetoric of reform--especially from multicultural
perspectives--suggests that parents should be closely involved in the reform process, the reality is that parents and
teachers alike struggle with how best to bring parents into reform-based instructional practices (Peressini, 1998;
Remillard & Jackson, 2006). We believe that if teachers are to be successful in engaging parents in support of
student learning, then it must happen within the framework of--not peripheral to--content-based instruction. In
other words, teacher-parent engagement must occur not only in the context of helping with bus lines, lunch or recess
duty, and field trips, but also around issues central to the teaching and learning of mathematics and science.
        Our   view  of  teacher  learning  is grounded    in   sociocultural perspectives   on  learning,   where   learning is
framed as changing participation within communities of practice (Lave & Wenger, 1991). We concur with Peressini,
Borko, Romagnano, Knuth and Willis (2004) that "teachers' knowledge and beliefs interact with historical, social
and political contexts   to create the situations  in  which   learning   to teach   occurs" (p.  68). We    assert that these
interactions can be particularly powerful when parents are co-participants with teachers, especially when teachers
and parents reflect different cultural and social backgrounds. This view of teacher learning re-situates how we think
about  teacher­parent    engagement    and    how  teachers    learn  by   engaging    parents.  In  contrast   to  traditional
understandings of parent involvement, which include parents volunteering in a range of school-defined ways, we
define engagement    as  an  interactive  process in  which    teachers  and  parents  draw  on   multiple   experiences    and
resources to  define  their  interactions with  one   another.   In  prior  research,  we  developed    a model    of parental
engagement in urban elementary schools, specifically in relation to "what" parents engage in and "how" they do so

                                                       722   ·  © ISLS
                                                      ICLS 2010    ·  Volume 1

(Calabrese Barton et al., 2004). Parents' effectiveness in schools is related to where engagement in the curriculum
occurs, as   well as to the    resources parents  activate    to   support  their children's  schooling.   This  understanding    of
parental engagement differs from traditional models because it highlights the importance of space and capital as
mediators of parental engagement and positions parents as authors and agents within schools. This last distinction is
particularly important in low-income urban schools, where parents tend to feel more alienated and with little power
(Harvard Family Research Project, 2002).
          One   area of capital  exchange   that  has  proven      critical is the  exchange  of  resources   and   understandings
related to   subject matter    knowledge,   pedagogy,      and     goals.   Studies of   learning  in   mathematics   professional
development indicate that teachers increased their communication skills and content understanding when engaged in
content  learning   activities with   parents (Civil   &   Quintos,   2002).      Likewise,  parents    who  participated  in their
children's elementary classrooms reported that talking about teaching, learning, and personal experiences, listening
to different perspectives and opinions, and teaching mathematics to other parents were rewarding aspects of working
in schools (e.g., Jackson & Remillard, 2005).
          Lee  and   Bowen     (2006) suggest    that the  link    between     parental  involvement    and  increases  in  student
achievement might be explained by the capital gained by parents through school involvement. However, little work
has explored gains in teachers' capital that might also contribute to this link, especially when parental engagement is
deeply situated in instructional content. It makes sense that we extend current research to include not just the nature
of resources   gained   by parents  but  also  those   resources     gained  by   teachers,  and  how   the  deployment    of these
resources    frames  their changing      participation with      parents.   Thus,   an   integral part   of  our  investigation   is
understanding teacher learning with respect to the resources that parents and families offer for a particular content
area, the  potential spaces    within mathematics     and  science    curricula   and   curriculum   materials  for accessing    and
building on these resources, and the relationship between these resources and school-based knowledge and practice.

Data Sources and Methods
Contexts
Our work has taken place across three distinct schools and districts, all of which are faced with intense pressures for
testing in mathematics and literacy, and all of which have significant percentages of students living in poverty. The
overall study took place over two years, though we spent one year in each school.
          Palmer School is a fairly small school in Granite School District, with about 420 students, K-6. The school
had recently taken in students from a neighboring school that closed due to lower enrollments and test scores. The
principal of Palmer is highly active in recruiting novel programs to her school, such as linking her school with a fine
arts  center in the  city, allowing    the  students   and    teachers    multiple  opportunities    to integrate the  arts   across
instruction. Palmer   Elementary    School    is located   in    a mid-sized    US   city confronted    with   issues of changing
demographics,     limited  resources,  and  testing    mandates.     The    school  district is   an urban   school   system  with
approximately   20,000    students, of   whom    78%   are African    American,     19%   white   and   3%  Latino/a.  70%    of the
students are eligible to receive free lunch.
          Washington Elementary, in the River City School District, is a mid-sized elementary school with three or
four classrooms per grade (K-5) and approximately 550 students total. Washington Elementary was created through
the merger of two schools two years prior to this study and is housed in a modern building built at that time. The
building also houses a large Boys' and Girls' Club as well as a thrift store. The two schools that were merged to
create Washington School were among the district's lowest achieving in terms of standardized test scores. Part of
the Washington's vision is to engage parents, families, and the community in their children's education. To support
this vision, Washington Elementary has a dedicated space in the school for parents and also offers several adult
education opportunities. However, there is little parent involvement in classrooms or in the content of children's
schooling. The student population at Washington is racially and ethnically diverse, with significant numbers of
African-American,    Latino/a,   and  Asian   students,    as well   as   students  from  a  variety    of European   and  African
countries.
          Beacon Academy is a free k-8 public charter school in Middleton. It sits on the west side of town, on the
edge of two transitional neighborhoods. The school focuses overtly in its mission statement on "character" and
"special" education, marketing itself to families whose children have not fared well in the regular school district.
While the city of Middleton serves as home to 22% African American, 10% Hispanic, 3% Native American, and the
remaining 64% White, Asian, or Pacific Islander and 23.2% children in poverty, Beacon Academy serves >95%
African American or Hispanic students, and 100% in poverty. The school promotes itself on brochures and its
website  as  a  high quality   school  that   teaches  all core    subjects    and  also  offers  "instruction in   computers    and
technology, art, music, drama and Spanish.". However, due to low test scores, the school administration mandated in
mid-April that no science or social studies be taught, causing some tension with our own project. Finally, Beacon

                                                         723     ·  © ISLS
                                                 ICLS 2010    ·   Volume 1

Academy's   administrative   staff is proud  of its   level   of parental  involvement.  They  hold  an annual   parental
involvement  celebration day,  and    the very  first bulletin   board one   sees upon  entering the  school  is one that
welcomes parents and contains information and notices to help them navigate the school. Parents are employed on
the staff to work in the office and to help out in the lunchroom. However, most parents have not been involved in the
academic side of the school.

Data Generation
We have utilized a narrative-driven ethnographic approach to investigating how learning with and about curricular
materials, reform-driven documents, and academic content in collaboration with parents impacts the ways in which
teachers engage parents in the design and enactment of school-based instructional practices. We utilized a range of
primary methods in crafting our case studies (See Table 1).

Table 1: Overview of data generation strategies across sites

                           Palmer                         Washington                   Beacon
Teacher Interviews         3 teachers, each               5   teachers interviewed     4 teachers interviewed
                           interviewed twice              twice (beginning and         once (end of experience)
                           (student artifact think        end of experience), 1
                           aloud, interview on T-P        interviewed once (end of
                           engagement)                    TE-PAC2 experience)
Parent Interviews          4 parents, each                2 parents, each              2 parents interviewed
                           interviewed once on T-P        interviewed once             once (end of experience)
                           engagement                     (Several other parents
                                                          participated in TE-PAC2
                                                          activities, but were not
                                                          interviewed)
TE-PAC2 sessions           Audio and fieldnotes           Fieldnotes                   Fieldnotes
Classroom observations     3 teachers, science            Observations and field       Observations and
                           classrooms observed 6          notes for Family Math        Fieldnotes for 7 science
                           times each, 30-60              Night                        lessons (in science,
                           minutes per observation,                                    computer, and ELA
                           fieldnotes                                                  classrooms)
Teacher and Parent-        Lesson plans; home             Planning sheets from         Lesson plans
related Artifact           extension lessons;             TE-PAC2 workshops,           Extension activities
Collection                 student life cycle stories     activities created for       Pictures of materials for
                                                          Family Night                 walls
Student Interviews and     Student lifecycle stories      Artifacts                    6 student interviews
Artifacts                  Fieldnotes on student          Fieldnotes related to        Student storyboards
                           participation                  student participation        Student movies
                                                                                       Fieldnotes on student
                                                                                       participation

Data Analysis
In analyzing and discussing these data, we utilized the Ecologies of Parental Engagement (EPE) framework we
developed in a previous study (Calabrese Barton et al., 2004) and focused on the importance of space and capital. In
particular, to make sense of teacher learning, we examined how participation within certain communities frames
issue of  space  and capital. Given   our  work  with   parents   in  low-income   urban schools,  we  were   particularly
concerned with how parents are often positioned within and against the communities of practices that make up urban
schooling. This led us to a key analytic idea, which emerges from cultural-historical and hybridity theories - namely,
that acts of creating hybrid spaces, discourses and identities are always political and of the highest risk for those
whose knowledge, discourse, and identities are positioned as lesser. Individuals in any given community of practice
engage in acts of hybridity all of the time when confronted with differences. They draw upon multiple resources or
funds to make sense of the world. Yet, being "in-between" several different funds of knowledge and Discourses can
be either productive or constraining, and even marginalizing, depending upon how they are recognized by those in
power (Moje et al., 2004).

                                                      724   ·  © ISLS
                                                   ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

         Case study data analysis involved multiple stages and levels of coding, all of which were based on Strauss
& Corbin's (1998) procedures for open coding and method of constant comparison. In analyzing case study data, we
have  begun  to develop   coding   schemes  on  those   aspects of    teaching which seem   to be particularly  relevant to
teacher-parent engagement in urban settings, including the kinds of curricular spaces teachers create for parental
engagement, the forms of capital teachers activate in support of engaging parents in content-based instruction, the
roles/identities teachers take on in relation to parents, and the ways in which scientific and mathematical ways of
thinking are linked to families' interests, experiences, and everyday understandings of the world (Perez Carreon,
Drake, & Calabrese Barton, 2005).
         In this paper, we focus in particular on the stories and counter-stories teachers tell about parent engagement
in their schools. We claim that changes in these stories over time provide evidence of teacher learning related to
teacher-parent engagement in mathematics and science content ­ including the goals, purposes, and practices that
support this kind of content-related engagement. We define teacher stories, or narratives, as socially shared accounts
of human intention and action (Bruner, 1990). For stories to have meaning in teaching and educational research,
they must report more than a listing of dates, places and events. They must also speak to the meaning of those events
in an individual's life. In the tradition developed and expanded by Clandinin and Connelly (2000) and others, we use
teacher stories to develop   rich,  contextual, accounts   of   their learning.  Drawing from   place-based  sociocultural
theory, we argue that personal stories, such as teacher stories, always exist in interaction with narratives at other
levels, including social and cultural (Tzou, Scalone & Bell, in press). As teachers, for example, interact with each
other they do so in spaces that are shaped by cultural narratives and resources available in those places, such as a
school  climate deeply  shaped   by  NCLB,     curricular policies,   and  other boundaries  and  supports  related to the
teaching and learning of mathematics and science.

Findings
Our  findings are  grounded   in   teacher stories  and   teacher  practices   with respect to  mathematics   and   science
instruction and parent engagement. These stories consist of the narratives that teachers craft about their teaching
alongside the artifacts from practice they use as evidence for their claims. We begin with cases from two of the
participating schools. (Due to space limitations, we do not present a detailed case from the third school, Beacon
Academy, here, though we incorporate findings from that case in the discussion section below.) These cases provide
a sense  of the kinds  of activities involved   in the  TE-PAC2     experience,  as well as the   supports and  constraints
available in the different school and district contexts for this kind of work. We then describe findings related to
teacher narratives ­ and changes in those narratives ­ across the three sites.

Case 1: Palmer School
This group began meeting in February and involved three 3rd and 4th grade teachers who attended all six of our after
school study group sessions, except one week when one of the teachers was absent due to a technology conference.
The teachers were supported by their principal who would often stop in for a brief moment with a big smile and ask
how everyone was going. They were also supported by the district curriculum coordinator for science who came to
the fifth of our six sessions to ask the teachers and parents to discuss their work with her.       Four parents attended
fairly regularly, with one missing occasionally, and one additional parent showing up at science class because she
could  not  make the  after school   sessions. One   of the   parents  was a   grandmother  who   had extensive  parenting
responsibilities for her grandchildren. Sometimes her granddaughters would come to our sessions but they mainly
played with each other and tended to "ignore" what the adults were doing.
         The structure of the meetings was to first to talk about "science experiences" of the week, then to "do
science" together  and  then to  discuss  ways  to  increase  parent-teacher    engagement  using  two strategies that   we
proposed: Lesson Extension Ideas and Lesson Integration Ideas. Playing with science often involved taking one
aspect of the mandated curriculum and doing the activities together, often in ways not prescribed in the text. The
early work of the group tended to focus more on designing and implementing "extension lessons for the home" and
then shifted to lessons that integrated activity in the home with activity in the classroom. The focus of these latter
discussions sat  within a   tension  of "what   would   parents  know   about   science" and   "what  will kids do  in the
classroom who don't do the home component." These discussions tended to focus on the deficiencies of some of the
parents within the school community, but the group decided to move forward with the belief that these activities
might "bring parents in."
         The  major  barrier that   the participants seemed     to face related  to instructional mandates  that  involved
science. The Granite City School District, like many around the nation, had been undergoing a series of reforms
meant to help boost test scores. A recent reform initiated by the superintendent's office had been the discontinuation
of any interdisciplinary teaching to ensure that each subject area was taught for the required amount of time each

                                                      725   ·  © ISLS
                                                 ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

day. All three participating teachers were vocally opposed to the new mandate and felt "harassed" by the district
official who roamed the building making unannounced visits to "check up" on instruction. This topic came up each
week as teachers met to explore life cycles together ­ and, through these discussions, teachers and parents were able
to expand their knowledge related to one another's perspective and to the broader policy and instructional contexts
of school science.
           What seemed particularly salient was how discussions of these new mandates emerged within the group
and the barriers these mandates imposed for teachers and parents in their efforts to support student science learning.
In particular, we noted that the teachers, from our very first TE-PAC2 session onward, spoke critically of the new
regulations for scripted "page a day" curricula and on the emphasis on basic skills or what the teachers referred to as
"kill and drill." We also noted that the teachers contrasted these mandates with their desire to use more "hands-on"
and "inquiry-based" learning in support of student motivation to learn science and making science more authentic.
As Beth reminded us, students need a reason to want to understand science. Parents were less critical of the new
mandates primarily because they seemed to not be as aware of the specific mandates. However, in support of the
teachers' desires to use more hands-on learning, the three parents harshly criticized the culture of accountability and
test scores as making it more abstract and difficult for them to understand what their students were learning and how
they might better support them in learning.

Case 2: Washington School
This group began meeting in November, 2008. Five teachers (1st, 2nd, 2 4th, and 5th grades) showed up very regularly
for all meetings, except for occasional family/child care conflicts. They had significant support from one of the Title
I math teachers, who serves as a mathematics leader within the school. He worked a second job, so typically could
not come to the meetings. Two out of the first three meetings were cancelled because of weather, so the facilitator
and teachers decided to re-group in January.
           Each meeting was attended by 2-6 parents, often with their children. The structure of the meetings was to
first  "do math"   together (teachers, parents, and children)  and  then   to discuss ways   to increase parent-teacher
engagement. Keeping in mind the "playing with science" theme from the Palmer case, most of the math provided by
the facilitator for participants to do together was in the form of math activities that are not traditionally done in
school ­ puzzles, games, tangrams, etc. There were a number of positive results and stories that emerged from this
aspect of the meetings. For instance, one father was very good at a particular kind of spatial puzzle and, after
observing his success with these puzzles, both the teacher and his own children began to position him as having
increased  expertise in mathematics.   Children  from the   2nd-grade class   began taking the  puzzles  back and  forth
between home and school and other children in the 2nd-grade classroom (whose parents were not involved in the
initial teacher-parent meetings) began asking for copies to take home. One family, in which the parents spoke only
Spanish, worked back and forth with their child and one another to complete a Magic Square, with the child and one
of the facilitators translating the "rules" of the activity while the parents provided the mathematical knowledge.
           The teacher-parent-child groups generated several interesting and ambitious ideas for increasing teacher-
parent engagement, including developing a school store to work on money concepts and a school garden to draw on
parents' expertise in carpentry and gardening with a focus on the mathematics involved in these activities. There
were frequent discussions within the groups about designing artifacts that could move between home and school in
order to increase parent engagement and connections between home and school. There was considerable concern
about sending things home that would not be used and ideas were generated for addressing this concern. Out of
these discussions, the plans for the Family Math Nights were developed. Ultimately, the group enlisted the Title I
teacher's help in putting together two Math Nights ­ one for 1st/2nd grade and one for 4th/5th grade (reflecting the
grade levels of the participating teachers and parents). They, along with the Title I teacher, designed the Nights to
have parents and children rotate through 4 classrooms ­ each with a laminated game or activity that the parents and
children would play in the classroom and could then take home with them (along with the necessary dice, counters,
etc.). Ultimately,  these Nights were   very well-attended   (particularly the 1st/2nd-grade night) by   more than  200
children and family members and teachers were very positive about this outcome.
           As researchers and facilitators, this case leaves us with several conjectures and questions. In particular,
Family Math Nights were not the initially-intended outcome of the project and, in that sense, the outcome is a
disappointment. On the other hand, having observed the Nights and the preparation that went into them and having
interviewed the teachers afterwards, the Family Nights seem to have served several positive functions related to
teacher-parent engagement. Specifically, the teachers had clear ownership of this project and they continued to hold
Family Math Nights during the next school year without the formal support of the TE-PAC2 project.

Teacher Stories about Teacher-Parent Engagement and Content

                                                     726  ·  © ISLS
                                                    ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

Initially, teachers' narratives about teacher-parent engagement were grounded in or mirrored the broader and more
dominant cultural narratives of their schools. Teacher narratives, for example, focused on what it meant to teach
mathematics or science in their particular school (and district) to their particular students, and what forms of parental
engagement were appropriate or necessary. These cultural narratives organized teachers' discourse and practices
related to what students (and parents) in their schools could accomplish, what good teaching was for their school's
population, and who had the power and the right to make instructional decisions.
          For example, at Washington School, teachers and parents all initially shared narratives of a general lack of
parental involvement in the school, despite the school's clear mission and formal policies to engage parents and
families. Some    of the group's   more  ambitious   ideas  for  teacher-parent  engagement    were  rejected  because   of a
conviction that parents at "this school" would not participate. Related to this narrative was an on-going discussion
that the parents who "need" to be here (i.e., the ones whose children are struggling) were the not the ones who were
participating.
          This narrative at Washington School was situated in a broader cultural narrative related to the district's
somewhat unique approach to mathematics teaching and curriculum. Although there was a set of standards and
objectives for the district, there was no district-adopted textbook or set of curriculum materials. Instead, there was a
strong and consistent narrative across the district related to teacher control over instructional and curricular choices
in mathematics. This narrative was told in contrast to the district approach to literacy ­ a subject in which a scripted
curriculum series had recently been adopted. Having an artifact in the form of common curriculum materials or even
common    activities/practices across  classrooms   might   have  helped  focus the TE-PAC2       group on examining    these
artifacts in order to identify "spaces" for teacher-parent engagement. The set of standards and objectives used in the
district was somewhat too broad and abstract to serve this purpose.
          As we can see with the teachers at Washington School, it was within these broader cultural narratives that
teachers  revealed   how much    their views of teaching    and  subsequent    parental engagement   in  that teaching  were
framed   by No  Child  Left Behind     legislation  and its extant policies  and   practices  for mathematics    and science
teaching in their schools and districts. A school's status as failing or near failing and the supports and constraints
this status imposed upon teachers were central to teacher narratives.
          We noticed similar constraints at Beacon School. Interestingly, even when teachers had expressed views of
learning that ran counter to cultural norms or formed fairly robust relationships with parents, who were highly active
in the school, their more personal ideas about how teachers and parents might collaborate on instructional decisions
were trumped by their perceptions of acceptable institutional practices and needs. For example, while the lead fifth
grade teacher at Beacon held an expansive view of learning, which included views on how she might integrate youth
interest in social networking technologies, she also spoke openly about not being able to trump the institutional
narrative at her school due to the students' low test scores and school expectations for what classroom teaching
ought to look like.  At the same time, she had a fairly robust relationship with the one of the parents involved in TE-
PAC2, and yet while both she and the parent had ideas for ways to incorporate local cultural knowledge into the
curriculum (i.e., incorporating oral histories or folklore into a lesson on predicting weather), they deprioritized these
ideas to take on more traditional tasks supported by the broader cultural narrative. The day the lesson plan involved
the students interviewing the parent    on her "rules of thumb" for weather, the parent ended up not coming to science
class because she felt it was more important for her to help oversee the lunch period in the cafeteria. The teacher felt
she could not ask the parent to leave the cafeteria because that was the parent's    "real" role in the school.

Changes in Teachers' Narratives: Counter-Stories
We found that having opportunities to study science and mathematics together (through curriculum materials and
reform documents)     provided   a space  in which   teachers    began to  try out narratives  regarding   mathematics   and
science instruction and parental engagement that ran counter to the broader institutional and cultural narratives.
These counter-narratives were deeply grounded in the instructional content - either in how the goals for teaching
content were framed, what the content of the lessons looked like, or how school and home could connect content.
These counter-narratives were strikingly different from the original narratives teachers told.      The original narratives
focused on the spaces ­ or lack thereof ­ for parent engagement in mathematics and science instruction. As part of
the TE-PAC2 experience, teachers began to see new roles and identities for parents. This allowed the teachers to
then imagine   new    narratives  for  teaching and   learning   mathematics    and science.   These    counter-stories were
supported   by non-routine  resources    made   available   within these  communities    (e.g, family   stories) and/or  new
meanings    given to  traditional  resources (e.g., Family    Math  Nights).   Finally, these  counter  narratives were  co-
authored and constructed/re-constructed over time as parents and teachers took greater risks in sharing ideas and
perspectives (e.g., building an understanding of and then an opposition to district policies over several weeks as
parents and teachers realized they shared similar concerns).

                                                        727  ·  © ISLS
                                                  ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

        Engaging in the study of science and mathematic curriculum and reform materials supported opportunities
for teacher learning by shifting the spaces in which teachers and parents typically engage each other. Instead of
interacting over individual  student  issues  or becoming    involved in  the management    of the  classroom,   studying
science and mathematics curriculum and reform materials together provided opportunities for sustained dialogue on
science and mathematics in everyday lives and shifted discourse from expert/novice to co-learners. In other words,
these shifts in spaces altered the resources and roles available to parents and teachers allowing them to take up
alternative narratives that countered the cultural norm. Teachers' views on resources for learning shifted as they
began to view parents in a more collaborative way. Some of the teachers expanded their repertoire of resources to
support their teaching and student learning when they began to understand that parents were more than recipients of
information or experts only on their own kids.
        At all of our sites, parents and teachers' collaboration eventually served as a somewhat safe space for
critical discourse on school policies, and in two cases such discussions led to opportunities for teachers and parents
to subvert aspects of school policy that they collectively agreed worked against children's learning. In both cases the
policy subverted related to the allocation of instructional time: In one case (Palmer) ignoring the superintendent's
call for no interdisciplinary teaching, and in a second case (Beacon) ignoring the school mandate to eliminate all
instructional time for science. At the third site (Washington), these discussions led teachers and parents to carve out
a space for parent engagement in mathematics that was notably and explicitly resistant to the dominant curricular
and parent  engagement    policies  that had  been created   with  respect to literacy. Also   at Washington,    the  high
attendance at the Nights provides a "counter-story" to the clear belief and expectation of both teachers and parents
that parents at this school do not participate in school events, particularly those related to content.

A Cycle of Teacher Narratives
If we think about teacher learning about teacher-parent engagement as a trajectory, we conjecture teachers made
important movement along the trajectory, but that movement was mediated by the social context (i.e., school level
support for science, teaching morale) along with teachers' personal resources for learning (i.e., teaching identity and
knowledge of content). Teachers in all three schools experienced a culture of regulation and disempowerment and/or
exhaustion  among   teachers.   In fact, this trajectory  cannot be  understood  separate  from   trajectories  related to
teachers' understandings of what it means to teach mathematics and science in their particular school and district. In
proposing   a trajectory of  teacher learning  about teacher-parent   engagement,   we   claim    that  the center of this
trajectory is defined by a cycle of teacher narratives (Figure 1) in which narratives of teacher-parent engagement are
initially situated in broader cultural narratives about mathematics and science education and the role of parents.
However, as teachers exchange resources with parents in the spaces defined by the TE-PAC2 experience, they begin
to tell counter-narratives not only about teacher-parent engagement, but also about the teaching of mathematics and
science more broadly. In other words, teachers' narratives shift from questions of where parents might "fit" within
the traditional teaching  of mathematics    and  science  to   how new   understandings  of  parent     engagement  might
transform the teaching and learning of mathematics and science.

            Roles/positioning of teachers and                              Telling of counter-narratives
            parents defined within broader           Teacher                   ·   Teachers and parents
            cultural narratives                      knowledge                     sharing resources and
            ·    About mathematics/science           and identity                  re/positioning
                 education                                                         themselves and others
            ·    About parents                                                     within shifting cultural
                                                                                   narratives

                                         Figure 1. Cycle of Teacher Narratives.

        At Beacon, we see the teachers as positioned at an early point along this trajectory. The teachers at Beacon
were less familiar with the new science standards and also had no school-purchased resources for science. They
tended to use the environment as a shield to prevent further engagement with parents. The initial narrative that
emerged among teachers and parents in the context of content explorations focused on the "troubles of the school"
that positioned teachers and parents differently and sometimes in opposition rather than the content of instruction.

                                                      728  ·  © ISLS
                                                ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

         Teachers at Washington and Palmer appeared to be positioned further along the trajectory as they were
better able to take advantage of opportunities to learn with and through parental engagement and engage in the
iterative cycle of narratives depicted in Figure 1. For example, at Palmer, teachers used the TE-PAC2 experience as
an opportunity to cultivate allies to work against policies that they felt worked against meaningful student learning.
They used   the TE-PAC2    space to share   complaints    and  to   strategize on how  to  work against  the negative
environment. At both Washington and Palmer, teachers' relationships with parents as people with experiences that
matter in science and mathematics developed dialectically with their views on the kinds of resources that support
student learning. Consequently, teachers shifted classroom practice to reposition parents with more authorship in the
classroom and/or curricular space. Parents helped to design extension lessons and served as content experts. They
also provided feedback on their children's responses to the classroom. However, in this hybrid community, teachers
still maintained overt control over when and how parents' shifting roles became public, even though many of the
teachers expanded  their views on what  was   possible   in   their school or  classroom. Going forward, we   hope to
continue to understand, both theoretically and practically, the nature of this trajectory and ways to support teachers
and parents in moving along this trajectory towards creating broader spaces and capital exchanges for engagement in
the teaching and learning of mathematics and science.

References
Calabrese Barton, A., Drake, C., Perez, G., St. Louis, K., & George, M. (2004). Ecologies of parental engagement
         in urban education. Educational Researcher 33(4): 3-12.
Bruner, J. (1990). Acts of Meaning. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Civil, M. & Quintos, B. (2002). Uncovering mothers' perceptions about the teaching and learning of mathematics.
         Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the American Education Research Association. New Orleans,
         LA.
Clandinin, D.J. & Connelly, F.M. (2000). Narrative Inquiry: Experience and Story in Qualitative Research. San
         Francisco: Jossey-Bass Publishers.
Harvard Family Research Project (2002). Concepts and Models of Family Involvement. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
         University.
Jackson, K., & Remillard, J. T. (2005). Rethinking parent involvement: African American mothers construct their
         roles in the mathematics education of their children. The School Community Journal, 15(1), 51-74.
Lave, J. & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated Learning: Legitimate Peripheral Participation. Cambridge: Cambridge
         University Press.
Lee, J-S. & Bowen, N.K. (2006). Parent involvement, cultural capital, and the achievmenet gap among elementary
         school children. American Educational Research Journal 43(2): 193-218.
Moje, E. B., Ciechanowski, K. M., Kramer, K., Ellis, L., Carrillo, R., & Collazo, T. (2004). Working toward third
         space in content area literacy: An examination of everyday funds of knowledge and Discourse. Reading
         Research Quarterly, 39(1), 38-70.
Peressini, D.D. (1998). The Portrayal of Parents in the School Mathematics Reform Literature: Locating the Context
         for Parental Involvement. Journal for Research in Mathematics Education 29(5), 555-582.
Peressini, D. Borko, H. Romagnano, L., Knuth, E. & Willis, C. (2004). A Conceptual Framework for Learning to
         Teach Secondary Mathematics: A Situative Perspective. Educational Studies in Mathematics 56(1): 67-96.
Perez Carreon, G., Drake, C. & Calabrese Barton, A. (2005). The importance of presence: Immigrant parents'
         experiences of school engagement.  American    Educational Research Journal 42(3): 465-498.
Remillard, J. & Jackson, K. (2006). Old Math, New Math: Parents' experiences with standards-based reform.
         Mathematical Thinking and Learning, 8(3), 231-259.
Strauss, A., & Corbin, J. (1998). Basics of qualitative research: grounded theory procedures and techniques.
         Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Tzou, C., Scalone, D. & Bell. P. (in press). The role of environmental narratives and social positioning in how
         place gets constructed for and by youth. Equity & Excellence in Education.

Acknowledgements
This work was supported, in part, by a grant to the two authors from the Spencer Foundation. Any opinions,
findings, conclusions, or recommendations are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
Spencer Foundation.

                                                    729  ·  © ISLS
