                                                ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

                  Assessing Change in Learner's Causal Understanding
                         Using Sequential Analysis and Causal Maps

       Allan Jeong, Florida State University, Department of Educational Psychology & Learning Systems,
                    Instructional Systems Program, Stone Building Rm. 3205E, ajeong@fsu.edu

    Abstract: New methods are needed to assess how group discourse triggers changes in causal maps and to
    measure and visualize across time how changes in causal maps of individuals or the collective group
    progress toward the group or target map. The software tool, jMAP, was developed to enable learners to
    individually produce causal maps, download and aggregate the maps across learners. It aggregates learners'
    maps to reveal similarities between individual/group maps, the percentage of maps sharing particular causal
    links, average   causal strength assigned to  specific   links, and degree of   match between  maps   of the
    collective group and target/expert diagram. jMAP produces data to create transitional state diagrams for
    visualizing how causal maps change over time and the effects of specific dialogic processes. This paper
    presents findings from two case studies to illustrate how jMAP can be used to support the assessment of
    causal understanding, and identifies areas for future research.

Introduction
Each one of us holds different beliefs and theories about the world. Learners' theories can be conceived, articulated,
and assessed more efficiently in the form of causal maps - networks of events (nodes) and causal relationships
(links) between events ­ than in the form of linearly written text. Some causal maps may be more accurate than
others--depending on the presence and/or absence of supporting evidence; and some maps and the causal links
within the maps may be more or less firmly held--depending on both the strength of the supporting evidence and
the strength of specific causal relationships. Furthermore, causal maps are not fixed and unchanging. Instead, they
are incomplete   and constantly evolving; may    contain  errors,   misconceptions, and contradictions;  may provide
simplified explanations of complex phenomena; and may often contain implicit measures of uncertainty about their
validity (Seel, 2003). As a result, causal maps can change, but usually not randomly. That is, we presume that events
trigger and provide the impetus for change. Causal maps and other similar forms of visual representations are being
increasingly used to help assess learners' understanding of complex domains and/or learners' progress towards
increased understanding (Spector & Koszalka, 2004; Nesbit & Adesope, 2006). However, the methods and software
tools to measure how learner's maps change over time (Ifenthaler & Seel, 2005; Doyle & Radzicki, 2007) and how
specific events (e.g., pedagogical discourse) trigger changes in learners' causal maps (Shute, Jeong, & Zapata-
Rivera, in press) have not yet been adequately addressed.

    To address some of these methodological challenges, Ifenthaler and Seel (2005) used transitional probabilities to
determine how likely learner's maps (when examined at as a whole) changed in structural similarity across eight
different time periods. Raters were given a specially designed questionnaire to determine if a learner's map at one
point differed in structure from the learner's map produced from the most previous point in time. The study found
that maps were most likely to change in structure at the early stages of the map construction process with the
likelihood of changes dropping from one version to the next. However, Ifenthaler (2008) found that changes in
scores on seven of nine measures of structural quality (e.g., total number of links, level of connectedness, average
number of incoming and outgoing vertices per node) had no correlation to the degree to which the learners' maps
matched the expert map. Not surprisingly, the one aspect of the learners' maps that did correlate to learning was the
number  of  links shared between  the  learner's map   and   the expert map. These   findings altogether suggest that
measures used to gauge changes at the global level (where the unit of analysis is the map as a whole) and measures
that are not scored in relation to a target map (e.g., expert or collective group map) may have little or no value as an
assessment tool.

    One alternative approach is to measure changes at a more micro-level using the node-link-node as the unit of
analysis and unit of comparison between learners' and target maps. At this level, we can examine how likely links
between specific nodes are to change from one state to another (e.g., strong vs. moderate vs. weak vs. no causal
impact; or high vs. moderate vs. low probability/confidence) as maps change over time. We also see to what extent
the observed changes in the values of each causal link converge towards the target causal link values present in the
target map. For example, we expect that the causal link values for links representing learner's misconceptions (e.g.,
erroneous links not observed in the target map) or learners' shallow understandings (e.g., links between two nodes

                                                    73  ·  © ISLS
                                                  ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

not directly related and/or better explained by inserting a mediating node) will converge towards a value of 0 (no
causal link) over time, following a close examination and critical discussion of the causal relationships. At the same
time, the expectation is that the causal link values of the links not observed in a learner's map (but present in the
target map) will progress from a value of 0 to the value observed in the target map. Using the node-link-node as the
unit of analysis enables a precise examination of how and to what extent observed changes in targeted links help
and/or inhibit learners from achieving the target learning outcomes (e.g., deeper and more accurate understanding).
Furthermore, this approach enables us to examine how specific interventions/events (e.g., depth of argumentation,
the production of supporting evidence) affect the direction and magnitude of changes across links that are missing or
links that are valid or invalid.

   For  example,   Shute,  Jeong     &  Zapata-Rivera (in    press)  conducted a   study  to  examine  the processes  of
collaborative theory construction    in an  online graduate   course   on instructional technology. In this  study, each
student used jMAP to individually construct a causal diagram (at the beginning, middle, and end of the semester)
that explains the complex events and conditions (including intermediate events and their causal relationships) that
determine when the use of media technology increases learning and achievement. In the causal maps, students
assigned a strength value to each causal link (1 = weak, 2 = moderate, 3 = strong impact) based on personal
experiences and empirical literature examined in the course. In addition, students were instructed to specify with
each causal link added to the causal diagram the quality of evidence they possessed and/or compiled to justify the
plausibility of each given link (0 = no evidence, 1 = weak evidence, 2 = moderate evidence, 3 = strong evidence). In
this case study, the experimenters coded all the maps by hand and causal links into adjacency matrices because the
early versions of jMAP     did   not perform this  function. Once    coded, jMAP   was   used to tabulate  the sequential
changes  in causal   links observed     in each  student's   causal  diagrams  produced    prior to and   subsequent  to
collaborative work (identifying factors; collecting, annotating, and sharing supporting evidence; cross-examining the
evidence; interpreting the evidence; consensus making).

   The Discussion Analysis Tool (Jeong, 2005) was then used to sequentially analyze the data to produce the
transitional state diagram presented below. The state diagram in Figure 1, for example, shows that 50% of all causal
links that were assigned a strength value of one remained the same between the first and second, and between the
second and third causal diagrams, when no evidence was presented nor discussed in the online group discussions to
establish the plausibility and the strength of the link. In contrast, the state diagram on the right shows that when
evidence was presented with the causal links, these same links with strength value of one were much more likely to
remain the same (86% instead of 50%). Overall, this preliminary study illustrates how the jMAP environment ­
when combined with sequential analysis ­ can produce a potentially powerful method to studying the processes of
theory construction and the factors and conditions that both support and inhibit the process.

   This  presentation will  demonstrate     the software  tool  called jMAP   that can  be used  to identify   differences
between learners' causal maps, initiate collaborative argumentation to produce justifications for proposed causal
links, and produces changes in learners' causal maps that better reflect/represent complex phenomena. Similar to the
Cognizer program (Nakayama and Liao, 2005), jMAP enable each learner to produce a causal map with numerically
weighted links (Figure 2) thus reducing unwanted biases and influences of other learners (Doyle & Radzicki, 2007).
jMAP can then be used to: 1) automatically code diagrams into adjacency matrices; 2) upload, download, and
aggregate multiple matrices so that the maps of an individual, the collective group, and/or expert (in any paired
combination) can be graphically superimposed to determine for example the degree to which a learner's diagram
matches that of the expert or the collective group at a given point in time; 3) view the superimposed maps across
different time periods to both visualize and quantitatively assess how learners' causal diagrams change over time
and the extent to which the changes are converging towards the maps of the expert or the collective group; and 4)
sequentially analyze and visualize how particular learners' causal diagrams and causal understanding of complex
phenomena change over time under different instructional processes, events, or conditions (Jeong, 2008).

   jMAP also enable researchers and teachers to: (a) graphically superimpose an individual learner's map over the
expert/target map to visually identify and highlight changes occurring over time in the causal maps of an individual
or group of learners; (b) determine the extent to which the observed changes progress toward a target or collective
model; (c) determine precisely where, when, and to what extent changes occur in the causal links within the causal
maps; and most importantly; and (d) identify and measure how and to what extent specific events (e.g., viewing
consensus data, discussing evidence, engaging in specific and critical discourse patterns) trigger changes in the
causal links between various states (e.g., strong, moderate, weak, and no causal link) as demonstrated in Figure 3.

                                                       74  ·  © ISLS
                                   ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

  Figure 1. Transitional state diagrams revealing the direction and likelihood of changes
    in causal strengths when links are presented without vs. with supporting evidence

Figure 2. Drawing a causal map with jMAP using weighted links to specify strength of each
 causal relationship and dotted links to specify level of confidence or evidenciary support

                                       75  ·  © ISLS
                                                ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

Figure 3. Visually comparing student 4's first map with the aggregated group map (g1) with darker links revealing
    matching causal strength values, lighter links revealing shared links (differing in values), and light gray links
                                             revealing missing links.

    The following case study illustrates how jMAP can be used to assess how differences in the quality of learner's
argumentation affect changes in learner's causal diagrams. Furthermore, this paper will also demonstrate how jMAP
can be   used to  compare    causal  maps  between learners,    identify differences between  learners'    maps and
initial/current consensus on map links, and to initiate and structure learners' discussions in ways that might help to
improve their causal maps. The case study presented in this paper presentation addressed the following research
questions:

    1.  What are the effects of consensus observed in initial maps on the level of consensus in subsequent maps?
        When learners use jMAP to determine which causal links are shared most among everyone's initial maps,
        are the most commonly shared links more likely to remain in learners' subsequent maps than the less
        commonly shared links?

    2.  What is the relationship between initial levels of consensus and level of argumentation? Do learners engage
        in more argumentation when a causal link is more or less commonly shared between learners? In other
        words, do higher or lower levels of initial consensus trigger higher levels of argumentation?

    3.  What  are the effects   of argumentation levels   on  consensus   in subsequent maps? Do      high levels     of
        argumentation lead   to higher  or lower  levels   of  consensus  in  maps produced  subsequent    to group
        discussions/debates?

                                                    76  ·  © ISLS
                                                 ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

Method
Participants
Nineteen graduate students (8 male, 11 female) enrolled in an online course on computer-supported collaborative
learning at a large southeastern university participated in this study. The participants ranged from 22 to 55 years in
age, and the majority of the participants were enrolled in a Master's level program in instructional systems/design.

Procedures
The course examined factors that influence success in collaborative learning and instructional strategies associated
with each factor. In week 2, learners used a Wiki webpage to share and construct a running list of factors believed to
influence the level of learning or performance achieved in group assignments. Students classified and merged the
proposed factors, discussed the merits of each factor, and voted on the factors believed to exert the largest influence
on the outcomes of a group assignment. The votes were used to select a final list of 14 factors that learners
individually organized into causal maps.
    In week 3, students were presented six example maps to illustrate the desired characteristics and functions of
causal maps (e.g., temporal alignment, parsimony). Students were provided the jMAP program (pre-loaded by the
instructor with nodes for each of the 14 selected factors) to construct their first causal diagram (map 1). Map 1
allowed students to graphically explain their understanding of how the selected factors influence learning in
collaborative settings. Using the tools in jMAP, learners connected the factors with causal links by: (a) creating each
link with varying densities to reflect the perceived strength of the link (1 = weak, 2 = moderate, 3 = strong); and (b)
selecting different types of links to reveal the level of evidentiary support (from past personal experiences) for the
link. Personal maps were completed and electronically uploaded within a one-week period to receive class
participation points (class participation accounted for 25% of the course grade). The maps were also used to
complete a written assignment describing one's personal theory of collaborative learning (due week 4, and
accounting for 10% of course grade).
    Using jMAP, the instructor aggregated all the initial maps (n = 17) submitted by students into a group matrix.
The group matrix was shared with students to convey to the students the percentage of maps that possessed each
causal link. The links enclosed in boxes in the right side of the figure are common links observed in 20% or more of
the learners' maps. For example, the causal link between `Individual Accountability' and `Learner Motivation' was
observed in 47% of learners' maps. To select this 20% cut-off criterion, the instructor ran multiple aggregations of
the learner maps at different cut-off criterion until the instructor felt that a sufficient number of links were present
for group discussion and to discriminate between links that were more versus less shared between learners. A
corresponding group matrix was also produced in jMAP to report the mean strength values of the links observed in
20% or more of the maps. The values were highlighted by jMAP to reveal which links were present in the expert's
map but missing in the group map (i.e., dark shaded cells with values = links shared and strength values match,
lightly shaded with values = links shared with non-matching values, lightly shared boxes with no values = missing
target links).
    In week 9, learners were shown the matrix that revealed the percentage of maps (map 1) that possessed each
link. Students posted messages in an online threaded discussion forum to explain the rationale and justification for
each proposed causal link. Each posted explanation was labeled by learners with the tag `EXPL' in message subject
headings. Postings that questioned or challenged explanations were tagged with `BUT.' Postings that provided
additional support were tagged with `SUPPORT.' In weeks 9 and 10, learners searched for and reported quantitative
findings from empirical research into a group Wiki that could be referenced and used later to determine the
instructional impact of each factor.
    Students received instructions on how to use jMAP to superimpose their own map over the aggregated group
map (Figure 2) to visually identify similarities and differences between their own maps and the collective
conception of the causal relationships between factors and outcomes. For example, figure 2 reveals the similarities
and differences between an individual student's first map (student #4) and the group map (g1) generated by the
aggregation of all the maps produced by all students at the first time period. The course instructor used jMAP to
superimpose his expert map over the group map produced at time period one (g1) and in time period two (g2) by
using the control keys (ctrl-h, ctrl-j, ctrl-k) to toggle between maps g1 and g2. By using the navigational tools to
toggle between the two group maps, the instructor was able to visually and quantitatively observe the progression of
changes averaged across all the students' maps in order to assess the extent to which the observed changes
converged towards the expert map. Jeong (2008) presents more detailed information on how to use jMAP to
visualize and animate progressive changes in maps created by a select learner (or group of learners) across multiple
time periods relative to a target map.
    In week 10, students reviewed the discussions from week 9. Within a discussion thread for each examined link,

                                                     77  ·  © ISLS
                                                 ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

learners posted messages to report whether they rejected or accepted the link (along with explanations). At the end
of week 10, each student posted a revised causal diagram based on their analysis of the arguments presented in class
discussions.

Data Analysis
To measure the level of change in learners' maps, link frequencies from each learner's second map (n = 15) were
aggregated to determine the percentage of maps that shared each link. Differences in the reported percentages
between maps 1 and 2 were computed and presented in a matrix. Overall, the percentages in 19 of the 24 commonly
shared links increased by an average of 26%. Four of these shared links changed by an average of -10.75%.

   The level of critical discourse produced within each discussion on each link was determined by the number of
observed EXPL-BUT,       BUT-BUT,   BUT-EXPL      or    SUPPORT,    and  BUT-SUPPORT      exchanges.  Challenges      to
explanations,   and explanatory responses   to challenges   were   used  as a measure  of critical discourse     because
explanations, when generated in direct response to conflicting viewpoints, have been shown to improve learning
(Pressley et al., 1992). Pearson correlations between variables are presented below.

Table 4. Correlations (n  = 24) between level of initial agreement, critical discourse, and change percent of learners
sharing each causal links

Findings
Effects of consensus in initial maps on level of consensus in subsequent maps.
Based on links (n = 24) that were observed in 20% or more of students' maps and discussed by students on the
discussion board, the correlation (Table 4) between the percentage of students that shared a causal link in the first
map and the average change in the percentage of students that   shared the  causal links was not significant (r = -.089,
p = .679). The opinions of the majority did not appear to influence learners' decisions to include or exclude causal
links into their revised maps. This suggests that the use of jMAP to reveal the similarities and differences between
students' maps did not foster group think.

Relationship between initial agreement and level of criticaldiscourse.
The correlation (n = 24) between the percentage of students that shared a causal link in the first map and the level of
critical discourse that was generated by students to exam the strength of each causal link approached statistical
significance (r = .385, p = .063). The students engaged in  more critical discussion over the causal links when   the
causal links were shared by more students rather than less students. This finding suggests that students did not
simply accept or give into the status quo. Conversely, the finding also suggests that students exhibited some
tendency to engage in less critical discussion over the causal links when the casual links were shared by fewer
students. One possible explanation for this finding may be that the causal links shared by the fewest number of
students where those that exhibited the most obvious flaws in logic and as a result, these links did not warrant much
debate to omit the causal link from the causal maps.

Effects of argumentation on changes in agreement in subsequent maps
No significant correlation was found between the level of critical discourse over each causal link and the change in
the percentage of maps sharing each casual link (r = - .152, p = .478). This finding suggests that the level of critical
discourse over each causal link neither increased nor decreased the percentage of students that rejected a causal link.
   However, post-hoc analysis on the individual effects of each of the four types of exchanges (all of which were
aggregated and used to measure the level of that critical discourse) revealed the frequency of EXPL-SUPP

                                                     78  ·  © ISLS
                                                 ICLS 2010  ·   Volume 1

exchanges observed in discussions over each link were moderately and positively correlated (r = .386, p = .063)
with changes in the percentage of students that shared each causal link. Supporting statements that were specifically
posted in direct response to other learners' causal explanations (e.g., presenting supporting evidence, simple
expression of agreement) were the types of events/exchanges that were most likely to persuade learners to adopt new
links into subsequent causal maps. This finding is consistent with the findings from a previous case study in which
causal link strength values were more likely to remain the same or increase in value when links were supported with
evidence. Worth noting here is that the frequency of supporting statements alone   in the discussions over each causal
link (without regard to what messages they were posted in response to) revealed a similar correlation but of lesser
statistical significance (r = .313, p = .136). This suggests that message-response exchanges as opposed to simple
message frequencies alone could provide more explanatory power when analyzing the effects of critical discourse on
causal understanding.

Additional findings
To be included at the time of presentation will be the findings produced from the visual comparison of the
transitional state diagrams (like Figure 1) depicting how the causal maps (or more specifically, the strength values of
each causal link) changed over time resulting from the high vs. low presence of EXPL-SUPP exchanges observed in
the discussions of each causal link.

Implications
The findings in this case study illustrate how jMAP can be used to assess the impact of critical discussions or other
instructional events/interventions on learners' causal understanding. When used as a research tool, jMAP provides
insights into the processes of learning (e.g., causal understanding) and insights into how specific processes (e.g.,
EXPL-SUPP) lead to specific learning outcomes/behaviors. At the same time, this case study illustrates how jMAP
can help  learners work  collaboratively  to build and     refine their  causal understanding. Learners  can   identify
similarities and differences in their causal understanding relative to others. Then they can use the differences as the
starting point to discuss and explore the causal relationships.

Directions for Future Research & Development
The findings in this case study are not conclusive given the limited sample size. Nevertheless, this study illustrates
how  jMAP   can be  used to assess   how  causal understanding     evolves  over time and how   specific processes  of
discourse (including processes of scientific inquiry) influences causal understanding. More research is needed to
identify the specific discourse processes and interventions that foster critical discourse that can trigger changes in
causal links ­ particularly changes that converge towards the expert and/or group model.
    To support future research, online discussion boards could be integrated into jMAP to automatically create
discussion threads for each causal link observed in learners' causal maps, to seed discussions with learners' initial
explanations, to support message tagging, and to compile and report scores that measure certain qualities observed
in the group discussions for any given set of causal links. Such a system could be used by instructors to assess not
only the quality of learners' causal maps and understanding, but also the quality of learners' discourse and its impact
on their causal understanding. Additional functions can be added to jMAP to recognize nodes that are indirectly
linked via mediating nodes to fully account for observed differences between learner and expert maps. Another
useful function would be one that can identify and measure to what extent and in what temporal direction changes in
causal links propagate subsequent changes in adjacent links ­ a measure that could be used to determine to what
extent learners apply a systematic approach to break down the causal relationships. To examine this issue in more
detail, a function can be added to jMAP that captures and logs every action performed in jMAP as learners construct
their maps.
    In addition, refinements to the jMAP user interface will be necessary to make map construction easier, more
intuitive, and less time consuming if systems like jMAP are to be used in school-based applications ­ particularly for
learners at younger ages. Instructions and guidance on how to conceptualize a coherent causal map/model (e.g.,
temporal flow, parsimony) should be embedded directly into the jMAP interface to assist learners that lack the skills
needed to construct a causal map. Other useful functions to add to jMAP include: swap and change the target map so
that one can compare different combinations of maps (individual, collective group, expert); show the percentage of
students' maps that possess each target link by varying the density of each link to reflect the observed percentages;
and select links to include in the aggregate/collective group map based on link frequencies that are significantly
higher than the expected frequencies based on a user-selected critical z-score.

                                                     79  ·  © ISLS
                                                 ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

References

Doyle, J., M. Radzicki, et al. (2007). Measuring change in mental models of complex systems. In Complex Decision
   Making: Theory and Practice. H. Qudrat-Ullah, J. M. Spector and P. I. Davidsen, Springer-Verlag: 269-293.

Ifenthaler, D., &  Seel, N.  M. (2005).  The   measurement     of change. Learning-dependent progression  of mental
   models. Technology, Instruction, Cognition and Learning, 2(4), 317-336.

Ifenthaler, D., M. Iskandaria,  et al. (2008). Tracking    the development  of cognitive structures over time. Paper
   presented at the American Educational Research Association 2008 conference, New York, NY.

Jeong, A. (2005a). Discussion analysis tool. Retrieved May 2009 http://myweb.fsu.edu/ajeong/dat.

Jeong, A. (2005b). A guide to analyzing message-response sequences and group interaction patterns in computer-
   mediated communication. Distance Education, 26(3), 367-383.

Jeong, A. (2008). jMAP. Retrieved July 24, 2008 http://jmap.wikispaces.com

Nakayama, V. K. & Liao, J. (2005). An outline of approaches to analyzing the behavior of causal maps. In V. K.
   Nakayama and D. J. Armstrong (Eds.), Causal mapping for research in information technology. Hershey PA,
   Idea Group Publishing: 368-377.

Nesbit, J., &   Adesope,  O. (2006).   Learning with    concept   and knowledge  maps: A  meta-analysis.  Review  of
   Educational Research, 76(3): 413-448.

Pressley, M., Wood, E., Woloshyn, V. E., Martin, V., King, A., & Menke, D. (1992). Encouraging mindful use of
   prior knowledge: Attempting to construct explanatory answers facilitates learning. Educational Psychologist,
   27(1), 91-109.

Seel, N. M. (2003). Model-centered learning and instruction. Technology, Instruction, Cognition and Learning, 1(1),
   59-85.

Shute, V. J., & Jeong, A. C., & Zapata-Rivera, D. (in press). Using flexible belief networks to assess mental models.
   In B. B. Lockee, L. Yamagata-Lynch, and J. M. Spector (Eds.), Instructional Design for Complex Learning.
   New York, NY: Springer.

Spector, J. M., & Koszalka, T. A. (2004). The DEEP methodology for assessing learning in complex domains (Final
   report to the National Science Foundation Evaluative Research and Evaluation Capacity Building). Syracuse,
   NY: Syracuse University.

                                                     80  ·  © ISLS
