                                                ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

The impact of web-based collaborative inquiry for science learning
                                   in secondary education
                                                           !
  Annelies Raes, Tammy Schellens, Bram De Wever, Department of Educational Studies, Ghent University,
                                          Henri Dunantlaan 2, 9000 Ghent,
              Email: annelies.raes@ugent.be, tammy.schellens@ugent.be, bram.dewever@ugent.be

       Abstract: Current educational practice in higher education shows a growing use of CSCL-
       environments. In secondary education, however, we only see the first signs of transformation
       in the age of technology and the Internet, and many of these signs are particularly at the
       administrative level rather than in the classroom. Nevertheless, research, as well as national
       standards,   support    collaborative learning   and   the integration of   ICT as  an answer  to  the
       decreased   interest  and  motivation   in science    learning and  the  growing   importance that  is
       attached to inquiry skills. This research project deals with the use of web-based collaborative
       inquiry as a promising approach for secondary science education. In particular, this study
       investigated the impact of the implementation of a Web-based Inquiry Science Environment
       (WISE) on students' content knowledge, their inquiry skills and their attitude and engagement
       towards science.     An empirical study in 19 secondary science classes was conducted and 375
       students    were  involved.   Additionally,    this    study  focused    on gender   differences  and
       highlighted the transformation of the teachers' role in web-based teaching. The present study
       demonstrates   the   effectiveness  of  this innovative    instructional approach   in the attempt  of
       making science accessible and interesting to all and to rectify the gender imbalance in science
       education.

Introduction
The latest Eurobarometer on "Young People and Science" (2008), investigating the public's opinion, revealed
that young Europeans (aged between 15 and 25) have a positive view about science and technology. However,
when presented with several choices of scientific study, only a minority of these young people said they were
considering them. These findings are in line with the first results of PISA 2006. The PISA results reveal that
Flanders belongs to the group of OECD countries which achieved very high results for scientific literacy. On the
other hand, in comparison with the 15-year-old students in the average OECD country, fewer Flemish students
reported that they are motivated to learn science, and only an absolute minority thought that they will work with
science later on (De Meyer, 2008). The number of students who consider taking up studies and careers in
science is at a low level. This is especially true for female students. Recent research findings emanating from a
range of countries demonstrate that gender equity in science education is still a cause for concern. One of the
reasons for this gender differentiation in science interest is the perception shared by many girls that only boys or
men are good in science and technology (Sedeno, Balmaseda, Suarez, & Dauder, 2008). Nevertheless, different
research findings demonstrate that during elementary education girls' scientific achievement is equal to boys'
achievement.   However, in   secondary    education, boys    significantly outperform   girls with respect to science
(TIMMS, 2003; PISA, 2006). The number of girls that graduate in a scientific, mathematic or technical master
is lower than the number of boys. Moreover, according to the Flemish board for scientific policy (2008), this
number is still decreasing.
       Concerns are raised about this lack of interest in science, and the resulting reduction in the numbers of
young people who opt to study science subjects at an advanced level. These concerns seem justified, especially
in an industrialized society. In addition to potential economic and labor market consequences of this disinterest,
there are also social and cultural consequences, since science represents an important part of the culture in
which an understanding      of scientific phenomena     is  required  to participate fully in  many  topical  debates
(Woodgate & Stanton Fraser, 2007).     One of the reasons for young people's lack of interest in science is that
much of what goes on in science classrooms is not particularly attractive to students (Stark and Gray, 1999;
Flemish governmental enquiry, 2005).
       Next to that, National standards stress the growing importance that is attached to inquiry skills. More
particularly, enhancing student's  understanding     of science    concepts   and  process skills rather than  merely
teaching the lower textual-level scientific knowledge is a major goal for science educators (Galili, 1996).
       These findings stress the review, rethink, and reform of science education to make science accessible
and interesting to all and to rectify the gender imbalance in science education. In this respect, we investigated
the impact of web-based collaborative inquiry as an innovative instructional approach for science learning in
Flemish secondary education.

                                                    736  ·   © ISLS
                                                ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

Theoretical and Empirical Framework
Inquiry-oriented science instruction has been characterized in a variety of ways over the years (Collins, 1986;
DeBoer, 1991; Rakow, 1986) and promoted from a variety of perspectives. Inquiry based learning is a student-
centered, active learning approach which stimulates students to get involved in a social, active, engaged, and
constructive learning   process,  as opposed    to  more   traditional approaches    which  tend   to emphasize   the
memorizing   of factual  information.   According   to  constructivist  models,  learning  is the  result of   ongoing
changes in our mental frameworks as we attempt to make meaning out of our experiences (Osborne & Freyberg,
1985).
         Inquiry-based programs have been found to generally enhance student performance related to scientific
literacy and understanding of science processes (Lindberg, 1990), conceptual understanding (Slotta & Linn,
2009) and positive attitudes toward science (Kyle et al., 1985; Rakow, 1986). Moreover, research shows clearly
that by reflecting, applying ideas, and collaborating with peers, students develop a sense of the relevance of
science (Bransford, Brown, & Cocking, 1999). Research confirms the commonly held view that collaborative
learning motivates students (Gillies, 2003) and there is evidence for the fact that students develop a positive
attitude towards the course in which collaborative learning is applied (Stevens & Slavin, 1995; Nichols &
Miller, 1994; Nichols, 1996; Springer, Stanne & Donovan, 1999).
         With the  growing importance    of the World   Wide Web,     this information resource can  serve as a means
for collaborative inquiry that opens the boundaries of the classroom and creates the possibility for students to
pursue questions of personal interest (Wallace, Kupperman, Krajcik, & Soloway, 2000). Research on Computer
Supported  Collaborative   Learning  (CSCL)     has contributed    to the  claim that  collaborative  activity  among
students can effectively be supported with computer technology (Lou, Abrami, & d'Apollonia, 2001). In this
respect, web-based   collaborative   inquiry is a  promising   approach.    National standards  and   policy  advisors
confirm this and call for inquiry learning and the integration of technology into science classes.
         In higher education, we are now witnessing a slow but steady growth in the use of CSCL, where
student activities and student-teacher exchanges are coordinated through online environments. In primary and
secondary education, however, we only see the first signs of transformation in the age of the Internet, and many
of these signs are particularly at the administrative level rather than in the classroom (Cox, Abbott, Webb,
Blakeley, Beauchamp, & Rhodes, 2004; Tondeur, van Braak, & Valcke, 2007). Apparently, teachers prefer
conservative, rather than revolutionary applications of technology. Teachers remain predominantly focused on
lectures and textbooks, using the Internet primarily as a supplemental resource for Web searches or multimedia
materials  (Slotta,  2004).    Nevertheless,    in  research   institutions   technology-based    environments    for
(collaborative) inquiry learning have been developed, such as WISE (Slotta, 2004) , Co-LAB (van Joolingen, de
Jong, Lazonder, Savelsbergh, & Manlove, 2005) or BGuILE (Reiser, Tabak, Sandoval, Smith, Steinmuller, &
Leone, 2001) as an arguably, more    interesting and motivational approach    to secondary science education.
         Although   different  technology-based    environments    for  collaborative  inquiry  learning   have  been
developed, little large-scale research has been conducted with regard to the benefits of this approach. Through
an intervention study   we  investigated  the   impact  of a web-based     collaborative inquiry  project  on  content
knowledge, inquiry skills and attitude and engagement towards science.
!
Research questions
Four major research questions drove this study:
    1.   What   is the  impact of   the web-based   collaborative  inquiry   project on  students'  understanding  of
         scientific phenomena?
    2.   What   is  the impact   of  web-based   collaborative  inquiry    on students'  inquiry  skills, particularly
         hypothesis generation?
    3.   What is the impact of web-based collaborative inquiry on students' attitude and engagement towards
         science?
    4.   Is there a differential impact for gender?

Additionally, this study wanted to investigate web-based collaborative inquiry from the teachers' point of view
with the aim of exploring how the changed classroom activity created by being online and involved in an
inquiry project affected the work of teaching.
!
!
Research design and Method
Participants
The participants in this study were 375 students from 19 secondary school classes (grade 9, 10, and 11, the
average age of these students was 16 years). The ratio of males to females in the participants was 54% girls to

                                                    737  ·  © ISLS
                                                 ICLS 2010  ·   Volume 1

46% boys. The classes were selected from 15 Flemish secondary schools and a group of 17 science teachers
were involved in the research project. Teacher participation in the intervention was voluntary and teachers
agreed to dedicate 4 lessons of 50 minutes to implement the CSCL-project.

Procedure and design
Forty-six master students Educational Sciences were involved in this study to support the implementation of the
project and to conduct the questionnaires and tests. For these students, this assignment was a formal part of the
7-credit course Educational Technology at Ghent University. The 46 master students were divided over the 19
classes participating in this study.   There were several reasons for designing the study in this way. First, the
classroom teachers did not have the time to go through a training period and the interventions had to be carried
out according   to  a set of   instructional principles. Second,   the   master  students   had more  expertise in the
theoretical backgrounds    of  CSCL    and   were   more   prepared   and   familiar with   the inquiry-based learning
environment. Third, master students acted as a researcher as well. After a specific training, master students were
responsible for data collection through a semi-structured interview, pre- and posttests, and observations during
the sessions.
        The    inquiry-based   learning  environment     used  in  this study was    the Web-Based    Inquiry  Science
Environment (WISE). WISE is developed to provide a solid technology platform that allows teachers to adopt
new forms of inquiry-based instruction (Slotta & Linn, 2009). Based on Peters & Slotta (2009) a Flemish
WISE-curriculum project was co-designed in partnership with science teachers and technology specialists. The
project addressed global warming and climate change and was connected to the standards-based curricula in
secondary   education.   The intervention    was developed     taking into  account  research-based   design principles
promoting knowledge integration and scientific inquiry.
        During the first session, secondary students completed the individual pretest and were introduced to
WISE. Depending on the time left, they also started in dyads the first activity of the project. The total project
consisted   of four main   activities. Students  worked     in the same    dyads during   the   whole intervention and
navigated through the sequence of inquiry activities using the inquiry map in the WISE environment. During the
project, students were asked to write their answers down in reflection notes. Consequently, all of their project
work was stored in a database, which was accessible to teachers and researchers for purposes of assessment.
Finally, all students completed the individual posttest.
        During the sessions, master students were asked to act as a "leader from the within" instead of a "guide
on the side". A "leader from the within" does not only monitor students but actively engage the students, helps
them to synthesize their views, and maintains a dynamic process of exchange within the classroom (Slotta &
Linn, 2009). After each session master students provided electronic, both positive and critical, feedback through
the feedback tool of WISE.
!
Data Collection, Instruments and Analysis
In this study data was collected using a mixed method approach.
        First, a pretest-posttest design was used to assess the impact of the intervention. The test consisted of
three main parts which assessed content knowledge, the ability to do scientific inquiry, and the attitude and
engagement towards science. In the first part, thirteen assessment items were developed to measure content
knowledge, eight of them were knowledge/multiple-choice items and five of them were explanation items that
went beyond reproducing knowledge and asked students to connect ideas in arguments. The latter items were
scored using the knowledge integration rubric that rewards both accurate and connected ideas, created by TELS.
This rubric contains a number of proficiency levels. The higher the proficiency level, the more complex the
skills that the students have to master to tackle the scientific problems. In the second part, students were asked
to read a research article and to generate the underlying hypotheses and research questions. In order to assess
students' attitude and engagement towards science, in the third part, three scales of the international PISA
(2006) questionnaire were used: support for science, interest in science and responsibility towards resources and
environments. Response options consisted of a 5-point Likert scale.
        Second, data was obtained through content analysis of all students' reflection notes during the four
successive science lessons and the additional observation reports made by the master students.
        Finally,   after completing    the project, semi-structured     interviews   of the classrooms  teachers   were
conducted   to  assess   their acceptance    and  attitude  towards     the innovative   environment    and  approach.
Furthermore, focus groups were organized twice with the master students to reflect on their experiences with the
organization and implementation of the web-based sessions. Special emphasis was put on their role as a teacher
in a web-based collaborative project.
        Data analyses were conducted using the software program SPSS, version 15.0. Paired sample t-tests,
independent sample t-tests and analysis of variances were conducted to determine the impact of the intervention.

                                                    738   ·  © ISLS
                                                ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

Results
General results
Based on the observations and focus groups, we found that master students had difficulties to perform as a
"leader from the   within". Most    of the time  they   monitored  the way  students  were progressing and   mainly
responded to any confusion, in this way they acted generally as a "guide on the side". They were quite occupied
managing the technology and monitoring students. Secondary school students who did not ask for help or did
not have obvious technical problems that required help, were not stimulated to do more. Master students asked
on a regular base how students were doing but when these students responded positive, no follow up questions
were asked.
          Regarding  the   classroom   teachers, all of   them were    positive about this experience. They   were
especially pleased to have their students learn in a web-based collaborative inquiry environment and are willing
to participate in future research.

Content knowledge, inquiry skill and attitude and engagement towards science
Based on the pre- and posttest items we can determine that, overall, there is significant improvement in terms of
knowledge and explanation. As shown in Table 1, students made progress in connecting ideas in arguments
(explanation items) and their active knowledge (content knowledge items) about climate change has increased.
In the pretest the numbers of incorrect and irrelevant answers were significant higher and knowledge about the
topic was rather isolated.

  Table 1: Average item mean, average item standard deviation, and differences (effect size and t-test for
  paired samples) between pretest and posttest using the individual as the unit of analysis

                                             Pretest              Posttest                 Difference

  Different scales                         M         SD        M         SD          ES            T (df)

  Content knowledge items                  1.38      0.57      2.23     0.44         1.6        27.97 (364)**

  Explanation items                        1.70      0.68      2.62     0.66        1.36       23.93 (365)**

  Inquiry skill                            1.8       1.03      2.17     0.82        0.41        6.49 (357)**

  Support for science                      3.69      0.43      3.68     0.48                    -0.237 (327)

  Interest in science                      3.43      0.68      3.47     0.67        0.05         2.02 (314)*

  Responsibility towards                   4.07      0.48      4.13     0.49        0.12        2.95 (305)**
  resources and environments

  * p < 0.05  ** p < 0.01
  N=375

          The results for the second part of the test where students were asked to deal with a research article are
also significantly higher. Students became better in generating the underlying research questions and hypotheses
in a research article. However, the qualitative data based on the reflection notes and observation reports force us
to refine this result. We observed frequent use of the `copy and paste' function, so that text fragments from the
internet were directly included in their answers. Furthermore, students tend to reduce the whole task to finding
an obvious answer on a particular website while less attention was paid to understanding the content and critical
thinking.
          With regard to the impact on attitude and engagement towards science, the results are less consistent.
Concerning the support for science, we noticed that this is quite high at the pretest (3.6 on 5-point-likert),
however no significant differences can be found compared to the posttest. However, the other two attitude
scales  (interest in science  and   responsibility   towards  resources  and    environments) do show   significant
differences between the pre- and the posttest although the effect sizes are low.

Gender differences
Boys and girls do not score significantly different on the knowledge part of the pretest. In contrast, the scores on
the posttest do significantly differ. Girls outperformed boys on knowledge items (t = 3.09, df = 367, p < .01) as

                                                    739  ·  © ISLS
                                                   ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

well as on explanation items (t = 4.32, df = 368, p < .01). In other words, girls benefited more than boys from
the intervention. With respect to inquiry skills, no significant gender differences can be revealed.
          With regard to the attitude towards science, no significant gender differences are found concerning the
support for science, this in contrast to the interest in science and the responsibility towards resources and
environments where significant gender differences are revealed. Girls had a significant lower interest in science
on   the pretest, but   this difference disappeared     after the intervention.  Regarding   the  responsibility towards
resources and environments, we can observe the same trend as in the knowledge part. Boys and girls do not
score significantly different on the pretest, but in the posttest girls were more positive than boys on this attitude
scale (t = -2.36, df = 269, p = .02).

Discussion and conclusion
This study aimed to get students engaged with science content through inquiry and action. More specifically,
this study  dealt  with  the  use and   impact  of  web-based     collaborative  inquiry  as a promising   approach   for
secondary science education on students' understanding of scientific phenomena, their inquiry skills, and their
attitude and engagement towards science. In addition, this study examined gender differences.
          The  present    study   demonstrated     the   effectiveness    of   web-based  collaborative    inquiry.  This
effectiveness is   especially  shown    for girls. On   the   posttest, girls outperformed   boys on  knowledge     items,
explanation items, and responsibility towards resources and environments. This implies that this innovative
instructional approach is an effective contribution in the attempt of making science accessible and interesting to
all and to rectify the gender imbalance in science education (TIMMS, 2003; PISA, 2006). Overall, after the
intervention, students made significant gains in understanding standards-based science concepts and improved
on   the inquiry  test. Yet,  we  can conclude     that information     seeking as a part of an  inquiry-based   learning
environment seems to be a complex and difficult progress for these students. During the web-based inquiry
project students were faced with information problems, tasks that require them to identify information needs,
locate   corresponding   information  sources,  extract   and    organize relevant information   from each  source,  and
synthesize information from a variety of sources (Brand-Gruwel, Wopereis, & Vermetten, 2005). It is often
assumed that students naturally master this complex cognitive skill of information problem solving. According
to this study, this assumption can be countered. According to previous research, we know that metacognitive
knowledge and awareness is critical for students to be able to control and regulate their information problem-
solving processes (Lazonder, 2003). However, little is known so far about effective instruction in information
problem solving. Further research planned in March 2010 will provide insight into effective scaffolds to support
student-directed inquiry. Furthermore, future research needs to focus on what teachers can do in an online
classroom to effectively support student learning at more than a merely technical level, given that CSCL works
best if the teacher interacts with the students and maintains a dynamic process of exchange within the classroom
(Slotta & Linn, 2009). Unfortunately, our findings show that most of the time, the teachers acted mainly as a
"guide on the side".
!
References
Brand-Gruwel, S., Wopereis, I., & Vermetten, Y. (2005). Information problem solving by experts and novices:
          analysis of a complex cognitive skill. Paper presented at the AERA 2003 Symposium, Chicago, IL.
Bransford, J. D., Brown, A.L., & Cocking, R. (1999). How people learn: Brain, mind, experience, and school.
          Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press.
Collins, A. (1986). A sample dialogue based on a theory of inquiry teaching (Tech. Rep. No. 367). Cambridge,
          MA: Bolt, Beranek, and Newman
Cox, M., Abbott, C., Webb, M., Blakely, B., Beauchamp, T., & Rhodes, V. (2004). ICT and pedagogy: a review
          of the research literature. ICT in Schools Research and Evaluation Series, 18. London: DfES/BECTA.
DeBoer, G. E. (1991). A history of ideas in science education. New York: Teachers College Press.
De Meyer, I. (2008). Science competencies for the future in Flanders. The first results from PISA 2006. Ghent:
          OECD.
European    Commission.(2008).     Flash    Eurobarometer:       Young   people  and  science:  analytical report,  from
          http://ec.europa.eu/public_opinion/flash/fl_239_en.pdf
Flemish Governmental enquiry (2005). Say what you want...about sciences, from
          http://ewi-vlaanderen.be/documenten/rapport_resultaten_enquete.pdf
Galili, I. (1996). Students' conceptual change in geometrical optics. International Journal of Science Education,
          18, 847­869.
Gillies, R.M. (2003). Structuring cooperative group work in classrooms. International Journal of Educational
          Research, 39, 35-49.
Kyle, W. C., Jr., et al. (1985). What research says: Science through discovery: students love it. Science and
          Children, 23(2), 39-41.

                                                      740   ·  © ISLS
                                               ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

Lazonder,   A.  W.  (2003).  Principles for   designing   web searching   instruction. Education  and Information
         Technologies, 8, 179-193.
Lindberg, D. H. (1990). What goes 'round comes 'round doing science. Childhood Education, 67(2), 79-81.
Lou, Y., Abrami, P.C., & d'Appolonia, S. (2001). Small group and individual learning with technology: a meta-
         analysis. Review of Educational Research, 71(3), 449-521.
Mullis, I.V.S., Martin, M.O., Gonzalez, E.J., & Chrostowski, S.J. (2004), Chestnut Hill, MA: TIMSS & PIRLS
         International Study Center, Boston College.
Nichols, J.D. & Miller, R.B. (1994). Cooperative Learning and Student Motivation. Contemporary Educational
         Psychology, 19, 167-178.
Nichols, J.D. (1996). The Effects of Cooperative Learning on Student Achievement and Motivation in a High
         School Geometry Class. Contemporary Educational Psychology, 21, 467-476.
Osborne, M., & Freyberg, P. (1985). Learning in science: Implications of children's knowledge. Auckland, New
         Zealand: Heinemann.
Peters, V. L., & Slotta, J. D. (2009). Co-designing curricula to promote collaborative knowledge construction in
         secondary   school  science.  Proceedings of  the  9th international conference  on  Computer   supported
         collaborative learning - Volume 1, Rhodes, Greece.
Rakow, S. J. (1986). Teaching science as inquiry. Fastback 246. Bloomington, IN: Phi Delta Kappa Educational
         Foundation.
Reiser, B.  J., Tabak, I., Sandoval,   W. A., Smith,   B. K., Steinmuller, F.,  & Leone,   A. J. (2001).  BGuiLE:
         Strategic and conceptual scaffolds for scientific inquiry in biology classrooms. In S. M. Carver & D.
         Klahr (Eds.), Cognition and instruction: Twenty-five years of progress (pp. 263-305). Mahwah, NJ:
         Erlbaum.
Sedeno,  E.  P., Balmaseda,   I. S.,  Suarez, M. J. M.,   &   Dauder,  S. G.  (2008).  Perception of  Science and
         Technology in teenage students from Madrid. Arbor-Ciencia Pensamiento Y Cultura, 184(733), 949-
         966.
Slotta, J. D. (2004). Web-Based Inquiry Science Environment. In M. C. Linn, E. A. Davis & P. Bell (Eds.).
         Internet  Environments    for  Science  Education    (pp. 203-231).  Mahwah,     NJ: Lawrence    Erlbaum
         Associates.
Slotta, J. D., & Linn, M. (2009). WISE Science: Web-Based Inquiry in the Classroom. New York: Teachers
         College Press.
Springer, L., Stanne, M. & Donovan, S. (1999). Effects of small-group learning on undergraduates in science,
         mathematics, engineering, and technology: A meta-analysis. Review of Educational Research, 69, 21-
         51.
Stark,  R., &   Gray,  D.  (1999). Gender   preferences   in  learning science. International Journal  of Science
         Education, 21(6), 633­643.
Stevens, R.J. & Slavin, R.E. (1995). The Cooperative Elementary School: Effects on Students' Achievement,
         Attitudes and Social Relations. American Educational Research Journal, 32, 321-352.
Tondeur, J., van Braak, J., & Valcke, M. (2007). Towards a typology of computer use in primary education.
         Journal for Computer Assisted Learning, 23(3), 197-206.
van Joolingen, W. R., de Jong, T., Lazonder, A. W., Savelsbergh, E., & Manlove, S. (2005). Co-Lab: Research
         and development of an on-line learning environment for collaborative scientific discovery learning.
         Computers in Human Behavior, 21, 671-688.
Wallace, R. M., Kupperman, J., Krajcik, J., & Soloway, E. (2000). Science on the web: Students online in a
         sixth-grade classroom. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 9(1), 75-104.
Woodgate, D. & Stanton Fraser, D. (2007). Workshop of Emerging Technologies for Inquiry-Based Learning in
         Science. Supplementary Proceedings of the 13th International Conference of Artificial Intelligence in
         Education, from http://aied.inf.ed.ac.uk/AIED2007/InquiryBasedLearning.pdf

                                                   741  ·  © ISLS
