                                                 ICLS 2010   ·   Volume 1

          Reconceptualizing Mathematical Learning Disabilities: A
                                         Diagnostic Case Study
                   Katherine E. Lewis, University of California, Berkeley, kelewis@berkeley.edu

          Abstract: Mathematical learning disabilities (MLDs) research aims to define, diagnose, and
          remediate  the cognitive   impairments   that   characterize MLDs.        Unfortunately little progress
          has been made towards these goals, because of unresolved methodological issues involved in
          distinguishing general low math achievement from low math achievement due to MLDs.                 To
          address these methodological issues, I conducted a small-scale exploratory study of MLD,
          which relied on several data sources to ensure that a student's low achievement was due to
          persistent and debilitating    difficulties with   mathematics    that cannot be  attributed  to  non-
          cognitive  sources.  I  conducted  four  weekly    video-taped  one-on-one    tutoring sessions   with
          students focused on the topic of fractions.     In this paper I present a case study of one student
          with MLD.    Analysis indicated that the student understood mathematical representations of
          fractional quantity in atypical ways and this alternative understanding was problematic for the
          development of more advanced fraction concepts.

Introduction
Lisa counts on her fingers to solve addition problems, cannot add fractions, and has just failed an arithmetic
course.  Lisa is a 19-year-old college   student. Despite  her best efforts and years of tutoring, she has not   mastered
elementary   mathematics.   Unfortunately,   research   on   mathematical    learning  disabilities (MLDs)   offers little
insight to help understand why students, like Lisa, experience persistent, pervasive, and debilitating difficulties
with mathematics. How are the difficulties experienced by students with MLD qualitatively different than those
experienced by all students? What are the sources of the student's difficulties? How can researchers distinguish
students  with MLDs      from   students  with low    mathematics    achievement?     These  difficult questions   remain
unanswered and are the focus of this exploratory study.
          Research on MLD is in its infancy, as compared to research on more general learning disabilities
(Fletcher, Lyon, Fuchs, & Barnes, 2008; Mazzocco 2007). Learning disability research has traditionally focused
on language-based learning problems, which involve difficulties with processing phonemes (the smallest unit of
sound), and therefore provides little insight into the cognitive difficulties students experience in mathematics
(Fletcher et al., 2008).    MLDs are typically understood as core cognitive deficits, which result in a student's
failure to learn or remember mathematical procedures or concepts (Geary, 2004).             However, there is currently
no consensus operational definition of MLDs and no diagnostic instruments available to accurately identify
students with  MLDs (Murphy, Mazzocco,       Hanich,    &  Early, 2007).   Consequently, researchers rely on    low math
achievement   test  scores  to  classify students, which   does   not  address   the myriad  reasons,  besides   MLDs, a
student could have performed poorly on the test.        Given the definitional and methodological issues hindering
this field, I adopt an alternative theoretical and methodological approach to the study of MLDs.
          In my    research I  adopt  a  difference,  rather than  deficit, understanding   of   disability and   leverage
advances made in language-based learning disability research for both subject identification and analytic foci. I
ensure that the students, not only meet the low-achievement criteria established by other researchers, but that the
student's low-achievement      is likely due to  a    cognitive rather than  environmental   factor. I  define  MLD   by
building upon innovative subject classification methodologies used in learning disability research, which require
that students  demonstrate     (1) low   achievement    (for   my  purposes,     in mathematics),  (2)  no   evidence of
confounding factors explaining that low achievement, and (3) failure to respond to an instructional intervention
(Fletcher et al., 2008).    In this case study, I conducted a detailed qualitative analysis of one student as she
engaged in the process of learning over several tutoring sessions with a particular focus on the student's ability
to conceptualize,    represent,  and work   with   numbers,   specifically  fractions. Just as the capacity   to  process
phonemes is fundamental to reading competency, numbers are the fundamental building block of mathematics
(Dehaene 1997, Landerl, Bevan & Butterworth, 2004).            Numbers, or quantities, get represented in a variety of
modalities (e.g., orally: "three-fourths", numerically "3/4", and graphically: area model for 3/4, see Figure 1).
Fluency with these representational systems is a crucial part of what it means to do and understand mathematics
(Ball, 1993; Lesh, Post, & Behr, 1987; NCTM Principles and Standards, 2000). This suggests that students'
fluency with number, quantity, and representations is a crucial component of mathematical development and a
productive analytic lens through which to explore MLDs.

                                     Figure 1. Area model representation of 3/4.

                                                      742  ·  © ISLS
                                                ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

        This   exploratory  case   study focuses  on  identifying   characteristics of MLDs.       I conducted detailed
diagnostic  analyses   of tutoring sessions   focusing   on the   difficulties the student  experienced,  the   kinds  of
atypical understandings she demonstrated, and her use of representations. This research addresses the following
questions:
        1)     What is the nature of the student's difficulties during the tutoring sessions?
        2)     What are the characteristics of the student's atypical understanding of mathematical concepts
               over the course of the tutoring sessions?
        3)     How does the student use and understand mathematical representations?
Analysis indicated that the student experiences persistent difficulties with fraction equivalence and operations.
Additionally, the student demonstrated atypical understandingsof representations of fractional quantity, which
hindered her ability to make sense of more complex fraction concepts.

Prior Research on Mathematical Learning Disabilities
Prior research on MLDs has made limited progress towards understanding this complex phenomenon due to a
lack of a consensus definition for what constitutes a MLD.         Currently, it is a widely accepted practice to use
achievement test scores below a given cut-off (typically the 25th percentile) to identify students with MLDs
(Murphy et al., 2007; Geary, 2004).     Various critiques of this approach have been identified.      The cut-off score
used is arbitrarily selected (Francis et al., 2005), and can range from the 8th percentile to the 46th percentile for
studies of MLDs (Gersten, Clarke, & Mazzocco, 2007; Swanson & Jerman, 2006). This has led to variability in
the profile of students   classified as  having   MLDs,   suggesting    researchers  are  not  all  studying a  common
phenomenon (Murphy et al., 2007).       In addition, researchers rarely attempt to control for factors that are well-
established as correlated with low-achievement.      Hanich, Jordan, Kaplan, and Dick (2001) report that studies of
MLDs have an over-representation of minority, poor, and non-native English speaking students in the MLD
group.  This   signifies  that the proxy   of low achievement      does not    adequately   address the complex    social
components at play in the operational definition of MLDs. Given the lack of adequate subject identification
methods, it can be argued that researchers are studying general characteristics of low math achievement rather
than MLDs.   To address this methodological hurdle, I propose adopting an alternative theoretical perspective
and methodological approach.

Theoretical Approach
Rather than    adopting   the  traditional conceptualization    of  MLDs    as   cognitive  deficits (Geary,    2004),  I
conceptualize MLDs in terms of cognitive difference.        A deficit understanding of MLDs orients researchers to
identifying the ways in which a group of students classified as having MLDs are in some way deficient when
compared to a typically achieving group.      Therefore, any statistically significant group difference is assumed to
be consequential and indicative of the students' MLDs. In contrast, a difference understanding of MLDs orients
researchers to identifying the nature of the individual student's qualitative differences. Instead of asking: "by
how  much   is the  MLD    group   deficient?"  this  approach    asks: "what   differences   are  consequential   for an
individual  with  a MLD    and   how  are  they  consequential?"      Recent   MLD   research   supports  the   idea that
qualitative differences exhibited by students with MLDs may ultimately be the key to differentiating these
learning disabilities from low math achievement (Mazzocco, Devlin, & McKenney, 2008).               Therefore, I adopt a
difference  model   of MLDs,    building   on a Vygotskian    perspective  of   disability, in which  a student  with   a
disability "is not simply a child less developed than his peers but is a child who has developed differently"
(Vygotsky, Knox, Stevens, Rieber, & Carton, 1993 p. 30). I argue that the nature of a student's disability is
revealed through an analysis of qualitative differences in how the student is reasoning over time, rather than in a
quantification of deficits in knowledge measured at one pointin time.

Fractions
For a number of reasons, fractions provide a mathematically rich terrain to explore how students with MLDs
make sense of mathematical concepts. First, MLDs research to date has focused almost exclusively on students'
difficulties remembering math facts (e.g., 4+5=9; Gersten, Jordan, & Flojo, 2005; Swanson & Jerman, 2006).
Equating MLDs with difficulty learning math facts reduces mathematical cognition to efficient and accurate
production of an answer. This finding does little to explain the range of difficulties students may have across the
variety of mathematical domains (Dowker, 2005; Geary, 2005).            Second, the kinds of difficulties that typically
achieving  students  experience    when  learning fraction    concepts  have   been extensively    documented   in math
cognition  research  (see  Lamon,    2007   for a review).     It  is therefore  possible   to classify the  difficulties
demonstrated   by students  with   MLDs    as typical or  atypical.   Considering   MLDs    in the  context  of fractions
allows for the exploration of procedural, conceptual, and representational difficulties that students with a MLD
may experience in this more complex mathematical domain.

                                                     743  ·  © ISLS
                                                 ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

Methods
This case study was drawn from a larger study that involved an extensive subject recruitment and classification
process to ensure that each student's mathematical difficulties were due to an MLD and not other factors. Low
achievement in math was considered a necessary but not a sufficient criterion for a MLD classification.             In
addition, subjects classified as having MLDs did not exhibit any evidence of other factors that could explain
their low achievement and when given a sufficient instructional intervention, the student failed to show learning
gains. Figure 2 provides an overview of each phase of this project including: initial recruitment, data collection,
subject classification, and diagnostic analysis.  Each will be discussed in turn.

                                   Figure 2. Overview of the design of the study.

Initial Recruitment
Subjects were recruited from several school sites, including: a public middle school, a private high school, and a
community college. Math teachers from these schools were asked to identify students who they believe may
have a   MLD.   For  those   students identified, only   students  who  met  the  canonical  MLDs   low-achievement
qualification (scoring  below  the 25th  percentile on  their most  recent  math    achievement  test) were invited to
participate in the study.

Data Collection

Student Interview
A 30-minute interview was conducted with the student before the administration of the pretest.          The interview
questions attempted to elicit the student's characterization of his/her difficulties (e.g., what about learning math
is hard  for you?), perceived  level  of  effort (e.g., do  you  tend to  complete   all your math  homework?)      and
available resources (e.g., what do you do when you don't know how to answer a math problem?)

Pretest / Posttest
A  videotaped  semi-structured   clinical interview-style   pretest and   identical posttest was  administered   to all
subjects.  The assessment was designed to cover all fraction concepts targeted in the tutoring sequence (see
Table 1 for exemplar problems).    The pretest was administered the week before the commencement of tutoring
sessions and the posttest was administered the week following the completion of the tutoring sessions.            The
student's answers and explanations were scored according to a rubric and total scores were calculated for each
of the target concepts.

Tutoring Sessions
Four hour-long  weekly    videotaped  tutoring   sessions   were  conducted  with   the subjects focusing  on  fraction
concepts.    These  sessions were  designed   based  on    prior research on the    teaching and  learning  of fraction
concepts and have been piloted and refined.      In each session a sequence of problems was posed to the student,
each problem   was  intended  to build   upon prior  problems     and provoke conversations    about   important math
content.  Table 1 provides details of the targeted concepts and exemplar problems from the pretest/posttest and
tutoring session problems.   Each of the problems had    follow-up questions and/or counter suggestions. To refine
the tutoring protocol (pretest, tutoring sequence, and posttest), it was administered to fifth-grade students with
no learning difficulties.  The fifth-grade students demonstrated substantial gains from pretest to posttest and
therefore, this instructional tutoring sequence was considered to be an adequate learning environment.

                                                    744   ·  © ISLS
                                                         ICLS 2010  ·       Volume 1

Table 1: Target fraction concepts, exemplar problems from pretest/posttest and tutoring sessions, and references
for related research.

Concept          Details                      Exemplar Pretest/Posttest            Exemplar Tutoring                  Related Research
                                              Problem                              Session Problem
Fraction          A fraction represents a      Can you circle the pictures that    Without writing down any            Ball (1993)
Representation    single number rather         you think are the same as 1/2?      numbers can, you draw a             Lesh et al. (1987)
and               than two independent         [representations include number     picture of 3/4 so that other        Mack (1990)
Interpretation    numbers, which involves      lines, discrete pieces, area        people would know that it's a       Post et al. (1985)
                  determining the number       models.  Both 1/2 and equivalent    picture of 3/4?                     Behr et al. (1992)
                  of equal parts of a unit     fractions (e.g. 2/4) are included                                       Saxe et al. (2005)
                  out of the total number      along with common student
                  of equal parts.              errors.]
Fraction          Fraction size depends on     Which is bigger or are they         Put these cards in order from       Armstrong & Larson
Comparison        relationship between         equal?                              least to greatest.  (Card values:   (1995)
                  two numbers.                 [2 area models are presented        0, 1/1000, 1/2, 2/3, 8/12, 9/10,    Post et al., (1985)
                                               based on Armstrong & Larson]        7/7, 1, 1 2/5, 3/2)
Equivalent        Many different fraction      Can you come up with a fraction     Using a whole sheet of paper,       Lamon (1996)
Fractions         names designate the          equivalent to: !, 1/3, 2/5, 8/12?   draw 2/3 of a cake.  Figure out     Lamon (2006)
                  same amount                                                      how you can cut the cake            Lamon (2007)
                                                                                   again so you still have even        Post et al. (1985)
                                                                                   pieces. What has change and         Ni (2001)
                                                                                   what has stayed the same?           Kamii & Clark(1995)
Fraction          Addition and subtraction     1/2+1/4=                            1/2+1/3 =                           Mack (1992)
Addition          of fractions requires                                            How would you solve this            Steffe (2003)
                  common denominators                                              problem using pictures?

Classroom Observations
Classroom observations were conducted concurrently with the tutoring sessions. Field notes documented any
evidence of the student's attention or behavior issues, level of effort, and performance relative to peers.                                This
was an exclusionary data source intended to capture evidence of students who have non-cognitive issues, which
could explain their poor performance.

Subject Classification
Several data sources were drawn upon to determine if the student's low achievement could be explained by
other factors. Those factors highly correlated with low math achievement were considered confounding factors
for the   purposes   of   this    study.    These  included:     attention      or behavior  problems,      lack     of English      fluency,
insufficient    resources,   math       anxiety   (Ashcraft,  Krause,        &    Hopko,   2007;       Chatterji,    2005;    Diversity     in
Mathematics Education, 2007; Zentall, 2007).               Classroom observations, interviews, and the videotaped pretest,
tutoring   sessions,     and  posttest     were   used   to determine        if   any  students       exhibited   or   reported    potential
confounding factors.      I do not assume that MLD cannot co-occur with these factors, but that disentangling the
effect of the confounding factor from the effect of MLD is beyond the scope of this study, and therefore any
students demonstrating these factors were excluded. The goal was not to identify allstudents with MLDs, but to
ensure that all students included in the larger study had an MLD. In addition, this tutoring protocol attempts to
rule out the possibility that the student's history of low-achievement was simply due to poor instruction.                            If the
student did show gains from pretest to posttest, it suggests that prior instruction may have been insufficient and
an  underlying    cause   of the   student's    low    achievement.         Conversely, if   the   student did    not   show   gains      from
pretest   to   posttest, this     suggests   that poor    instruction       was  not  the  primary       cause   of   the  student's       low
achievement and indicates that the student likely has an MLD. For example, Figure 3 displays a comparison of
a fifth grade student's pretest-posttest change as compared to that of a community college case study student
(Lisa), who I classify as having a MLD. The contrast between the student's scores (as measured by slope from
pretest to posttest) is striking, providing strong substantiation of an MLD classification for Lisa.

Figure 3. Comparison of a pretest/posttest scores for a typically-achieving fifth grade student and a community
                                        college student who is classified a having a MLD.

                                                             745  ·  © ISLS
                                                   ICLS 2010    ·  Volume 1

Diagnostic Analytic Approach
All videotapes of the sessions (pretest, tutoring sequence, and posttest) were transcribed and all student work
was scanned.    A microgenetic bottom-up analysis of the whole data corpus for each student was conducted (see
Schoenfeld, Smith, & Arcavi, 1993, for an example of this kind of analysis applied to graphing).                  This kind of
analysis involved iterative passes through the data in an attempt to generate analytic categories that capture the
nature   of  the    student's   understanding     (including      difficulties,  atypical    understandings,     and   uses  of
representations). The generation and refinement of the analytic categories involved a process of compiling the
instances   of  a proposed    kind   of understanding,     specifying    inclusion   and   exclusion   criteria, generating   a
hypothesis about the understanding, and returning to the entire data corpus (both transcripts and videos) to
support  or  reject the  hypothesis.    Analysis    focused     on identifying   the   kinds  of   student understanding    that
resulted  in   difficulties or  appeared    to  be  consequential     for   how    the student   was  making     sense  of  the
mathematics. Some of these student understandings were well documented as common problems in the math
cognition   literature (e.g., thinking   that  1/100 is  larger    than  1/10   because   100   is larger  than  10)  and  were
therefore not the focus of my analysis. The rationale for focusing on these atypical understandings was an
attempt to evaluate what, beyond the canonical difficulties, resulted in the student's failure to learn during the
tutoring sessions.

Results
The focal case study subject, Lisa, was considered to have a MLD because she exhibits low achievement, which
was not attributable to other factors, and because she failed to respond to the tutoring instruction.            Lisa had just
completed her first year of community college, and her math achievement test score was in the lowest 25th
percentile.  Interviews  and   observations revealed     that there  were no   identifiable confounding    factors;  Lisa was a
white upper-middle class, native English speaker with no attention or behavior problems. Lisa's overall score
did not improve from prettest to posttest, and for some fraction topics, her score was lower at the time of the
posttest (see Figure 3).

Diagnostic Analysis
Why does Lisa fail to learn from the tutoring sessions?              A detailed analysis of all sessions (pretest, tutoring
sessions, and posttest) indicates that Lisa experienced difficulties with comparing fractions, adding fractions,
and generating equivalent fractions throughout all of the sessions including the posttest.              Her understanding of
fractional  quantity   appeared  to  be  unstable,  in   that she    operated   on  representations  of    fractions as if they
represented a partitioning or removal activity as opposed to a fractional quantity. This alternative understanding
of fraction representations appears to derail Lisa's ability to build an understanding of fraction equivalence,
comparisons, and operations.
          A detailed   analysis of Lisa's use and understanding       of area model representations was      conducted.    Area
models are a common pedagogical representation for fractions, in which a shape is partitioned into evenly-sized
pieces corresponding to the denominator, and then the number of pieces corresponding to the numerator is
shaded.   For example, an area model for 7/12 would be drawn by partitioning a shape into 12 even pieces and
then shading 7 of those pieces.     Lisa, however, understood area models as if they signified an action as opposed
to a quantity.    This  understanding      has two  primary     manifestations.    First, the shading   of  area  models    was
understood   as the amount    taken away,   rather than indicative    of the fractional   quantity. Second, Lisa     understood
"one-half"   as an  action   of halving    rather than   the  quantity   of 1/2.    These  understandings    were    considered
atypical because they have not been documented in the math cognition literature, and were not experienced by
any of the fifth-grade subjects used to validate the tutoring protocol.          In addition, this alternative understanding
proved to be highly consequential for the student's ability to make sense of more complex fraction concepts.

Understanding Area Models as Representing an Amount "Gone"
Lisa understood the shading of area models as the amount removed, rather than indicative of the fractional
quantity.    Lisa's  focus   on  the removal      action as   opposed    to  quantity   led  to  inconsistently  between    her
construction   and  interpretation   of area   model representations.       In  the following    example,   she  was  asked  to
compare the fractions 7/12 and 1/2.        She correctly constructed a drawing of 7/12 by partitioning the shape into
12 pieces and shading 7 of those pieces.       However, she incorrectly determined that 7/12 is smaller than 1/2 and
when I asked her to explain she referred to the shaded pieces as "gone" and began attending to the five pieces
"left."

                                        a)                        b)
Figure 4. Reproduction of the student's drawing of 7/12, in which she (a) partitioned a shape into 12 pieces, and
                                             then (b) colored 7 of the pieces.

                                                       746    ·  © ISLS
                                                  ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

 L: I mean, ok, so let's say that this is the cake (gestures back and forth over entire shape­ Figure 4b) and
 seven pieces are gone (makes sweeping motion over the shaded pieces of the shape).
...
 K: Which one do I have more for?
 L: Um.    The half.

        Although she drew a canonical area model (using shading to represent the numerator) she subsequently
interpreted the shaded   region   of  area  models    as  being   "gone".   This disconnection      between   her  correct
construction and   incorrect    interpretation was    not easily  remediated   and persisted      throughout  the  tutoring
sessions to the posttest. I argue that, for Lisa, the shading represented the action of removal rather than the
fractional quantity. In this example, her ability to make sense of the fraction comparison task was compromised
by  her atypical   conception    of  the   mathematical     representation.   Throughout      the tutoring sessions,   this
understanding   of   fractional representations    in terms    of action  appeared     to  be highly  consequential    and
detrimental to her ability to build a more complete understanding of fraction equivalence, fraction comparison,
and fraction addition.

Understanding "one-half" as Partitioning Rather Than a Quantity
Lisa often represented the fraction one-half as a partition rather than a quantity. For example, in the posttest she
drew one-half by "halving" the shapes but not by designating a quantity of one-half (see Figure 5).           When asked
about what part of the drawing was one-half, she pointed to or redrew the line darker.

        Figure 5. The written work of the student's answer to the posttest item "draw or write one-half".

        This action orientation to area model representations of quantity appeared to be consequential to her
inability to develop a robust understanding of equivalent fraction and fraction addition concepts. For example,
at the end of one tutoring session she was attempting to write in her journal about what she had learned.          During
the tutoring session she had been correctly generating equivalent fractions by repartitioning area models (see
Figure 6).
                                       Draw area model of         Repartition shape to
                                          given fraction        create equivalent fraction

                                                12           =           36
        Figure 6. Illustration of the process used to create equivalent fractions during the tutoring session.

        Although     she had    been successfully   using    area models   to create   equivalent   fractions   during this
session, when she attempted to summarize what she had learned with an example, she incorrectly determined
that 1/2 equaled 1/6.  She began by drawing a square and partitioning it into two pieces (without shading).            She
then added two new horizontal partitions.       However, because her drawing did not involve shading of 1/2, she
incorrectly determined that 1/2 was equivalent to 1/6.
                                               a)                      b)

                                                      12       =               16
    Figure 7. Recreation of Lisa's attempt to construct an equivalent fraction for 1/2 which omitted shading.

   L: Ok, so like, what we were doing, if you have like one-half (draws shape and draws vertical line, see
      Figure 7a), and then   like, cut it like that, (draws partitions, see figure 7b) it still stays the same. It is just
      cut into different sections then.
   K: So, how many sections is it cut into?

                                                      747  ·  © ISLS
                                                   ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

  L: Six.    So one-sixth?

          After representing    1/2 as the    partitioning line  rather  than by shading   one-half    of  the shape,   she
produced a repartitioned area model with no shading.         She correctly determined that the shape was divided into
six pieces and guessed that the equivalent fraction for 1/2 was 1/6. This recording of an example, intended to be
the culminating activity for this tutoring session, was undermined by her unconventional representation of one-
half as a partition rather than a quantity. Lisa's answers and gestures throughout the tutoring sessions suggested
that she understood one-half to be represented by the act of partitioning rather than a resulting quantity. Lisa's
understanding of both the shaded region as signifying an amount taken away and her understanding of one-half
as a partition, involved what proved to be a detrimental orientation to the area model representation asaction
rather than a quantity.

Conclusion
Lisa's atypical   understanding,  representation,    and   manipulation   of quantities appeared    to be  a   fundamental
source of  her  difficulties, which  interfered    with her  ability  to develop   a foundational   fraction   concepts  of
equivalence and fraction operations.    The two primary manifestations: understanding shading as taken away and
understanding one-half as a partition as opposed to a quantity, have appeared in two other students in the larger
study who are classified as having MLD.         This suggests that the atypical understanding of representations of
quantities may be a powerful finding and a productive avenue to consider in the design of diagnostic tools.
Given this kind of diagnostic understanding of a student's difficulties, it is possible to begin designing and
testing remediation tools, which help the student compensate for these difficulties.This case study explored the
nature of MLDs, by identifying the kinds of problems a student with an MLD exhibits beyond the canonical
problems   typically   experienced   by    students when     learning mathematics.    Future  work   should    attempt   to
capitalize on the existence of these kinds of qualitative differences exhibited by students with MLD, rather than
relying upon math achievement tests for classificatory purposes. Ultimately the goal of MLD research should
not be to label students and classify their deficiencies, but to understand their differences and help them learn to
compensate.

References

Armstrong,    B., &   Larson,  C. N.   (1995).  Students'    use of part-whole   and  direct comparison      strategies for
          comparing partitioned rectangles. Journal for Research in Mathematics Education, 26(1), 2-19.
Ashcraft, M. H., Krause, J. A., & Hopko, D. R. (2007). Is math anxiety a mathematical learning disability? In D.
          B. Berch & M. M. M. Mazzocco (Eds.), Why is Math So Hard for Some Children?: The Nature and
          Origins  of  Mathematical    Learning     Difficulties and  Disabilities (pp. 329-348).    Baltimore:   Paul   H
          Brookes.
Ball, D. L. (1993).    Halves, pieces, and twoths: Constructing and using representational contexts in teaching
          fractions.  In T. P. Carpenter, E. Fennema, & T.A. Romberg (Eds.), Rational numbers: An integration
          of research (pp. 157-195).   Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Behr, M. J., Harel, G., Post, T., Lesh, R. (1992). Rational number, ratio, and proportion. In D. Grouws (Ed.),
          Handbook of research on mathematics teaching and learning (pp. 296-333). New York: Macmillan
          Publishing.
Chatterji, M. (2005). Achievement gaps and correlates of early mathematics achievement: Evidence from the
          ECLS K­first grade sample. Education Policy Analysis Archives, 13(46).
Diversity in Mathematics Education (DiME) Center for Learning and Teaching (2007).                  Culture, race, power,
          and mathematics education.       In   F. K. Lester  (Ed.)  Second   Handbook   of  Research     on Mathematics
          Teaching    and Learning (pp. 405-434).    Charlotte, NC: Information Age Publishing, Inc.
Dowker, A. (2005). Early Identification and Intervention for Students With Mathematics Difficulties.Journal of
          learning disabilities, 38(4), 324-332.
Fletcher, J. M.,  Lyon,  G. R., Fuchs,  L.  S., Barnes,  M.  A.  (2007).  Learning   disabilities: From   Identification to
          intervention. New York, NY, US: Guilford Press.
Geary, D.C. (2004).    Mathematics and learning disabilities.     Journal of Learning Disabilities, 37, 4-15.
Geary, D. C. (2005). Role of Cognitive Theory in the Study of Learning Disability in Mathematics.Journal of
          learning disabilities, 38(4), 305-307.
Gersten,  R.,   Clarke, B.,   & Mazzocco,       M.  M.  M.   (2007).  Historical and    Contemporary      Perspectives   on
          Mathematical Learning Disabilities. In D. B. Berch & M. M. M. Mazzocco (Eds.), Why is Math So
          Hard    for Some    Children?:   The   Nature   and    Origins  of Mathematical    Learning     Difficulties  and
          Disabilities (pp. 7-27). Baltimore: Paul H Brookes.
Gersten,  R., Jordan,   N. C.,  &   Flojo, J. R.   (2005). Early  Identification and  Interventions    for Students    With
          Mathematics Difficulties. Journal of learning disabilities, 38(4), 293-304.

                                                      748  ·   © ISLS
                                                ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

Hanich, L.   B., Jordan,  N.  C.,   Kaplan,  D.,   & Dick,    J.  (2001).  Performance     Across   Different Areas    of
        Mathematical Cognition in Children With Learning Difficulties. Journal of educational psychology,
        93(3), 615-626.
Kamii,  C., &  Clark,  F. B.  (1995).  Equivalent   fractions:    Their difficulty  and educational   implications. The
        Journal of Mathematical Behavior, 14(4), 365-378.
Landerl, K., Bevan, A., & Butterworth, B. (2004).       Developmental dyscalculia and basic numerical capacities:
        A study of 8-9-year-old students.   Cognition, 93(2).     99-125.
Lamon, S. J. (1996). The development of unitizing: Its role in children's partitioning strategies. Journal for
        Research in Mathematics Education, 27(2), 170-193.
Lamon,  S.  J. (2006).    Teaching  fractions and    ratios   for understanding:     Essential content   knowledge  and
        instructional strategies for teachers (2nd ed.).    Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Lamon,  S.  J. (2007).   Rational numbers    and   proportional    reasoning: Toward     a   theoretical framework     for
        research.   In F.K. Lester, Jr. (Ed.) Second handbook of research on mathematics teaching and learning
        (pp. 629-668). Charlotte, NC: Information Age Pub Inc.
Lesh, R., Post, T., Behr, M. (1987). Representations and translations among representations in mathematics
        learning and problem solving. In C. Janvier (Ed.), Problems of representation in the teaching and
        learning of mathematics (pp. 33-40). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Mack,  N.   (1990).   Learning  fractions  with  understanding:    Building   on    informal knowledge.    Journal     for
        Research in Mathematics Education, 21, 16-32.
Mazzocco,   M. M.   M. (2007). Defining and  differentiating   mathematical   learning disabilities and  difficulties. In
        D. B. Berch, & M. M. M. Mazzocco (Eds.) Why is math so hard for some children?: The nature and
        origins  of  mathematical   learning  difficulties  and   disabilities (pp.  29-48).   Baltimore,  MD:  Paul   H
        Brookes Publishing.
Mazzocco, M.M.M., Devlin, K.T. & McKenney, S. J. (2008).             Is it a Fact? Timed Arithmetic Performance of
        Children    With  Mathematical    Learning   Disabilities  (MLD)    Varies   as  a Function   of  How  MLD     is
        Defined', Developmental Neuropsychology, 33:3, 318-344.
Murphy MM, Mazzocco MMM, Hanich L, & Early MC. (2007). Cognitive characteristics of children with
        mathematics learning disability (MLD) vary as a function of the cut-off criterion used to define MLD.
        Journal of Learning Disabilities. 40:458-478
National Council of Teachers of Mathematics. (2000). Principles and standards for school mathematics. Reston,
        VA: Author.
Ni, Y. (2001). Semantic domains of rational numbers and the acquisition of fraction equivalence. Contemporary
        Educational Psychology, 26(3), 400-417.
Post, T. R., Wachsmuth, I., Lesh, R., & Behr, M. J. (1985). Order and equivalence of rational numbers: A
        cognitive analysis. Journal for Research in Mathematics Education, 16(1), 18-36.
Saxe, G. B., Taylor, E. V., McIntosh, C., & Gearhart, M. (2005). Representing fractions with standard notation:
        A developmental analysis. Journal for Research in Mathematics Education, 36(2), 137-157.
Schoenfeld,  A.  H.,  Smith, J. P., Arcavi,  A.  (1993).    Learning:   The  microgenetic    analysis  of one  student's
        evolving    understanding   of a   complex   subject   matter   domain.      In R.   Glaser (Ed)   Advances    in
        Instructional Psychology.    Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Steffe, L. P. (2003). Fractional commensurate, composition, and adding schemes learning trajectories of Jason
        and    Laura: Grade  5. The   Journal   of Mathematical     Behavior.  Special   Issue:  Fractions,   Ratio and
        Proportional Reasoning, Part B, 22(3), 237-295.
Swanson, H, L. (2007). Cognitive Aspects of Math Disabilities. In D. B. Berch, & M. M. M. Mazzocco (Eds.)
        Why is math so hard for some children?: The nature and origins of mathematical learning difficulties
        and disabilities (pp. 133-146).   Baltimore, MD: Paul H Brookes Publishing.
Swanson, H. L., & Jerman, O. (2006). Math Disabilities: A Selective Meta-analysis of the Literature. Review of
        Educational Research, 76(2), 249-274.
Vygotsky, L. S., Knox, J. E., Stevens, C. B., Rieber, R. W., & Carton, A. S. (1993).The collected works of L. S.
        Vygotsky, Vol. 2: The fundamentals of defectology (abnormal psychology and learning disabilities).
        New York, NY, US: Plenum Press.
Zentall, S. S. (2007). Math performance of students with ADHD: Cognitive and behavioral contributors and
        interventions. In D. B. Berch & M. M. M. Mazzocco (Eds.), Why is Math So Hard for Some Children?:
        The    Nature  and   Origins   of Mathematical     Learning     Difficulties and   Disabilities (pp.  219-244).
        Baltimore: Paul H Brookes.

Acknowledgments
The research reported here was supported by the Institute of Education Sciences, U.S. Department of Education
pre-doctoral training grant R305B090026 to the University of California, Berkeley. The opinions expressed are
those of the author and do not represent views of the Institute or the U.S. Department of Education.

                                                    749  ·  © ISLS
