                                                ICLS 2010    Volume 1

   Students' Use of Multiple Strategies for Spatial Problem Solving
                                    Mike Stieff, Minjung Ryu, Bonnie Dixon
                             University of Maryland-College Park, College Park, MD
                             mstieff@umd.edu, mryu@umd.edu, bdixon1@umd.edu

         Abstract: In scientific problem solving, spatial thinking is critical for reasoning about spatial
         relationships in three-dimensions and representing spatial information in diagrams. Despite
         the importance of spatial thinking, little is known about the underlying cognitive components
         of spatial thinking and the strategies that students employ to solve spatial problems. Namely,
         it is unclear whether students employ imagistic reasoning strategies while engaged in spatial
         thinking. In the present study, we investigate which strategies students use to solve spatial
         chemistry problems and the relationships between strategy choice, achievement, spatial ability
         and sex. The results indicate that students employ multiple strategies that include the use of
         diagrams  and   heuristics rather than  merely   relying  on  imagistic  reasoning. Moreover   we
         observed women to employ strategies differently than men after extended instruction in the
         domain.

Objectives & Theoretical Framework
A recent report from the National Research Council (2006) identifies spatial thinking as a critical component of
scientific problem solving and reasoning and advocates for training spatial thinking in the science classroom.
Such a call is consistent with the content of science instruction, which often requires students to reason about
the three-dimensional relationships of objects and phenomena that are of interest to scientists. For example,
chemistry students must learn about the three-dimensional structure of molecules, physics students must learn
about the trajectory of projectiles and geology students must learn how geological structures transform over
time. Given  the prevalence    of spatial thinking across    the sciences, several  researchers have suggested   that
student aptitude for spatial thinking, as measured by spatial ability psychometrics, predicts their success in
science classrooms (Pallrand & Seeber, 1984; Wu & Shah, 2004) and careers (Shea, Lubinski, & Benbow,
2001). Indeed, a host of studies have shown positive correlations between visuo-spatial ability and achievement
in several science     domains (Carter,  LaRussa,  &   Bodner,    1987;  Hegarty  &  Sims,   1994;  Keehner,  Lippa,
Montello, Tendick, & Hegarty, 2006). Consequently, these findings have led to claims that sex differences in
spatial ability are responsible for sex differences in science achievement (cf. Fogg, 2005).
         Despite the importance of visuo-spatial ability, questions remain about the cognitive components of
spatial thinking. Typically, spatial thinking in science has referred to imagistic reasoning that includes mental
imagery, mental rotation, spatial perspective taking and spatial visualization (Bodner & Guay, 1997). However,
practicing scientists  and novice   students alike successfully   solve  spatial tasks through  the use   of external
diagrams, models, and computer simulations that may or may not recruit these cognitive processes (Stieff, 2007;
Stieff & Raje, 2010; Trafton, Trickett, & Mintz, 2005). Also, a variety of domain-specific analytic algorithms
and heuristics have been reported that lead to solutions with little to no use of spatial information given in a
spatial problem  (Schwartz     &  Black,  1996; Stieff,   2007).  The  availability and utility of  these alternative
strategies raises several questions about the components of spatial thinking and their role in scientific problem
solving at all levels.
         The present paper aims to identify the underlying cognitive components that comprise spatial thinking
in science. We address this aim with four questions: What strategies do problem solvers use to solve tasks that
involve spatial thinking? Does strategy choice predict success on a variety of spatial tasks? Do spatial ability
and sex  predict strategy   choice?  How   does  instruction  affect  strategy choice?  We   address each    of these
questions by examining student problem solving in the domain of organic chemistry. Historically, this domain
has privileged the role   of visuo-spatial ability due  to   the content of organic   chemistry  which  includes  the
analysis of three-dimensional relationships within and between molecular structures (Mathewson, 1999; Wu,
Krajcik, & Soloway, 2001; Wu & Shah, 2004); yet, little is known about what strategies students employ when
considering these relationships. Previously, Stieff and Raje (2010) have shown that expert chemists engage in
spatial thinking using a variety of domain-specific diagrammatic and analytic strategies as opposed to mental
imagery; however, strategy use among chemistry students remains unknown. Here, we build on the work of
Stieff and Raje, by examining college students' choice of problem solving strategies for solving spatial organic
chemistry problems to determine the extent to which chemistry students employ multiple strategies and how
strategy choice changes with increasing domain knowledge.

                                                   765      ISLS
                                              ICLS 2010    Volume 1

Study 1
In Study 1, we designed a strategy choice questionnaire that first asked students to solve 10 canonical organic
chemistry assessment tasks. On each task, students were asked to indicate how they solved the problem using a
list of known strategies applicable to the task. Previously, Stieff and Raje (2010) documented experts' use of
specific imagistic and non-imagistic strategies for solving organic chemistry problems; the findings of that study
were used to populate the list in the present work. The goal of Study 1 was to identify patterns of strategy use
among students and any associations between strategy choice, achievement and sex.

Method
Thirty-nine college students (20 males, 19 females) who had completed 6 months of instruction in organic
chemistry  were asked   to complete  a  chemistry  strategy    choice questionnaire.   The strategy questionnaire
consisted of 10 organic chemistry problems that asked participants (1) to identify spatial relationships between
molecules or substituents within a molecule and (2) to consider spatial transformations of molecular diagrams.
All chemistry  problems    were  scored for  correctness   using a binary   rubric (1  = correct, 0 =  incorrect).
Participants were also asked to report the strategy they used to solve each chemistry problem by selecting from
a list of possible strategies applicable to each problem. Participants were allowed to choose more than one
strategy and to write in their own strategy if they believed that none of the choices matched their strategy. Each
list of strategies for individual problems was developed in an earlier protocol study conducted by Stieff and Raje
(2010); each strategy was coded according to a priori categories of strategy type listed in Table 1. Briefly,
categories included those strategies that relied more extensively on reasoning via mental imagery (Spatial-
Imagistic), diagrams (Spatial-Diagrammatic), rules and heuristics that operated on spatial information (Spatial-
Analytic) and rules and heuristics that operated on non-spatial information (Algorithmic). Participants could
also indicate if they knew the answer to a problem (Recall) or if they randomly guessed (Guessing). We note
that the three categories that include the spatial prefix involve the direct consideration of spatial information
while the  algorithmic  category  does  not. In cases    where participants  wrote  in their own   strategies, two
researchers independently coded the free responses according to the four categories in Table 1. Comparison of
the two raters' codes indicated an inter-rater reliability score above 85%.

Table 1: Strategy Categories.

          Strategy Type                               Example Fixed-Choice Strategy Responses
Spatial-Imagistic                 I tend to imagine the molecule in 3D and rotate it "in my head".
                                  I tend to imagine myself moving into the paper or around the molecule.

Spatial-Diagrammatic              I tend to first draw a basic skeletal structure and then make changes as I go.
                                  I tend to redraw the molecule using a different chemical representation to help
                                  me think about it.

Spatial-Analytic                  I tend to assign R/S labels to each molecule.

Algorithmic                       I just know that in stable molecules particular groups must be in a specific
                                  relationship.
                                  I tend to use a specific formula to calculate the number of stereoisomers.

Results & Discussion
Figure 1 summarizes the frequency of each strategy choice across the 10 tasks. Among the 418 strategies
reported, participants  selected Spatial-Analytic  strategies    most  frequently  (36%)   followed  by  Spatial-
Diagrammatic strategies (26%), Spatial-Imagistic strategies (22%) and finally Algorithmic strategies (16%).
Figure 2 shows a detail of strategy frequencies by task. The distribution of strategies differed dramatically
among the ten tasks, which suggests that students freely switched between the different types of strategies
depending on each task. For example, the majority of reported strategies applied to Tasks 1, 5, 6, and 8 were
Spatial-Analytic strategies, but Spatial-Imagistic strategies were reported more often on Tasks 9 and 10. The
dataset was further analyzed to determine whether participants used primarily one strategy for each task or
applied multiple strategies. In total, we were able to identify the strategy used by participants in 326 (83.5%) of
the 390 cases of problem solving. The remaining 64 cases either lacked strategy choice information or were
solved via Guessing or Recall. As Table 2 illustrates, 240 tasks (73.6%) were solved with only one type of

                                                  766     ISLS
                                                ICLS 2010     Volume 1

 strategy, 80 tasks (24.5%) were solved with two types of strategies, and 6 tasks (1.8%) were solved with three or
 more types of strategies. In cases where participants used only one strategy, Spatial-Analytic strategies were
 reported most frequently. Interestingly, in cases where participants selected two types of strategies, the majority
 of reported strategies involved  the use  of  a Spatial-Diagrammatic        strategy and  one other type  of strategy.
 Notably, we observed a negative correlation between the number of participants who successfully completed a
 problem and the number of participants who used two or more strategies, (r(10) = -0.654, p = 0.040), which
 suggests that students tend to apply multiple types of strategies as questions become more difficult.

Figure 1. Overall frequency of strategies                             Figure 2. Strategy choice distribution for each
reported by category.                                                 task.

 Table 2: Numbers and types of strategy used for each task.

    No. reported strategies used               Strategy type                     Frequency                Total

                 1                  Spatial-Imagistic                                 49
                                    Spatial-Diagrammatic                              47
                                                                                                      240 (73.6%)
                                    Spatial-Analytic                               107
                                    Algorithmic                                       37
                 2                  SI+SD                                             16
                                    SI+SA                                             15
                                                                                                        80 (24.5%)
                                    SD+SA                                             21
                                    SD+AL                                             21
            3 or more                               -                                 -                 6 (1.8%)
              Total                                                                                        324
 Note. Dashes indicate no further analysis was conducted. SI=spatial-imagistic, SD=spatial-diagrammatic,
 SA=spatial-analytic, AL=algorithmic. 64 tasks coded as recall/guessing/unknown are not included.

          The relationship between correctness and type of strategy used was tested using a Pearson's !2 test for
 2  (use of each  strategy) x 2  (correctness) contingency     table. Using   an alpha   level of 0.05, no  association
 between success and strategy use was found, indicating that strategy choice does not have an impact on whether
 a participant answer a task correctly. Sex differences in problem-solving success and strategy choice were tested
 using an independent two-sample t-test. The mean total correctness score of male participants (M = 4.25, SD =
 1.45) was not found to differ from the mean total correctness score of female participants (M = 4.15, SD = 1.12),
 t(37) =  0.22, p  =  0.41. Likewise,  strategy  choice    did not    differ significantly between   female and     male
 participants, as illustrated in Figure 3. Men and women displayed similar patterns of strategy choice: in order of
 reported strategy use, both  groups  employed    Spatial-Analytic,    Spatial-Diagrammatic,      Spatial-Imagistic and
 Algorithmic strategies. In order to examine the relationship between sex and strategy choice, strategy scores of
 participants were calculated by counting the numbers of each strategy used across the ten survey items. t-tests to

                                                    767     ISLS
                                               ICLS 2010    Volume 1

compare   Spatial-Imagistic,  Spatial-Diagrammatic,  Spatial-Analytic    and Algorithmic  strategy  scores  between
male and female were not found to be statistically significant at an alpha level of 0.05.

                    Figure 3. Overall frequency of strategy choice by males and females.

Study 2
In Study  2, we  adapted   the strategy  choice questionnaire   for group    administration via  a remote   personal
response  system  (i.e., "clickers") in an organic chemistry    classroom    during instruction. Although   Study 1
established that students primarily made use of spatial-analytic strategies for solving organic chemistry tasks,
the participants in that studied had completed several months of instruction in the domain. Thus, Study 1 yielded
no information about how student strategy choice changes with instruction. Therefore, we conducted Study 2 to
determine whether students employed spatial-analytic strategies in the context of an organic chemistry course
and whether students employed the same strategies uniformly over the course of instruction.

Method
103 undergraduate students enrolled (sex was reported for 90 students: 33 males and 57 females) in a 6-week
intensive organic  chemistry   course were  assigned   unique   personal response   devices to   respond to  adapted
strategy choice questions administered during the course. Over the duration of the course, students were asked
10 unique organic chemistry questions and related strategy choices. Questions were administered approximately
once each week of instruction. During the final meeting of the course, students were asked 8 organic chemistry
questions and related strategy choices that included 6 of the 10 questions administered during earlier sessions of
the course. All questions were presented on large LCD televisions at the front of the classroom and students
answered questions by clicking a multiple-choice answer on their assigned device. The scoring rubric and
strategy categories from Study 1 were used to analyze student responses. Notably, the adapted questions in
Study 2 did not contain algorithmic strategies as the course instructor deemed that the strategy survey questions
that included algorithms    were  beyond   the  scope  of   her course.  In  addition, unlike  the  strategy survey
questionnaire, students were not able to choose more than one strategy per problem because the classroom
clicker system could not capture multiple answers per student for a given question. Students were able to report
their own strategies after each class if they employed a strategy not presented in the provided options.
         Among the 103 students, 91 students volunteered to complete a spatial ability battery that included the
Vandenberg Mental Rotation Test (Vandenberg & Kuse, 1978) and Guay's Visualization of Views (McDaniel
& Guay, 1976). Descriptive statistics of strategy choice were generated for each task and strategy use on both
administrations of the   6 questions  was  compared.     Unlike Study   1, group  administration   of the  questions
permitted students to interact and discuss their responses prior to inputting an answer on their clicker devices
and the course instructor assigned these questions for course credit; therefore, the independence of student
answers to chemistry problems could not be guaranteed and reports of student achievement were not considered
valid for analysis. In contrast, because students did not receive credit for strategy responses and the instructor
emphasized that there was no correct answer to these questions, we considered student responses to these
questions valid for analysis.

                                                   768     ISLS
                                                 ICLS 2010    Volume 1

Results & Discussion
The distribution of strategy choices at each administration time point in the classroom is presented in Table 3.
As indicated,  the students   reported that    they employed    Spatial-Imagistic   strategies more than  any    other
strategies both during and after instruction. Excluding recall, guess, and unreported strategies, Spatial-Imagistic
strategies were most frequently reported by students (947 times, 64.95%), followed by Spatial-Diagrammatic
strategies (397 times, 27.23%) and Spatial-Analytic strategies (114 times, 7.82%). Although Spatial-Imagistic
strategies dominated both during and after organic chemistry instruction, comparison between the two occasions
suggests that fewer Spatial-Imagistic strategies were employed after instruction while Spatial-Diagrammatic and
Spatial-Analytic strategies were reported more frequently.
         Reports of strategy use on the six questions appearing both during and after instruction were examined
further to clarify changes in strategy use after instruction. As indicated in Table 4, after instruction the average
number of Spatial-Imagistic strategies across all tasks reported decreased (t(102) = -3.98, p < .001), and the
average number of Alternative strategies increased (t(102) = 4.95, p < .001). Figure 4 illustrates the frequency of
reported strategies for each of the six questions at each presentation. Examination of these items indicates that
students do   indeed    employ  Spatial-Imagistic    strategies  less   frequently  after instruction. Interestingly,
distributions of strategy choice after instruction varied across the six question items. For questions 1 and 6,
reports of using  Spatial-Analytic  strategies  rose dramatically,   while  reports of using   Spatial-Diagrammatic
strategies rose relatively higher on questions 2 and 4. In contrast, no noticeable difference in the relative use of
each strategy type was seen on questions 3 and 5. Examination of these six items revealed that students not only
adopted strategies alternative to Spatial-Imagistic Strategies after instruction, but the choice of strategy after
instruction was related to the task itself.

Table 3: Frequency of strategy use.

                                                                No. strategy choice
    Types of strategy          During instruction a             After instruction a                  Total
 Spatial-Imagistic                596 (73.22%)                    351 (54.50%)                   947 (64.95%)
 Spatial-Diagrammatic             172 (21.13%)                    225 (34.94%)                   397 (27.23%)
 Spatial-Analytic                   46 (5.65%)                      68 (10.56%)                   114 (7.82%)
 Total                             814 (100 %)                      644 (100%)                    1458 (100%)
a 10 question items were administered during instruction and 8 items were administered after instruction.

Table 4: Mean number of Spatial-Imagistic and Alternative strategies reported during and after instruction.

                                               During the instruction                     After the instruction

         Types of strategy                      M                   SD                 M                   SD

 Spatial-Imagistic strategies                  3.56                 1.48               2.63              1.91**

 Alternative strategies                        0.99                 1.09               1.83              1.79**
Note. Scores for each category range from 0-6 excluding recall and guessing strategies.
** p < 0.001

                                                     769     ISLS
                                               ICLS 2010    Volume 1

Figure 4. Frequency of strategy use reported by students (a) during and (b) after instruction.

        Associations between spatial ability and strategy choices were analyzed via ANOVA. The 91 students
who completed the spatial ability psychometrics were categorized into three groups based on their performance
on the Mental Rotation Test (MRT) and Visualization of Views Test (VoV): High (N=31, M=51.94, SD=13.02
for MRT     and M=17.74,   SD=4.56  for VoV),  Medium        (N=30, M=34.20,  SD=10.39 for     MRT  and    M=8.71,
SD=4.44 for VoV), and Low (N=30, M=15.40, SD=12.08 for MRT and M=4.21, SD=3.58 for VoV). Table 5
illustrates the results from the ANOVA.    On  the     first presentation of each strategy question,  the   use    of
Alternative strategies did not vary with spatial ability (F(2, 88)=0.96, ns) at an alpha level of 0.05. After
instruction, however, we observed a trend in the data that indicated students in the lower ability group employed
Alternative strategies more frequently than higher spatial ability students (F(2, 88)=3.10, p=0.05). Associations
between each student's strategy choice and spatial ability were analyzed via a Multivariate Analysis of Variance
(MANOVA) test of Alternative strategy scores with within-subjects effect of administration time (i.e., during
and after the instruction) and between-subjects effect of spatial ability group. The analysis failed to show a
significant interaction between student strategy choice after instruction and spatial ability, Wilk's != 0.968, F (2,
88)=1.43, ns. Thus, spatial ability was not found to predict the use of any particular strategy after instruction.

Table 5: Comparison of Alternative scores during and after the instruction in three spatial ability groups

                                 High                       Medium                   Low
Occasions of the task        M          SD               M          SD          M              SD       F (2,88)
During the instruction      0.90        1.07           1.30         1.08       1.06        1.20            0.96
After the instruction       1.35        1.56           2.43         1.94       2.17        1.80            3.10

        Finally, relationships among sex, spatial ability and strategy choice were investigated. Using an alpha
level of 0.05, males were found to outperform females on the Mental Rotation Test (M = 45.63, SD = 16.07 for
male, M = 27.62, SD = 17.63 for female, t(83) < 0.001) and on the Visualization of Views (M = 13.42, SD =
8.27 for male, M = 8.66, SD = 5.94 for female, t(83) = 0.003). During instruction, males and females did not
differ in use of Spatial-Imagistic strategies (M = 3.81, SD = 1.36 for male, M = 3.32, SD = 1.40 for female, ns)
or the use of Alternative strategies (M = 1.00, SD = 0.87 for male, M = 1.07, SD = 1.10 for female, ns). After
instruction, however, females were observed to use Alternative strategies more frequently than males (M = 1.24,
SD = 1.56 for male, M = 2.47, SD = 1.79 for female, t(88) = 0.002); however, the difference between male and
female use of Spatial-Imagistic strategies was marginal (M = 3.21, SD = 1.92 for male, M = 2.53, SD = 1.83 for
female, t(88) = 0.096). Repeated measures analysis of Alternative strategy scores involving within-subjects
effect of administration time (i.e., during and after instruction) and between-subjects effect of sex resulted in
significant interaction between sex and occasion of the tasks (MANOVA, Wilk's ! = 0.892, F(1, 88) = 21.31, p
= 0.002).

Conclusions & Implications
The above results offer some tentative answers to the questions we posed initially. First, the findings clearly
illustrate that students employ a variety of strategies to solve tasks that involve spatial thinking. In Study 1, we

                                                   770     ISLS
                                                 ICLS 2010     Volume 1

observed students to rely more consistently on Spatial-Analytic and Spatial-Diagrammatic strategies as opposed
to Spatial-Imagistic strategies, as typically believed. Likewise, in Study 2, we observed students to employ
Spatial-Imagistic strategies preferentially during instruction, yet adopt more alternative strategies by the end of
the course. Moreover, we also observed students to fluidly switch between different types of strategies between
tasks. The findings of the present work suggest that students choose task-dependent strategies in a manner
similar  to expert chemists    and apply multiple  strategies   on   problems   of   increased  difficulty. These   results
indicate that students are aware of the availability of diverse strategies and are willing to employ alternative
strategies. In other words, students are not limited to reasoning about spatial information in molecular structures
via imagistic reasoning, but can reason about spatial information with a variety of strategies.
         The results also indicate that strategy choice does not predict success on spatial tasks in chemistry. The
findings in Study 1 suggest that students reach equivalent levels of achievement regardless of whether they
employ strategies that involve reasoning via mental imagery or alternative strategies. Equally important, we did
not observe significant differences in achievement between men and women on chemistry tasks. Despite these
findings, we did observe that multiple strategies were applied on tasks that the majority of students failed to
solve. This finding is consistent with the literature on flexible strategy choice that reports individuals employ
multiple strategies on tasks of increased difficulty (cf. Siegler, 1996). The use of multiple strategies, however,
did not lead to increased success on such tasks. Thus, it did not appear that the application of one or more
strategy    types  (e.g.,   Spatial-Imagistic,  Spatial-Analytic,     Spatial-Diagrammatic,      Algorithmic)    predicts
achievement. That is, each strategy is equally likely to result in success or failure on a given task.
         Study 2 permitted us to examine the relationship between strategy choice and instruction in the context
of an organic chemistry classroom. The results of that study clearly illustrate that instruction has a direct effect
on strategy choice. In the beginning of the course, we observed students rely primarily on Spatial-Imagistic
strategies to solve spatial tasks; by the end of the course, we observed a sharp increase in the use of strategies
alternative to  Spatial-Imagistic  strategies. Interestingly,  the   participants in  Study   2 reported    greater use of
Spatial-Imagistic strategies at the end of instruction while the participants in Study 1 reported greater use of
Spatial-Analytic   strategies. We  believe the  reason   for   this discrepancy   is due   to two important   differences
between the participants in each study. First, the students received instruction over different time periods. The
students in  Study  1   completed  ~20 weeks    of instruction   during   course  of  an   academic  year;  however,    the
students in Study 2 learned less material in a 6 week summer course. It is possible that the longer duration of
study in Study 1 resulted in better apprehension of and preference for alternative strategies. Similarly, the
instructors for each course reported notable differences in their own emphasis on strategy use. The instructor in
Study 1 reported she was `bad at visualization' and emphasized diagrammatic and algorithmic heuristics, but the
instructor in Study 2 reported she attempted to teach as many strategies as possible for the benefit of the
students. Thus, instructional differences may have resulted in the observed differences in strategy preference.
Nevertheless, although students in Study 2 reported using Spatial-Imagistic strategies as their primary strategy,
the increased use of domain-specific alternative strategies suggests that as expertise develops, students may rely
less on imagistic reasoning and more on heuristics to solve spatial tasks.
         Study 2 also permitted us to examine the relationship between spatial ability, sex and strategy choice in
the classroom. Although the results of that study do not indicate a direct relationship between spatial ability, sex
and strategy choice, they do suggest a potential interaction may exist. First, our findings clearly show that over
the course of instruction women reported a significant increase in the use of alternative strategies compared to
men. Second, our findings tentatively suggest that low spatial students may preferentially switch from Spatial-
Imagistic strategies to alternative strategies after instruction; high spatial students do appear to rely on Spatial-
Imagistic strategies throughout instruction. Thus, the data suggests that low-spatial females preferentially switch
to  alternative strategies. Two  major limitations  of   the   Study  limit the   validity of  these findings. First,   our
analysis relies solely on students' strategy reports on 6 questions. The results of Study 1 indicate that several
strategies are task-specific and our reliance on so few tasks casts doubt on the interpretation of these findings.
Second, students were asked to respond to the clicker questions in Study 2 under classroom time constraints and
they were also permitted to collaborate on their responses. Thus, there was an increased risk in Study 2 of
failing to detect changes in strategy choice and individual differences in spatial ability. Nevertheless, we believe
the trends in the data suggest a potential interaction between spatial ability, sex and strategy choice does exist
and warrants further investigation.
         Taken together, the results of the present studies indicate that spatial thinking in advanced scientific
problem solving, specifically organic chemistry, involves a range of strategies that vary significantly in the
extent to which they rely on imagistic reasoning. Of particulate note, our findings suggest that students approach
the study   of  organic chemistry  using mental    rotation  and    other spatial-imagistic   strategies to reason   about
molecular structures, but quickly adopt a variety of algorithms and heuristics after instruction. This behavior
leads us to question the utility of instructional methods that emphasize the exclusive focus on training students
to use imagistic strategies (e.g., by improving students' visuo-spatial ability, Ferk, Vrtacnik, Blejec, & Gril,
2003). Rather, we suggest instead that students may benefit most from instruction that teaches the applicability

                                                     771     ISLS
                                                 ICLS 2010     Volume 1

of multiple  strategies,  as  in Study 2.   Moreover, the   present    study  did not identify  significant correlations
between   sex   and   chemistry   problem   solving  success.   This   result contradicts  previous  claims    that  men
outperform women in science due to their aptitude for spatial reasoning (Fogg, 2005). Rather, our findings
suggest that female students apply the same strategies as male students with equal levels of success in chemistry
and that they are likely to switch to alternative strategies when necessary in a course.

References
Bodner, G. M., & Guay, R. B. (1997). The Purdue visualization of rotations test. The Chemical Educator, 2(4),
          1-18.
Carter, C. S., LaRussa, M. A., & Bodner, G. M. (1987). A study of two measures of spatial ability as predictors
          of success in different levels of general chemistry. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 24(7),
          645-657.
Ferk, V.,  Vrtacnik,    M.,  Blejec,  A.,   & Gril,  A.  (2003).   Students'   understanding    of molecular    structure
          representations. International Journal of Science Education, 25(10), 1227-1245.
Fogg, P.  (2005,   January   28). Harvard's   president  wonders    aloud  about   women   in  science and     math.  The
          Chronicle of Higher Education, p. A12.
Hegarty, M., & Sims, V. K. (1994). Individual differences in mental animation during mechanical reasoning.
          Memory & Cognition, 22(4), 411-430.
Keehner,  M.,   Lippa,  Y.,  Montello, D.   R., Tendick,    F., & Hegarty,    M.  (2006). Learning   a spatial  skill for
          surgery: How the contributions of abilities change with practice. Applied Cognitive Psychology, 20,
          487-503.
Mathewson,     J.  H. (1999).  Visual-spatial thinking:  An     aspect of science    overlooked by  educators.  Science
          Education, 83, 33-54.
National Research Council (2006). Learning to think spatially. Washington, D.C.: The National Academy Press.
McDaniel,   E.    D., &  Guay,   R. B. (1976).  Spatial  ability,  mathematics    achievement,  and    the  sexes.  Paper
          presented at the Annual Meeting of American Educational Research Association, San Francisco, CA.
Pallrand, G.   J., &   Seeber, F.   (1984). Spatial ability and   achievement     in introductory  physics.  Journal   of
          Research in Science Teaching, 21(5), 501-516.
Schwartz, D. L., & Black, J. B. (1996). Shuttling between depictive models and abstract rules: Induction and
          fallback. Cognitive Science, 20, 457-497.
Shea, D. L., Lubinski, D., & Benbow, C. P. (2001). Importance of assessing spatial ability in intellectually
          talented young adolescents: A 20-year longitudinal study. Journal of Educational Psychology, 93(3),
          604-614.
Siegler, R. S. (1996). Emerging minds. New York: Oxford University Press.
Stieff, M. (2007). Mental rotation and diagrammatic reasoning in science. Learning and Instruction, 17, 219-
          234.
Stieff, M. & Raje, S. (2010). Expertise and imagistic reasoning in chemistry. Spatial Cognition & Computation,
          10(1), 53-81.
Trafton, J. G., Trickett, S. B., & Mintz, F. E. (2005). Connecting internal and external representations: Spatial
          transformations of scientific visualizations. Foundations of Science, 10, 89-106.
Vandenberg, S. G., & Kuse, A. R. (1978). Mental rotation: Group test of three-dimensional spatial visualization.
          Perceptual and Motor Skills, 47, 599-604.
Wu,   H.-K.,   Krajcik,  J.  S.,  &  Soloway,    E.  (2001).    Promoting     conceptual  understanding     of chemical
          representations: Students' use of a visualization tool in the classroom. Journal of Research in Science
          Teaching, 38(7), 821-842.
Wu, H.-K., & Shah, P. (2004). Exploring visuospatial thinking in chemistry learning. Science Education, 88(3),
          465-492.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported, in part, by a grant from the National Science Foundation (DRL-0723313). Any
opinions, findings or conclusions expressed in this paper are those of the author and do not necessarily represent
the views of this agency.

                                                     772     ISLS
