                                               ICLS 2010    Volume 1

 What Are They Talking About?                             Findings from an Analysis ofthe
       Discourse in Peer-Led Team Learning In General Chemistry

Patrick Brown, Keith R. Sawyer, Regina Frey, Sarah Luesse, Daniel Gealy, Washington University in St. Louis,
                         Campus Box 1022, One Brookings Drive, Eads Hall Rm. 105
                Email: Pbrown23@wustl.edu, ksawyer@wustl.edu, gfrey@wuchem.wustl.edu

         Abstract: Peer-Led Team Learning (PLTL) is a structured method for helping students
         engage actively in collaborative conversations. The method originated in undergraduate
         chemistry courses, but is now used in math and in other science classes as well. Previous
         studies have shown that PLTL results in improved student learning in undergraduate
         chemistry. However, researchers have not studied the group mechanisms and the discourse
         processes that lead to this improved outcome. This study is one of three inter-related studies
         that are the first to explore those mechanisms and processes. In this study, we observed
         videotapes of PLTL sessions and analyzed the discourse of peer leaders and of students. We
         found that the structure and nature of the problems influences student discourse.

Introduction
There is now a consensus in science education research that the most effective learning environments are those
in which students engage in productive, collaborative discourse to build knowledge (e.g., American Association
for the Advancement of Science [AAAS], 1989; National Research Council [NRC], 1996).         Knowledge building
occurs when students engage in collaborative conversations intended to advance both individual understanding
and the collective knowledge of the group in pursuit of a common goal (Bereiter, 2002; Engle & Conant, 2002;
Rogoff, Matusov, & White, 1996).     In response to this research, numerous institutions of higher education have
introduced a form of collaborative learning into lower level science courses that is called peer-led team learning
(PLTL) (Gafney & Varma-Nelson, 2008; Gosser et al., 2001; Gosser & Roth, 1998; Hockings, DeAngelis, &
Frey, 2008; Sarquis et al., 2001). Although there are still large lectures each week, PLTL supplements the
lecture with formalized study groups that are facilitated by a peer leader and provide opportunities for active and
collaborative learning. A PLTL study group contains 6-8 students    facilitated by a peer leader, a student who has
previously received a high grade in the class, and who works under the close supervision of the instructor of the
class. In each PLTL session, students work together    to solve problems designed by the instructor of the class.
Neither the peer leader nor the students are given the solutions to the problems, because the goal of the session
is not to get the correct answer; instead, it is to provide opportunities for engaging in problem solving while
discussing the concepts in the problem. The goals of PLTL are to: (i) teach undergraduates how to effectively
study in a group; (ii) improve students' problem-solving skills; (iii) provide facilitated help for students; and (iv)
provide an active- learning environment for students to engage in scientific discourse.
         Although previous studies have shown that PLTL results in improved learning in undergraduate
chemistry (Gafney & Varma-Nelson, 2008; Hockings, DeAngelis, & Frey, 2008; Tien, Roth, & Kampmeier,
2002), few researchers have studied the group mechanisms and discourse processes that lead to this improved
outcome.  In two inter-related studies, we found that peer leaders used two distinct interactional styles, which
we call instructional and facilitative, that influence students' dialogue, participation, and knowledge building. In
the first study, we found that peer leaders who use a high percentage of facilitative discourse was related to
increased chains of student-to-student interactions and more equal student participation (Brown, Sawyer, &
Frey, 2009b). Conversely, peer leaders who   used equal amounts of    facilitative and instructional discourse had
shorter chains of interactions and unequal participation. In the second study, we observed that when a peer
leader used primarily facilitative discourse and provided abundant managerial support, students displayed
extended discussions that went beyond applying equations in a rote manner and began to develop an
understanding of the concepts (Brown, Sawyer,    & Frey, 2009a).   This study is the third in a series of studies that
examines the discourse practices used in PLTL. After observing the transcripts of the first two studies, we
believed that the specific nature and framing of the problem presented to the students had an impact on their
discourse, and we wanted to better understand the specific links between the posed problem and the resulting
discourse. Thus, the research question we posed for this study is: How does the nature and structure of the
problem influence how students talk about the underlying concepts?

                                                   773     ISLS
                                                ICLS 2010     Volume 1

Research Design

Participants
In fall 2006, during the 14-week semester, three PLTL sessions (# 4, #7, and #9) of each of 15 returning peer
leaders were videotaped. For the project, all verbal interactions in 6 PLTL groups for two parts of session 7
were analyzed from these recordings. We used a purposeful sampling approach to identify cases and parts of
problems that were "information-rich" (Beals & Tabors, 1995; Patton, 2002). The 6 groups were chosen based
on observation of all the video data. Based on our experiences working with peer leaders,    we purposefully
selected: (1) 6 PLTL groups that represented a range of peer leader styles (instructional or facilitative) (see
Brown, Sawyer, & Frey, 2009b); and (2) questions that represented typical PLTL activities (reviewing content,
problem solving, and concept discussion).

Data Analysis
We implemented multiple approaches to analyze the data. We identified, labeled, and time-stamped the amount
of peer-leader talk, student talk, individual tasks, and off-task behaviors that occurred during the selected PLTL
activities based on relevant, transcribed portions of the video data.   Each transcription was divided into
segments of talk, in which a segment of talk represented an individual's contribution to the discussion.    An
individual's talk could consist of multiple utterances depending on how many ideas were included in one
segment of talk.  Each utterance was assigned a code (Brown,      Sawyer, & Frey, 2009b). The coding scheme
involved two levels of coding: categories and codes. The categories we developed were consistent with the
constant comparative method   of qualitative data analysis (Glaser & Strauss, 1967).  Categories are general types
of speech observed and include 4 broad areas: (1) explanation, (2) content question, (3) facilitation, and (4)
problem solving. Codes refer to specific types of identifiable speech within these 4 categories. For example,
closed question and open question are both codes within the category "content question."
         To calculate the reliability of the coding manual, two trained coders were used; one has a background
in science education and qualitative research and the other was a co-instructor of the general chemistry series.
The second coder was   blind to the  motivation and hypotheses of the   study. When disagreements arose, the two
coders discussed differences and either a rule for coding was decided upon or a revision was made to the coding
manual.  Cohen's Kappa is an  inter-rater reliability measure for qualitative studies (Bakeman & Gottman, 1986;
Lunn, 1998). Bakeman and Gottman (1986) characterized a Cohen's Kappa of greater than 0.75 as excellent.
The Cohen's Kappa for the final stage of coding was 0.90; thus, meeting the criteria for excellent inter-rater
reliability.

Results
Our data at this stage of the project is preliminary. Thus, we  chose relevant portions of the data from our
qualitative analysis to highlight findings from our full data set. We focus on a specific trend in our data that we
observed across our 6 PLTL groups.
         To study whether the nature and structure of the problem influences knowledge-building discourse we
examined a portion of the seventh PLTL session. During the session, students reviewed and solved problems
associated with understanding the topic "periodic trends" -- characteristics of elements as one moves across a
period (row) and  down a   group (column) of the periodic  table.  This analysis focuses on the Review and
Problem 1 portion of the session.   During the review, students    discussed the content covered in lecture and
recitations.  During Problem 1, students   arrange each set  of atoms (e.g., (a) Rb, Cs, Li; (b) B, Li, F; (c) Cl, F,
Br; (d) Rb, Be, K) in order of increasing atomic radius.

Review
The transcript that follows is an example of how Gillian's students began to talk about the periodic trends
during the review.

11   F1:      So I have a bunch of periodic trends (inaudible). There's Z* (effective nuclear charge), one for
2             electronegativity, and one for Atomic radius.    Do you wanna draw all those?
3    M7:      And electron affinity.
4    F1:      Draw the, Draw the boxes [2Student tells peer to draw a "box," in the shape of a rectangle, on the
5    F4:      front board]
6    F1:      Why don't you just draw the boxes?
7    F4:      I like the boxes. (laughs). Just write like, Z*, and then arrow, increasing (pointing). And then arrow
8             down, decreasing (pointing). [Student tells her peer who is at the front board to draw a box with a
9             one-sided arrow pointing from left to right and another arrow pointing from the bottom to the top of
10            the box]

                                                    774     ISLS
                                               ICLS 2010    Volume 1

1Line number
2Relvant nonverbal interactions

In this excerpt, students drew a "box" to represent the periodic table and used arrows to indicate whether atoms
increase or decrease across a period (row) and down a group (column) according to the different diagrams for
the period trends that they covered in lecture (e.g., electronegativity, atomic radius, electron affinity, and Z*)
(LN: 1-6). For example, students began talking about the periodic trends by focusing on the procedures for
describing how Z* increases and decrease across and down the periodic table (LN: 7).  When identifying
important content to review from the lectures and recitations, and without prompting from the peer leaders,
students used the diagrams they had learned in class as an algorithm (a set of finite rules) for solving problems
(LN: 7). Without the peer leaders guidance, we found that students used the diagrams they had learned in class
almost exclusively when reviewing the periodic trends.

Problem 1
In problem 1, students arranged atoms in order of increasing atomic radius. The problem-solving discourse was
characterized by students using the diagrams they discussed during the review to solve atomic radius problems.
The transcript that follows illustrates how Rachael's students focused on applying the diagram that was
discussed during the review to arrange the atoms B, Li, and F in order of increasing atomic radius. Rachael's
students' discourse was typical of how students talked about the atomic radius problem (Problem 1).

254     M1:    Umm, Bi, Li, and F (reading the problem). So we're going left to right, and the diagram says is
255            decreases (referring to the diagram on the board developed during the review), so, if I want it
256            from increasing, it's Li, B, F. [Student looks at the diagram on the board showing a one-sided
257            arrow pointing from right to left to answer the question]
258     F3:    No
259     M2:    No, it goes the other way (inaudible).
260     PL:    Increasing should start with the smallest, and then...
261     M1     Oh. So, F, B, Li.
262     PL:    Don't let it trip you up. Does everyone agree?
263     F3:    Yeah.

In the excerpt above, M1 used the diagram on the board that they discussed during the review to solve the
problem (LN: 254). In this example, M1 accidentally listed the elements from largest to smallest atomic radii
(the directions in the problem asked students to list the elements  from smallest to largest atomic radii). In line
259, the peer leader calls to attention that M1 has placed the elements in the reverse order. In line 260,  M1
reacts by listing the elements in the correct order. In this excerpt, students discourse was entirely focused on the
diagram discussed during the review and they did not discuss the underlying concepts associated with the trend.
         Gillian's students' discourse was also focused on applying the diagram they had discussed during the
review on problem 1.   However, Gillian engaged students in the concepts by using probing questions (LN: 337).

337    PL:    ...So what's the, what's the idea with radius? What are you doing, to kind of put those(referring to
338           atoms) in order?
339    F1:    We just compared it to the, the, drawing up there (referring to the front board), the table.
340    F5:    The number of, like, protons, um, of each element and then the number of, I don't know, I guess
341           electrons?...
342    F1:    Well, one, we didn't have any ions, so that wasn't really important (laughs).
343    F5:    Right. So if there was like, more protons, like, going down the periodic table, like down a column,
344           or whatever, um, they (referring to atomic radii) would be increasing because they would just be a
345           bigger
346    F1:    Well, there's more elect...(referring to electrons)
347    F5:    It would be more electrons...If we're going down, it's, it would be more electrons.
...3   ...    ...
420    PL:    So you guys down there, what's the, what's kinda like the trend?
421    M7:    Whichever one has the lower number of protons has a tighter pull on the electrons, so the radius
              will be smaller (across a group)
...    ...    ...
425    PL:    ... (Does everyone) agree with that?
426    F1:    And as you're adding elect..., it's like the same if you're adding electrons (down a period), then an
427           increased radius.
3Transcripts were omitted because student talk was off task.

                                                   775     ISLS
                                              ICLS 2010      Volume 1

       Gillian's students' responses indicate that they focused on applying the diagram they had discussed for
atomic radius during the review to the problem (see line 339).    However, Gillian used probing questions to
promote discussions, student interactions, and scientific explanations of the content (LN: 337 and 420).
Students acknowledged, built upon, and elaborated on each other's ideas.    Additionally, Gillian's students'
explanations went beyond using the diagrams they learned in class to solve the problems and they began to
address some of the underlying concepts (LN: 340-346, 421, and 426).
       In summary, both the nature and structure of the problem influenced student discourse. We found that
during the review students focused on describing the periodic trends according to diagrams that they learned
about in class. Without prompting from the peer leader, students almost exclusively talked about the periodic
trends according to a finite set of rules that they learned about in class. Students' discussion during the review
had an influence on how they  talked about the periodic trends problems.   Students used the diagrams that they
discussed during the review to solve the periodic trends problems. Thus, the nature and the structure of the
PLTL problems influenced students discourse.

Conclusion
There is a great deal of research evidence that students who participate in PLTL perform better than students
who learn individually and alone. Our work begins to examine exactly how the discourse in PLTL groups
contributes to improved chemistry understanding. From our analysis, it appears that not all peer-group
experiences are equivalent in promoting chemistry understanding.
       Based on previous research we found that peer leaders who used equal amounts of facilitative and
instructional discourse had shorter chains of interactions and unequal participation. Conversely, the use of a
high percentage of facilitative discourse was related to increased chains of student-to-student interactions and
more equal student participation (Brown, Sawyer, & Frey, 2009b). Second, we observed that when a peer leader
used primarily facilitative discourse and provided abundant managerial support, students displayed extended
discussions that went beyond applying equations in a rote manner and began to develop an understanding of the
concepts. Conversely, when a peer leader used more equal combinations of discourse coded as instructive and
facilitative, students spent considerable time working individually and their discourse focused on the algebraic
steps necessary to solve the problem (Brown, Sawyer, & Frey, 2009a).      In this study, we observed that students'
discourse was related to the nature and structure of the problem.  Students mostly talked about the periodic
trends using the diagrams they learned  about in class. The discussions that occurred during the review
influenced how the students solved periodic trends problems.    Students focused on using the diagrams they
discussed during the review to solve problems and rarely engaged with the underlying concepts associated with
understanding the periodic trends. Thus, for some problems, students would benefit from explicit conceptual
questions in order to engage in discussions of the underlying concepts.
       The goal of PLTL is to engage students in building chemistry knowledge through a more open forum
of collaborative discourse with greater student involvement.    To provide quality PLTL sessions, Chemistry
instructors must understand the discourse practices of peer leaders and students. Many education researchers
have stressed that an effective student culture of collaboration requires close attention and scaffolding, and once
a collaborative group culture has emerged, classroom conversations can lead to significant individual cognitive
advancement and the development of deep conceptual understanding (Greeno, 2006; Sawyer, 2006;
Scardamalia & Bereiter, 2006). This preliminary study suggests that the nature and structure of the problem
influence student discourse. If problems include explicit conceptual questions then collaborative group cultures
could emerge that encourages students to engage in deep knowledge building.

Implications for Future Research
Examining student discourse during a content review and problem solving activity has implications for the
redesign of PLTL problems and future research.  We believed that students would discuss the underlying
concepts associated with the review and the problem based on their experiences in lecture and recitation
sessions. Based on the early stages of our third study, implications arise for the redesign of PLTL problem sets.
Based on the findings of the third study we are redesigning PLTL problem-sets to begin with guiding questions
that encourage students to discuss key concepts and experiments in addition to equations and variables.
Altering existing problem sets to provide explicit questions that have students discuss phenomena before
problem solving may engage students in higher-order thinking and alter students' interactions with each other
and the peer leader. Future research is needed that investigates whether revising the way PLTL problems are
written better fosters the type of conversations that lead to deep conceptual understanding. Restructuring the
problems could favorably affect student's chemistry understanding, critical thinking, and knowledge building
from collaborative discourse.

                                                  776      ISLS
                                             ICLS 2010    Volume 1

References
Bakeman, R., & Gottman, J. (1986). Observing interaction: An introduction to sequential analysis. New York:
       Cambridge University Press.
Beals, D. E., & Tabors, P. O. (1995). Arboretum, bureaucratic, and carbohydrates: Preschoolers' exposure to
       rare vocabulary at home. First Language, 15, 57-76.
Bereiter, C. (2002). Education and mind in the knowledge. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Brown, P., Sawyer, K. R., Frey, R. (2009a, Oct). Peer-led team learning in general chemistry: Investigating the
       discourse of peer leaders and students. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the Mid-western
       educational Research Association Conference, St. Louis, MO.
Brown, P., Sawyer, K. R., Frey, R. (2009b, April). Investigating peer-leader discourse in peer-led team
       learning in general chemistry. Poster presented at the annual meeting of the American Educational
       Research Association, San Diego, CA.
Engle, R. A., & Conant, F. R. (2002). Guiding principles for fostering productive disciplinary engagement:
       Explaining an emergent argument in a community of learners classroom. Cognition & Instruction,
       20(4), 399.
Gafney, L., & Varma-Nelson, P. (2008). Peer-led team learning: Evaluation, dissemination, and
       institutionalization of a college level initiative. Dordrecht, the Netherlands: Springer.
Glaser, B., & Strauss, A. (1967). The discovery of grounded theory. Chicago: Aldine.
Gosser, D. K., Cracolice, M., Kampmeier, J., Roth, V., Strozak, V., & Varma-Nelson, P. (2001). Peer-Led Team
       Learning: A guidebook. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Gosser, D. K., & Roth, V. (1998). The workshop chemistry project: Peer-led team learning. Journal of
       Chemical Education, 75(2), 185-187.
Greeno, J. G. (2006). Learning in Activity. In R. K. Sawyer (Ed.), The cambridge handbook of the learning
       sciences (pp. 79-96). New York: Cambridge University Press.
Hockings, S. C., DeAngelis, K. J., & Frey, R. F. (2008). Peer-led team learning in general chemistry:
       Implementation and evaluation. Journal of Chemical Education, 85(7), 990-996.
Lunn, M. (1998). Applying simple k-sample tests to conditional probabilities for competition risks in a clinical
       trial. Biometrics, 54, 1662-1672.
Patton, M. Q. (2002). Qualitative research and evaluation (3rd ed.). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.
Rogoff, B., Matusov, E., & White, C. (1996). Models of teaching and learning: participating in a community of
       learners. In D. R. Olson & N. Torrance (Eds.), Handbook of education and human development (pp.
       338-414). Malden, MA: Blackwell Publishing.
Sarquis, J. L., Dixon, L. J., Gosser, D. K., Kampmeier, J. A., Roth, V., Strozak, V. S., et al. (2001). The
       workshop project: Peer-led team learning in chemistry. In J. E. Miller, J. E. Groccia & M. S. Miller
       (Eds.), Student-Assisted Teaching (pp. 150-156). Boston: Anker.
Sawyer, R. K. (2006). Analyzing collaborative discourse. In K. R. Sawyer (Ed.), The Cambridge Handbook of
       the Learning Science (pp. 187-204). New York: Cambridge University Press.
Scardamalia, M., & Bereiter, C. (2006). Knowledge building: Theory, pedagogy, and technology. In R. K.
       Sawyer (Ed.), Cambridge handbook of the learning sciences (pp. 97-118). New York: Cambridge
       University Press.

Acknowledgements
The research in this paper has been funded by NSF CCLI grant award #0633202. The authors thank all of the
peer leaders for their efforts in making the PLTL program successful at Washington University in St. Louis.

                                                 777     ISLS
