                                                  ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

  Fading Instructional Scripts: Preventing Relapses into Novice
                            Strategies by Distributed Monitoring
            Christof Wecker, Frank Fischer, University of Munich, Leopoldstr. 13, D-80802 Munich
                              christof.wecker@psy.lmu.de, frank.fischer@psy.lmu.de

          Abstract: During the fading of instructional scripts learners might relapse into their initial
          novice strategies after script prompts are withdrawn. One possibility to overcome this problem
          could be   a learning  partner   providing   distributed     monitoring  of   the performance     of  the
          strategy suggested   by   the  script. In a 2-factorial   experiment    with  the  factors   fading  and
          distributed  monitoring   that involved   126   students   of  educational    science  we  investigated
          whether during the fading of an instructional script there is a moderating effect of distributed
          monitoring on the performance of the strategy and thereby on the acquisition of the cognitive
          skill of argumentation. Strategy knowledge was fostered best by the combination of fading
          and distributed monitoring. Distributed monitoring also kept the performance of some aspects
          of the strategy at higher levels during fading, which was positively related to the acquisition of
          strategy knowledge.

Theoretical background

Argumentation as a cognitive skill
In the literature on cognitive skill acquisition, a skill is typically regarded as a system of procedural knowledge
that can be described by a set of production rules (e. g. Newell, 1990; Anderson & Lebiere, 1998). Each single
procedural knowledge component described by a production rule can fulfil at least one of two functions: It can
regulate the execution of the skill by setting subgoals, or it can directly contribute to performance by helping
accomplish  these    subgoals  (cf. Anderson,    1987).   The   main   mechanism   for  acquiring   a  unit of   procedural
knowledge according to these theories is applying it (Anderson & Lebiere, 1998).
          Argumentation     competence   can  be  regarded    as a  cognitive  skill. On    the basis  of a cognitive   task
analysis, the  ability to arrive at a   counterargument     against  the relevance  of  someone    else's  argument   for a
specific claim (as one aspect of argumentation competence) can be described as a series of subgoals that can be
accomplished    by   procedural  knowledge    that  implements      argumentation   schemes     (Wecker,    2008):  (1) the
identification of  a  claim in  someone    else's utterance,    (2) the  identification of  an  argument    put  forward  to
support the   claim,  (3) the identification  of  the type    of the   claim, (4) the   identification of the   type of  the
argument, (5) a check of the fulfilment of the conditions of relevance of the argument with respect to the claim,
and (6) the formulation of a counterargument on the basis of the results of the analysis conducted in steps 1 to 5.
Accordingly, the specific aspect of argumentation competence mentioned above involves strategy knowledge
about this series of steps.
          Learners may be supported by means of an instructional script to apply such a strategy while engaging
in collaborative learning (e. g. Stegmann et al., 2007). As long as they do not master the strategy, they use
general-purpose productions to interpret these instructions (Taatgen, Lebiere & Anderson, 2006) and set the
corresponding subgoals in accordance with them. In this phase, learners do not yet apply the strategy knowledge
themselves since control of performance is exerted completely by the script that guides them. Consequently, this
kind of perfomance contributes little to the acquisition of strategy knowledge according to the assumptions of
skill acquisition theories mentioned above. In order to strengthen strategy knowledge, learners need to use it to
self-regulate their performance. Fading can provide them with opportunities to do so.

The fading of instructional scripts
Very diverse kinds of instructional support can be faded, ranging from stimuli and prompts (Riley, 1995) to
steps in worked-out examples (Renkl & Atkinson, 2003). In most of these cases, fading proved effective for
learning (e. g. Schunk & Rice, 1993; Renkl, Atkinson & Große, 2004). However, the kinds of instructional
support   faded in   these  studies  are   quite unlike   instructional  scripts. These     are more   akin   to scaffolds;
collaboration  scripts  can actually    be regarded   as  a   kind  of socio-cognitive   scaffolding   (Carmien,    Fischer,
Fischer & Kollar, 2007).
          Fading has always been regarded as an integral part of scaffolding (Wood, Bruner & Ross, 1976; Pea,
2004; Puntambekar & Hübscher, 2005). So far, only a couple of studies on the effects of the fading of scaffolds
have been conducted, with mixed results. Leutner (2000) conducted two experiments on the effects of fading on
the acquisition of software skills. One provided evidence for beneficial effects of fading, the other indicated
decreased performance in the process of fading. McNeill, Lizotte, Krajicik and Marx (2006) demonstrated a
marginally significant positive effect of fading on knowledge about the principles of scientific explanations. In a

                                                      794   ·  © ISLS
                                                   ICLS 2010    ·  Volume 1

study by Lee  and  Songer      (2004)   the fading of scaffolds    had  no  effect on the quality of explanations   in the
posttest, but the quality of explanations during learning decreased over time while scaffolds were faded.
         From the perspective of cognitive skill acquisition these results do not come as a surprise: As long as
there is unfaded support, learners do not practice the application of strategy knowledge to self-regulate their
performance. As soon as support is faded, they are immediately required to jump in and exert self-regulation of
their performance, which       they  had no   opportunity    to   practice before. A  way  out of  this paradox    may be
available in collaborative situations.

The role of distributed monitoring
When support previously available from an instructional script is gradually withdrawn, successful performance
requires learners to take over control of their activities. A full cycle of control involves planning, monitoring
and adapting one's steps as part of a strategy. This task may overwhelm learners if they are supposed to take
responsibility for all of its parts at once. In such a situation, the idea of distributed metacognition (King, 1998)
proves useful: Specific components of control may be distributed among collaborating learners. For example, a
learner can be freed from the task of monitoring his or her own application of a strategy and receive feedback on
the performance from a learning partner. As soon as he or she wanders off track, such feedback can be used in
subsequent cycles to plan the single steps in accordance with the strategy to be internalized.

Research questions
Accordingly, this study focused on the following research questions:
(1) What are the effects of fading and distributed monitoring on the acquisition of strategy knowledge?
(2) What are the effects of fading and distributed monitoring on the performance of the strategy suggested by
the script in the course of time?
(3) What is the relation between the performance of the strategy and the acquisition of strategy knowledge?
It was assumed that fading will play out its full potential to foster the acquisition of strategy knowledge only
when combined with distributed monitoring. The hypothesized mechanism behind this effect is self-directed (i.
e. unguided)  performance        of the strategy suggested      by  the script,  which may  be  kept    up by    distributed
monitoring.

Methods

Participants
The participants of the study were 126 students in courses in educational science and teacher preparation who
attended a lecture with the title "Introduction to Educational Psychology". On average, they were 23.3 years old
(SD = 3.9). Of them, 73.8 % were female and 26.2 % were male. They were randomly paired to dyads who
discussed on separated online discussion boards during a collaborative learning phase.

Design
A 2x2 design with the factors fading and distributed monitoring was implemented (see table 1).

Table 1: Design of the study.

                                                                                 !"#$%&'
 ($)*+$,-*.#'/0%$*0+$%&!                                  !"#$%&%'()*+,-!                         .$%&%'()*+,-!
 /+-012-'%+(-*+32-&%'41"+-1*+"5'                      "#!$%&$'()*!+,-'./'!                  "0!$%&$'()1!+,-'./'!
 /+-0'%+(-*+32-&%'41"+-1*+"5'                         ")!$%&$'(21!+,-'./'!                  "3!$%&$'()4!+,-'./'!

Learning task, material and environment
The two learners in each group dealt with cases on the application of Weiner's attribution theory in a text-based
online discussion board. They were told that they were discussing analyses of these cases in groups of four and
that two of the other learners had the task to write these analyses. The learners themselves were asked to write
critical replies to each of theses analyses and could discuss any questions that came up during this task on the
discussion board. In fact, six case analyses with at least two questionable claims were posted to the board under
the names  of two  simulated      group  members   at fixed   points    of time. As a  preparation for  this collaborative
learning session, the learners read a three-page text on Weiner's attribution theory and a four-page text on how
to generate counterarguments for the critical replies.
         A script supported the learners in all four conditions in the process of formulating counterarguments
against the prepared case analyses by providing instructions on how to analyze the argumentation in the case

                                                      795  ·    © ISLS
                                               ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

analyses to  discover  problematic  assumptions.    The   script contained   three kinds  of information:            sequence
information, argument     schemata and  application support  (see   figure  1). Sequence  information  describes          the
process of analyzing the argumentation in the prepared case analysis and the construction of a critical reply to it.
The steps of the strategy to arrive at a counterargument were mirrored in the interface as prompts that changed
according to the state of the editing, and specified the next step. Argument schemata contained information on
what types of argument are appropriate to support the identified type of claim and what conditions of relevance
need to be fulfilled for an identified pair of argument and claim, which was crucial for the assessment of the
argumentation in the case analysis. They were implemented by means of selection fields for the type of the
claim and the argument as well as by a prompt for the assessment of the conditions of relevance. Application
support was provided by means of explanatory sentences for the terms used in the prompts and selection fields
of the script as well as examples for the respective types of propositions. They were displayed in the interface
directly next to the respective control elements.

                      Application support

                                                                             Argument schemata
                 Sequence information

                                                                                                                 1

                 Figure 1. Implementation of the script for the formulation of counterarguments.

Independent variables

Fading
In the conditions with faded script components of the interface were removed based on the number of critical
replies posted. The following fading regime was used: The application support disappeared completely after
two critical replies  had been written. Sequence   information   prompts    were faded  by replacing  two            randomly
chosen prompts per round by the request "Please perform this step on your own.", starting with the composition
of the third critical reply. This means  that after five  critical replies only  this unspecific request           was shown
before each step. With respect to the argument schemata "later" elements had to be faded first because for the
branching of the support for different argument schemata unequivocal input was required: First the specific
question concerning the fulfilment of the conditions of relevance (step 5) was replaced by an unspecific one.
From the forth critical reply on, the dropdown field for the type of the argument did no longer contain any
options, but the learners had to fill in the type of the argument themselves. From the fifth critical reply on, the
dropdown field for the type of the claim did no longer contain any options, but the learners had to fill in the type
of the claim themselves. After five critical replies had been posted, the interface did not change as a function of
the number of critical replies any more, no matter how many messages were written. After 70 minutes, finally
the students were provided only with a simple text box for the formulation of their critical replies to the case
analyses as customary in asynchronous discussion boards.
         In  the conditions  with unfaded script  the  interface   for the composition  of critical replies          remained
unchanged throughout the learning phase.

                                                   796  ·  © ISLS
                                                 ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

Distributed monitoring
In the conditions with distributed monitoring, one of the learnings had the task to provide the other one with
feedback for each of his or her critical replies, based on which the other learner was asked to revise his or her
critical reply. During the formulation of this feedback, the learning partner was supported by the interface: By
simply clicking    on check  boxes,  a  message   about   the  completeness  of the six  steps of  the strategy for the
construction  of   a counterargument,    on  the appropriateness    of the  identification of  the types of claim   and
argument, and on the correctness of the answer to the question concerning the conditions of relevance could be
composed. Furthermore there was the opportunity to add text remarks. In the condition with faded script and
distributed monitoring, the distributed monitoring was continued after the fading had started.
          In the conditions without distributed monitoring, the learning partners were neither asked nor supported
to provide feedback on the critical replies.

Dependent variables

Strategy knowledge
Strategy knowledge was measured by means of a task with open answering format. The learners were asked to
describe their strategy for checking the relevance of an argument for a claim and formulating a counterargument
against it. The learners' unsegmented answers were coded for the occurence (0 ­ absent/1 ­ present) of each of
the six steps of the strategy implemented in the script. One further coding item captured the correctness of the
sequence. The agreement of two coders for these coding variables ranged from 76 % to 90 % (median: 86 %);
Cohen's ! ranged from .46 and .70 (median: .51). Therefore, the objectivity of the codings can be regarded as
sufficient (cf. Orwin,   1994,  p. 152). The    seven coding   items   were added   up to  form  the scale for  strategy
knowledge with a possible range from 0 to 7. The seven items were internally consistent (Cronbach's " = .93).

Performance of the strategy
Performance of the strategy was measured based on five single variables indicating for each critical reply for
each of five of the six steps of the strategy whether this step had been performed (1) or not (0). The last step was
omitted since it coincided with composing the message, which is performed in any reply irrespective of the
strategy  applied.   For the first four  steps,  the corresponding   adherence   variables  were   taken directly from
logfiles. The   adherence  variable  for the fifth   step of  the strategy was  coded  (percentage   agreement:  99 %,
Cohen's ! = .98).
          The overall scale for the performance of the strategy was formed in two steps: First, for each of the five
steps the proportion of all messages in which the step had been performed was calculated (also separately for all
messages before and after the fading of support). Finally, the indicator for overall performance of the strategy
was computed by adding the five variables for the performance of the single steps and could range from 0 to 5.
Its reliability was rather high (Cronbach's " = .86).

Procedure
Data were collected in a series of sessions of three hours of length with up to 20 students each. These were
distributed over   two   rooms; learning partners    who  collaborated   online sat in different rooms.  After  a short
introduction into the purpose and procedure of the study, the participants filled in an online questionnaire for
control variables and read printed texts on attribution theory and on how to construct counterarguments. They
could keep them until the end of the learning phase. The collaborative learning phase started with a demo video
on how to use the learning environment. After a short break, an 80-minute collaboration phase in the different
experimental conditions followed. Finally, the learners completed online post-tests.

Statistical analysis
Data were analyzed with individual students as the units of analysis. From each dyad, one member was selected
who had not provided distributed monitoring. Furthermore, a hierarchical-linear analysis of the performance of
the strategy over the course of time was conducted with single messages (the critical replies) as the units of
analysis. The significance level was set to 5 % for all analyses.

Results

Effects of fading and distributed monitoring on the acquisition of strategy knowledge
The descriptive results for the acquisition of strategy knowledge in the four conditions are displayed in table 2.
An analysis     of variance  with   strategy knowledge     as  the  dependent   variable   and fading  and  distributed
monitoring as independent factors shows that strategy knowledge was significantly higher in the faded script
conditions than in the unfaded script conditions, which corresponded to a medium size effect of fading, F(1;
62) = 6.32; p < .05; partial #2 = .09. Likewise, a significant medium to large size effect of distributed monitoring

                                                     797   ·  © ISLS
                                                ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

on strategy   knowledge    in favour of the conditions    with distributed  monitoring  compared    to the conditions
without distributed monitoring was detected, F(1; 62) = 8.20; p < .01; partial #2 = .12. The small to medium size
interaction effect of these two independent variables was marginally significant, F(1; 62) = 3.21; p < .10; partial
#2 = .05. However, the main effects are largely due to the superiority of the condition with the faded script along
with distributed monitoring. Students in this condition significantly outperformed the students in the three other
conditions on the strategy knowledge test.

Table 2: Means and standard deviations of strategy knowledge in the experimental conditions.

                                                                                                 Strategy knowledge
Distributed monitoring                      Fading                                      N        M           SD
Without distributed monitoring             Unfaded scriptFaded script                   15       0.79        1.81181.472.13
With distributed monitoring                Unfaded scriptFaded script                   13       1.46        2.30174.242.88

Effects of fading and distributed monitoring on the performance of the strategy
suggested by the script
Research question 2 asked whether fading and distributed monitoring affect the performance of the strategy
suggested by the script in the course of time . The temporal development of the performance of the strategy was
analyzed by means of a hierarchical-linear analysis. The level-1 growth model predicted the performance of the
strategy during the formulation of message t from person i on the basis of the temporal position of message t:

        yti = $0i + $1i · (number of messaget) + eti

Intercepts  (base  levels)    and  slopes  (growth   rates)   varied  substantially  between    students,  intercepts:
%2(62) = 229.73; p < .001; & = .34; slopes: %2(62) = 120.79; p < .001; & = .02. As can be seen from the intercept
for number of message presented in table 3, however, on average there was neither an increase nor a decrease in
the performance of the strategy suggested by the script over time.
        The explanatory level-2 model used the experimentally manipulated variables fading and distributed
monitoring to predict both the base level (intercepts $0i) and the growth rates (slopes $1i) of the performance of
the strategy for person i:

        $0i = '00 + '01 · (fadingi) + '02 · (distributed monitoringi) + r0i
        $1i = '10 + '11 · (fadingi) + '12 · (distributed monitoringi) + r1i

As can be seen from table 3, the base level did not vary significantly as a function of either fading or distributed
monitoring.   The average   individual  growth rate  in the   condition with  the unfaded script without   distributed
monitoring (basal growth rate), however, was significantly below zero, indicating a decrease in performance of
the strategy in this condition. While fading did not significantly affect this growth rate, distributed monitoring
significantly raised this  negative  growth, yielding   an    approximately   constant level of  performance    of the
strategy in the corresponding conditions (-0.08 + 0.11 > 0). The proportion of variance in slopes accounted for
by the explanatory model was 6 %, which was still significant, %2(62) = 117.59; p < .001, indicating that there
may be further factors that substantially contribute to it.

Table 3: Hierarchical-linear analysis of the development of the performance of the strategy triggered by the
script as a function of fading and distributed monitoring.

Growth model: Prediction of the performance of the strategy yti                           $1           t           p
Number of message                                                                             -0.03       -1.18    .24
Explanatory model:
Prediction of the base level $0i in the growth model                                      '0q          t           p
Fading                                                                                        0.21         1.39    .17
Distributed monitoring                                                                        0.09         0.57    .57
Prediction of the growth rate $1i in the growth model                                     '1q          t           p
Basal growth rate (without fading and distributed monitoring, intercept '10)                  -0.08       -2.19    .03
Fading                                                                                        0.01         0.24    .81
Distributed monitoring                                                                        0.11         2.45    .02

                                                    798  ·  © ISLS
                           number of steps performed per message
                                                                                                     ICLS 2010  ·           Volume 1

The role of distributed monitoring for the performance of the strategy suggested by the script was analyzed
separately in the conditions with the faded script by means of an analysis of variance for repeated measures with
performance of the strategy as the dependent variable, distributed monitoring as a between-subjects factor and
fading as a within-subjects factor with the two values before fading and after fading, i. e. the performance of the
single steps of the strategy was averaged over all messages from each participant written before support for the
particular step was faded and over all messages written after support for the particular step was faded, and
aggregated over the five steps of the strategy (see figure 2).

                                                                                                       adherence to strategy

                                                                   5

                                                                   4

                                                                                                                                                    distributed monitoring

                                                                   3                                                                                    without distributed monitoring

                                                                                                                                                        with distributed monitoring

                                                                   2

                                                                   1

                                                                   0
                                                                                  before fading                          after fading

                                                                                             fading (within-subject factor)

 Figure 2. Average proportions of messages in which the strategy as a whole was performed before and after
               fading (separated for the conditions with and without "distributed monitoring").

         A decrease in the performance of the strategy was found that reached the boundary of significance,
F(1; 31) = 4.16;  p = .05;                                             partial #2 = .12.            However,    this         decrease    occurred   only  in the             condition       without
distributed monitoring, as indicated by a significant interaction between the within-subjects factor fading and
distributed monitoring, F(1; 31) = 7.38; p < .05; partial #2 = .19.
         Exploratory analyses on the level of individual steps of the strategy revealed that these effects were
mainly due to the learners' performance of the last two steps of the strategy: Both for the identification of the
type of the argument and the check of the fulfilment of the conditions of relevance there was a decrease after the
fading of the corresponding support in the condition without distributed monitoring, identification of the type of
the  argument: t(15) = 1.97;                                               p < .05 (one-sided),           check             of the     fulfilment of  the conditions                    of relevance:
t(15) = 2.32; p < .05 (one-sided). For the identification of the type of the argument the interaction effect between
the within-subjects factor fading and distributed monitoring was marginally significant, F(1; 31) = 3.06; p < .10;
partial #2 = .09, while                                               for the  check            of the fulfilment           of  the    conditions  of relevance              the       corresponding
interaction was significant F(1; 31) = 5.27; p < .05; partial #2 = .15.

Relation between the performance of the strategy and the acquisition of strategy
knowledge
Between the performance of the strategy and the acquisition of strategy knowledge there was a significant small
correlation, r = .22; p < .05. Because on average there were no differences in the performance of the strategy
between the four experimental conditions, this finding does not explain the differences in the acquisition of
strategy knowledge between the experimental conditions.
         As argued before, the performance of a strategy while learners are guided through its single steps rather
than performing them in a self-directed way, should contribute little to the acquisition of strategy knowledge.
What is expected to contribute to the acquisition of strategy knowledge is the performance of the strategy in
phases in which support has been withdrawn and learners have the opportunity to practice the self-regulation of
these steps, which occurred to a larger extent when they received distributed monitoring, as described in the
previous section. Accordingly, separate correlations between the performance of the single steps before and
after the fading of the corresponding support and strategy knowledge about these specific steps were calculated.
These are reported for the last two steps because, as described above, for these two there were differences in
performance in the course of time between conditions with and without distributed monitoring: Performance of
the step of the identification of the type of the argument before the fading of the corresponding support and
strategy knowledge about it were not significantly correlated, r = -.15; n. s., whereas performance of it after the

                                                                                                         799  ·  © ISLS
                                                      ICLS 2010     ·  Volume 1

fading of  the   corresponding       support   was   marginally     correlated  with   the  corresponding    knowledge,     r = .30;
p < .10. Most    importantly,    the  difference     between    these    two correlations    was  significant, z = 1.71;    p < .05.
Similarly the performance of the step of checking the fulfilment of the conditions of relevance before the fading
of the corresponding support and strategy knowledge about this step were uncorrelated, r = .00; n. s., while
performance of it after the fading of the corresponding support again was marginally correlated with strategy
knowledge about it, r = .33; p < .10. In this case, the difference between the two correlations was marginally
significant, z = 1.59; p < .10.

Discussion
The main    findings   of this   study  indicate     that  the  performance    of  the strategy   implemented     in a  script may
decline over time, especially if components of the script are faded. It could be demonstrated however, that it can
be kept on a continuously high level by means of peer support such as distributed monitoring. The performance
of the strategy was shown to be related to the acquisition of strategy knowledge, particularly in phases in which
components of the scripts have been faded and accordingly the learners have the opportunity to practice the self-
regulation of the steps of the strategy. This provides an explanation for the beneficial effect of the combination
of a faded script with distributed monitoring on the acquisition of strategy knowledge.
         The     current  study    extends     our   understanding      in  several  ways.     With   respect to    the  effects of
collaboration   scripts,  it replicated    the finding     that scripts  are appropriate     means  to   trigger specific   learning
activities (Weinberger       et al., 2005;     Kollar et   al., 2007;    Stegmann    et   al., 2007),   even  after  the fading  of
components of the script. It could be shown, however, that the level of performance of the script can be kept at
an even higher level by providing distributed monitoring.
         With respect to fading, thereby an important condition of its effectiveness was identified: Learners may
need further support to take advantage of the opportunity to self-regulate their performance. This finding might
contribute to a clarification of the reasons for the varying effects of fading reported in previous studies on fading
(cf. Lee & Songer, 2004; McNeill et al., 2006; Leutner, 2000).
         This    opportunity    to   practice  the   self-regulation   of  the steps   of  a   strategy may  not  be  sufficient if
learners  fail to  take  advantage    of   it. Distributed     monitoring    can  be regarded    as one    potential way    to raise
learners' self-regulatory activities in accordance with the strategy implemented in a script even after the fading
of the   components      to  support   it. Accordingly,         distributed  monitoring    can   be one    way   to  make    use of
collaboration during the acquisition of complex skills in computer-supported collaborative learning. It is also
one option     for adapting     support  to    the   current   needs  of   learners  because    the learning  partner    providing
distributed monitoring will only jump in with corrective feedback when there is divergence from the strategy to
be internalized.
         This study went beyond standard practice in research also in a methodological respect by analyzing
learning   activities diachronically    by     means  of   multi-level   analyses   of  the  temporal    development     of specific
quality aspects of learning activities instead of aggregating indicators of the quality of learning activities over
the whole learning phase (e. g. Weinberger et al., 2005). Thereby it can more closely account for the causal
structure of the single learning events influenced by the independent variables. This should be pushed even
further by relating single learning events to learning outcomes since the way in which learning activities might
affect learning outcomes was still analyzed on the basis of such aggregated indicators. How this can be done is a
topic for further discussion.
         It is an important limitation of the present study that argumentation skill was not measured on the basis
of perfomance in argumentative situations but by means of a declarative test of strategy knowledge about how
to arrive  at  a  counterargument      against     a position   advanced     by  a  learning   partner.  Furthermore,    the   study
captured only rather short term effects of learning with a faded script and distributed monitoring. As it was
conducted under laboratory conditions, the claims put forward in this paper still are in need of validation for
more natural learning environments.
         Accordingly, future research should focus on effects of fading and distributed monitoring not only on
declarative strategy knowledge but also its application in the context of executing argumentation skill. Effects of
longer-term interventions on immediate learning outcomes as well as their retention over more extended periods
of time  should    be studied,   preferably     in   field contexts   with   more   authentic   kinds   of collaboration.   Further
research should also test the theoretical claims put forward in this study with other domain-general learning
outcomes such as online search competence, which is currently being undertaken (Wecker, Kollar, Fischer &
Prechtl, 2010). Finally, ways to adapt the fading of a script to a learner's current competence level would be a
very promising direction to explore.
         Based     on the    findings from     this  study   it can   be recommended       that  scripts should   be faded   out to
provide learners with the opportunity to practice the self-regulation of skilled performance (as suggested by Pea,
2004; Puntambekar & Hübscher, 2005; and others). This recommendation has to be supplemented by the caveat,
however, that it is important to keep learners' performance of the strategy to be acquired at a high level in these
self-regulated phases. Collaboration may be exploited to accomplish this goal.

                                                           800    ·  © ISLS
                                                 ICLS 2010       ·  Volume 1

         Thus,  fading   may    be a way   to move   from      a   high  degree  of support   to self-directed  learning  with
authentic tasks. In this process the acquisition of competence can be considered as an internalization of control
that has been exerted socially by peers before.

References
Anderson,   J. R.  (1987).   Skill  acquisition: Compilation          of weak-method      problem   solutions. Psychological
         Review, 94(2), 192-210.
Anderson, J. R. & Lebiere, C. (1998). The atomic components of thought. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Carmien,  S.,  Fischer,  F., Fischer,   G. &  Kollar,  I. (2007).     The   interplay  of internal  and  external scripts -  a
         distributed  cognition    perspective.  In F.   Fischer,     H.  Mandl,      Haake  &   I. Kollar  (Eds.), Scripting
         computer    supported     communication      of  knowledge:         Cognitive,   computational     and   educational
         perspectives (pp. 303-326). New York: Springer.
King, A. (1998). Transactive peer tutoring: Distributing cognition and metacognition. Educational Psychology
         Review, 10(1), 57-74.
Kollar, I., Fischer, F. & Slotta, J. D. (2007). Internal and external scripts in computer-supported collaborative
         inquiry learning. Learning and Instruction, 17(6), 708-721.
Lee, H.  S. &  Songer,   N.  B.  (2004).   Expanding   an  Understanding         of Scaffolding  Theory   Using   an Inquiry-
         Fostering Science Program. Unpublished manuscript.
Leutner, D.   (2000). Double-fading     support  ­  a  training     approach    to  complex   software   systems. Journal    of
         Computer Assisted Learning, 16, 347-357.
McNeill, K. L., Lizotte, D. J., Krajcik, J. & Marx, R. W. (2006). Supporting students' construction of scientific
         explanations by fading scaffolds in instructional materials. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 15(2),
         153-191.
Newell, A. (1990). Unified theories of cognition. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Orwin,  R.  G. (1994).   Evaluating   coding  decisions.   In      H. Cooper  &    L.  V. Hedges    (Eds.), The handbook     of
         research synthesis (pp. 139-162). New York, NY: Russell Sage Foundation.
Pea, R. D. (2004). The social and technological dimensions of scaffolding and related theoretical concepts for
         learning, education, and human activity. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 13(3), 423-451.
Puntambekar, S. & Hübscher, R. (2005). Tools for scaffolding students in a complex learning environment:
         What have we gained and what have we missed? Educational Psychologist, 40(1), 1-12.
Renkl, A. & Atkinson, R. K. (2003). Structuring the transition from example study problem solving in cognitive
         skill acquisition: A cognitive load perspective. Educational Psychologist, 38(1), 15-22.
Renkl, A., Atkinson, R. K. & Große, C. S. (2004). How fading worked solution steps works ­ a cognitive load
         perspective. Instructional Science, 32, 59-82.
Riley, G. A. (1995). Guidelines for devising a hierarchy when fading response prompts. Education and Training
         in Mental Retardation and Developmental Disabilities, 30(3), 231-242.
Schunk,  D.  H.  &  Rice,    J. M. (1993).  Strategy   fading      and   progress   feedback: Effects  on   self-efficacy and
         comprehension    among      students receiving   remedial       reading  services.  Journal  of Special  Education,
         27(3), 257-276.
Stegmann, K., Weinberger, A., & Fischer, F. (2007). Facilitating argumentative knowledge construction with
         computer-supported collaboration scripts. International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative
         Learning, 2(4), 421-447.
Taatgen, N.    A., Lebiere,  C.   &  Anderson,   J. R.   (2006).      Modeling   paradigms    in ACT-R.     In R. Sun   (Ed.),
         Cognition   and  multi-agent    interaction:  From        cognitive modeling     to social  simulation (pp. 29-52).
         Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Wecker,  C.  &  Fischer,  F.    (2007). Fading   scripts  in   computer-supported       collaborative learning:  The    role of
         distributed monitoring. In C. Chinn, G. Erkens & S. Puntambekar (Eds.), [Proceedings of the] CSCL
         2007 (pp. 763-771). International Society of the Learning Sciences.
Wecker, C., Kollar, I., Fischer, F. & Prechtl, H. (2010). Fostering Online Search Competence and Domain-
         Specific Knowledge in Inquiry Classrooms: Effects of Continuous and Fading Collaboration Scripts.
         Paper presented at the 9th International Conference of the Learning Sciences (ICLS), Chicago, June 29
         ­ July 2 2010.
Weinberger, A., Ertl, B., Fischer, F. & Mandl, H. (2005). Epistemic and social scripts in computer-supported
         collaborative learning. Instructional Science, 33(1), 1-30.
Wood,   D., Bruner,   J. S.  &   Ross,   G. (1976).   The    role     of tutoring   in problem   solving.   Journal  of Child
         Psychology & Psychiatry & Allied Disciplines, 17, 89-100.

Acknowledgments
This study was partially funded by Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG).

                                                      801    ·   © ISLS
