                                                 ICLS 2010     Volume 1

      Student Learning Through Journal Writing in a Natural Science
                     Course for Pre-Elementary Education Majors.

                    Michael T. Dianovsky and Donald J. Wink, University of Illinois at Chicago
                                         845 W. Taylor St., Chicago, IL 60607
                                      Email: dianovsk@uic.edu; dwink@uic.edu

         Abstract:   This paper describes the use of journals in a general education chemistry course for
         elementary education majors. In the journals, students describe their understanding of a topic, its
         development, and its connection to their lives.     The following types of reflections were identified
         in student journals: action, prior knowledge, project ideas, text resources, classroom events, and
         monitoring of knowledge.      A multiple   linear   regression   analysis of  total course  points earned
         versus student GPA, ACT score, number of reflections made for each reflection type, and total
         number of reflection made throughout all journals was used to determine the significance of the
         type of reflections made by students in relationship to their chemistry content understanding.       The
         results indicate that students who reflected more on classroom events and those who monitored
         their knowledge correlated positively with a higher content knowledge.           However, reflecting on
         text resources had a negative correlation to students' overall chemistry content knowledge.

Introduction & Theoretical Background
         This paper reports an investigation of student journal writing as a regulator of student metacognition in a
general education chemistry course.    Journal writing provides an opportunity for learners to understand their own
learning process, to increase their active involvement in learning, and to gain personal ownership of their learning
(Moon,   1999).   Writing journals    encourages self-thought,  which     allows   for the   development  of metacognitive
practices and the promotion of new learning by evaluating prior experiences.            The use of journal writing in the
science classrooms allows students to reflect on their actions, prior experiences, text resources, classroom events,
and current knowledge, with reflection referring to "those intellectual and affective activities in which individuals
engage to explore their experiences in order to lead to new understandings and appreciations" (Boud, Keogh, &
Walker, 1985).    Also, reflection in writing has a strong metacognitive component that helps students monitor their
learning  (Bangert-Drowns,   Hurley,  &  Wilkinson,    2004).   Previous   research    indicates the importance   of having
students reflect upon their current knowledge and understanding (Brown, Bransford, Ferrara, & Campione, 1983;
Puntembekar & Kolodner, 1998; Davis, 2003).       Writing assignments incorporating reflection on content knowledge
enables students to formulate a better understanding of unprocessed materials and events and to document how their
learning occurs, increasing connections with prior knowledge.         Also, using productive reflection in the classroom
promotes the knowledge integration process by expanding ideas and allowing students to identify the weaknesses in
their knowledge.   The nature of the assignment and the prompts given to a student are import for this.       Davis (2003)
found  that students who    reflected on generic    prompts  had    a more  coherent    understanding  as   they worked   on
complex projects than those students that reflected on direct prompts.
         The present study examines a chemistry course for pre-elementary education majors that includes journal
writing assignments in which students respond to generic prompts to present their understanding of certain key
topics and to reflect upon their own experiences  with the   topic.   Our study focuses on the   types of reflection students
exhibited in their journals and how   these  relate to student content    knowledge    in the course. We    also studied the
choices  students  make  with generic  prompts   that  are aimed    at developing   a  metacognitive  perspective   in their
writing.  The theoretical framework for this study is composed of metacognition and writing-to-learn perspectives.
Metacognition refers to the knowledge concerning one's own cognitive processes (Flavell, 1979).              Brown (1987)
related metacognition to the learners' knowledge, awareness and control of the      processes by which they learn.     It was
determined that metacognitive learners are able to recognize, evaluate, and reconstruct existing ideas (Baker, 1991).
These findings of Brown and Baker represent two views of metacognition currently known as the knowledge and
regulation of cognition. Learning is said to occur when    new  data  or information presented to a student conflicts  with
what he or she already knows and give the student a chance to change their mind to think differently (Cracolice,
2005).
         Several different kinds of assignments have been used to promote metacognition in chemistry learning
(Rickey & Stacey, 2000).    This included the deliberate use of a thinking frame (Mattox, Reisner, & Rickey, 2006),
student documentation of their thinking through heuristics such as concept maps (Novak & Gowin, 1984), student

                                                      802     ISLS
                                                  ICLS 2010      Volume 1

work in extended problem solving situations (Cooper et al, 2008), and working in using extended writing within
laboratory work (Greenbowe & Hand, 2005; Wink & Choe, 2008). The theoretical framework of writing to learn is
used in this work because it characterizes the components involved when students respond to an opportunity to write
about scientific topics. The writing to learn framework has been used in work by Britton (1970) and Emig (1977).
In this approach, learning is supported and assessed by students' writing about their developing ideas.         One of the
most common      forms   of writing to learn  is done  by informal   personal    journal responses   related to educational
experiences such as literary readings, scientific experiments, videos, or from discourse with others (McCrindle &
Christensen, 1995).   The process of writing journals helps with the process of understanding relationships among
ideas, knowledge transformation and construction of new meaning (Wallace, 2007; Klein, 1999).             A major goal of
the course was for students to be able to construct ideas and generate connections between concepts to make sense
of the ideas rather than simply memorizing isolated facts.      Another goal was to improve students' scientific literacy
by having them write about the learning of science and to consider how they process information.        The writing to learn
strategy will help students achieve these goals.  It has been shown that students develop conceptual growth through the
process of writing, including parallel metacognitive growth in the learner (Mason & Buscolo, 2000).
         In the course, students experienced writing-to-learn in the context of their journal work.Journals are well
known in the K-12 literature, including the work of Davis(2003) that also contributes to the methodology of our work.
She showed that prompts for student reflection promoted knowledge integratiown hich occurs as learners expand their
repertoire of ideas, identify weaknesses in their knowledge, and combine knowedlge integration processes together.
Journal writing is also used in the college science classroom, for example in a study of reflective journal writing
within a first year university biology class (McCrindle & Christense, 1995).      Students were randomlyssaigned to either
write reflectively in their "Learning Journal," or produce a scientific report every week during the last five weeks of the
course.  The students in the journal writing group were given instructions and prompts as to the form of their jronual
writing. Results indicated that those students who did write reflectively on the content of their learning and the process
of their leaning reported a more sophisticated conception of learning and had a direct impact on their metacognitive
awareness. Similar researchon lab report writingproduced similar results (Keyset al, 1999).

Method

Participants
         The participants consisted of 76 students from two offerings of the course (Fall 2007 and Spring 2009),
called The Chemical World, who gave consent for their work to be included in a research program.                 Different
instructors taught  each  course.   Virtually all of   these participants  were   enrolled in the  pre-service  elementary
education   program  of  the  university and  they  took  the   course as   part of a natural   science general  education
requirement (Varelas   et al, 2008), which included this  course.  Out of the seventy-six  participants seventy-four were
females and two were males, reflecting the existing gender distribution in the course.        Students attend a one-hour
lecture twice a week held by the instructor and a three-hour laboratory section led by a graduate student.        Students
are assessed   by a student  introductory  essay,  six student   journals, student  portfolios, unit and final  exams, lab
reports, assigned topical projects, and a big theme project (Wink et al, 2009).        The present study focuses on the
journal assignments, which are the major place for students to describe developments in their understandings of
chemical content.

Task and Procedure
         The students submitted a total of six journals, approximately biweekly, throughout the course.         The journal
topics that were assigned consisted of material the students covered in lecture or lab in their previous weeks of class.
The approximate length of each journal was 700-900 words.           The journal entries on various topics of chemistry
provided    an opportunity   for students  to reflect  on   their current   understanding  and   how    they came  to  this
understanding.   They  were   also  a  place  where  students   communicated     with  and  received  feedback   from  the
instructor.  The prompts for the journals were consistent throughout the semester, with only a single assignment
sheet given out at the beginning of the course. Hence, the prompts fit the category of "generic," (Davis 2003),
permitting students to work in different ways within a simple scaffold. Students were instructed to include five
components in their journals and were given a rubric documenting the layout and value of each component.               The
first three components all related to a content topic in the course and are the focus of this research.           The first
component prompts enabled the students to write about their current understanding of a topic.            Here the students
were able to express, in writing, what they know about the topic and how they know it.            The second component
required the students to present specific examples of chemistry and chemical substances in relation to the topic.
Following this, the third journal component prompted students to make connections by writing about what the topic

                                                      803     ISLS
                                                 ICLS 2010    Volume 1

might mean to them in their personal history, current experience, or future plans, with frequent reference to their
everyday life or career choice.
         The fourth and fifth components of the journals covered other aspects of their work and are outside of the
scope of this paper. Specifically, the fourth component required that students write about their ongoing work on a
"big theme project," developing an idea that would become part of an individual final course project reflecting an
aspect of chemistry of interest to them (Wink et al, 2009). Finally, students wrote a section of their journal reporting
their progress in the course.   In this section students expressed the concepts or skills that they find unclear or
struggle with, how they were progressing, what was working for them, and what external factors were causing them
trouble.  They were told that a good journal would consist of approximately 700-900 words total, though many
students exceeded that number.
         Student journals were first coded for the types of reflection on understanding of the six journal topics. The
coding scheme for journals is shown in Table 1.      This was created from a coding scheme for student reflection in
journals that was derived from Davis' study of student reflections on generic and   direct prompts (Davis, 2003).  This
enabled us to code for the types of reflections found within the student journals. Each reflection written by the
student was coded with the non-hierarchical indices 1-6 to note the type of reflection.    Two coders independently
coded students' journals for reflections. There was   a 92% interrater-reliability between the two coders.

Table 1: Coding for Student Reflection in Journal Responses

    1.   Reflection on actions: involves thinking about what     ways of behaving are most appropriate, as well as
         contemplating very general goals.
    2.   Reflection on prior knowledge:   involves thinking specifically about prior experiences in which   knowledge
         was gained.
    3.   Reflection on project ideas:  involves thinking about the conceptual ideas   presented in the project itself
         (Mineral, Nutrition, and Big Theme)
    4.   Reflection on text resources:  involves thinking specifically about information presented in  the textbook,
         lab instructions, or handouts.
    5.   Reflection on classroom events:    includes thinking rendered from individual experiences from lectures,
         labs, and discussions from peers, teaching assistants, and the instructor.
    6.   Reflection on knowledge:   indicates a focus on monitoring or improving one's understanding

         Lastly, during the second course offering, students completed the Metacognitive Activities Inventory
(MCA-I) developed by    Cooper, Sandi-Urena and Stevens (2008) at the end of the semester.     This survey represents
a way to see if students are metacognitive during problem solving tasks in chemistry.   The results of this survey and
the reflection made by the students will be compared to see if those students who are actively metacognitive during
problem solving are also metacognitive during writing.

Data Analysis and Findings

Journals
         Throughout the semester students wrote a total of six journals.    Six different reflections were apparent in
the journals  after reading through   them, listed in Table   1.  All journals were  coded for   these reflection types.
Examples of student reflection responses for the six coded categories are shown in Table 2.

                                                     804     ISLS
                                                 ICLS 2010      Volume 1

Table 2: Examples of student reflection code

 Reflection                                       Example from Student Work
    Type
   Action     I find if I take the extra time to figure out how to do each problem and read the chapters, I could
              be well off and prepared.    The only problem is managing enough time to set aside for chemistry.

    Prior     Over the last weeks we have learned unit conversions in the metric system in class. I grew up in
 Knowledge    Germany and     used  the metric system all  my life and am used to the system.   It is easier to use
              and convert in  the metric system because     it is all powers of ten. I am confident in my
              understanding of the common prefixes used.

  Project     I think that in order to do my individual project it is necessary to know how to work with unit
    Ideas     conversions because this will help me understand better how much of each chemical is put in
              food to make it grow faster and better.

    Text      I came to understand the properties about polarity and functional groups of organic compounds
 Resources    through reading chapter 9 in Chemistry for Changing Times.         Reading the book gave me a basic
              idea about what functional groups are and what it means to have polarity.

 Classroom    The labs have helped me understand better how scientists work because I have to follow the
   Events     same procedures/steps they use in order to complete the labs.      In order to do the labs I have  to
              think like a scientist and this is very interesting and fun.

 Knowledge    I feel very confident about my progress in class so far because I am been able to understand how
              the cycles  work and their importance to our survival.      I am able to analyze the cycles and point
              out where each of the four spheres takes place and why.

Regression Analysis
         To understand how the journals might impact learning, we did a multiple linear regression analysis of the
sum of all points earned in the course as the dependent variable against student:       GPA prior to course enrollment,
ACT composite score, the number of reflections made for each of the six codes in the six journal entries, and the
total number of reflections made in each of the six journal entries as the independent variables.   This analysis sought
to determine which variables correlate significantly with student content knowledge of chemistry.      The analysis was
done for each of the two classes and an aggregate of both classes.    Before the two class sets of data    were combined
and analyzed, a comparison was done between them to see if there were any significant differences between the
students in the two courses. An independent t-test was conducted on prior GPA, ACT composite score, and course
grades given to the students.  There was no significant different between the two classes in prior GPAs (t(74) =
0.140, p > 0.05), ACT (t(74) = -1.210, p > 0.05) and course grades (t(74) = -0.743, p > 0.05).     Each class was given
the same set of assignments and covered the same chemistry material.        Student course grades derived from the total
number of points the student earned during the semester.      Both of the two classes had a total of 1075 points that a
student could earn. The students' GPA that was used for this analysis was their GPA prior to the semester in which
they took the course.
         The linear regression model for all three data sets (Fall 2007, Spring 2009, and Aggregated Data) shows a
relation between student course grade and four predictor variables, shown in Tables 3-5.     This signifies that between
58% and   63% of    the variance   in student course grade    is explained  by   student prior GPA   and   three types of
reflections made by students in journal writing. The first predictor variable is the students' prior GPA.   A high prior
GPA is a good prediction of doing well in the class.     Student reflection on classroom events (Code 5) and on their
knowledge  (Code    6)  correlated positively and significantly    with   higher performance    in the course.    Student
reflection on textbook, handouts, and worksheets (Code 4) correlated negatively and significantly with higher course
performance.

                                                     805     ISLS
                                                 ICLS 2010    Volume 1

Table 3: Fall 2007 regression analysis for prediction of course grade based on student GPA, ACT, reflection type,
and total number of reflections during Fall 2007

                            Significant Predictor Variables                        !
                                       Prior GPA                                 .731
                                         Code 4                                  -.144
                                         Code 5                                  .052
                                         Code 6                                  .086
         Note: Regression equation: Grade = .409 + .731(GPA) - .144(Code 4) + .053(Code 5) + .086(Code 6),
                                            (R = 0.794, R2 = 0.630)

Table 4:  Spring 2009 regression analysis for prediction of course grade based on student GPA, ACT, reflection
type, and total number of reflections during Spring 2009

                            Significant Predictor Variables                        !
                                       Prior GPA                                 .551
                                         Code 4                                  -.020
                                         Code 5                                  .038
                                         Code 6                                  .034
         Note: Regression equation: Grade = .593 + .551(GPA) - .020(Code 4) + .038(Code 5) + .034(Code 6)
                                             (R = 0.764, R2 = 0.584)

Table 5: Aggregated data regression analysis for prediction of course grade based on student GPA, ACT, reflection
type, and total number of reflections

                            Significant Predictor Variables                        !
                                       Prior GPA                                 .590
                                         Code 4                                  -.031
                                         Code 5                                  .033
                                         Code 6                                  .075
         Note: Regression equation: Grade = .315 + .590(GPA) - .031(Code 4) + .033(Code 5) + .075(Code 6)
                                            (R = 0.783, R2 = 0.613)

MCA-I Survey
         The Spring 2009 class of the Chemical World was given the Metacognitive Activities Inventory (MCA-I)
survey to see if students who were metacognitive during problem solving were also metacognitive in their writing.
This 27 item self-report instrument assesses students' metacognitive skillfulness when solving chemistry problems
and may be used as a diagnostic tool in deciding to implement interventions by the instructor (Cooper, Sandi-Urena
and Stevens, 2008). Students select their agreement with the items from a 5-point Likert scale (1, strongly disagree
to 5, strongly agree). The score was reported as a percentage of the maximum number of points attainable.  The
higher the percentage a student received relates to a higher metacognitive awareness the student has during problem
solving activities. The percentage of the maximum number points for each student was correlated against each of
the six reflection types, and the total number of points the student received in the class.   The results of these
correlations are shown in Table 6.

                                                     806     ISLS
                                                  ICLS 2010    Volume 1

Table 6: Correlations of MCA-I Survey

                                  Variables                               MCA-I Score
                                     Code 1                                   -0.041
                                     Code 2                                   -0.034
                                     Code 3                                    0.061
                                     Code 4                                   -0.436**
                                     Code 5                                    0.512**
                                     Code 6                                    0.574**
                              Total Course Points                              0.564**
                     Note:  N = 45, *p  < .05, **p < .01

         The results of the correlations analysis reveal that students who reflected more on textbooks, homework,
and worksheets tend to be less metacognitive during problem solving activities (r = -0.436, p = 0.03).         However,
students who reflected more on classroom activities (r = 0.512, p = 0.00) and reflected on their own knowledge (r =
0.574, p = .000) tend to be more metacognitive during problem solving activities.      Lastly, students who did well in
the course and who are assumed to have a high chemistry content knowledge (r = 0.564, p = 0.00), tend to also be
more metacognitive during problem solving activities.        Therefore, students who are highly metacognitive in their
writing by reflecting on interactions within the classroom (Code 5) and on their current knowledge (Code 6) of the
chemistry content tend to be more metacognitive when they are engaged in problem solving of chemistry problems.

Conclusion
         The objective of this study was to determine the effect of journal writing in a natural science course for pre-
service elementary education majors.     It is not common in science classes for students to be able to write down their
learning process of a certain science topic and integrate this to formulate a final understanding.   Reaching this point
of reflection in their journal helps students self-regulate their learning. The use of journals in the classroom provided
students an opportunity  to  become    self-regulators of their learning.  These   entries made   by the students  helped
facilitate discussion with the instructor that might not have happened in the classroom or laboratory.        Having the
instructor aware  of student  thinking   can help   guide   students in  the right direction   to correctly monitor their
understanding.  This reflection process is important for the instructor to reflect back on.    Cooper et al (2008) noted
that it is essential for not only the student to be aware of metacognition but also for the instructor to be aware of how
students are learning.  Students were able to express what they know and what they are struggling with.            Some
students even wrote about how they would try and better their understanding if they werefinding it hard to grasp the
central ideas of the topic. In their writing they also talked about where they developed this understanding from for
certain topics  such as from   prior   experiences, the  lecture, text resources,  laboratory, discourse with  peers, the
teaching assistant, or the instructor.
         Our use of specific codes to categorize different types of reflection revealed that the positive relationship of
reflective writing and content understanding depends also on the type of reflection. As noted earlier, students with
strong content were very likely to write about their current understanding as developed from their own thinking
(code 6) or from classroom   activities (code 5). Students  who reflected on text resources tend to have a  lower content
understanding of the chemistry topics in the course.      Reflecting on learning from the classroom events provides a
better opportunity for students to experience new learning situations by engaging in activities with others.       When
students reflect solely on text resources they are more likely to be engaged in the activity alone or to take a simple
reading of the text and use it as the basis of understanding, and this does not, we believe, provide the student with
new experiences to help facilitate change in understanding.       A possible threat to the validity of this research is that
we did not know anything about the writing of the students coming into the course.          Knowing the students' prior
writing skills would help us determine how well students are at expressing ideas.       If students struggle at this task
they may struggle with reflecting on their learning and being able to formulate well structuredreflections.

Implications for Research and Instruction
         The journal produced by the student is an artifact that can be used at the end of the semester as a planning
resource for exams.  The student is aware of the understanding they had by referencing the journal and are able to
evaluate their current understanding to see if understanding has changed at the end of the term.         At this point the
student can monitor what they need to review in order to succeed on exams.        This whole process is a good source of
self-regulation for students to take part in, and gives them time to sit down and think about their understanding of
science topics. Also, it is a substantial and consistent tool for students to learn about themselves as learners.

                                                      807     ISLS
                                                 ICLS 2010     Volume 1

         This research confirmed a relationship between content knowledge and journal writing, supporting the idea
that this writing-to-learn activity is valuable as a means of supporting students in the exploration and understanding
of their learning processes. It has been noted that the reflection process offers an opening for students to understand
their learning process and increase their active involvement in learning (Moon, 1999).        It also helps students gain a
personal ownership of their learning.
         These   findings add   to  the research  literature   on the   analysis of  writing-to-learn   and reflection in
instructional learning of science. The findings show that not all types of reflection correlate    with improved learning,
which implies that it is essential for researcher to examine the content of specific reflective students, not just overall
reflection. Second, the link of metacognition to learning in this work is strengthened by the additional use of the
MCA-1 survey as an independent measure of metacognition in problem solving.
         There are three implications on writing-to-learn as a result of this research study.         First, students may
benefit from  directed reflections (Davis, 2003).    This  benefit   requires activities, and this is an active classroom
(Varales et al, 2008). A major component of direct reflection is knowledge growth within the learner (Davis, 2003).
Second, caution about what may be rote recapitulation of textbook material.          Lastly, if students know there is a
potential direct relation between journal topics and assessment, they may perform better on both.
         The second major implication relates to the particular benefit of reflection in both writing and in problem
solving. McCrindle and Christensen (1995) also found that journal writing tasks in a science class not only promote
metacognitive thought but also helped learners gain more developed cognitive strategies and attain better learning
outcomes.
         Third,  having   students  write reflective  journals    is  a very  good   way   to  detect  how  they  express
metacognitive awareness, complementing other strategies (Mattox, Reisner, & Rickey, 2006; Greenbowe & Hand,
2005; Cooper, Sandi-Urena, Stevens, 2008; Keys et al, 1999).         But the findings of specific benefits from reflection
on knowledge (an explicit metacognitive act) and on activities, but not on the textbook, also suggest that providing
an activity-rich environment for students to use as the basis of their reflection is important. These results seem to
provide additional support for the effectiveness of learning in a mode where the student actively creates knowledge,
often in conjunction with other peers (Cooper, 2005).

Acknolwedgements!!!
This project   has been  supported   by an NSF    Course,   Curriculum,    and  Laboratory    Improvement   Grant, DUE-
0311624.

References

Baker, L. (1991).  Metacognition, comprehension monitoring, and the adult reader. Educational Psychologist, 1, 3-
         38.
Bangert-Drowns,    R.,  Hurley, M.   M.,  &  Wilkinson,     B. (2004).    The  effects of  school-based   writing-to-learn
         interventions on academic achievement:      A meta-analysis.      Review of Educational Research, 74, 29-58.
Britton, J. R. (1970). Language and learning.  London: Allen Lane.
Boud, R. Keogh, and D. Walker (Eds.), Turing Experience into Learning (pp. 19).            EastBrunswick, N.J.:  Nichols.
Brown, A. L. (1987).   Metacognition, executive control, self-regulation, and other mysterious mechanisms.        In F. E.
         Weinert and R. H. Kluwe (Eds), Metacognition, Motivation, and Understanding (pp.65-116). Hillside, NJ:
         Lawrence Erlbaum.
Brown,   A.  L., Bransford,  J.  D.,  Ferrara, R.  A.,   &   Campione,     J. C. (1983).   Learning,   remembering,  and
         understanding.   In P. H. Mussen (Ed.), Handbook of child psychology:         Cognitive development, (Vol. III,
         pp. 77-166). New York: Wiley.
Carcolice, M. S. (2005). Introduction to the science writing heuristic. In N. J. Pienta, M. M. Cooper, and T. J.
         Greenbowe (Eds) Chemists' Guide to Effective Teaching (pp.12-27). Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice
         Hall.
Cooper, M. M. (2005). An introduction to small-group learning. In N. J. Pienta, M. M. Cooper, and T. J. Greenbowe
         (Eds.), Chemists'  Guide    to Effective Teaching     (pp.140-154).   Upper   Saddle  River,  NJ:  Prentice-Hall.
Cooper, M. M., Cox, C. T., Nammouz, M., & Case, E.         (2008). An assessment of the effect of collaborative groups
         on  students'  problem-solving   strategies and   abilities.   Journal  of Chemical   Education,   85,  866-872.
Cooper, M. M., Sandi-Urena, S., & Stevens, R. (2008).       Reliable multi method assessment of metacognition use in
         chemistry problem solving. Chemistry Education Research and Practice, 9, 18-24.
Davis, E. A., (2003).   Prompting middle school science students for productive reflection: Generic and directed

                                                     808     ISLS
                                                ICLS 2010    Volume 1

        prompts.   The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 12, 91-142.
Emig, J. (1977). Writing as a mode of learning. College Composition and    Communication, 28, 122-128.
Flavell, J. H. (1979).  Metacognition and cognitive monitoring: A new area of cognitive development inquiry.
        American Psychologist, 34, 906-911.
Greenbowe, T. J., & Hand, B. (2005). Introduction to the science writing heuristic. In N. J. Pienta, M. M. Cooper,
        and T. J. Greenbowe (Eds.), Chemists' Guide to Effective Teaching (pp.140-154). Upper Saddle River, NJ:
        Prentice-Hall.
Keys, C. W., Hand B., Prain, V., & Collins, S. (1999).     Using the science writing heuristic as a tool for learning
        from laboratory investigations in secondary science.    Journal of Research   in Science Teaching, 36, 1065
        1084.
Klein, P. D. (1999).   Reopening   inquiry into cognitive    processes in writing-to-learn.  Educational Psychology
        Review, 11, 203-270.
Mason, L., & Buscolo, P. (2000).   Writing and conceptual change: What changes?       Instructional Science, 28, 199
        226.
Mattox, A. C., Reisner, B. A., & Rickey, D. (2006). What happens when chemical compounds are added to water?
        An   introduction to  the model-observe-reflect-explain    (MORE)    thinking frame.   Journal  of  Chemical
        Education, 83, 622-624.
McCrindle, A. R., & Christensen, C. A. (1995).    The impact of learning journals on metacognitive and cognitive
        processes and learning performance. Learning and Instruction, 5, 167-185.
Moon,  J. (1999a).  Reflection  in Learning  and  Professional  Development    (pp.188-194).  London:  Kogan    Page.
Novak, J. D., & Gowin, D. B. (1984).     Learning How To Learn.        New York, NY: Cambridge University Press.
Puntembekar,  S., &  Kolodner,  J. L.  (1998).  Distributed  scaffolding:  Helping  students  learn in a learning by
        designTM Environement.    Proceedings International Conference of the Learning Sciences '98, pp.35-41.
Rickey, D.,  & Stacy,  A.  M.  (2000).  The  role of   metacognition   in learning chemistry.  Journal   of Chemical
        Education, 77, 915-920.
Varelas, M., Plotnick, R., Wink, D., Fan, Q., & Harris, Y.    (2008).  Inquiry and connections in integrated science
        content   courses for elementary   education majors.    Journal   of College  Science  Teaching,   37, 40-47.
Wink, D. J. & Choe, J. H. (2008).    Pennies and Eggs:     Initiation into inquiry learning for preservice elementary
        education teachers.  Journal of Chemical Education, 85, 396-398.
Wink, D. J., Ellefson, J., Nishimura, M., Perry, D., Wenzel, S., & Hwang-Choe, J (2009).        Fostering pre-service
        teacher identity through student-initiated reflective projects. Feminist Teacher, 19, 151.

                                                   809      ISLS
