                                                  ICLS 2010  ·   Volume 1

                   Disciplinary Knowledge, Identity, and Navigation:
                      The Contributions of Portfolio Construction
                                              Jennifer Turns, Brook Sattler
                                         Human Centered Design & Engineering
                                           jturns,brooks2@u.washington.edu

                                                     Deborah Kilgore
                     Center for Engineering Learning and Teaching, University of Washington
                                               kilgore@u.washington.edu

         Abstract: In this paper, we look at how the construction of two types of professional portfolios
         supports engineering student learning.      To frame "engineering learning," we use the dimensions
         brought together by Stevens and his colleagues: disciplinary knowledge, identity, and navigation.
         We present data from a comparative study in which students constructed one of two types of
         professional portfolios and provided data through extensive questionnaires. In this analysis, we
         look at their answers to the first question on the questionnaire ("What did you take away from this
         experience")   in terms  of the  extent  to which   the students   reported insights  about disciplinary
         knowledge, identity, and navigation as a result of portfolio construction activities and the nature of
         the insights reported.

Introduction
As with other forms of professional education, the goals for engineering education are complex and the lists of
outcomes or competencies are extensive (e.g., ABET learning outcomes, conclusions from national policy reports
such as ENGR 2020, Rising above the Gathering Storm, Grand Challenges).            To meet the challenges of a dynamic,
rapidly changing   global  milieu,   the engineering  education   community    has   been exploring  various pedagogical
innovations such as problem-based learning and integrated first-year curricula, to provide students exposure to the
kinds of complex, multifaceted learning experiences that more closely resemble situations they are expected to face
as engineering professionals.   Portfolio construction is an activity that has been advocated as valuable in supporting
reflection on these and other learning experiences.    While the body of work on the educational benefits of portfolio
construction has been growing in other disciplines, work remains to be done to help fully understand how portfolio
construction can enhance engineering learning.
         In this paper, we present data from two portfolio interventions requiring different amounts of time and
resources on the part of students and educators, to determine the engineering learning that might be possible given
investment in   such activities. To   examine  student  learning  from    a perspective   that complements   the  complex
challenges of the present age to engineering education, we used a three dimensional approach proposed by Stevens
and his colleagues, to include accountable disciplinary knowledge, identity, and navigation. We found this to be a
useful framework for understanding what students perceived to be important benefits of portfolio development.

Portfolios in engineering education
Portfolios are frequently understood as a collection of student work with a purpose.            Among the many reasons
driving interest in portfolios are the following:    student knowledge is represented by their own work, students can
take control of gauging the quality of the work, and the processes of selecting and explaining work in a portfolio can
create opportunities for reflection.
         Portfolios are not new to engineering education. The various portfolio projects being reported represent
goals that are diverse, implementations that range from course to institution-wide, and variation in the extent to
which reflection is emphasized.    For example, Eris (2007) explored the potential of portfolios to capture significant
types of design knowledge, Williams (2002) focused on a systematic process for setting up a portfolio framework
that is oriented toward a particular competency in engineering education and supports reflection, Campbell and
Schmidt (2005) described an institution level initiative that goes beyond assessment toward career planning as a goal
and has reflection as a key feature, and Knott and colleagues (2004) reported on multiple university-level portfolio
initiatives along with data on student experiences in these initiatives. Such a snapshot suggests the level of interest in
portfolios and the range of uses.     Barrett (2007)  provides   useful ways   of laying  these  uses.  For example, she
differentiates the idea of  using  portfolios for assessment   of learning  or assessment   for  learning, and she draws
distinctions between a positivistic approach for using portfolios (i.e., providing documentation of true knowledge)

                                                      818  ·  © ISLS
                                                  ICLS 2010    ·  Volume 1

and a constructivist approach (i.e., providing a venue for helping students construct understanding).       It is not always
easy to determine which paradigm is prominent in the portfolio uses in engineering education.
         In our work, we are interested in what happens when creation of the portfolio is framed as construction of
an argument about the ways in which one is prepared to contribute to future engineering practice, specifically the
realm of engineering practice that is of personal interest.    Operationally, we have students instantiate this argument
in the form of a portfolio containing a professional statement and multiple annotated artifacts.            We explain  the
professional statement as a written narrative in which students explain the ways in which they are prepared to
function as an engineer and which functions as the core of the argument.        Artifacts are products and by-products of
experiences that support the claims made in the statement.       Annotations are explanations of artifacts, the experience
that gave rise to them, and the link from the artifact to one or more claims.
         There are clearly many ways to think of what such a task means theoretically.         For example, seen from a
lens of situated learning and legitimate peripheral participation (Lave and Wenger, 1991), this notion of portfolio
construction invites  students  to frame or reframe  prior     experiences  as legitimate  peripheral participation  in the
practices of engineering (e.g., linking prior communication experiences in any setting to the kinds of communication
that will be required in engineering practice). Clearly such a task is likely to be easier for some experiences than
others.  For example, an internship at an engineering company or participation in a capstone design project is likely
to have much similarity to engineering practice, and thus the portfolio activity may simply involve being able to
articulate the ways in which the experience contributed to being prepared.      For other experiences, such as being in a
leadership role in a  sorority  or spending a  quarter  in   a   music appreciation class, the  challenge   involves better
understanding as well as articulating the possible ways in which the experience contributed to preparation for
engineering  practice.   While   much   work  on  education      is moving   toward  having  students   have   educational
experience that are more "like" engineering practice, it is still important to remember that students are having lots of
experiences  (some   we control,   some we  do  not)--experiences      that can be  contributing  to  their preparation for
engineering practice and that giving students opportunity to frame the experiences as preparation has the potential to
have educational significance.
         In our studies, we have been exploring such questions of educational significance as well as questions of
educational feasibility (i.e., what resources are required) in relation to different instantiations of this overall idea.
Different instantiations involve different ways of constraining the task and different ways of providing students with
support.   For  example,    one way  of constraining  or   not   constraining  the task involves  deciding    the scope  of
experiences across which students are invited to base their argument about their preparation.          This has led us to
explore cross-curricular engineering portfolios (CCP) in which students reflect on all of their experiences to date as
well as course-based engineering portfolios (CBP) in which students focus on how the experiences associated with a
specific course have contributed to being prepared.  Our program of research has focused on student construction of
these two types of portfolios (e.g., Turns, Cuddihy and Guan, submitted; Eliot and Turns, accepted; Guan and Turns,
2007; Lappenbusch and Turns, 2005).
         These variations clearly differ in terms of educational feasibility.    For example, course-based engineering
portfolio activities could be added as a required assignment to any existing course, thereby not requiring significant
change to  the curriculum.  Incorporating a cross-curricular engineering portfolio   activity into the student educational
experience  is not as  straightforward.  In addition, the larger scope of the cross-curricular engineering portfolio
suggests a need for more resources.     As a result of such issues, over the past six years, we have studied students
constructing these types of portfolios within as well as outside classroom settings
         The   differential educational significance of   these   two  framings of  the portfolio is  also  open  question.
Across our studies, we have collected data via observations, interviews, and surveys and our analyses of the data
have used a variety of lenses in order to fully understand the role that this intervention can have.    For example, we
have analyzed our data from a writing-to-learn perspective, a community of practice perspective, an epistemic space
perspective, and an identity perspective.   Across   this work,     we have  consistently noted  that students engaged   in
constructing these types of portfolios have significant educational experiences and an effort to fully understand these
experiences would require a broad framework.     The contribution of this paper is to apply such a broad framework to
data from our newest study, a comparative study in which student participants constructed one of the two types of
portfolios and then told us about their experience through an extensive, open-ended survey.

Disciplinary knowledge, Identity, and Navigation
In a recent paper, Stevens and his colleagues argued for the value of looking at three dimensions of engineering
learning when thinking about the challenges of helping students become engineers (Stevens et al., 2008). These
three dimensions--disciplinary knowledge, identity, and navigation--individually and in combination present a rather
comprehensive view of how students conceptualize engineering knowledge and themselves as engineers, as they

                                                     819   ·   © ISLS
                                                    ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

move   into, through,   and  beyond   their   undergraduate   engineering   education.    Stevens  et al. present   this three-
dimensional model as a means for examining the experiences and development of engineering students from the
analyst's perspective and illustrate the model with insights developed from ethnographic research. As we will show,
the three dimensions may also provide a framework for students to reflect on and characterize their own experiences
and development.
         As   Stevens    and  his colleagues     point  out,  much    work    on   disciplinary  education     has focused   on
characterizing and  comparing     the knowledge     of  disciplinary  experts   and   student novices.    In   engineering,  for
example, researchers have focused on the critical role of design activity to engineering practice and have explored
issues such as how expert engineers engage in design, how students engage in design, and how to help engineering
students travel the path toward design expertise.
         Stevens et al. take a significant turn in examining disciplinary knowledge as malleable and situational,
rather than   the relatively  stable  and     progressively  acquired   body    of knowledge     assumed   by    expert-novice
comparisons. They propose the concept of accountable disciplinary knowledge to highlight the idea that while
disciplinary knowledge might be defined relative to the profession, the knowledge that is considered "accountable"
or  relevant changes    over the  course   of  a student's  academic    career.    For example,    while  lifelong  learning  is
considered critical to effective functioning of a professional engineer (i.e., see ABET accreditation criteria), students
may not be held accountable to such a notion in the early years of their undergraduate education (or throughout their
undergraduate years, for that matter) in favor of bodies of knowledge, like physics or even engineering design, that
are more established in the literature and therefore easier to assess.      Stevens et al. offer the example of engineering
education in a particular large public institution that was the subject of their in-depth ethnographic inquiry. The
character of knowledge for which students at this institution were accountable changed over the course of their years
in college. In their first two years or so, students were assessed largely on their ability to solve discrete closed-ended
textbook problems on their own, while in their upper-class years, students were assessed largely on their ability to
tackle open-ended ambiguous problems while working in teams. The consequence of such a structural shift in what
"counts" as knowledge, not unusual in U.S. engineering programs, is illustrated by the second-year student who
found it difficult to reconcile his experiences in a research lab with what he believed would be important for his
application to an engineering department.
         Influenced by situated learning theory, Stevens et al. also assert the importance of identity in understanding
engineering learning.    Here, identity is not only how  a person thinks   of herself as an engineer, but also how a person
is identified  with engineering    by  others.   Thus,   identity  development     is  an interactive  process     involving an
individual's efforts to develop a conception of self as an engineer, and the larger community's growing recognition
of the individual as an engineer (or not an engineer).     As students develop a sense of what does or does not count as
engineering, they develop a sense of self as more or less "engineer-like" according to how much or little they find
themselves doing what they think counts as engineering. Likewise, others around them identify students as engineers
more or less depending on the extent to which the student is doing what others perceive to count as engineering.
         This two-sided process is illustrated by Stevens et al. in their observations about students at the institution
in which they conducted their ethnography. For example, gaining increasing access to limited educational resources
served to support the students' growing identities as engineers; while on the other hand, the competitive admissions
process at the university (students have to apply to an engineering department during their sophomore or junior year)
impeded students' identification as engineers, as they tended to refrain from committing to engineering until a
department committed to them. One consequence of such structural conditions is that individuals' identification with
the profession may weaken as they worry about admissions.
         The third element of the three dimensional view, navigation "focuses on how a person moves through the
personal and institutional pathways as an engineer-in-the-making to be officially recognized in one or more ways as
`an engineer,' pathways     that are  cut  along   both official  and unofficial   routes" (Stevens   et  al., 2008, pp.  356).
Navigation provides "a way to talk about how other people and institutional resources play a role in a particular
individual becoming     an engineer   or  not" (Stevens  et  al., 2008,   pp. 356).    Navigation  would  include    obligatory
passage points, official routes, unofficial routes, and detours. For example, an obligatory passage point might be a
particularly  difficult pre-requisite course   and  an  official  route might   include   taking the  required   courses in  an
engineering department. At the same time, there are many unofficial pathways and detours, including internships,
summer   jobs, extracurricular    activities, that can  be  the  greatest sources     of variation in students'    experiences,
engineering learning, and development. Such navigational flexibility can expand the possibilities for a student.             For
example, working at an engineering job gave one student access to a number of individuals who provided mentoring
and additional opportunities for him, not necessarily available to other students.

                                                        820  ·   © ISLS
                                                  ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

Something that happens? Something you can control?
We agree with Stevens and his colleagues that these three dimensions hold great promise for thinking broadly about
how engineering students become engineers.      What we also wonder is the extent to which these dimensions can be
used to characterize the ways in which an intervention helps students take control of their own development.           The
idea implicit in such a question is that these elements are not only significant for characterizing what has happened
to a student along the way, but can also be variables over which a student may have some measure of control.           How
effectively can students think broadly about the knowledge that they possess and recognize that subsets of their
knowledge   are accountable  for  certain  situations?  To    what  extent can thinking explicitly  about   such   an  issue
actually affect the state of disciplinary knowledge?   To what extent can trying to explain one's preparedness to be an
engineer to someone else affect one's own identification with engineering?      To what extent can students effectively
monitor their own pathways, making sense of where they have been and adjusting their direction as they move
forward? Our experience suggests that students can have agency in these matters, and that this agency can be
supported through professional portfolio development activities.

Approach
In our study, students created either a course-based professional portfolio (CBP) or a cross-curricular professional
portfolio (CCP) and shared their portfolio construction experience with us via an extensive online survey.         For this
paper, we used the three dimensional framework introduced above as a basis for analyzing their response to the first
and broadest question on the survey, "what did you take away from this experience?"

Procedure
All participants attended workshops where they were given instructions and support for creating their portfolios.
Participants in the cross-curricular portfolio intervention group attended four 90-minute workshops during the fall of
2008, while  participants in  the    course-based professional   portfolio intervention group  attended    two  90-minute
workshops   during the winter     of 2009.   In both   cases,  workshops   were devoted   to instructions   for creating a
professional portfolio and opportunities to peer review one another's work. In the course-based portfolio condition,
because of  the  timing,  participants  only had   the opportunity    to  peer review   the final portfolio.  In   contrast,
participants in the cross-curricular portfolio condition had the opportunity to peer review elements of the portfolio,
like the professional statement or specific annotations, as they were developed, as well as the completed portfolio as
a whole. Admittedly, these two conditions differed not only in the type of portfolio being constructed, but also the
"time on task" and the extent of peer review feedback.    The decision to configure the two conditions in this way was
based on what was deemed a minimum scale implementation of each type of portfolio as part of an effort to help the
engineering community understand what could be possible with these interventions.
        A single individual served as the facilitator for all sessions.    In addition, to ensure consistency across the
sessions, the facilitator's role in these workshops was highly scripted. In particular, the facilitator offered little or no
information about  the   criteria for  choosing   portfolio   content or  possible future uses for  the    portfolio  itself.
Participants often asked such questions in the workshop and in these cases the facilitator was instructed to turn such
questions over to the group for general discussion.

Participants
A total of 69 undergraduate engineering students participated in the study, 37 in the cross-curricular condition and
32 in the course-based condition.    Collectively, the participants ranged in age from 18 to 44 years, with a   median age
of 21 years. There were approximately the same number of females and males in the study. Because of the relatively
small number of participants, we chose to ask students whether they considered themselves underrepresented and
over 50% said yes. Participants indicated that they were from a variety of engineering disciplines.

Data collection
The primary data collected in this study was in the form of extensive online questionnaires that elicited information
about the students' experiences of constructing their portfolios. These questionnaires were administered during the
final workshop sessions to manage the quality of the data collection.       Students spent between 35 and 45 minutes
completing  the survey.   In this  exploratory  paper,  we    focus on   analyzing the  students' responses     to the first
question--"What did you take away from this experience?"          We chose this "take away" formulation rather than a
formulation that asked directly about learning (e.g.,  "what did you learn")   for a variety of reasons. Our goal with the
first question was to get a sense of students' learning broadly.    However, recent work on personal epistemology has
helped point out that students themselves have ideas about what counts as knowledge.         On our part, we have seen

                                                      821   ·  © ISLS
                                                   ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

evidence  of  such   issues in  other students, when,    for example,  students  described how     a portfolio  construction
activity helped them become more aware of what they know and helped them to see the connections among their
different courses and learning experiences, yet subsequently said that they "hadn't really learned anything."        In our
choice of asking about take-aways, we wanted to try to bypass potentially constrained ideas about what counts as
knowledge and learning.

Data analysis
We used a combination of deductive and inductive analysis of the student "take-away" responses to explore a) the
extent to which students reported insights related to disciplinary knowledge, identity, and navigation, b) the nature
of these insights, and c) how insights reported by students differed across the two portfolio interventions.
          We are using the term deductive analysis to refer to the process of filtering the data relative to each of the
three dimensions     from   the framework     introduced earlier.   In addition,  because  initial   inspection of the data
suggested the prevalence of comments directly related to the portfolio, we added a fourth coding dimension.
   !      Disciplinary knowledge:     a) literal references to "skills" or "knowledge," b) references to other terms that
          can be considered surrogates for skills and knowledge such as "qualifications" and "qualities"
   !      Identity:  a) literal references to being "an engineer" either in their own eyes or in someone else's eyes, b)
          references to personal sense of self and "who they are"
   !      Navigation:   a) literal references to "experience," b) references to specific types of experiences such as
          projects, courses, etc., c) references to accomplishments and achievements because such terms typically
          refer to experience delineated by a superior quality
   !      Portfolio:  a) references to some aspect of the portfolio experience such as having the portfolio or the
          process of constructing the portfolio
The two first authors independently coded each student response as related or unrelated to each dimension based on
the guidelines presented above.     A single response could be coded for multiple dimensions. Reliability was high as
measured by Cohen's kappa (0.77 for Disciplinary knowledge, 0.91 for Identity, 0.68 for Navigation, and 0.94 for
Portfolio).  The lowest value--the value for Navigation--was the result of one coder including mentions of specific
courses   as a part  of navigation.     This  broader    view  was  adopted   for the final coding,    and the   remaining
disagreements  were   resolved   by the first author.  Since we were interested in comparing the prevalence of these
insights across the two conditions, the coding was done blind to the condition so that preconceptions about the
conditions could not influence the coding outcomes.
          We used an inductive analysis to characterize the nature of the insights associated with each dimension.
The goal of this analysis was to identity themes in the responses coded as related to each dimension.           In the results
section below, we describe these themes and illustrate the themes using the students' response.

Results
As depicted in Table 1, the Navigation and Portfolio dimensions were similarly prevalent in the data--both appeared
in around 65% of the overall set of responses.     The dimensions of Identity and Disciplinary Knowledge were less
prevalent but still prevalent to a notable degree (i.e., 22% and 30% respectively) in the overall responses.       In terms
of differences between conditions, the prevalence     was similar for Disciplinary Knowledge and Portfolio.        The CCP
condition had a much higher prevalence of Identity and Navigation, while the CBP condition had a much higher
prevalence of portfolio-only responses--responses that did *not* address any of the three primary areas of interest
(i.e., disciplinary knowledge, identity, navigation). In the remainder of the results, we describe the themes present in
responses coded within each dimension.     We start with disciplinary knowledge as a category of interest that was not
different across conditions, then discuss navigation since it was present but different across the conditions, and then
turn to identity which was different across the conditions and almost absent in the CBP condition.             We end with
comments on the portfolio themes.

Table 1: The percentage (and counts) of the responses addressing each dimension (i.e., extent)
                                         Overall               CCP            CBP                  Comparison
                                         (n=69)              (n=37)           (n=32)
Disciplinary knowledge                  30% (21)           27% (10)         34% (11)               CCP < CBP
Identity                                22% (15)           32% (12)          9% (3)            CCP >> CBP
Navigation                              62% (43)           68% (25)         56% (18)           CCP >> CBP
Portfolio                               65% (45)           68% (25)         63% (20)               CCP ~ CBP
---Portfolio Only                       30% (21)           19% (7)          44% (14)           CCP << CBP

                                                       822   ·  © ISLS
                                                    ICLS 2010    ·  Volume 1

Disciplinary Knowledge
Three  themes   emerged    from    inductive analysis   of   the twenty   one responses    coded   as related to   disciplinary
knowledge.    First,   the students' responses   showed      marked   attention  to  the issue  of  "accountability"  of   their
knowledge.    Most frequently this took the form of identifying or thinking about the portion of their knowledge most
relevant to employers or recruiters, but some students also thought about the portion of their knowledge relevant to
"professional practice," to "engineering," and to their "engineering career."
    !    A sense of what skills and valuable experiences I have that I can bring up when talking to recruiters,
         interviewers, etc. to make myself a stronger candidate; A realization that these experiences/skills that make
         me   a strong   candidate  are not   limited   to technical  experiences/skills.  Examples    from   other   academic
         disciplines and nonacademic pursuits are also valuable, as are examples related to my major that show
         nontechnical skills (ability to work in a group, time management, etc.)
    !    I feel like I can look at a course differently now. What I mean by that is that I can look at a current class
         and ask myself "what marketable skills am I gaining from this class."
    Second, the student responses also suggested that the activity of constructing the portfolio helped students to
gain a better sense of the body of knowledge that they had been able to develop by this point in time.         In some cases,
this was characterized as an inventorying process, while in other cases there was an element of discovery.                Such
awareness creates a basis for thinking about what knowledge might be accountable to some group.
    !    However, my chief take-aways from this experience is my realization that I have actually produced a lot
         more ""artifacts"" than I had remembered. This allowed me to go back and look at the skills I've managed
         to develop over time. .... (Inventory with a hint of discovery)
    !    "Building   an  engineering  portfolio  helped    me    to view  my  completed    coursework   from   a   professional
         perspective as opposed to an academic one. It gave me the opportunity to rethink what I learned and added
         to the value of the material covered in the course... " (Discovery)
    Third, students also reported insights concerning the process for doing the first two activities.           Such insights
included recognizing the scope of accountable knowledge and how a course can be used to demonstrate knowledge,
and even a recognition of the importance taking the time to do such thinking.
    !    A realization that these experiences/skills that make me a strong candidate are not limited to technical
         experiences/skills. Examples from other academic disciplines and nonacademic pursuits are also valuable,
    !    I feel like I can look at a course differently now. What I mean by that is that I can look at a current class
         and ask myself "what marketable skills am I gaining from this class."
    !    I haven't really taken the time to think about what it is to be an engineer and show how I have those skills

Navigation
In the 43 responses      that were  coded  as   related to   navigation  across  the   two conditions,  students   1) revisited
experiences they had already had, 2) expressed that they had developed a greater appreciation for their experiences,
3) articulated a broader understanding of the experiences that are relevant to navigation through engineering, and 4)
discussed plans    for directing future paths.   Unsurprisingly,     the  CBP    responses  were   more likely  to  emphasize
course-specific experiences, although they frequently talked about courses in generally rather than simply the course
on which they had focused the portfolio, while the CCP responses emphasized experience more generally.
         Several students described how the portfolio development process encouraged them to revisit their prior
experiences. For one student, portfolio development simply "forced me to review all of my experiences" while
another student "gained a deeper understanding of my professional experience." In addition, students said they
developed greater appreciation for the experiences they had had. Some students expressed this greater appreciation
in terms of realizing they had accomplished more than they thought, as with one student who wrote, "My chief take-
away   from   this experience   is my   realization that   I  have  actually  produced   a  lot more   "artifacts" than  I had
remembered." Another student "gained more insight into what I could prove from experiences.... I realized they
showed more about me than I had realized before."
         Students also described how their understanding of the relevance of their many experiences had expanded,
"how   everything   that I have  done   up `til now   has  some     kind of  value  in the engineering  field."  This  broader
conception of relevant experiences, coupled with greater appreciation for such experiences, led students to consider
their value:  "all my  experiences   could   potentially   be documented     for future  benefits." In looking   back  at  their
experiences, students also were compelled to look forward, as one student who planned to continue reflecting on her
learning experiences said, "I need to think about each project or assignment as something that is helping me to
become a better engineer." In addition to those students who planned to continue reflecting in the future, some
students planned to take greater control of their future paths. One student wrote, "I discovered that I needed more to

                                                        823   ·  © ISLS
                                                   ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

show that I was an engineer. I will now be looking more closely at internships..." In addition to "thinking about
everything I have accomplished," some students are also inclined to look forward, at "things I wish to accomplish by
the time I graduate..."
         Navigation, described by Stevens et al. as the dimension that may introduce a great deal of the variation
among students' experiences, learning and development, here is shown to present opportunities for students to exert
greater control over their learning. Some students say that the portfolio development activity has enabled them to re-
think and organize their prior pathways, and be more intentional about those pathways they follow in the future.

Identity
Since most of the identity-related responses were associated with the CCP condition, a comparative analysis is not
strongly warranted.   It is possible to note, however, that the three CBP identity-related responses were quite different
in emphasis and covered much of the space of the twelve identity-related CCP responses.        Of the fifteen responses
that were coded as related to identity, most (12) were associated with the CCP condition.            Two   major themes
emerged from inductive analysis of the fifteen responses coded as related to identity.        These themes were 1) a
changed personal sense of identification with engineering and 2) a changed sense in the ability to explain one's
preparedness for engineering. In the process of identifying oneself with engineering, as one student wrote, "I've had
to go back and evaluate myself and what I have done as an engineer," some students gained greater identification as
an engineer. This same student added, "What I'm mostly going to take out of this is what I have discovered about
myself and how everything that I have done up till now has some kind of value in the engineering field." Another
student wrote simply that portfolio development, "helped me define who I am as an engineer."
         Furthermore, students recognized the importance of being able to explain or prove their preparedness for
engineering, as one student wrote, "I have learned how to think about the things I have done in my classes in a way
to present myself as an engineer. I learned how to draw on my experiences to come up with specific proofs of my
qualities." Another student commented on the value of "having some basis/artifacts for the claims that I am a good
engineer." The process also caused students to plan future action toward developing the ability to demonstrate their
preparedness. Through reflection on their experiences, some students felt, as one expressed, "I discovered that I
needed more to show that I was an engineer. I will now be looking more closely at internships and will be saving
assignments." Another recognized the need to pursue "more activity that related to my career as an engineer."
         Students' responses also illustrated the two-sided process of identity development as described by Stevens
et al., with the individual developing a sense of self as an engineer at the same time and in interaction with others
forming a perception of that individual as an engineer. For example, one student wrote, "Sharing with others my
experiences and their experiences helps me understand where I stand relative to other engineers in my community."
Another  also found   value in  comparisons    across other   engineers,  "I got to look back what   I have   done   as an
engineer, and how it may differ from other engineers."
         We may assume that the two-sided process of identity development described by Stevens et al. is always in
play as students interact with their environment, and therefore it is no surprise that the process continues through
portfolio development as an educational intervention. The difference here is the possibility for students to look upon
their own developing professional identities as the subject of reflection, drawing connections between what they do
and who they are becoming. By making sense of these relationships, students gain awareness of the control they can
have   over their pathways,    and thus    become more     deliberate  in developing  and  claiming    their professional
engineering identity.

Portfolio
Two major themes emerged from inductive analysis of the forty-five responses coded as related to portfolio.        These
themes were 1) having the portfolio and 2) having a process for creating a portfolio. First, students drew attention to
the simple fact that they gained from the experience a physical portfolio. Some students went even further and
described the portfolio as an organizing tool, and sometimes even specifically to share with others (e.g., "A portfolio
that I can  present to  future employers   and academic    admissions   boards").   The  students also students reported
gaining knowledge about the "fundamentals of how to build a portfolio" and a sense of how creating a portfolio is
related to other types of writing they have learned about (e.g., "Creating a portfolio is quite similar to any other
paper  I've been  writing.  You   make    an argument--Professional     statement,  annotations--and   you   support your
argument--artifacts").  Some students linked the process of creating a portfolio with having one, by describing the
portfolio they created as a starting point for developing future portfolios such as in the following quote: "I am taking
away a foundation for a future engineering portfolio if I wanted to start one, as this one is a solid foundation then
only polishing would be needed at this point."     It was interesting to note the number of portfolio-only responses
associated with the CBP condition.

                                                       824  ·  © ISLS
                                                    ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

Discussion and Concluding remarks
In this paper, we showed how the three dimensions of disciplinary knowledge, identity, and navigation can be used
to make sense of what students reported taking away from two types of portfolio construction activities.          We were
able to code much of the data using these dimensions and then identify themes within each dimension. For example,
students reported greater awareness of their own knowledge and how to think about what is accountable at any
point, stronger identification with engineering, and a broadened sense of what could be included in the engineering
pathway to date and ideas about how to manage the pathway in the future.          These results suggest that portfolios can
help  students  take greater  responsibility   for their education.     The relatively small scale of  these interventions
(particularly when compared to large scale curricular change) makes these results even more compelling.                The
comparative emphasis of this study is intended to provide information for creating portfolio assignments that meet
available  resource  requirements   (i.e., the amount    of  time  available) and also  help students focus  on   important
learning goals. In our work, the results suggest that educators who are interested in helping students think directly
about identity issues should consider the cross-curricular portfolio over the course-based portfolio.
          We believe the results presented here may underestimate the extent to which students had insights relative
to each   dimension  since   we  analyzed     only a small   amount   of information   from  each  student.  Because   our
questionnaire  was more extensive, we will be able to    explore this conjecture in future analyses.  What we     will not be
able to explore directly is whether students would have had these insights without the portfolio intervention.       While
it does seem plausible that some students would have such insights eventually, it nevertheless seems valuable to
know that portfolio construction can help students along in this process. This work contributes to the scholarship on
portfolios as  an  educational  intervention,  efforts   to understand   engineering learning broadly, and,    of particular
importance, efforts to help empower engineering students to take charge of their education.

References
Barrett, H. (2007), "Researching Electronic Portfolios and Learner Engagement: The REFLECT Initiative," Journal
          of Adolescent & Adult Literacy, 50(6), 436­449.
Campbell,   M.  and  Schmidt,   K.  (2005),    "Polaris: An     Undergraduate  Online  Portfolio System   that Encourages
          Personal Reflection and Career Planning," International Journal of Engineering Education, 21(5), 931-942.
Eliot, M. and Turns, J. (accepted).    Constructing professional portfolios: Sense-making and professional identity
          development for engineering      undergraduates.   Submitted to the Journal of Engineering Education.
Eris, O.  (2007),  "Insisting on   Truth   at the  Expense   of   Conceptualization: Can  Engineering  Portfolios  Help?,"
          International Journal of Engineering Education, 22 (3), 551-559.
Guan, Z. and Turns, J. (2007).     Same intervention, different effect: A comparison of the impact of portfolio creation
          on students' professional development, Proceedings of the American Society of Engineering Education
          Conference, Honolulu, HI, June.
Knott, E.W., W.K. Lohani, O.H. Griffin, G.V. Loganathan, G.T. Ade, and T.M. Wildman (2004), "Bridges for
          Engineering Education: Exploring ePortfolios in Engineering Education at Virginia Tech," Proceedings of
          the American Society for Engineering Education Annual Meeting.
Lappenbusch,    S. and Turns,   J. (2005).    "Finding   Their  Place in TC:   Using a  Community   of Practice   Model to
          Research   Emerging   TC   Professionals,"   Proceedings    of the  International  Professional Communicator's
          Conference, Limerick, Ireland, 524-533.
Lave, J. and Wenger, E. (1991).       Situated Learning: Legitimate Peripheral Participation. Cambridge University
          Press: New York.
Stevens, R., O'Connor, K., Garrison, L., Jocuns, A., and Amos, D. (2008).         Becoming an Engineer: Toward a Three
          Dimensional View of Engineering Learning, Journal of Engineering Education, 97(3), 355-368.
Turns, J., Cuddihy, E., and Guan, Z. (submitted). I thought this was going to be a waste of time: Using portfolio
          construction to support reflection on project-based experiences, Submitted to the Interdisciplinary Journal
          of Problem-based Learning.
Williams, J.M. (2002), "The Engineering Portfolio: Communication, Reflection, and Student Learning Outcomes
          Assessment," International Journal of Engineering Education, 18(2), 199-207.

Acknowledgments
This work has been supported by the National Science Foundation through grant REC-0238392.                The authors wish
to thank the students who participated in this study and shared their experiences with us.       The authors wish to thank
Matt Eliot and Cindy Atman for their contributions to this work.

                                                        825   ·  © ISLS
