                                               ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

            Spatial and Temporal Embedding for Science Inquiry:
                       An Empirical Study of Student Learning
             Tom Moher, Jennifer Wiley, Allison Jaeger, Brenda López Silva, Francesco Novellis
             University of Illinois at Chicago, 851 S. Morgan (M/C 152), Chicago, IL 60607, USA
       Email: moher@uic.edu, jwiley@uic.edu, ajaege1@uic.edu, brendita@uic.edu, fnovel2@uic.edu
         Deborah Kilb, Scripps Institution of Oceanography, IGPP/UCSD, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA
                                        Email: dkilb@epicenter.ucsd.edu

        Abstract: In consecutive years, a fifth grade teacher of a self-contained classroom enacted
        five-week Earth sciences units that included learning activities focusing on the interpretation
        of seismograms and the location of earthquake epicenters. In one class, the unit utilized an
        embedded     design  that situated  learners   within   the   spatial and  temporal   extent     of the
        phenomenon during the epicenter determination activities. In the other class, while the activity
        set remained   the  same,  the embedding    features    were  removed.  Students  in  the  embedded
        condition demonstrated greater learning gains than their non-embedded counterparts in pre-
        post assessments of student skill, declarative knowledge, and conceptual understandings, even
        among topics unrelated to the determination of epicenters. Post-activity student interviews
        evidenced    strong  preference    for the  immersive,      asynchronous,    and  temporal    staging
        components of the embedded condition.

Introduction
In designing classroom-based      learning activities  to support     science inquiry,  one of  the  most    significant
challenges is the choice of strategies through which learners might engage with the phenomenon under study.
While technologies as old as the printed page have expanded the modalities of engagement and broadened the
range of accessible phenomena, they sometimes do so at the cost of some distancing of the learner from the
phenomena themselves. As a consequence, learners sometimes lose the opportunity to experience some of the
challenges--and excitement--inherent in conducting investigations.
        In  this paper we   report the  results  of a  quasi-experimental      empirical  study of   learner    outcomes
associated with an activity structure that seeks to shape learner inquiry experiences by embedding them within
the spatial and temporal extents of the scientific phenomenon of a series of earthquakes. Spatial embedding is
implemented by introducing the conceit that the classroom itself is a (scaled) area of seismological activity
situated on a tectonic plate boundary. Over the course of about a month, learners experience a sequence of
simulated earthquakes--"RoomQuakes"--at unpredicted times, embedding them within the (scaled) temporal
course of the phenomena. Students are challenged to locate the plate boundary bisecting the classroom by
reading simulated seismograms from seismometers situated around the classroom and using trilateration to
combine those results in a way that permit them to determine the epicenters of the seismological events.
        In previous reports, we have described the "embedded phenomena" framework (Moher, 2006) and
described learner outcomes for a similar RoomQuake unit relative to a no-treatment control (Moher, 2008).
Here we extend that work by contrasting the learner outcomes of a fifth grade classroom engaged in an Earth
sciences unit on earthquakes incorporating the embedding strategies described above with those of a second
class, taught by the same teacher, that received the same instruction and enacts the same set of activities within a
non-embedded framework. In this second condition, the seismological inquiry is centered on the determination
of a fault line  in southern California    based on   the  sequential   massed   analysis of  an   historical   series of
earthquakes, using maps rather than the classroom space as the locus of trilateration. Learners were assessed
                                               before   and     after the  unit  across   multiple   outcome     spaces,
                                               including   skill in   the interpretation of seismograms      the  use  of
                                               trilateration,   and   understandings of   the temporal,     spatial,  and
                                               intensity distributions of earthquakes. We also assessed structural
                                               and  causal    content  domain   understandings     associated   with   the
                                               surrounding instructional unit, such as the structure of the Earth
                                               and  the   causes of   earthquakes, that  were not   directly  associated
                                               with   the fault-line   determination   activities. After    the unit,  we
                                               probed the impact of embedding by posing hypothetical choices
                                               between    the   treatment learners had   received  and   the alternative
     Figure 1. Simulated strip-chartseismogram used in RoomQuake.treatment.Inthefollowingwereportonthese outcomes     anddiscuss their implications for our understandings of how specificelements of the "embedding" might impact learning.

                                                   826  ·   © ISLS
                                                    ICLS 2010    ·  Volume 1

RoomQuake
In the embedded version of RoomQuake, students adopt the pretense that their classroom is an active seismic
field, and that a series of earthquakes is expected over the course of several weeks within that field. Computers
running conventional browsers, served from our laboratory, act as simulated seismographs (Figure 1) that depict
continuous strip-chart recordings (seismograms) of local vibration, where locality is conditioned upon their
specific placement of the computers within the classroom. Most of the time, the seismograms reflect a low level
of background vibration. At (apparently) unpredictable times, rumbling speakers at each seismograph signal the
onset   of  an   earthquake.   Upon     this signal    (or  as   soon
thereafter as classroom instruction permits), students move
to the seismographic stations to read the waveforms.
           Reading    the   seismogram     recorded    at   a  single
location   provides   two    critical pieces  of  information:     the
magnitude of the event, and the distance (but not direction)
of  the event    from  the   recording   station. Determining      the
epicenter of an earthquake requires readings from multiple
sites, which may be combined together through the process
of  trilateration  to    obtain   a   location    solution.   In   the
embedded      version of  RoomQuake,      we    use calibrated   dry-
lines  anchored    at the   seismographs   to   sweep   out   arcs of
potential  epicenter   loci; the  solution   is obtained   when    the
students   at the  end   of those lines   converge   at a   common
point.  Once      the  location   and    magnitude      have     been    Figure 2. Photo of classroom hosting embedded
determined,    the teacher   hangs    a color-coded    (representing     version of RoomQuake. Styrofoam balls on the
magnitude) Styrofoam ball from the ceiling at the epicenter                ceiling mark event epicenters, color-coded by
point, providing an historical record of the event series, and           magnitude. Wall charts are used to track timing
students update poster-based representations of the temporal                     and magnitude of event series.
and intensity distributions of the events (Figure 2).

Embedding as an Activity Design Strategy

Spatial Embedding
A central component of our framework is the conceit that the phenomenon under investigation is unfolding
within the confines of the classroom itself. This is not an obvious choice, nor necessarily the correct one. When
studying seismology, for example, many learning researchers would argue that authenticity demands that the
discourse be situated in a scientifically accurate geographic framing; we should be talking about earthquakes
around the Ring of Fire, for example. We conjecture, however, that by situating the phenomena "in here" rather
than  "out  there"    we  might  increase  learners'   emotional    interest in  the phenomena,  and  leverage incidental
associations between the simulated and real worlds (e.g., "the epicenter was right over my desk"). Moreover, we
hope   that   by situating   the imaginary      phenomena     within   the classroom  space  students can build on  their
accumulated knowledge of the physical, social, and cultural features of the environment as they undertake a new
type of activity.
           Another feature of our approach is the decision to maximize the nominal spatial extent of imagined
phenomena by scaling them (up or down) to fill the physical space of the room. From a perceptual perspective,
we hope to increase the salience of the phenomena for learners (Collins et al., 1991; Yantis & Egeth, 1999). On
a more practical level, we also believe that this strategy can reduce congestion in the classroom by allowing
students to use the entire floor space as they conduct their investigations.
           In embedded      phenomena,     access   to  the   representation  of the  state of phenomena   is  physically
distributed throughout the space of the classroom. We believe that this offers three important benefits. First, it
creates multiple natural contexts for students to engage in discourse with peers and teachers (Vygotsky, 1978)
concerning the phenomenon. Second, it reinforces the important science concept that understanding the state of
a phenomenon might not be possible from a single observation, but may require multiple probes from different
vantage points that require aggregation and coordination to come to full understanding. Third, we expect that by
requiring physical movement from one part of the room to another in order to obtain complementary data we
might reinforce memory by associating it with a physical action (Wisneski, et al., 1998).
           Our strongest motivation, however, draws from a desire to physically immerse learners within the
experience (Dede et al., 1997); in our framework, not only are the phenomena embedded in the space, indeed
the  learners  themselves    are  embedded      within  the   phenomena.     The importance   of embodiment    has strong
advocates both in psychology (Johnson, 1987; Clancey, 1997; Clark, 1997; Glenberg, 1997, 1999; Winn, 2003)
and human-computer interaction (Dourish, 2001). Embodiment approaches argue that "thought grows from
action and that activity is the engine of change" (Thelen, 1995). In this perspective, cognition arises specifically

                                                        827    ·  © ISLS
                                                ICLS 2010   ·   Volume 1

through bodily interactions with the world. Learning that pairs action and knowledge, or engagement in goal-
directed actions, particularly within social contexts (Lindblom & Ziemke, 2007), is viewed as necessary for
higher cognitive capacities of thought and understanding to develop.

Temporal Embedding
The embedded phenomena framework engages the issue of time along two important dimensions: duration and
persistence. The long time course of these deployments offers three important benefits. First, it opens the door
to the study of phenomena that unfold slowly, requiring investigative processes unlike those used in most
classroom  science   work.   A  second   potential  benefit    lies in  the  value  of time   for  students to  become
meaningfully involved in the enterprise of scientific investigation: different learners engage in activities at
different paces. Our prior classroom experience (Moher, 2008) led us to expect that while highly motivated,
achievement-oriented students would readily become engaged in our activities, other students would need time
to move, in Lave and Wenger's terms, from the periphery to the center of the community of scientific practice
(Lave & Wenger, 1991). The persistent representation of phenomena, combined with the spatial immersion,
further promotes the goal of engaging all students; for all but the most dedicated non-participant, it eventually
becomes easier to participate in an activity that impinges on his or her perceptual system all the time, wherever
they look, than to ignore it, particularly when respected peers are engaged in the activity. Finally, by spreading
interaction with the phenomena over multiple episodes we hope to take advantage of the potential of temporally
distributed instruction over "massed" instruction with respect to recall and motor skill development (Donovan &
Radosevich, 1999; Cepeda et al., 2006). It is important to note that effects of spacing and learning with respect
to more complex material are less well understood (Dempster, 1989).
        Persistence brings at least three additional benefits. First, by continually representing phenomena, we
create the opportunity   to   reinforce the concept      that, in   nature, important  state  changes  are  not always
synchronized to fixed schedules, that "things happen when they happen" (asynchronously with respect to the
flow of instruction), and that scientists (particularly in observational sciences) are often at the mercy of events
rather than the other way around. Second, persistence provides opportunities for "incidental" learning in much
the same way that foreign vocabulary words adorning classroom walls may result in learning without explicit
reference during formal instruction. We argue that the role of "student in the classroom" inherently demands the
ability to attend to multiple concurrent threads of activity; at the same time that a teacher is speaking, a student
might be working on a laboratory project, avoiding a spit-wad propelled in their direction, tracking the progress
of a playground basketball game visible through the classroom window, and receiving an oral invitation to an
after-school event from the student at the next desk. By adding an attentional channel that promotes curricular
goals, we address the human need for variety and offer a potentially productive alternative to the normative
instructional  flow. Finally, by  interleaving  salient   simulations    with  regular instruction, we   surreptitiously
expand students' opportunities to engage with additional science content.

Method
We investigated the alternative learning conditions with two cohorts of fifth grade students across subsequent
years with the same teacher in a Midwestern U.S. elementary school. The teacher had previously conducted
three  RoomQuake     units. The  two    cohorts were   randomly     assigned   to  condition  with  27 students  in the
embedded condition and 18 students in the non-embedded condition. There was attrition of one student in each
condition due to incomplete data.
        Both classes received the same lessons during their regular science periods on Earth science concepts
including  the background    on the Earth's  layers   and   composition,    the existence  of tectonic plates,  and the
geological features that relate to the interactions of these plates.
        Both classes also completed a series of 15 earthquake activities where they computed the epicenter of
earthquake events from simulated seismograms.        The main manipulation was in how the students engaged in
these activities across the two cohorts. Students in the "classroom embedded, temporally-distributed" condition
experienced a series of 15 simulated earthquakes ("RoomQuakes"), each presumed to occur within the physical
space of the classroom. The simulation was effected by placing four 24" iMac computers around the classroom;
each computer served as a simulated seismograph which depicted a continuously running strip chart recorder of
ground  vibration for  that   exact location    in the   classroom.    Between    events, the seismographs   displayed
simulated  random    noise;  when   a RoomQuake        occurred,    however,   they traced   out  unique characteristic
waveform (seismogram) corresponding to the expected vibration at their specific locations due to an event at a
particular location in the classroom. The earthquake events occurred at unexpected times during the school day
over a four-week period and were signaled by a low-frequency rumbling sound generated by the speakers in the
computers.
        In the non-embedded condition, students also worked with a series of 15 earthquakes, however, these
were not simulated, nor were they presumed to be occurring in the physical space of the classroom. Instead
students used the computers to access historical seismogram data from 15 earthquakes that occurred in Southern

                                                     828  ·    © ISLS
                                                ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

California. For this condition, each computer represented a different seismograph station in Southern California
and the four iMac computers were placed all in a row. The screens displayed snapshots of single seismogram
readings  and  the students  were   able to go  forward    or  backward  through   15 snapshots representing   the  15
different earthquake recordings. Students completed this set of activities as a single unit during their normal
science time (it generally took a couple class periods to complete the set).
          For each event in both conditions, students working in small teams were responsible for determining
the  epicenter and  (Richter) magnitude     of each  earthquake  and    cataloging information  about  the event.   By
reading the seismogram at each seismographic station, students were taught how to determine the magnitude of
the event, and the distance of the event from that station. They learned that earthquakes generate multiple waves
that travel at different rates; and that the latency between arrival of two of those waves, P and S, is proportional
to the distance between the earthquake and the seismograph. Magnitude can be determined by comparing event
distance with graph amplitude. A reading from a single station, however, is insufficient to locate the epicenter,
since it does not provide directional information. In order to obtain a solution, students needed to combine the
distance information from multiple (at least three) stations through the process of trilateration.
          In professional seismologic practice, trilateration is performed through the process of determining the
common point of intersection among three or more circles, requiring a level of mathematical sophistication
beyond that held by our learner group. To simplify this process for the students, the embedded class used
calibrated dry-lines anchored at each of the seismographic stations to sweep out arcs reflecting the locus of
solutions from the individual seismic stations until they found the location in the room where the endpoint of
their measures coincided. Alternatively, in the non-embedded condition students used calibrated strings that
were anchored at each of the seismographic stations on their large maps of Southern California to find the
endpoint where all the measures coincided.
          The unit also used workbooks that gave students practice with data recording methods and various
kinds  of symbolic  representations   of  the  data. Three    types  of public displays  were  also  created. For   the
embedded group, the locations of the events were recorded by hanging Styrofoam balls from the ceiling at their
epicenters, color-coded to reflect the event magnitudes. In the non-embedded group, however, students located
the earthquake epicenters on a large map of Southern California and used color-coded stickers to reflect the
magnitude. Two other public data representations were also maintained using colored sticky dots on large wall
posters: magnitude frequency distribution (the number of earthquakes of magnitude 3, 4, 5 and 6) and a timeline
of the events. The embedded condition had access to these representations through out the entire unit, while the
non-embedded condition only saw them during science classes when working with the earthquake data.

Learning Goals and Measures
The learning goals of the RoomQuake unit were focused in three areas: (1) the acquisition of skill in authentic
seismological practice, including the determination of event distance and magnitude, and the use of trilateration
to determine event epicenters, (2) the development of an understanding of the distributional characteristics of
earthquakes across the dimensions of space, intensity, and time, developed through student observation of the
patterns reflected in the emerging historical record of events, and (3) an understanding of target Earth science
concepts.

Skill in  seismological   practice. Following   the  unit,  students  were  individually   interviewed and    asked to
demonstrate their ability to read seismograms and compute epicenters. This included locating the arrival of the P
and S waves, determining the distance between the arrivals of those waves, and determining the amplitude.
They were also asked to find the magnitude of the earthquake using the data they had already collected from the
seismogram. Additionally, students were asked to show the loci of potential epicenters using two different
methods. First they had to find the epicenter by means of the method used in their class (either with strings in
the classroom or strings on a map) and then as a transfer task they were asked to find an epicenter using three
compasses   on  a   piece of  graph   paper.   We   also  probed  declarative  understanding   of   seismograms    and
trilateration through a series of multiple-choice prompts using a written instrument that was administered prior
to, and directly following, the instructional unit.

Understandings   of earthquake  distribution    patterns  in  space,  time and  intensity. Over time,  collections  of
earthquakes exhibit characteristic distributions in where they occur (along fault lines marking plate boundaries),
in when they occur (after-shocks follow large seismic events), and in their magnitude (strong earthquakes are
less  frequent than mild  earthquakes).   We   probed    these understandings   through  a  series of multiple-choice
prompts using a written instrument that was administered prior to, and directly following, the instructional unit.
The same test was administered to both classes.

Structural and Causal Earth Science Concepts. Also included in the written instrument administered prior to,
and directly following, the instructional unit we assessed understanding of Earth science concepts with a series

                                                     829  ·   © ISLS
                                              ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

of multiple-choice questions.  The  questions     probed   knowledge   on topics  including   Earth structure and
composition, plate tectonics, and the formation and location of geological features at plate boundaries.

Results

Pre/post Comparisons
The results of the pre- and post-activity assessments are shown below in Figure 3.

              Figure 3. Performance on pre- and post-activity assessments for students in the
           embedded ("+Embed") and non-embedded ("-Embed") conditions: demonstrations of
         ability to identify earthquake epicenters, understandings of seismometers and their use,
            trilateration, earthquake distributions, Earth structures and causes of earthquakes.

Demonstration of Epicenters. For this task, students were asked to complete the epicenter tasks using the same
methods as they had during RoomQuake (strings in classroom or on maps), as well as to compute epicenters
using  compasses on graph paper  as a  transfer   task.   The  results were analyzed with   a 2  (embedded,   non-
embedded)   x 2 (same context, transfer context)    repeated  measures   ANOVA.     Neither the main effect for
context, nor the interaction, were significant. However, the main effect for embeddedness was, F (1, 40) = 5.34,
MSE = .125, p < .03. Students in the embedded condition outperformed students in the non-embedded condition
on both practiced and transfer skill assessments.

For the remaining assessments, the results are analyzed with 2 (embedded, non-embedded) x 2 (pretest, posttest)
repeated measures ANOVAs with pretest and posttest serving as the repeated measures.

Seismometer Use. There was a significant main effect for test time, F (1, 42) = 12.7, MSE = .10, p < .01.
Students gained from pre- to posttest in their understanding of seismometers and their use. There was a marginal
effect for embeddedness,  as  students in the     embedded   condition  tended to  have better   understanding of
seismometer use, F (1, 42) = 3.76, MSE = .15, p < .06. The interaction, however, was not significant, with
similar performance gains across the two conditions.

Understanding Trilateration. There was no main effect for embeddedness condition or test time. However, the
interaction of these variables did reach significance, F (1, 42) = 3.97, MSE = .06, p < .05 with students in the
embedded condition showing greater gains than students in the non-embedded condition.

Earthquake Distributions. There was a significant main effect for test time, F (1, 42) = 18.4, MSE = .06, p < .01.
Students in both conditions gained from pre- to posttest in their understanding of earthquake distributions.
However, neither the main effect for condition, nor the interaction, reached significance.

                                                  830   ·  © ISLS
                                               ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

Structural and Causal Earth Science Concepts. Overall there was a significant main effect from pre- to post-test
on the understanding of Earth science concepts, F (1, 42) = 5.88, MSE = .02, p < .02, and a marginal effect for
embeddedness condition, F (1, 42) = 3.79, MSE = .02, p < .06.         These were both qualified by a significant
interaction, with students in the embedded condition showing greater performance gains, F (1, 42) = 7.76,
MSE = .02, p < .01.

Student interviews
An examination of the students' responses to the open-ended questions posed during the post-unit interview
gives some additional insight into the features of the design that impacted their perception of the activity. In
response to an item asking learners to describe "what they did" during the unit, students in the embedded
condition focused strongly on the epicenter determination activity, while their non-embedded counterparts were
much more likely to respond with descriptions of the other curricular activities included in the unit. To a
question about the length of the unit intended to gauge student patience and boredom with the unit, "embedded"
students were more likely to express a desire that the unit had been longer, with more "non-embedded" students
voicing the opinion that it was too long.
       Included in the interviews were several items that asked students to make comparisons between the
condition that they experienced and hypothetical alternatives characteristic of the alternative treatment with
respect to which would "help you learn about earthquakes and their causes better." In the following we will
focus on the responses provided by the students in the embedded condition.
       In one item, we asked students whether they would have preferred to have all of the earthquakes "back
to back" on consecutive days (the "massed" treatment). In their responses, 22 of the 25 students interviewed
indicated a preference for the temporally distributed approach, characterizing it as affording better opportunities
for learning.

       Charley: "The one we did, like which was when you guys did RoomQuakes because we took the
       time on each one so it helped me learn. I can't learn really fast."

Asynchrony was perhaps the most appealing design element from the perspective of the learners, all 25 students
saying they would learn better from the random earthquakes than ones scheduled at specific times, as suggested
in another interview item. In their responses, they focused on realism and the excitement of not knowing when
an earthquake was coming:

       Marty: "It did, because if they were only during science time, that's not how they happen in real
       life, they only happen in real life, they don't have a certain schedule. In real life, they don't have a
       certain time that they are going to do it, so that gives you practice for the real world."
       Robert: "Being a mystery and at different times because, well like having a mystery, because for
       when there is a real earthquake coming you don't even know so you're just doing your work and
       it's always a mystery."
       Danielle: "Because of you did them all in a row in a couple days then we would know what to
       expect and when it would happen, but when you guys did it, it threw us off guard completely."
       Charley: "It just catches you in headlights, like you really don't know when it is going to come. It
       just surprises you."

When asked whether the activity might have been more valuable as a learning activity if the trilateration work
were done on a map rather than in the physical space of the room, 19 students preferred the latter, characterizing
is as more "hands-on," more accurate, and more fun that a map version.

       Jacob:   "In the room  because     it would be    better because it was turning our room    into, say,
       California and we were having earthquakes."
       Ariel: "I think putting it on the room because it's, you can locate it more easily. Like it is easier to
       locate. Because you can like see where it is exactly like maybe you might, sometimes you could be
       off on a map."

In their responses to this item, several of the students described the visceral impact of the experience in terms
related to the presence construct.

       Abby: "I like the way we did it here, it is like more real life because there are like RoomQuakes
       actually happening, it is not like we are reading what happens, we are actually in it."
       Nguyen: "Right here because I can feel it and I can do it right here."

                                                   831  ·  © ISLS
                                                ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

        Jacob's response anticipated the final question in our interview, which asked students if it would be
better to characterize the earthquakes as "happening right here in your classroom" or "somewhere else, like
southern California." Over half the students favored the embedded treatment, saying that they could "experience
more" and that it would be better for learning.

        Michelle: "Well, I think always visualizing it, more experiencing it is better for people to learn
        because doing, being able to do it is not the same as being able to see it or hear it or because you
        will be able to interact with it and you'll be able to feel it. So, it's like an actual earthquake. But, if
        it is in Southern California you can't feel it and you really don't know if it happened."
        Shaquille: "Probably in by our classroom because if it is in another state or something, like, it's
        like you don't know how it is or how it's like and a RoomQuake is kind of like an earthquake and
        you can actually feel how it sounds like."

In  contrast, six of  the students preferred  the  hypothetical  alternative  treatment,  characterizing is as "more
realistic," a better way to learn more about other places, and more fun to imagine being somewhere far way. The
remaining students expressed no preference.

Discussion
While the number of subjects and variability of performance limited the power of the design, taken as a whole
the study  provides   support  for the claim  that  the  spatial and temporal     embedding   elements   employed    in
RoomQuake      had  a positive  impact on  learner  outcomes.    Students  in the  embedded    condition  consistently
outscored their non-embedded counterparts on post-test assessments, with significant gains in several areas.
        At the outset of the instructional units, none of the students had prior experience with the interpretation
of seismograms or the use of trilateration to resolve distributed readings. Given the multiple opportunities for
developing    these skills, we  were  not surprised   to  see that students   were proficient  at  these tasks at   the
conclusion of the units. We were surprised, though, at the significantly better performance demonstrated by the
students in the embedded condition, since students in both treatments were given the same number of practice
opportunities. The difference in performance cannot be attributed to a mismatch between the practice during the
unit and during the assessment, since students used the same media for demonstrating the trilateration process
(either calibrated dry-lines or strings on a map) that they had used in class in learning the skills.
        What then, could account for the difference? While the classroom teacher organized students into
teams for the epicenter determination activities and encouraged students to rotate roles within those groups,
ultimately the  choice   of  whether  and how   to participate   rested  with the individual  learners.  One possible
explanation is that the opportunity to engage in the activity might have been diminished in the non-embedded
case because it was more difficult to share responsibilities; determination of the epicenter, for example, required
only a single   student   in the  non-embedded     condition  whereas    a pair of  students  (one    anchored at   the
seismograph, one sweeping out arcs at the other end of the dry-line) was required in the embedded condition.
An alternative explanation is that the motivation to participate in the non-embedded condition was damped by
the fatigue or boredom induced by the massed scheduling, predictability, or less physical nature of the activity,
or by the more restrained "impact" of the fruits of their labor on the accumulating inquiry evidence base.
        The significant pre-post gains on the items related to seismometers and their uses, we believe, might be
direct outcomes of the real-time and embodied nature of the embedded condition. In the embedded condition,
students had the opportunity to witness the differential arrival of P- and S-waves at the simulated seismometer
both visually (a change from "flat-line" to higher-amplitude graphs) and aurally (the rumble accompanying the
arrival of the first wave). This may have reinforced their understandings of the seismometers as responsive
instruments   whose   relative performance  was   dependent   on   their (differential) distances from  the simulated
seismic events.
        Post-test performance on the trilateration items showed only weak gains for students in the embedded
condition, and in fact a small loss for students in the non-embedded condition. We suspect that these results may
be an artifact of the assessment items, which situated students in a transfer task requiring them to identify the
loci of points defined by cartoon characters looking for one, two, and three items located around them, a task
some students had difficulty in interpreting.
        Students     in both   groups  improved    in their   declarative  understandings   of    the distributions  of
earthquakes, with students in the embedded group showing about twice the level of improvement from pre- to
post-test assessment. Here we suspect that the salience of the representations of the empirical data (Styrofoam
balls hanging from the ceiling and large posters with representations of the formative data at the front of the
room), combined with the longer time course of the data collection process, worked to learners' advantage in
recognizing the emerging patterns.

                                                    832  ·  © ISLS
                                              ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

        The most surprising result was the significance of the difference in learning gains on the Earth science
concepts (structure and causes of earthquakes) between the two groups. It is important to keep in mind that the
learning activities associated with these concepts were identical in both classes, and were decoupled from the
activity associated with the determination of event epicenters, in that the earthquakes themselves were merely
the surface manifestations of underlying structures and processes not explicitly represented by our technologies.
        While the "embedded phenomenon" strategy incurs minimal technology and materials costs, its use in
classrooms  demands   significant preparation   and    scaffolding  effort on the part    of teachers.  A  necessary
prerequisite to broader use of the technique is the existence of an evidentiary base that associates its use with
positive learner outcomes across teachers and science content domains. The research presented here represents
the first products of an ongoing counter-balanced multi-classroom, multi-domain research study that will be
completed in 2010.

References
Collins, A., Brown, J., and Holum, A. (1991). Cognitive apprenticeship: Making thinking visible. American
        Educator, 6(11), 38-46.
Cepeda, N J, Pashler, H, Vul, E, Wixted, J, & Rohrer, D (2006). Distributed practice in verbal recall tasks: A
        review and quantitative synthesis. Psychological Bulletin.
Clancey, W. (1997). Situated Cognition: On Human Knowledge and Computer Representations. Cambridge,
        MA: Cambridge University Press.
Dede, C., Salzman, M., Loftin, R. B., & Ash, K. (1997). Using virtual reality technology to convey abstract
        scientific concepts. In Jacobson, M. J., Kozma, R. B. (Ed.), Learning the Sciences of the 21st Century.
        Lawrence Erlbaum.
Dempster, F. N. (1989). Spacing effects and their implications for theory and practice. Educational Psychology
        Review, 1, 309-330.
Donovan, J., & Radosevich, D. (1999). A meta-analytic review of the distribution of practice effect: Now you
        see it, now you don't. Journal of Applied Psychology, 84(5), 795-805.
Dourish, P. (2001). Where The Action Is: The Foundations of Embodied Interaction, MIT Press.
Glenberg, A. (1997). What memory is for. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 20, 1-55.
Glenberg, A. (1999). Why Mental Models Must Be Embodied. In Mental Models in Discourse Processing and
        Reasoning, Rickheit, G. and Habel, C. (eds). New York: Elsevier.
Johnson, M. L. (1987). The body in the mind: The bodily basis of meaning, imagination, and reason. Chicago
        University Press.
Lave, J., &  Wenger,  E.  (1991).  Situated Learning:     Legitimate   Peripheral Participation.   Cambridge,  UK:
        Cambridge University Press.
Lindblom, J., & Ziemke, T. (2007). Embodiment and Social Interaction: A Cognitive Science Perspective. In:
        Ziemke, Zlatev & Frank (eds.). Body, Language and Mind. Vol. 1: Embodiment (pp. 129-162). Berlin:
        Mouton de Gruyter.
Moher, T.  (2006).  Embedded    Phenomena:     Supporting   Science   Learning  with Classroom-sized     Distributed
        Simulations. Proceedings ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI 2006)
        (Montreal, Canada, April 2006), 691-700.
Moher,  T.  (2008).  Learning   and   participation in    a persistent whole-classroom       seismology  simulation.
        Proceedings   International   Conference    of the   Learning  Sciences   (ICLS   2008),   Vol.  2 (Utrecht,
        Netherlands, June 2008), 82-90.
Thelen, E. (1995). Time-scale dynamics in the development of an embodied cognition. In Mind In Motion, R.
        Port and T. van Gelder, Eds.. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Vygotsky, L. (1978). Mind in society. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Wilson, M. (2002). Six views of embodied cognition. Psychonomic Bulletin and Review, 9(4), 625-636.
Winn, W.D. (2003). Learning in artificial environments: Embodiment, embeddedness and dynamic adaptation.
        Technology, Instruction, Cognition and Learning, 1, 87-114.
Wisneski, C., lshii, H., Dahley, A., Gorbet, M., Brave, S., Ullmer, B., & Yarin, P. (1998). Ambient displays:
        Turning   architectural space into  an interface    between  people  and  digital information.  Proceedings
        International Workshop    on  Cooperative     Buildings    (CoBuild '98)  (Darmstadt,  Germany,    February
        1998), 22-32.
Yantis, S. & Egeth, H. (1999). On the Distinction Between Visual Salience and Stimulus-Driven Attentional
        Capture. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 25(2), 661-676.

Acknowledgments
This  material is based upon    work  supported by   the  National   Science  Foundation     under Grant  No. DRL-
0735569. The authors wish to acknowledge the helpful comments and suggestions offered by the anonymous
referees and to express our appreciation to our partner learners and teachers for their help and patience.

                                                  833   ·   © ISLS
