                                                ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

 Appropriating Conceptual Representations: A Case of Transfer
                        in a Middle School Science Teacher

          Suparna Sinha, Steven Gray, Cindy E. Hmelo-Silver, Rebecca Jordan, Sameer Honwad,
          Catherine Eberbach, Rutgers University, 10 Seminary Place, New Brunswick, NJ 08901
    suparna.sinha@gse.rutgers.edu, stevengray142@yahoo.com, cindy.hmelo-silver@gse.rutgers.edu,
    rebeccacjordan@yahoo.com, sameer.honwad@gse.rutgers.edu , catherine.eberbach@gse.rutgers.edu
             Spencer Rugaber, Swaroop Vattam, Ashok Goel, Design & Intelligence Laboratory, School of
                 Interactive Computing, Georgia Institute of Technology,Atlanta, GA 30332
                   spencer@cc.gatech.edu,        svattam@gmail.com,          goel@cc.gatech.edu

          Abstract: This paper presents a case study in which a middle school science teacher modifies her
          classroom instruction and teaching materials using the Structure, Behavior, and Function (SBF)
          representational framework      to transfer   her   reasoning  about   one  natural system   (an   aquarium
          ecosystem) to another natural system (human cells and body systems).

Promoting an understanding of complex systems is a difficult yet important component of scientific literacy
(Sabelli, 2006).  Through     emergent   processes      and localized   interactions, the behaviors    of  a system's
components affect its overall function (Jacobson & Wilensky, 2006). These interactions are often dynamic
and invisible which make them difficult for learners to understand and presents challenges for teachers
(Feltovich et al.,2001 Hmelo-Silver et al., 2007).
            The Structure-Behavior-Function (SBF) conceptual representation allows students to understand
the relationships between     the   structures, behaviors,    and functions   of systems  and    to map   SBF  across
multiple levels. In the science classroom, academic researchers have developed tools utilizing the SBF
representation as a way to teach about multiple complex systems (Hmelo-Silver et al., 2007; Liu & Hmelo-
Silver, 2009).  Structures are    defined as    the components    of  a system,    behaviors  as the  mechanisms    or
processes that occur within a system and functions as system outputs (Goel et al, 1996; 2009). We present a
case study of a teacher who appropriated the SBF conceptual representation that was originally introduced
by  a team   of  researchers, to  create  tools  to  meet   her   curricular needs.   The focus  of  the   study is to
understand how the teacher transferred the use of the SBF representation between two different curriculum
units. Some of the common critiques against the classical approach of transfer have put the spotlight on
questions related to the conditions that facilitate transfer, the context of instruction, and the pertinent cues
that learners need to be able to identify that signal the application of appropriate problem solving strategies
(Lave,  1988,   Bransford  et al.,  2000;  Mestre,      2003). The  study    looks at  transfer  under two   alternate
perspectives and the possible synergy between using multiple perspectives to study transfer.
          Our study considers transfer from both an actor oriented approach (Lobato, 2002, 2006) and a
preparation  for future learning    perspective  (Bransford    &  Schwartz,   1999)   to  investigate  the teacher  as
learner applying knowledge in a new area. We look at the influence of previous activities and procedures
adopted by a learner to construe similarities in new situations (Lobato, 2006). In particular our interest is in
understanding    how a  teacher     constructs  the  relationships   and similarities  between    two  systems;   one
provided by researchers and one designated by the teacher. Adopting an actor oriented perspective requires
considering which connections the learners make, on what basis, and how and why those connections are
productive (Lobato, 2002). Evidence for transfer from this perspective is found by scrutinizing a given
activity for any indication of influence from previous activities. Additionally, we investigate how a greater
understanding of SBF might have contributed to transfer from a preparation for future learning (PFL)
perspective.    This provides     a framework       for evaluating  the  quality   of particular    kinds of learning
experiences (Bransford & Schwartz, 1999). The PFL perspective allows us to uncover strategies that have
been adopted to interpret a new situation; "Interpretation of the situation invariably involves some use of a
previous experience it cannot be reduced to a simple replication of that experience" (Broudy, 1977, p. 11).
Integration of these two perspectives on transfer was crucial to understanding the importance of activities
and experiences (from an actor oriented perspective) which prepare the learner to develop new concepts
that, in this case, focuses on transfer between complex systems.

                                                    834   ·  © ISLS
                                               ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

A Case of Transfer: The Instructional Context
The context    for this study   is a  technology-intensive    curriculum   unit that helps  middle   school  science
students learn  about   an  aquarium   ecosystem    using    SBF   as a  conceptual    representation. The  learning
environment is comprised of two parts; (1) Reptools toolkit and (2) The Aquarium Construction Toolkit
(ACT).   The   RepTools   toolkit  includes  a function-oriented     hypermedia   (Liu  et al, 2007)   and NetLogo
computer simulations (Wilensky & Reisman, 2006). The hypermedia (Figure 1) introduces the aquarium
system with a focus on function and provides linkages between structural, behavioral and functional levels
of aquariums.   In  addition,  two   NetLogo   simulations    are included  to  make   the macro    and micro   level
behaviors visible to the learners. The second component to the learning environment, ACT, allows students
an opportunity to organize their understanding about complex systems by explicitly identifying structures,
behaviors,  and   functions in  both  an SBF     table  (Figure 3)  and  through  concept  mapping     which  allows
relationships  to  become   explicit  (Figure  4). This  gives  the   students an opportunity   to   understand both
individual mechanisms and the meta-level concepts related to complex systems (Goel et al, 2009)
         In this study, we highlight a particular case in which a teacher participant, Ms. Y, who has been
working with the SBF Aquarium curriculum for more than five years, developed her own instructional
tools using the SBF representation and computer-tools to meet her classroom teaching needs. In the fourth
year of enacting the SBF Aquarium curriculum, Ms Y used the SBF representation as an instructional tool
to teach about the cell and human body systems (digestive, reproductive, respiratory etc.). The result, in
collaboration with another science teacher from the same school, Ms. T, was the creation of a human body
system hypermedia modeled after the function-centered aquatic hypermedia.

Methods
To characterize how the SBF representation is appropriated by Ms. Y and to understand the processes by
which the teacher transfers these tools to other domains, we adopt a qualitative approach. An interview
with the teacher and video analysis sessions were conducted to understand (1) why the teacher transferred
her understanding of SBF to new instructional domains and (2) how she transferred these understandings.
We held an interview session with Ms Y after she had completed teaching about both the systems. The
primary focus of the interview was to understand how she conceived the idea of extending the computer-
based representational tools beyond what was expected from her, the influence of her prior knowledge
during this  process    and her  attempts to   prepare   herself  to  solve new   challenges.  After   the interview
transcription, we   looked   for   evidence   of  mechanisms     for  transfer  and  how   the teacher   constructed
similarities between aquarium and body systems.
         To understand the nature of transfer in Ms. Y's teaching of the content, we selected representative
clips of critical events from Ms. Y's classroom that demonstrates evidence for using the SBF as a tool to
teach about another complex system. These video clips included whole class discussions that Ms. Y has
with her students while (1) introducing the SBF concept for the aquatic ecosystem the year before she
created the cell/body unit (2) introducing the SBF concept for the aquatic ecosystem the year she employed
her cell/body unit and (3) explanation of SBF and modeling of the cell/body unit. These clips include three
classroom interactions for all three time interactions under evaluation. These video data were analyzed
using  Interaction  Analysis    (IA), which    involves  collaborative    viewing   of video   clips of a  group  of
researchers to examine the details of social interaction (Jordan & Henderson, 1995). The basic goal of IA
methodology    is  to use   the video   data   to  understand   the  means  by   which    people interact  in  social
environments   and    how,  if any,   learning takes   place. We    conducted   nine   IA  sessions  successively to
collaboratively review the selected video clips, describe observations, and generate hypotheses.

Results
Teacher Created Hypermedia
Ms Y., in collaboration with her colleague Ms. T, created a hypermedia in the form of an interactive
PowerPoint of the cell and body systems mirroring the aquarium hypermedia developed by the research
team (Figures 1 and 2). The teacher hypermedia outlines the different structures in the system along with
leading `why' and `how' questions. The `how' questions are directed towards understanding the behavioral
aspect of system components and the `why' questions focus on functions. The teacher created hypermedia
was developed as additional learning resources to textbooks to connect cell systems to higher order body
systems. Neither    the body    system hypermedia      nor the  use   of modeling   these  systems   using the  ACT
software was planned by the research team; the teachers did this of their own volition.

                                                    835  ·  © ISLS
                                               ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

                                                                                                    Behaviors
Structures

                                                                                                Functions

Functions
                                                                                                 Structures

Behaviors

           Figure 1. Researcher-developed hypermedia           Figure 2. Teacher-developed Hypermedia

Identifying similarities through the SBF lens
Ms Y's initiative to extend and appropriate our research and develop additional classroom tools led us to
consider the process of transfer. We intended to understand the processes she adopted to draw similarities
between    what she  had  been teaching    for several   years (the aquatic ecosystem) to the current      unit she
developed (cell and body systems).       Adopting an actor oriented perspective helped us to articulate which
connections she makes, on what basis, and how and why those connections are productive (Lobato, 2002).
A PFL approach allowed us to understand how her learning experiences may have prepared her to apply the
SBF representation when she created her new hypermedia. Our hypothesis, based on the interview, is that
she used the SBF as a tool to trace similarities across complex systems. For example, consider the response
when both Ms Y and Ms T were asked about the utility of their hypermedia:
           Researcher:...what is the purpose of the Hypermedia you guys came up with? And how does it
                   help you teach about complex systems?
           Ms. Y.: Okay, first we were teaching the cell. And we also have to teach body systems especially
                   in the new standards, so its going to work out that we're actually covering both of those.
                   But they teach the cell as an isolated entity. And we were saying that you know the whole
                   body is made of cells and you know you teach the systems separate, you teach the cell
                   separate, and then we just name the parts of the cell and tell what each part does. And
                   there's no connection about how the parts interact, interact with each other in the cell, let
                   alone how the cell interacts with the whole body.
           Ms. T: Because kids don't even know that each- Like you're bodies is made up of cells, they just
                   think of it as cells.
           Researcher: Everything discrete?
           Ms. T: Right. .., everything's separate and that you know, the idea that everything is made up of
                   different types of cells and the cells work together; they just don't get that, at all.
           Ms. Y: Right, and it's a hard concept to get. So, what we were thinking about is like the kids
                   actually think when they eat food it breaks down and then leaves the body. They don't get
                   that the food has to go to the cells and the cell actually works and creates energy from
                   this food and then there's a waste and it sends that back to the body for it to be excreted.
                   So we're trying to give them not only the names of the parts and what each part does
                   individually but how it needs to work-
           Ms. T: I would say we're trying to bring in the behavior into it. They get the structure, we teach
                   part the function, but there was never that behavior why does it need to do what it
                   does....
           Ms. Y: And we're doing the behavior not only of the cell itself but behavior of all the systems and
                   then the behavior of the whole body. And the cells are all part of that whole body.
This excerpt highlights that Ms. Y understood that the cells are an integral part of the body systems and
cannot be   taught   in isolation. She   discusses that   systems in  the body are not disconnected        and have
complex mechanisms which allows for higher order operation. It is apparent that she understands how
structures within a system perform multiple behaviors in order for it to function effectively. Owing to the
strong connection to the SBF representation, we felt it critical to observe the learning trajectory she adopts
to refine her understanding of the SBF as a conceptual tool. This led us to analyze Ms. Y introducing the
SBF  concept    (via IA  sessions)  over  multiple  years   to determine  how  she may  have  refined      her  own

                                                   836  ·  © ISLS
                                              ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

understanding of SBF as a basis to then extend it into a new area.
Refining SBF as a Conceptual Tool
Upon examining Ms. Y's classroom introduction of SBF over time, analysis of the video suggested that her
understanding   of the  SBF  representation    as  a  conceptual  tool  changed.   She   adopted  several  distinct
strategies to introduce the topic of complex systems ranging from discrete (the year before she developed
her unit), to acknowledging complexity (the year she developed her unit), and finally providing a systems
perspective  with  her  new  cell/body   unit. The    year before    developing  her  new   unit, she   began   her
introduction to the  SBF    representation  by mentioning    the  new  terminology    being  used  to   discuss the
system, however, she introduced structures, behaviors, and functions as individual constructs that should be
dealt with  discretely. In  the following   year, she promoted    the  SBF   representation as a  comprehensive
perspective, acknowledging it as a conceptual unit. Finally while introducing it within the context of the
unit on cells and body she explains it as a system, complete with nested subsystems and stressed the
importance of inter-relatedness.
         Ms. Y's early introduction to SBF suggests a focus on linear connections. This is shown by the
way in which she fills out the ACT SBF table (Figure 4) in front of the classroom. As a way to connect
ideas about the Structure, Behaviors, and Functions, she drew clear conceptual lines between one structure
at a time and all the behaviors exhibited by that structure as the following example shows:
        Ms. Y: We just named them all yesterday ... The heater, the fish, the plants. Those things are
                   called the structure. The next word we're gonna use is Behavior. The behavior is what the
                   fish do. What    do  the things do   in the tank?   And   the next  word  we're  gonna   use  is
                   Function, okay? So what I want to do today ... to start with structure and behavior.....
                   So, I made a chart and ...The first column is the structure, or the parts. So everyone write
                   down  one    of the things  in the fish tank   is fish. and the second   column    I wrote   was
                   behavior, and the third column I wrote was function. We're going to start with this second
                   column which is behavior. When I ask you the behavior of something, I want to know is
                   what does it do?
        Ms. Y: "What do fish do?" Swims, eats, breathes, and poops. Okay, all fish swim. That is their
                   behavior okay. They swim. What else do fish do?
       Andy: Breathe
       Ms. Y: They breathe. What else do fish do?
       Andy: Eat..
This excerpt indicates that, after covering structures the day prior, she begins by describing the meaning of
the term `behavior'. This was immediately followed by establishing all linear connections between the
structures (fish) and the multiple behaviors (swims, eats, breathes, poops) that this structure exhibits.   After
promoting   an understanding    of  the behavior   exhibited by   the  structure (fish), she then  drew   another
relationship between each individual behavior to the last column to indicate the behavior's function.
        Over time, Ms Y's introduction to the SBF concept became richer and more complex.                   In the
excerpt below taken from the year after she developer her unit, she describes SBF as interconnected entities
within a system, rather than discrete elements on a worksheet:
        Ms. Y: Okay, now, let's do the filter..... I'm gonna do the filter with you and then you're gonna do
                   one on your own. Alright, so... what does the filter do?        What does the filter do? Jim
                   what does the filter do?
       Jim: Um, cleans out the tank
       Ms. Y: Cleans the tank. Or cleans the "what part of the tank?"
       Jim: The water in the tank?
       Ms. Y: All right, so the filter will clean the water. Okay? Now, why does it clean the water?
       Jim: So it can put more oxygen into the water?
       Ms. Y: No. That's another thing that it does. It actually, because it's spinning around, because it's
                   spinning like this, it's actually, one of the things it does- we could make a second bullet-
                   is it adds oxygen to the water. Now, this part here, why does it do it? First of all, I want to
                   stop right here. The filter is this big grey thing here. Right? Now, first of all, how does it
                   work? What's this big tube doing? [Points to picture of filter on the screen.]
       Pat: Sucking up the water
       Ms. Y: Sucking up the water. Then the water comes up here, right? And it gets sucked up and it
                   goes back here and it pours back down. When it flushes back over that's when the oxygen

                                                  837  ·   © ISLS
                                              ICLS 2010      ·  Volume 1

                    from the air can get pulled back into the water. Okay, so how- you said it cleans the
                    water- how does it do this?
         Pat: Well, it has in the filter. The filter has like chemicals and stuff... well like,
                    (inaudible) right here, we're gonna start with the fish tank. This bag, because right here..
         Ms. Y: What do you think is in this bag?
         Pat: Bad stuff
         Ms. Y: Well, eventually the bad stuff is going to get in here, but actually there's charcoal in here,
                    gravel in here. And then when the water flows through it, can it catch all the big
                    chunks?...Maybe the fish feces and stuff like that? So, and then see how it spins back
                    down here? Water splashes and it's pulling in the oxygen. So now... Alright, so now,
                    why does it clean the water? What is the point of cleaning the water? Because of the
                    what? Right, it keeps clean water for the who?
The class went on to discuss the fish and the plants, and how the filter aerates the tank and what the filter
does for the whole system. In this example, when Ms. Y discussed the behaviors (cleans water in tank) and
function of the filter (by collecting feces from fish) she was guiding students' answers to S, B, and F
simultaneously and filling in the chart appropriately rather than focusing on any one aspect in isolation. Ms.
Y also used student answers to generate more questions that linked what (Structure) and why (Function)
questions throughout her classroom discussion, highlighting the complexity of how the system works.
         Later in the same year, when introducing her unit on the cells, Ms Y emphasized how the SBF
within a system work as a whole across multiple levels, not directly, but implicitly by leading questions as
seen from the example below:
         Ms. Y: Eventually what we want [the researchers] to do for us is allow us to model systems within
                    systems.  What happens if I can click on the cell and zoom in on that and put the cell
                    parts in there? Because they don't have the ability to zoom right in on that one part, are
                    there any ideas on how to connect the cell through modeling to the other body systems?
                    Because you also want to go and look at the function. What do you think?
         Lucia: Umm, what about if you like umm put a picture of the cell.
         Ms Y: Yeah but I want to drive everything to the cell because that's, you know, the whole body
                    operates to get things to the cell, you know that right? But then I also want to show what
                    the cell does inside once you send the food there. So how can I show that part? How can I
                    show it on this graph? Okay. You know how this is a system. The body parts and the cell
                    is its own little mini system, how can I show the stuff inside the cell? Should I circle all
                    the mitochondria right around the cell? Or should I pull the cell out and make that part
                    separate? ...Okay so here on this side we'll do all the body parts connected to the cell,
                    and over on this corner do you want to do the cell again and show the inside of the cell..
These   excerpts  demonstrate  the process    of refining      of Ms.  Y's   thinking about  the  SBF    concept   as a
conceptual tool. Whereas earlier, her focus was primarily in working with living organisms in the aquarium
(fish), she later  introduced a  new    level of complexity       by  trying to  relate the  influence   of non-living
structures  on  other living organisms.     She  was   still   focusing  largely on   structures  but she   does make
connections to behaviors and functions. In addition, she helped students understand that one structure may
have multiple behaviors and functions. Comparing her SBF introduction of the cell system here to that of
the aquatic  ecosystem   in  the earlier unit,  she presented      it to the class as   an entire system    and  not  as
fragmented pieces as S, B & F with linear connections. In addition, when applying SBF to the cell, Ms. Y
introduced a meta-perspective by explicitly explaining that the task was to represent their ideas through
modeling. Moving away from the isolated task provided in earlier in the context (i.e., filling out the table
by first listing structure followed by behavior, and then function) Ms Y explained that the students are
going organize their knowledge in the table graph. By placing emphasis on the modeling tool and providing
students  with  the starting point of   the structure, the     cell,  Ms Y   explains that  the  task is to develop   a
representation of their ideas about the human body system, using the table to organize their ideas and
providing the students with leading questions that she had provided earlier when talking about the SBF in
the aquarium unit.
         This   process of   transition led us  to believe     that  Ms  Y.  was an   active learner  herself.  As she
explored the aquarium hypermedia and talked about SBF representations in her class, she frequently asked
questions   to the  research team  and   her  colleague   Ms.     T., to refine  her  understanding.   We   think  this
experience had two effects. First, it helped her identify and address the gaps in her understanding, which
prepared her for future learning. Secondly, it shed light on the processes that she as an actor (learner) use to

                                                   838  ·    © ISLS
                                            ICLS 2010   ·    Volume 1

construct similarities between the aquatic ecosystem and cell system (Lobato, 2002).
Recognition of Teacher as a Learner
In the interview, Ms. Y indicated that since the beginning of her involvement in the project, her knowledge
has continually developed. She explained that she was the primary source by which information was passed
from the research team to the students and that, over time, she felt that she has become more competent in
this role. Effective learners learn to look  critically   at their current knowledge    and beliefs (Bransford,
Brown, & Cocking, 2000) instead of making old responses by simply associating new information to the
existing concepts or schemas. In the following excerpts from the interview, she acknowledges her lack of
mastery over the content and is aware that she refined her ideas of the SBF representation and the aquarium
unit which lead to adoption of the new unit:
           Okay, my knowledge of this still develops every year because it's knowledge that [Project PI] had
        and it- you know- was her angle on something and then I had to try to understand what was going
        on in her head. So it's taken me many years of practice and talking to [Project PI], talking to
        [researchers in the room], to kind of get this. And I still do not feel like I'm really solid on it, but I
        get it more and more each year.
These statements demonstrate Ms Y as a learner in her classroom as she was looking critically at her
current knowledge and beliefs (Novick, 1988). This experience prepares her to deepen her understanding of
the content, and revise her ideas as she gathers new information.
Appropriating Salient Features of the Aquarium Hypermedia
When asked about what parts of the Hypermedia she found useful in her own development, Ms. Y felt that
working with the same piece of software for 5 years allowed her to incorporate key features within the
hypermedia   she created. Although   her hypermedia     does   not  possess the technological  and  conceptual
sophistication of the aquarium hypermedia, it prepares her for refining her model along a trajectory of
increasing expertise (Figures 3 and 4). Moore & Schwartz (1998) suggest that even if students generate
representations that are not entirely correct or are faulty, these experiences help them in noticing critical
features of experts' representations. This process is important from an actor-oriented transfer framework, as
it enables her to see the connections between two situations by identifying the salient features of one
learning environment (Lobato, 2002). The excerpts below demonstrate how she is expanding upon her
knowledge to integrate important characteristics from the aquarium hypermedia:
        I would say that I definitely liked how each question lead to another question because that's how
        we modeled ours was every question gave an answer but then lead to another question and another
        question and another question.
The above excerpt highlights a key feature of the aquatic hypermedia of linking different concepts via
leading questions.   The students can  learn about  the   behaviors   and  functions of different structures by
browsing these questions.
        Another important feature of the hypermedia is its presentation. Each section comprises of a brief
description accompanied by a visual image. The following excerpt highlights the fact that Ms Y used it as a
parameter while constructing her hypermedia:
        We also used just short pieces of information because I think the kids get bored if you put too
        much it's overwhelming. We used pictures and then we also had it not only lead to different the
        next one and the next one but it bounced back sometimes a design in the hypermedia too.
It is clear that as Ms. Y. identified the relevant features of the aquarium hypermedia. This process of
experimentation is also helping her clarify her own thinking (Bransford et al., 1990) about the concepts that
she is placing within the new hypermedia contexts.      It is notable that she transferred other features of the
hypermedia structure beyond SBF, including the use of guiding questions as well as the use of short pieces
of text accompanied by simple and relevant graphics.

Appropriating ACT to Model a New System
        In addition to appropriating aspects of the Aquarium Hypermedia, Ms. Y also appropriated the
ACT program so that students could model body systems in the same fashion as they had for the aquarium
system. After students read through the body system hypermedia, they were instructed to develop SBF
tables and concept maps using the ACT software (Figures 3 and 4). The following excerpt highlights Ms
Y's intentions of evaluating student understanding when placed into the ACT program:
        ...at first she [PI] came and she was just testing the kids knowledge and that I was not really
        involved and then we started, actually we started originally started talking about the cell and the

                                                839  ·  © ISLS
                                            ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

        body so that was one of the things then she got the idea of the respiratory system because that was
        an area she worked in and then she, this slowly develops into you know the NetLogo and the
        Hypermedia then structure, function, behavior, and I think for me it was all just disjointed all the
        pieces were here and I was just trying to keep up with her. And then...the ACT program helped a
        lot because it sort of put everything together for me in the end, like okay, here's all the knowledge
        that the kids have been getting along the way, here is proof that they got it. And for me it was just
        a slow process of absorbing everything and you know kind of understanding it until I could you
        know turn key it and then we could turn around and together make another Hypermedia with it
We think that this exemplifies the importance of the ACT software as a capstone to allow for student
understanding of the new system to become explicit. This example from the interview, and the classroom
task of modeling body systems in ACT, indicates that Ms. Y possessed the confidence to organize the new
ideas generated by her hypermedia into SBF terms using the tool and the importance. Additionally it also
highlights her ability to appropriate the  ACT  tool   as the  final classroom task to   evaluate knowledge
generated by the hypermedia as a way to organize student ideas about complex systems.

Figure3. Digestive System ACT table view                     Figure 4 Digestive System Student ACT Model

Discussion
The most relevant contribution our study makes to the current research on alternative approaches to transfer
(Lobato, 2004, 2006; Bransford & Schwartz, 1999) is to further expand on the notion of looking at new
ways for understanding learning trajectories. As we observed Ms. Y's transition over multiple years our
focus was not in assessing mastery over content knowledge but on the processes she adopted during this
transition. In terms of learning trajectories, our results highlight the fact that Ms. Y is looking critically at
her  current knowledge  and gradually  evolves to   an   experienced  novice within that content  area. Data
analysis from earlier years reveals an early understanding of the SBF as a conceptual tool.    However, she
actively sought resources (fellow colleague, Ms. T; project PI; other researchers present in the classroom)
to help her understand the interconnections between SBF. Her increasing confidence in the content area,
coupled with collaboration, resulted in her being highly motivated to extend the research tools. From a PFL
perspective both these processes are vital as she is able to revise her current knowledge and beliefs and it
sets the stage for her to analyze and appreciate critical features of the new information presented to her
(Bransford et al., 1990; Moore & Schwartz, 1998). This process of analyzing her own beliefs and strategies
also targets the active nature of transfer, which is an important part of PFL. The initiative she took in
applying her SBF understanding to teaching a new unit demonstrates her ability to revise and rethink the
current situation to suit her current goals. Even the hypermedia she created echoes the same pattern of
organization as that of the Aquarium Hypermedia. From a PFL perspective this is valuable as it reveals the
importance of activities and practices that are beneficial for "extended learning" rather than on one shot
task performances  (Bransford  & Schwartz,   1999).      The analysis  presented in this study suggests  the
possibilities of extended research within the field of nontraditional approaches to transfer. In our case,
teacher adoption  and  appropriation  of a learning    framework   was an exciting  by-product of  scholarly

                                                840  ·  © ISLS
                                           ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

research because it indicates promising evidence that classroom interventions can be sustained and built
upon to be appropriated given specific curricular need. Additionally, our analyses characterize that under
the correct conditions, some teachers  may  be motivated      to create their own learning tools      when the
knowledge is transferred to a new domain, thereby extending the reach of classroom interventions.

References
Bransford, J. D., Brown, A. L., & Cocking, R. (2000). How people learn. Washington DC: National Academy Press.
Bransford, J. D., Vye. N,, Kinzer, C, & Risko, V. (1990). Teaching thinking and content knowledge:
        Toward an integrated approach. In B. F. Jones & L. Idol (Eds.), Dimensions of thinking and
        cognitive instruction: Implications for educational reform (Vol. 1, pp. 381-413). Hillsdale, NJ:
        Erlbaum.
Bransford, J. D. & Schwartz, D. L. (1999). Rethinking transfer: Asimple proposal with multiple
        implications. In A. Iran-Nejad & P. D. Pearson (Eds.), Review of research in education (Vol. 24,
        pp.61­100). Washington, DC: American Educational Research Association.
Broudy, H. S. (1977). Types of knowledge and purposes of education. In R. C. Anderson,
        R. J. Spiro, & W. E. Montague (Eds.), Schooling and the acquisition of knowledge (pp.
        1-17). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Feltovich, P. J., Coulson, R. L., & Spiro, R. J. (2001). Learners' (mis)understanding of important and
        difficult concepts. InK.D. Forbus&P. J. Feltovich (Eds.), Smartmachines in education: The
        coming revolution in educational technology (pp. 349­375). Menlo Park, CA: AAAI/MIT Press.
Goel, A., Rugaber, S., & Vattam, S. (2009). Structure, behavior, and function of complex systems: The structure,
        behavior, and function modeling language Artificial Intelligence for Engineering Design, Analysis and
        Manufacturing, 23, 23-55.
Goel, A. K., Gomez de Silva Garza, A., Grué, N., Murdock, J. W., Recker, M. M., & Govinderaj, T. (1996).
        Towards designing learning environments -I: Exploring how devices work. In C. Fraisson, G. Gauthier &
        A. Lesgold (Eds.), Intelligent Tutoring Systems: Lecture notes in computer science. NY: Springer.
Hmelo-Silver, C. E., Liu, L., Gray, S., Finkelstein, H., & Schwartz, R. (2007). Enacting things differently: Using
        NetLogo models to learn about complex systems. Paper presented at the Biennial meeting of European
        Association for Research on Learning and Instruction.
Hmelo-Silver, C. E., Marathe, S., & Liu, L. (2007). Fish swim, rocks sit, and lungs breathe: Expert-novice
        understanding of complex systems. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 16, 307-331.
Jacobson, M. J., & Wilensky, U. (2006). Complex systems in education: Scientific and educational
        importance and implications for the learning sciences. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 15, 11-34.
Jordan, B., & Henderson, A. (1995). Interaction analysis: Foundations and practice. Journal of the
        Learning Sciences, 4, 39-103.
Liu, L., & Hmelo-Silver, C. E. (2009). Promoting complex systems learning through the use of
        conceptual representations in hypermedia. Journal of Research in Science Teaching.
Lobato, J. (2006). Alternative Perspectives on the Transfer of Learning: History, Issues, and Challenges for
        Future Research. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 15, 431-449.
Lobato, J. (2004). Abstraction, situativity, and the "actor-oriented transfer" perspective. In J.
Lobato (Chair), Rethinking abstraction and decontextualization in relationship to the "transfer
       dilemma."Symposium conducted at the annual meeting of the AERA, San Diego, CA.
Moore, J. L., & Schwartz, D. L. (1998). On learning the relationship between quantitative
        properties and symbolic representations. In Proceedings of the International Conference
        of the Learning Sciences (pp. 209-214). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Sabelli, N. (2006). Complexity, technology, science, and education. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 15,
        5-10.
Schwartz, D. L,, & Bransford, J. D. (1998). A time for telling. Cognition and Instruction, 16, 475-522.
Wilensky, U. & Reisman, K. (2006). Thinking like a wolf, a sheep or firefly: Learning biology through
        constructing and testing computational theories ­ an embodied modeling approach. Cognition and
        Instruction, 24, 171-209.
Acknowledgments
This research was funded by IES grant # R305A090210 to the third author. Conclusions or
recommendations expressed in this paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of
IES.

                                               841  ·  © ISLS
