                                              ICLS 2010   ·   Volume 1

          Discipline-specific Socialization: A Comparative Study
 Iris Tabak, Michael Weinstock, Hilla Zviling-Beiser, Ben Gurion University of the Negev, P.O.B. 653, Beer
                                                Sheva, 8415, Israel
                           itabak@bgu.ac.il, micwein@bgu.ac.il, zvilingh@bgu.ac.il

         Abstract:   Do  different  disciplines cultivate    different epistemologies?      We draw    on  the
         epistemological framework of D. Kuhn et al. that delineates three perspectives: absolutist,
         maintaining  that knowledge   is objective   and    immutable;  multiplist,  maintaining   a  radical
         relativism; and evaluativist, maintaining a qualified relativism. We conjectured that typical
         instruction in the  humanities   would  tend   to   foster evaluativist views   more   than   typiacl
         instruction in the  sciences. Twenty    biology     majors and  twenty     history majors   evaluated
         competing accounts in biology, history and judicial contexts. Structured interviews concerning
         these accounts    were  used  to assign  each    participant   an epistemologicalview      in each
         discipline. These  results were   considered     in conjunction   with  learners'   reports  of  their
         educational experiences. We were disappointed to find that there was an overall tendency
         toward  absolutism.   Our  main  finding  is   that  students  are distinguished    by major    and
         epistemological view, and that typical history instruction more than typical science instruction
         seems to foster evaluativist views in history.

Introduction
Learners' epistemologies   are  of increasing   concern   to  learning  scientists. Whatlearners   believe about   the
certainty and simplicity of knowledge, and about the source and justification of knowledge influences how they
approach knowledge construction and learning(Hofer, 2004; Schauble, Glaser, Duschl, Shulze, & John, 1995;
Songer & Linn, 1991). Schooling and level of education appear to be a strong factor in the development of these
beliefs (Kuhn,  Cheney,    & Weinstock,    2000;  Schommer,       Calvert, Gariglietti, &    Bajaj,  1997.) Although
developmental patterns have been associated wtih grade level, it seems that educational experiences rather than
age explain most differences in epistemological views. Unique educational experiences are associated with
epistemological perspectives that depart from that grade-level's norm (Smith, Maclin, Houghton, & Hennessey,
2000), and classrooms with different curricular foci at the same grade level can be characterized by different
epistemological belief patterns (Tabak & Weinstock, 2005).
         Moreover, there is increasing evidence that epistemological views are disciplin-especific, that is, the
same individual may hold different beliefs about science than about art or psychology(Hofer, 2006). Despite
differences between disciplines, there seems to be some measure of regularity concerning beliefs within and
about particular disciplines. This suggests that learning experiences are key in shaping epistemological views,
and that different disciplines cultivate different beliefs about the nature of knowledge. In this paper, we report
on a study that examined whether different disciplines, college-level biology and college-level history, fostered
different approaches to knowledge. Specifically, we compared the ways in which biology majors and history
majors evaluated competing-claim scenarios in biology, history and judicial domains. In additio,nwe explored
whether students' approaches to these tasks and any differences among themseem related to students' accounts
of their college learning experiences.

Background

The Absolutist, Multiplist, Evaluativist Framework
We approach    this  exploration of biology and   history    majors'   epistemological  views   from   the framework
advanced by Kuhn and her colleagues (e.g., Kuhn & Weinstock, 2002). This framework is consistent with a
number of approaches in developmental psychology's investigation of personal epistemolog(yHofer & Pintrich,
1997). The framework distinguishes between three approaches to knoweldge: (1) "absolutist"--the conception
of knowledge and knowing as objective and absolute, (2) "multiplist"--regarding all knowledge as subjective
and relative and, therefore, indeterminate because of multiple points of viewa,nd (3) "evaluativist"--a qualified
subjectivity that integratessubjective and objective aspects of knowledgepermitting a degree of evaluation and
judgment of knowledge claims. Table 1 elaborates some of the beliefs about the certainty of knowledge, the
source of knowledge and the justification of knowledge that are associated with each of these perspectives.

                                                  842   ·  © ISLS
                                              ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

Table 1: Characteristics of epistemological views along central dimensions of the nature okfnowledge

                             Absolutist                       Multiplist                   Evaluativist

Certainty          Knowledge is certain. Any        There is no certainty.          There is no certainty. But,
                   uncertainty results from                                         one account may be more
                   error or insufficient                                            trustworthy if there is more
                   information.                                                     evidence to support it.

Simplicity         There is one single correct      There are multiple accounts.    There are multiple accounts
                   account based onself-                                            each containing different
                   evident facts.                                                   types of information,
                                                                                    arguments, and
                                                                                    interpretations.

Source             Knowledge comes from             Knowledge derives from          Knowledge is constructed.
                   experts or authority that are    opinions.
                   able to discern the objective
                   reality.

Justification      Facts either prove or            Knowledge claims can never      Preponderance of valued
                   disprove knowledge claims.       be truly defended, because      sources of evidence.
                                                    all opinions are equally
                                                    valid.

Why Adopt this Developmental Framework in the Learning Sciences
        This framework has been employed mostly in the area of developmental psychology. In the learning
sciences, research on epistemology has focused more closely on particular discipinl es, predominantly science,
and has focused on the distinction between absolute and dynamic or constructivist views of science/knowledge
(e.g., Hogan, 2000; Songer & Linn, 1991). We have found that the Kuhn et al. framework has refined our
understanding   of epistemological  perspectives    within  particular disciplines, and especially   in  scienceI. n
particular, this conceptualization reveals nuanced distinctions that might eixst in students' specific conceptions
of the nature of science, by pointing to two perspectives that can fall under a constructivist or dynamic view of
science. For example, learners who note that two scientists can look at the same data and arrive at twodifferent
but correct explanations may be attributed with a dynamic view of science. Yet, when viewed from the Kuhn et
al. framework, there are two possible epistemological views that might underlie this positio:na multiplist or an
evaluativist perspective. This distinction has important implications for learning in the disciplines, and most
notably in inquiry-based science, because of its impact on an individual's inclination to critique and refine
explanations.
        Being inclined to judge the value of a claim or explanation rests on a consideration of knowledge as a
product of construction. If knowledge is considered immutable, then it makes more sense to simply assimilate
the new information, than to question the strength of its warrants or explanatory powre(Songer & Linn, 1991).
This depicts  an absolutist  perspective, and  this depiction is  a point of convergence  between    the prevalent
approaches in the learning sciences and in developmental psychology.Yet, even if knowledge is considered
constructed, there may not be much motivation to critique it if radical relativit,ymultiplicity, is espoused. That
is, if people believe that all claims are equally valid then critique may seem like a pointless exerciseT. his is in
contrast to scientific practice, where explanations are continually critiqued and refined in order to arrive at the
most parsimonious explanation that explains the widest range of data or phenomena. This type of practice is
motivated by seeing knowledge as constructed but subject to adjudicatoi n. Or, in other words, on adopting an
evaluativist perspective. In sum, an evaluativist, but not a multiplist perspective would be commensurate with
science learning goals, but this distinction would not be perceptible in the absence of the Kuhn et al. lens.

The Present Study
We conducted the present study as a follow up to earlier surprsiing findings. In an earlier study we compared
epistemological perspectives between a "regular" school and a scienc-ecentered school that has an extended
project and inquiry oriented science curriculum. We had expected students in the scienc-ecentered school to
tend more toward evaluativism, especially in science. However, these students actually tended toward absolutist

                                                  843  ·   © ISLS
                                                ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

views in science (citations omitted for blind review).This led us to consider why an emphasis on science might
lead to absolutist views. We conjectured thatthe emphasis on science made broader societal belief,ssuch as the
belief in the superiority and certainty of sciencemore salient, and that these broader scripts shaped learners'
views  about    science. In response  to   our surprising  findni gs, we  also began  to   explore learning  in  other
disciplines, and further conjectured that instructionas it is typically carried out in the humanities, and especially
in art, would foster evaluativist views to a greater extent than typical science educatino. There is a measure of
irony in this line of conjecture­ in the sense that the disciplines that are less privileged in society, such as art in
comparison to science cultivate the epistemological views that are more valued (at least from a Western social
science perspective).
         Therefore, we set out to compare the epistemological views of students in a scientific discipline and in
a humanities discipline. We focused on biology and history as a function of access to participants, and of our
prior research experience. We expected history majors to tend more toward evaluativism than science majors.
We expected students to have differentiated views concerning their own and other disciplines. As we noted in
the introduction, prior research has documented discipilne-specific and differentiated epistemological views
(Hofer, 2006). Many of these studies employed questionnaires that ask participants about how knowledge
claims are handled in different disciplines. We were interested in examining howlearners' epistemological
views come into play and guide their decisions in contextualized reasoning tasks. Questions about a discipline
might trigger stereotypes and societal scripts, but performance on a task, we though, twas less susceptible to
these  threats. So, we   decided to  compare   students'   views by   comparing  their  reactions through  structured
interviews to competing accounts in their major discipline, in the other group's major discipline, and in an
everyday context.

Methods

Participants
We interviewed ten university biology majors and ten university history majors in a university in IsraelT. he
students were in their second or thrid years of study. Undergraduate studies in Israel in the humanities, social
sciences and natural sciences are three years long, so third year students in particular were at the final stages of
their undergraduate disciplinary education.Importantly, undergraduate studies in Israeli universities arevery
discipline-focused, that is, almost all of the coursework in completedwithin the department of their major. This
often  includes  various    "service courses,"  for  example,    students   majoring in    education, psychology     and
sociology may each take a statistics course, but they will not take the course in the statistics department,arther
they will take the course in their respective departments. Thislends more support to attributing any differences
found  between    biology   and  history   majors to their   disciplinary   socialization. It alsosuggests  that any
disciplinary socialization that we may find may be stronger than in more interdisciplinary contexts (such as the
emphasis on a rounded education in liberal arts that is found in many colleges in the United States).

Task
Our task draws on earlier work by Kuhn and Weinstock(2002), who presented participants with competing
accounts of historical cases. Our task included three scenarios from three different disciplines: biology, judicial,
history. The biology case was adapted from learning environment design work by Linn and colleagues(Linn,
Clark, &  Slotta,   2003).  The judicial case  was  loosely  adapted    from a case  used  in earlier studies (Kuhn,
Weinstock, & Flaton, 1994) to assess argument skill (the original cases were abridged and selective versions of
actual cases). The history scenario wasadapted from the Kuhn & Weinstock study. . The three disciplines were
chosen so that each participant will engage with a scenario from their discipline of study, a sceniaor from the
other group's discipline of study, and a scenario from an everyday domain. Each of the three scenarios depicts
competing accounts of the same events. Figure 1 shows an English translation of the biology scenario. Each
scenario was    followed    by a post-task epistemology    interview   that targeted the   participants' views  ofthe
dimensions   of   personal   epistemology,   mainly  the   dimensions    of  certainty,  source  and   justification of
knowledge. Figure 2 shows the post-task epistemology interview guide for thebiology task. There were only
slight variations in the post-task epistemology interviews to accommodate the different disciplines, for example,
whether  historians  or  scientists  were  named  in the   questions.  We   also questioned   participants about  their
learning experiences, and in particular, whether they had encountered discrepant accounts as part of their major
area studies. Figure 3 shows this pos-ttask learning experiences interview guide.

                                                    844  ·  © ISLS
                       ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

      Figure 1: Biology scenario adapted from Linn et al.

Figure 2: Post-task epistemology interview for the biology scenario

      Figure 3: Post-task learning experiences interview

                          845  ·   © ISLS
                                                 ICLS 2010    ·  Volume 1

Procedure
A number of research assistants interviewed the participants.Each scenario followed the same sequence: The
research assistant gave the participant a sheet of paper with the scenario and gave the participant a few minutes
to read through the scenario. When the participant felt that they had read the scenario carefully, the research
assistant interviewed them following the pos-ttask epistemology protocol for that task, in a structured interview
style (see  Figure 1   for an   example    of the  biology      interview). The order   of  the scenarios   varied across
participants. After all three scenario interviews, the research assistant continued with tehinterview following the
post-task learning experiences interview (see Figure 2).The sessions were audio recorded.

Analysis
The interviews were transcribed and coded. Transcripts, devoid of identifying information, such as the subject's
major, were segmented into statements. Each statement was coded as exhibiting an absolutist, multiplist or
evlautivist perspective,   based  on   the characterizations      summarized    in Table    1. For  example,   attributing
differences between the discrepant accountsto error or lack of skill would be coded as absolutist, attributing
differences to equally valid opinions would be coded as multiplist, and emphasizing interpretation over opinion
would be coded as evaluativist. These response-level codes were used to assign an overall epsitemological
perspective per scenario to each interviewed participant.About 20% of the interviews were coded by a second
coder with a high degree of agreement between the coders.
        The   learning  experiences    interview   was    not   coded. Rather,  after  each  particpant  was assigned    an
overall epistemological    view, we    grouped    the learning   interviews  by  major   and   epistemological   view.   We
examined the interviews to see whether there were similarities in the learning experiences reports and whether
these similarities corresponded to epistemological assignment, and or major.

Findings and Discussion
The results of the epistemological view assignments are presented in Table2, a capital letter "X" under the
corresponding column denotes the epistemological assignment: A--absolutist, M--multiplist, E--Evaluativist.
For some participants it was difficult to make a firm decision about their epistemological assignment, therefore,
they were coded as being mid-way between two views. This is indicated in the table by two lower caseeltters
"x" positioned midway between two columns.
        We    found   that both  biology   and    history majors   tended    to be absolutists   in  all disciplines, most
pronouncedly   in  the judicial  discipline,  which   was    outside   both group's    area of  study.This  is surprising,
because prior research suggests that the majority of people maintain multiplist positions(Hofer & Pintrich,
1997; Kuhn et al., 2000). History majors were markedly absolutists in the biology scenario, tended markedly
toward evaluativism in the history scenario, and tended markedly toward absolutism inhte judicial scenario.
Biology majors showed a clear pattern only in the judicial scenario where they were markedly absolutists. They
also  tended toward    absolutism  in  both   the biology     and the  history  scenarios.We    speak   of these patterns
cautiously,  because  our  sample  is  small  so  assertions    concerning   patterns  are  prohibitive, especially   in the
absence of statistical tests.
        The main finding is that history majors but not biology majors exhibit within their discipline of study
an epistemological perspective that is distinguished from their views in the other disciplines.Moreover, the
history majors' view in the history scenario, their discipline of study, tended toward an evaluativist perspective,
which is considered to be a more productive view in academic contexts. The difference between history and
biology majors in the overall patterns of epistemological assignment, and the difference within the history
majors' assignments    in  their discipline   of  study   versus  other   disciplines, suggest  that history   and bilogy
students have different learning experiences and that these experiences give rise to different epistemological
views   when  contending    with  discipline-specific   content.  It   also suggests that   epistemological    views, and
evaluativist views specifically, can be cultivated through instruction.
        We   do   not  have   baseline data   for these   participants  documenting     their  perspectives  prior to  their
college education, so there remains some question about whether these patterns can be attributed to their college
experiences. In addition, one could argue that there is a form of sel-fselection at play here that conflates the
results. That is, it may be thatpeople who maintain certain views tend to pursue certain majors. However, if this
were the case we would not expectto see the type of within-major outside-of-major trends that we seem to be
seeing for the history majors. Of course, these questions need to be probed more rigorously with a broader study
that includes this type of baseline data. Nonetheless, we believe that the findings from the learning experiences
interview lends support to our findings and claims, despite these methodological limitations.

                                                      846  ·  © ISLS
                                             ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

Table 2: Epistemological view assignment per scenario per participant

                            Biology Scenario               History Scenario         Everyday Scenario
         Major              A      M         E            A         M        E      A        M              E
         History                             X                        x   xa        X
         History            X                                       X                        X
         History            X                                         x   x         X
         History            X                                         x   x             x  x
         History            X                                         x   x         *        *              *
         History            X                                         x   x             x  x
         History            *         *      *                        x   x         X
         History                             X                               X                  x         x
         History            *         *      *            *         *        *          x  x
         History            X                             X                             x  x

         Biology                             X            X                         X
         Biology            X                                                X      X
         Biology            X                             X                         X
         Biology                   X                        x    x                  X
         Biology                             X            X           x   x                                 X
         Biology            *         *      *            X                         X
         Biology            X                                                       X
         Biology            X                                                       X
         Biology            *         *      *            *         *        *      *        *              *
         Biology            X                                                X               X

       The participants' responses to questions concerning their educational experiences at theuniversity also
show distinctions between history and biology major.sAll of the history majors noted that they had encountered
situations similar to those presented in the scenarios, where the same phenomenon or event is explained through
competing accounts. Only fourbiology majors reported encountering competing accounts in their lcasses.
       The   History majors responded    immediately,      assuredly  and fluently that they  had encountered
competing accounts in their studies, and easily provided specific examples. They seemed to associate this idea
of competing or multiple accounts with "whatHistory is."
For example:

       "Ah, actually yes. There are a lot of cases like that that show you some event and then ((two
       undecipherable  words)) another   direction     and  then you   need  uh to decide  uh  which
       interpreter you go for more. I usually just combinehte two interpretations. Present uh there
       are some that say this and there are some that say that and I try uh not not to say anything
       conclusive. Which explanation is more acceptable. Because some think this and some think
       that. History is not an exact science. That is you can't uh say what is right and what is
       wrong. Anyone can come with his interpretation." [History majo,rtranslated from Hebrew]

       "(Laughing) of course I did. That's what you do in history. (Interviewer: Can you describe
       the situation). Yes, if I need to hand in a paper on two different sources that I need to
       compare and check who wrote from what perspective did he write, from what era did he
       write, and who paid him to write...so like I need to think about these things". [History
       major, translated from Hebrew]

The Biology majors hesitated, and were hard pressed to provide examples. Somebiology majors referred to a
different concept, such as being presented with different accounts on an exam and having to identify the correct
one (i.e., multiple choice questions), or noted that there are proteins that havetwo different functions.
       Despite their familiarity with the notion of competing accounts, thehistory majors did not express
ideas concerning principled ways of critiquing competing accounst, and for favoring one account over the other.
Most of the history students noted that individuals simply have to choose for themselves what seems to suit

                                                 847  ·  © ISLS
                                              ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

them most. For example (sic, translated quotes): "...if one book strengthens your view and another tthwa eakens
your view, then you will obviously go with the one that strengthens your view..." or "I hold on to what works
for me, what I believe in and that's that. I know that both are uncertain." In this respect, thehistory majors
reflected more of a multiplist than evaluativist perspective.
        Our findings are commensurate with our expectations that instruction can play an important role in
cultivating epistemological views, and that typical instruction in the arts and humanities is more focused on
multiplist and evaluativist views than typical science instruction.This is ironic, because as we have noted in the
background section, it is the evaluativist perspective that is most commensurate with science learning goalsT.he
overall tendency toward absolutist perspectives is rather disappointing. It is also somewhat disappointing that
the history majors seem to lack a disposition to critique, which we posit would be part and parcel of a full and
complex evaluativist perspective.

Conclusion
This study was exploratory. It served mostly to point to profitable research directions, than to provide firm
ground for conclusions. We studied a small number of participants, and employed only a single measure. In
addition, our knowledge of the instruction underlying the viwe s we explored is limited to narrow sel-freports.
Our goal is to follow this initial study with a broader investigation. We intend to combine written instruments
administered   at a large  scale with  smaller scale  interviews,  and  to complement   student  se-lrfeports with
instructor self-reports and  classroom  observations. We    expect that such a  study would   enable us to    make
stronger claims about disciplinary differences in the cultivation and adoption of epistemological viewsa,s well
as point to the particular instructional strategies that seem to foster these views.Our hope is that these endeavors
will help us understand how instruction and learning environments canadvance the refined development of
evaluativist perspectives.

References
Hofer, B.  K.  (2004).  Exploring  the dimensions  of    personal  epistemology in differing  classroom   contexts:
        Student interpretations during the first year of college.Contemporary Educational Psychology, 29,
        129-163.
Hofer, B. K. (2006). Domain specificity of personal epistemology: Resolved questions, persistent issues, new
        models. International Journal of Educational Research, 45(1-2), 85-95.
Hofer, B. K., & Pintrich, P. R. (1997). The Development of Epistemological Theories: Beliefs about Knowledge
        and Knowing and their Relation to Learning.Review of Educational Research, 67(1), 88-140.
Hogan, K. (2000). Exploring a Process View of Students' Knowledge about the Nature of Science.Science
        Education, 84, 51-70.
Kuhn, D., Cheney, R., & Weinstock, M. (2000). The development of epistemological understanding.Cognitive
        Development, 15, 309-328.
Kuhn, D., & Weinstock, M. P. (2002). What is epistemological thinking and why does it matter? In B. K. Hofer
        &   P. R.   Pintrich (Eds.), Personal  epistemology:   The psychology   of beliefs about knowledge     and
        knowing (pp. 121­144). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc.
Linn, M. C., Clark, D., & Slotta, J. D. (2003). WISE design for knowledge integrationScience Education, 87(4),
        517-538.
Schauble, L., Glaser, R., Duschl, R. A.,Shulze, S., & John, J. (1995). Students' understanding of the objectives
        and procedures of experimentation in the science classroom.Journal of the Learning Sciences, 4(2),
        131-166.
Schommer, M., Calvert, C., Gariglietti, G., & Bajaj, A. (1997). The develpoment of epistemological beliefs
        among secondary students: a longitudinal study.Journal of Educational Psychology, 89, 37-40.
Smith, C., Maclin, D., Houghton, C., & Hennessey, M. G. (2000). Sixth-Grade Students' Epistemologies of
        Science: The Impact of School Science Experiences on Epistemological Development.Cognition &
        Instruction, 18(3), 349-422.
Songer, N. B., & Linn, M. C. (1991). How do students' views of science influence knowledge integration?
        Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 28, 761-784.
Tabak, I., &   Weinstock,    M. P. (2005). Knowledge     is knowledge   is knowledge?  The   relationship between
        personal and scientific epistemologies. Canadian Journal for Science, Mathematics and Technology
        Education, 5(3), 307-328.

                                                  848  ·  © ISLS
