                                            ICLS 2010    Volume 1

        Fostering Mathematical Inquiry: Focus on Teacher's
                                           Interventions
                                    Mara V. Martinez and Wenjuan Li
                                      University of Illinois at Chicago

       Abstract: Previous research has emphasized the need to better understand and articulate
       the demands in the work of teaching mathematics entailed by an inquiry-based approach.
       It is in this context that, first, we describe an inquiry task intended to provide high school
       students the opportunity to construct algebraic proofs. Second, as students work on the
       problem,   we map    students'  inquiry process.   More,  we   identify elements common     to
       students'  inquiry   process   and  current    views  of  how   mathematics   knowledge     is
       constructed. Last, we illustrate the teacher's interventions intended to sustain students'
       inquiry.  Among     these,  we identified: (1)  helping  students re-focus their inquiry,  (2)
       helping students select mathematical tools, (3) accepting students' provisory ideas, (4)
       recognizing the potential in students' ideas and promoting the student to showcase the
       idea, and (5) reviewing a property using an additional example to preserve the original
       challenge for students.

Introduction
In the United States, the mathematics instruction that most students experience in today's classrooms embodies
myths that  misrepresent   the nature  of mathematics    as well   as what it  means   to  learn and  do mathematics.
Mathematics textbooks, pedagogical practices, and current assessment policies work in concert to perpetuate the
idea that mathematics is the discipline of certainty. This is despite current reform efforts as voiced in the NCTM
Standards (National Council of Teachers of Mathematics, 2000) and as articulated in standards-based NSF-funded
curricula. These documents advocate for a shift in emphasis from routine skills and factual knowledge to, posing and
solving a variety of math related problems, reasoning and communicating mathematically, and appreciating the
value of mathematics. Mathematical inquiry, also known as inquiry-based learning, discovery learning, or inquiry-
based teaching, is an approach to teaching and learning that intends to engage students in authentic mathematical
activity for the purpose of learning about what is entailed in doing mathematics. However, creating a classroom
atmosphere and designing instruction to promote mathematical inquiry presents many challenges for the teacher
(Goldman, Radinsky, Tozer, & Wink, in press; Lampert, 1995). For instance, individual students are interested in
different questions or taking different approaches to the problems, but the teacher must teach the class as a whole.
Or, students are inclined to use informal language or everyday life language in the inquiry process, but using formal
language or precise disciplinary language is a major goal of learning in discipline. To facilitate inquiry learning,
teachers need to know more about students' inquiry process and their thinking in different stages as well as effective
scaffolding strategies that connect students' thinking with mathematics.
       Therefore, the first goal of this paper is to describe an inquiry task that intends to provide high school
students' an opportunity to learn about algebraic proof (Martinez, 2008). Second, to map students' inquiry process.
And, last, to illustrate the teacher's intervention intended to sustain students' inquiry. Before addressing the goals,
and to contextualize this study, it is necessary to revisit in more detail the nature of inquiry, mathematical inquiry,
challenges associated with the implementation of and inquiry based approach, and research questions that still
remain open in the field.

Framework
Inquiry
Inquiry based learning is a pedagogical approach largely embraced across disciplines and goes back in time as far as
Socrates (Goldman, et al., in press) "Inquiry learning foregrounds the questions rather than the answer and places
the focus on learning in the learner, not in the material that can be transmitted by the teacher" (Goldman, et al., in
press). This is in opposition to the more predominant behaviorist view of learning that reduces learning to the
acquisition of ready-made    facts through  listening,   memorizing,  and  practicing.  In an inquiry  based learning
approach, students in addition to learn the discipline, they would also learn habits of mind (e.g., form and pursue
questions and the tendency to think critically, among others.)
       In agreement with Lampert (1995), mathematical inquiry is an approach to curriculum and instruction that
gives the teacher the responsibility for introducing content in a way that is illuminated and modified in response to

                                                849     ISLS
                                            ICLS 2010     Volume 1

students' questions and ways of thinking about that content. Specifically, the teacher defines the focus of inquiry by
posing problems to the class while students take an active part in acquiring knowledge by generating not only
answers, but formulations of problems, definitions of the terms of discourse, and analyses of alternative solutions.
Such approach assumes a constructivist epistemology (e.g., von Glaserfeld, 1991) while at the same time integrating
contributions from supporters of viewing mathematics as a humanistic discipline (e.g., Ernest, 1991). Moreover, it
builds upon Dewey's and Peirce's view of knowledge as "a process of inquiry motivated by doubt" (Siegel &
Borasi, 1994). Following Borasi (1994), mathematical inquiry calls for highlighting ambiguity and uncertainty in the
mathematical content studied so as to generate genuine conflict or doubt, and, consequently, the need to pursue
inquiry. Indeed, doubt and anomalies, namely something that contradicts our expectations, are considered motors for
inquiry.
         An inquiry stance has implications in the way that not only learning and teaching are conceptualized, but
also mathematical knowledge (Siegel & Borasi, 1994). In fact, mathematical knowledge is fallible and created
through  a  non-linear process  in which   the generation   of  hypothesis plays  a key  role; also, the production  of
mathematical knowledge is a social process and truth is constructed through rhetorical practices. For instance, as
evidenced in Lakatos (1976), once the original theorem of Euler's on the characteristic of polyhedra was proved, it
was challenged by several counter-examples yielding revisions on both premises of the theorem and definitions used
in its proof. Clearly, this position is contrary to the view of mathematics as certain, objective, and unproblematic.
Absolutist, Logicism, Formalist, Intuitionist and Platonist argue that mathematics is a body of absolute and certain
knowledge; the truths of mathematics are universal; and mathematics is discovered but not invented (Ernest, 1998).
In an inquiry epistemology, mathematics is regarded as a humanistic and cultural product; mathematics knowledge
is fallible; and the results of mathematics are a changeable social product (Ernest, 1998).

Inquiry in the Mathematics Classroom
School mathematics is often presented as a body of absolute and certain knowledge. Learning mathematics in school
is about knowing  facts    and procedures, and  getting   the  right answers as  quickly as possible  (Lampert,  1990).
Richards (1991) argued that the problems in school mathematics are habitual and unreflective and the discourse of
school mathematics is just "number talk". On the contrary, mathematical inquiry is about encouraging students to
ask mathematical questions; to solve mathematical problems that are new to them; to propose conjectures; and to be
active participants in the construction of mathematical arguments (Richards, 1991). Central to the inquiry classroom
is to offer students   the opportunity  to experience   the   uncertainty in the mathematical   content,   the nonlinear
development in constructing mathematical knowledge, and to generate questions and to justify their answers (Siegel
& Borasi, 1994).
Research centered on student thinking (Lampert, 1995) suggests that in this type of environment, the teacher's job
should be a relatively simple matter of refining and connecting informal understanding with what we want students
to learn in school. Research conducted on inquiry-based classrooms focusing on the work of teaching indicates
otherwise.
         Goldman et al. (in press) identify three challenges related to the classroom instructional context and the
teacher's guidance. First, the teacher's level of preparedness to guide inquiry-learning projects; indeed, effective
guidance of inquiry activities requires that teachers understand both the process and the content of the inquiry.
Second, teachers need to shift norms of classroom discourse away from the traditional pattern (teacher initiation,
student response, and teacher evaluation) to shared construction of reasoned arguments. Third, teachers need to
move students' everyday language to a more formal language as it is used in the discipline.
         Lampert  (1995)   identifies several  tensions   that a teacher  navigates in an   inquiry  based mathematics
classroom. For instance, individual students are interested in different questions, but the teacher must teach the class
as a whole. Also, students' inquiry may push them deeply into one topic, but the teacher is responsible for their
knowledge of a broad range of topics. Additionally, students' conjectures push them in different directions through
the subject matter, but the teacher is responsible of keeping track of who knows what and what they still need to
learn. Further, students may develop idiosyncratic systems for structuring their understanding, but they are also
supposed to learn to communicate with a wider community that shares well-established conventions. In an inquiry-
based classroom, teachers construct discourse in response to student activity, thus their responsibility is much grater.
Therefore, teachers who want to teach in an inquiry based approach need to be able to navigate these tensions.
From a research perspective, little attention has been paid to the challenges of the teaching practice that must be
addressed in this type of classroom environment, and how teachers navigate them. Specifically, less attention has
been given to "how" to guide the inquiry process once students were engaged in it. It is in this context that this paper
focuses on teacher's interventions intended to sustain students' inquiry process when conjecturing and producing an
algebraic proof in a high school mathematics class.

                                                850     ISLS
                                            ICLS 2010      Volume 1

Methodology
Teaching Experiment
The data was collected in the context of a teaching experiment conducted in a high school in the greater Boston in
Massachusetts by the first author of this paper. One of the goals of the teaching experiment was to offer students the
opportunity to conjecture  in  a context other than   geometry1,   to  use algebra as a tool  to prove, and to produce
algebraic proofs. It was intended to provide students the opportunity to experience proof as a way to understand
"why" a mathematical phenomenon happens. In other words, in constructing the proof students would have the
opportunity to access the reasons that make the mathematical statement true.
       The   teaching experiment    consisted  of a   total of fifteen  lessons. All lessons  were video taped and all
students' written work was collected. In addition, all small group conversations were audio taped. This allowed
having an understanding of the class both at a macro level (whole group) and at a micro level (small group and
individual students). Also, all students were interviewed individually twice; once half-way-through the teaching
experiment and a second time at the end of the teaching experiment.
       A    group of  nine  students, who   were    in 9th   and 10th    grades, participated throughout  the  teaching
experiment. Students worked in the same group of three for the duration of the fifteen lessons. Lessons were one
hour long and were hold in addition to their regular mathematics class. During the fifteen lessons students worked
on a set of seventeen Calendar Algebra Problems designed by the first author of this paper. The qualitative analysis2
presented later is based on one of the three groups participating in the teaching experiment. In what follows, a
description of the subset of data that is the focus of this paper is presented along with a detailed description of the
problem that students solved during the first two lessons of the teaching experiment.

The Calendar Algebra Problem
As mentioned earlier, students worked on approximately 17 problems as part of their participation in the project. In
this paper, data reported in this paper stems from students' work on the first Calendar Algebra Problem (Figure 1).

Problem 1
Part 1: Consider a square of two by two formed by the days of a certain month, as shown below. For example, a
square of two by two can be         1       2
                                                       8         9
These squares will be called 2x2 calendar squares. Calculate the difference between the products of the numbers in
the extremes of the diagonals.
Find the 2x2 calendar square that gives the biggest outcome. You may use any month of any year that you want.
Part 2: Show and explain why your conjecture is true always.

                              Figure 1. Problem 1 from the Calendar Algebra Problems.

       Students were provided with calendars corresponding to years 2005-2008 accompanying Problem
1-Part 1 (Figure 1). As part of their work on Part 1, students had to analyze the nature of the outcome of the
described calculation (subtraction of the cross product). It was expected that students would anticipate
some kind of variation in the outcome in relation to the set of days where the operator is applied. This
would contradict students' findings as a result of their exploration of the problem. The outcome is always -
7 independently from where (i.e., within a month, across months, and across years) the square is located.
This contradiction was intended to function as a motor for inquiry (Siegel and Borasi, 1994). The ultimate
educational goal of Part 1 of Problem 1 was to get students to produce conjectures (correct and incorrect)
about the behaviour of the outcome (i.e., number obtained as the result of the subtraction of the cross
product) as it relates to the location of the square in the calendar.
       After each group of students produced their conjectures, Part 2 of Problem 1, students had to
gather evidence to show that their conjecture was indeed true. In addition, students had to figure out why
this phenomenon happens, and whether this is always going to be the case.

Data Analysis
Data was analyzed qualitatively taking a grounded theory approach (Glaser & Strauss, 1967), which is a
bottom-up approach. In other words, starting from the data theoretical relationships and categories are
constructed. As mentioned above, in this paper, a map of students' inquiry process is generated based on

                                                851     ISLS
                                               ICLS 2010    Volume 1

the work  on   problem  1   of one group    of  three  high school  students.  In addition,  among    the teacher's
interventions we identified and analyzed the interventions that were intended to sustain students' inquiry
process.

RESULTS
The non-linearity of students' inquiry process
Analysis of the group's discussions revealed the non-linearity of students' inquiry process. According to
current epistemological perspectives (Ernest, 1998; Lakatos, 1976; Siegel & Borasi, 1994), mathematical
knowledge   is constructed     through  a   complex    process that  involves  several stages     and includes   the
production   of   conjectures,     examination     of    examples     and  counterexamples,       arguments      and
counterarguments,    reformulation   of conjectures,   redefinitions  of  terms,  evaluation   of theories, among
others. This is in contrast with a more traditional epistemological view where the mathematician constructs
a conjecture, proves the theorem, and as a consequence, truth is established forever. This is what we call
linear process. It is characterized by a lack of loops going back to review or question prior accepted
knowledge.
         Indeed, students went through the following stages: Interpretation of the problem, conjecturing
process, agreement   on the    conjecture   to prove,  determining   how   to prove  the conjecture,   proving   the
conjecture using algebra, and finally evaluating the implications of their work onto their mathematical
knowledge.
         Students   started exploring   the problem    by   using specific examples.   Students   will  do  this by
placing the 2x2-calendar square in different places within a month, and in different months. As a result,
they conjectured that the outcome would be always -7. This was in contradiction with their expectations.
Initially, they had assumed that the outcome would vary depending on the location of the square. This has
been described in the literature as follows "most often this feeling of doubt arises when an anomaly-
something that doesn't make sense in light of existing beliefs- is encountered" (Siegel & Borasi, 1994,
p.222). In this episode students encountered an anomaly, something that contradicts their expectations. This
anomaly functions a motor for inquiry.
         In what follows, students justified their conjecture stating: "it is -7 because there are 7 days in a
week". Students are aware that this is not a proof; however, it seems that the fact that a week has seven
days warrants the construction of their conjecture, and in a way, is reassuring. This is what Lakatos (1976)
refer to as "conscious guessing" in the process of production of mathematical knowledge. Following Siegel
and Borassi (1994), this "guess" enables to set in motion the process of knowledge production.
         Once the proving process was set in motion, they seemed to agree that they needed to produce a
general argument, probably using algebra. In doing so, students tried different paths, some of them correct
and some incorrect. One of the incorrect attempts involved using a linear function when it was not the
correct mathematical tool to use. At this point, the teacher stops by the group, and without questioning
directly the correctness of the strategy, helps them to shift direction (Episode 1 in section below). The
teacher's intervention helped them to make explicit and gravitate towards the idea of using variables so that
they can continue working on it.
         The   next challenge   that students   faced  was   how   many,   and   which independent     variables to
consider to have a complete algebraic model of the situation. First they used two independent variables to
represent the numbers in the 2x2-calendar-square when, indeed one independent variable is needed. Once
again, the teacher stopped by and helped students' to continue their inquiry process (Episode 2 in section
below).
         After that, students   wrote   the expression    a(a+8)-(a+1)(a+7)   to represent  in a  general  way   the
calculation performed   on   the  2x2-calmdar-square.     Students   were  able   to distribute   transforming   the
expression a(a+8) into a2+8a. However, things did not go as well with the negative sign of the second term,
namely -(a+1)(a+7). At this point, the teacher intervened by recalling an example to illustrate how the
negative sign would impact the expression (Episode 3 in section below). After overcoming this challenge,
students constructed and algebraic proof showing why the outcome is always -7 independently of the
location of the 2x2-calendar-square.
         Students' inquiry describes a non-linear process, or what Lakatos called "a zig-zag" path. In this
process, students conjectured, revised conjectures, gathered evidence, formulated and reformulated their
ideas, devised strategies and re-evaluated them based on feedback provided either by the teacher, their
findings, or peers. Students' inquiry process resembles current views of the production of mathematical
knowledge. Contradiction functioned as a motor to engage students in inquiry. Students structured their

                                                   852     ISLS
                                               ICLS 2010    Volume 1

work base  on  a "conscious      guess"   and  produced   mathematical    knowledge upon     it. In what  follows,
teacher's interventions are analyzed in the light of scaffolding or sustaining students' inquiry process.

Teacher's interventions intended to sustain students' inquiry
Teacher's interventions play a key role in sustaining students' inquiry process. However, little attention has
been paid to the role of the teacher in sustaining students' inquiry once they are engaged in it (Chazan &
Ball, 1999; Lampert, 1995). Given that teacher's discourse is constructed in response to student activity, the
teacher's responsibilities  and   intellectual demands    are substantial.  The analysis yielded    five teacher's
interventions intended to    sustain  students'  inquiry    process. In   what follows, these    interventions are
identified and illustrated.

Episode 1: Helping students to re-focus their inquiry

       1 Student 2 (S2): It's ... these the numbers increase at a constant rate right
       2 S2: That's why it's always -7.
       3 Teacher (T): So your hypothesis is that it doesn't matter where you place the square,
       you are going always to obtain minus 7, that is you hypothesis? Ok. So, how do you
       gather evidence to prove that? That is your problem now. How did you do? How did you
       come to that idea [outcome is always -7]?
       4 Student 1 (S1): Did examples.

       Interpretation: As part of their inquiry, students analyzed the underlying mathematical structure of
the calendar, concluding that it was linear. Even though this is correct and potentially useful, the teacher
interpreted that the students were focusing mostly on the writing of the linear relation. In addition, it
seemed that students were aware of the link between the existence of a linear relationship and the fact that
the outcome is always -7, as evidenced in the dialogue (lines 2 and 3). However, there was no evidence that
students were analyzing how and why having a linear relation connects to their conjecture (i.e., the outcome
is always -7). This indicated to the teacher that students probably thought that the mere existence of the
linear relation was sufficient evidence to prove their conjecture. Therefore, the teacher brought back to the
conversation the conjecture and the question "How do you gather evidence to prove that?" At the same
time, the teacher wanted to link this last question to how they had arrived to their conjecture. This was an
attempt to promote students to continue building on the examples they had used and, perhaps, construct
specific linear relations among the elements of the 2x2-calendar-square. Note that the teacher here tries to
sustain students' inquiry process by returning the question "how do we prove this?" and, by selecting a
portion of their work (i.e., examples used to construct their conjecture) that had the potential to continue
building the mathematical relations needed to prove.

Episode 2: Helping students select mathematical tools and accepting students' provisory
ideas

       1 T: Ok let's try something then. Can I write in this one? So, what we need to do is to
       gather   information      here... How   can you    show that   for any  number,  this [difference
       between numbers that are the same column in the calendar and in consecutive weeks is 7]
       is going to be true?
       2 S2: Oh I get it, so we do `x'
       3 T: Ok you can try.
       4 S2: All right so like different variables.
       5 S2: 'a' 'b' 'c' 'd', ok
       6 S1: So, it doesn't matter, in a square is always ...
       7 T: Why did you come up with the idea of using letters?
       8 S2: Using variables?
       9 T: Yes, variables.
       10 S2: Because if you have a formula that shows that they'll always be the same then it
       will work for anything so actually
       11 T: Ok so try to work on that and see whether that gives us something solid to prove.

                                                   853     ISLS
                                             ICLS 2010       Volume 1

         Interpretation: Until now, students had made great progress by finding out that in all the examples
they tried the numbers in the first row of the square are exactly a week apart (i.e., seven days) from the
                                       2   3      2         3
corresponding numbers below (e.g.,             =               ). However, they were not sure how to represent
                                       9   10    2+7      3+ 7
the relationship mathematically capturing all cases, namely they were looking for a general expression. The
teacher intervened   by  asking  a question  that included     the phrase "for   any number"   (line 1)   with the
underlying hypothesis that this would help them to connect with algebra. As a result, one of the students
suggested to use "x", linking the problem to algebra. The teacher wanted to check whether they understood
why "using x" would work (line 7). As evidenced in the student's response "if you have a formula that
shows   that they'll always   be the  same  then  it will   work   for  anything"  algebra was being    used in  a
meaningful   way.  The  teacher   intervention helped     students to  identify the mathematical tool   that   they
needed by re-stating what they were trying to do and, deliberately, including the phrase "any number". By
helping students to identify a potentially useful mathematical tool, students were able to continue their
inquiry process; therefore the teacher's intervention sustained students' inquiry.
         In addition, note that when students suggested the use of four distinct independent variables "a, b,
c, and d", even though this idea could have been identified by the teacher "as incorrect or incomplete", the
teacher accepted it as a provisory idea. This intervention (accepting the idea) gave students the opportunity
to students to further refine the idea by themselves as a result perhaps of their later work. More, students'
identification of 4 variables indicates progress in terms of their inquiry process; at this point, they do know
that they are working with four variables. They still have to figure out that these four variables are indeed
related among    them  (i.e., a, b=a+1,  c=a+7,   and   d=a+8).    This type of  teacher  intervention, accepting
students' provisory knowledge, helps sustain students' inquiry process to that extent that gives students the
opportunity to refine their "incomplete" ideas further.

Episode      3: Recognizing       the  potential     in   students'    ideas    and  promoting   students       to
showcase their ideas

         1 S2: I think that a and b... b is a plus 1. So if we make that 'a' plus 1 then we can cancel
         out both a's and that can be 1
         2 T: Oh, did you hear his idea? Say it again please.
         3 S2: All right so if we change 'b' to 'a' plus 1 cause that's what it's equal to then we can
         cancel 'a' and then just have 1 here
         4 S3: I guess that'd work. Yeah.

         Interpretation: One of the students in the group proposed the idea that b is indeed a plus 1. The
teacher recognizing the potential of the idea in advancing students' work, had him re-stating it for the other
group members. Thus, this intervention, first recognizing the potential of the student's idea, and second by
showcasing it, helps students to advance their inquiry.

Episode 4: Reviewing a property using an additional example to preserve the original
challenge for students

         1 T: What is the impact of this minus in the signs of the elements here? Do you remember
         that?
         ...
         2 T: Ok. [...] Let's say that we have this example here -(3+x), if I want to make disappear
         the parentheses and this minus there do you remember what we do? Do we remember the
         rule to change the signs?
         ...
         3 T: I will remind it to you, I will remind it to you, don't worry, don't worry. ...
         ...
         4   T: Yes?  Ok so   that is your challenge      now. Here   [pointing to  the minus sign   in -
         (x2+8x+7)], how does this negative here impact the signs here? And, in that way you can
         get rid of the minus here and the parentheses and continue working in order to cancel,

                                                 854       ISLS
                                           ICLS 2010     Volume 1

       which was your idea.
       5 S3: Ok
       6 T: Try that challenge now please.

       Interpretation: Students did not remember how to distribute the minus sign in the expression "-
(x2+8x+7)". In order to help them, the teacher, created another example (i.e., -(x+3)) and remind them how
the distributive property works. In doing so, she reminded them how to distribute the minus sign purposely
using an expression different from "-(x2+8x+7)". This intervention did not take away students' opportunity
to apply the property once they remembered how it works. Once the teachers intervened, students knew
how the property worked and still had the opportunity to do it by themselves.
       In summary, the following five teacher interventions intended to sustain students' inquiry were
identified: (1) helping students re-focus their inquiry, (2) helping students select mathematical tools, (3)
accepting students' provisory ideas, (4) recognizing the potential in students' ideas and promoting the
student to showcase the idea, and (5) reviewing a property using an additional example to preserve the
original challenge for students. Employing these strategies, the teacher did not take away from students the
intellectual challenge of the inquiry and provided support in response to and built upon students' activity. In
doing so, the teacher's interventions sustained students' inquiry.

Conclusion
First, we provided a description of a task designed to foster students' mathematical inquiry. Specifically, it
was intended to provide high school students' an occasion to learn about algebraic proof. The Calendar
Algebra problem was designed to provide students the opportunity to experience a contradiction between,
their expectations, and their findings as result of their exploration of the problem. Students' experienced
this contradiction and functioned as a motor for inquiry (Siegel and Borasi, 1994). Second, we mapped
students' inquiry process. Further, we identified elements of students' inquiry process that are described in
current epistemological views of the nature of mathematical knowledge (e.g., non-fallible, it is produced
through a non-linear process). Last, we identified and illustrated five teacher interventions (e.g., recognize
the potential in students' ideas) that helped students sustain their inquiry. This is relevant to the field, given
that little attention has been paid to how teachers guide students' inquiry once they are engaged in it
(Chazan & Ball, 1999; Lampert, 1995). Still, we need to know more about how teachers construct and
implement assignments that engage students in mathematical inquiry. We also need to know more about
teacher's interventions that foster or hinder students' inquiry process. Once the field systematizes these
results, they have the potential to inform the preparation of pre-service teachers and develop programs to
better support in-service teachers to implement inquiry-based learning in mathematics.

References
Borasi, R. (1994). Capitalizing on errors as `springboards for inquiry': A teaching experiment. Journal for
   Research in Mathematics Education, 25(2), 166.
Chazan, D., & Ball, D. (1999). Beyond being told not to tell. For the Learning of Mathematics, 19, 2-10.
Ernest, P. (1998). Social constructivism as a philosophy of mathematics. Albany, NY: State University of
   New York Press
Glaser, B., & Strauss, A. (1967). The discovery of grounded theory: Aldine de Gruyter New York.
Goldman, S., R., Radinsky, J., Tozer, S., & Wink, D. (in press). Learning as Inquiry. In B. M. E. Baker, and
   P. Penelope (Ed.), The International Encyclopedia of Education (3rd ed.). Oxford: Elsevier.
Lakatos, I. (1976). Proofs and Refutations. The Logic of Mathematical Discovery, edited by J. Worrall, E:
   Zahar, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Lampert, M. (1990). When    the Problem    Is Not     the Question   and the Solution  Is Not the Answer:
   Mathematical Knowing and Teaching. American Educational Research Journal, 27(1), 29-63.
Lampert, M. (1995). Managing the tensions in connecting students' inquiry with learning mathematics in
   school. In D. Perkins, J. Schwartz, M. West & M. Wiske (Eds.), Software goes to school: teaching for
   understanding with new technologies (pp. 213-232). New York: Oxford University Press.
Martinez, M. (2008). Integrating Algebra and Proof in High School: Student Work With Variables And
   Parameters On The Calendar Sequence. Doctoral Dissertation. Tufts University, Medford, MA.
National Council of Teachers of Mathematics. (2000). Principles and Standards for School Mathematics.
   Reston, VA: Author.

                                               855     ISLS
                                           ICLS 2010    Volume 1

Richards, J. (1991). Mathematical discussions.     In E.  v.          Glasersfeld (Ed.), Radical constructivism  in
   mathematics education (pp. 13-51). New York: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Siegel, M., & Borasi, R. (1994). Demystifying mathematics education through inquiry. In E. Paul (Ed.),
   Constructing mathematical knowledge: Epistemology and mathematics education (Vol. 4, pp. 201-
   214). Washington, D.C: The Falmer Press.
von Glaserfeld, E. (1991). Radical constructivism in mathematics education. Dordrecht, The Netherlands:
   Kluwer.

(1) In the United Sates, proofs appear mostly exclusively in the geometry curriculum in high school.
(2) The analysis was conducted in all groups participating in the teaching experiment. Given space restrictions we
illustrate our findings with the analysis of one of the three groups. We chose this group given that the results that we
wanted to illustrate appeared all as part of the work of this group.

                                               856     ISLS
