                                                 ICLS 2010   ·   Volume 1

 The Effectiveness of Reading Comprehension Strategies in High
                                   School Science Classrooms

                            Phillip Herman, University of Pittsburgh, pherman@pitt.edu
                   Kristen Perkins, Northwestern University, kristen-perkins@northwestern.edu
                    Martha Hansen, Evanston Township High School, hansenm@eths.k12.il.us
                           Louis M. Gomez, Kimberley Gomez, University of Pittsburgh
                                        lgomez@pitt.edu, kgomez@pitt.edu

         Abstract:     Reading   strategies have   been   shown     to increase comprehension      for   younger
         learners. As students move to middle and high school, there is little opportunity to learn about,
         practice, and apply these strategies in classes, particularly in the content domains like science.
         Nonetheless, there is a growing national consensus that high school content area teachers need
         to better integrate discipline-specific reading supports throughout the curriculum. We evaluate
         the    effectiveness of an  effort  to  integrate   reading   comprehension    strategies    in biology
         classrooms.     Students'  independent    proficiency      with  the   strategies  predicted    science
         achievement,     even when    controlling for  prior  reading   achievement.   These   results  provide
         evidence that strategies are effective and practical in intact science classrooms. We discuss the
         implications of the findings for the design of content-area literacy instruction. Finally, we
         describe our efforts to refine the design of the strategy supports based on the empirical results.

Learning to Read and Reading to Learn
Reading is a complicated cognitive process that is likely the most important competency acquired in all of
schooling.  As   students  move  from   the  early elementary    years   through   high school    and beyond,    the focus
changes from `learning to read' to `reading to learn.' Many middle and high school students fail to make this
transition. That   is, many   students can   decode   individual    words on  a  page   but are   unable  to successfully
comprehend the sentences and paragraphs that make up academic text. Based on an influential theoretical model
of reading comprehension, we could say that these students are unable to build an adequate text base (direct
representation of the semantic structures of text) and situational model (integrated reordering of text content
with prior knowledge) (Kintsch, 1998), which represent readers' constructive understanding of the meaning of
text. It is well known that American students struggle to read academic texts. About 70% of American eighth-
grade  students    performed  below  the proficient   level  on  the   National  Assessment    of  Educational   Progress
reading tests in 2003 (National Center for Educational Statistics, 2005). Students who struggle to read to learn
remain at a disadvantage throughout school and later in life as more desired careers require workers to be able to
independently read new material, integrate that material with existing models of understanding of a domain, and
generate ideas from the new understanding.       In the work described here, we detail an intervention that grew out
of our multi-year effort to support high school science teachers as they work to increase students' disciplinary
learning by focusing on targeted reading comprehension strategies that students use as they engage with high
school science texts. We describe the reading comprehension strategies teachers and students used in intact high
school biology classrooms, present some of the research base on the use of comprehension-building strategies
with older students, and present a rationale for the embedding of reading comprehension strategies in content
domains    like science.  We   provide evidence    of the effectiveness   of  the  strategies based   on  performance   of
students   on two   assessments  of  science  achievement.     Finally,   we  take initial  steps to  revise the  reading
strategies  based  on  the empirical   findings. Our  work    is particularly  congruent   with   the goals  of  the ICLS
conference    that stress  how   discipline-specific  learning   needs    to be  accounted    for in   effective learning
interventions.

Reading Comprehension Strategies in Science
Contemporary models of reading stress that in order to derive meaning from text, readers rely on both text-
driven and    knowledge-driven     processes  (Goldman     &   Rakestraw,    2000)  in  which   they  make   connections
between elements in a text, their understanding of the text, and between the text and prior knowledge (Wittrock,
1990). A    reader must   actively construct  understanding      by integrating existing   and  new   knowledge   in  part
through the application of flexible strategies that help foster, monitor, regulate, and maintain comprehension
(Alexander    &  Jetton,  2000). A  number    of studies   have  demonstrated     that students'  understanding   of  and
memory for text can be strengthened through explicitly teaching students multiple comprehension strategies
(Pressley, 2000). Some common reading strategies include paraphrasing, self-questioning, reflecting, marking
structures of text, summarizing the gist of text, teaching others about a text, etc.
         When learned well, strategies have been shown to increase comprehension.             Even so, there is evidence
that high schools rarely provide opportunities for students to learn and practice effective reading strategies

                                                      857  ·  © ISLS
                                                 ICLS 2010    ·  Volume 1

(Langer, 2001). Part of the problem is that as students move into domain-specific classrooms in high school,
content teachers are often underprepared to meaningfully support reading comprehension generally and domain-
specific reading in particular (Gomez, Herman, & Gomez, 2007). Several teachers have reported to us that it
should primarily be the responsibility of middle school English teachers to get students "ready to learn science."
High school science teachers are under pressure to cover science content standards. Still, science teachers are
frequently frustrated by students' inability to learn from texts, even if they are not sure how to address the
problem. We have found that science teachers will often assign reading to students, but then didactically teach
the "important content" (Gomez, Herman, & Gomez, 2007). This approach fails to hold students accountable for
independently accessing and learning from text. This marginalizing of text in science is extremely unfortunate
given   how central reading   to  learn science  is  to any   meaningful    definition of  scientific literacy  (Norris &
Phillips, 2003). One's ability to comprehend science content from reading is important to the work of scientists
in the field, as well as critical to promoting scientifically literate citizens. Although there have been influential
calls to action to better integrate literacy within the content domains (Biancarosa & Snow, 2006), there remains
little practical advice for content-area teachers that is theoretically and empirically grounded in the disciplines.
An important goal of our work is to demonstrate that when students have the chance to learn, practice, and apply
reading comprehension strategies that are deeply coupled to domain learning goals and domain practice, content
learning will increase along with students' ability to independently read to learn.

Reading Strategies: Structure, Reflection and Gist
Science readers should have a corpus of strategies they can use prior to, during, and after reading to learn from
text. Students benefit when they are taught to apply comprehension strategies when they read (Anderson, 1992;
Collins, 1991).  Through   repeated   transactions  with   texts   and  by  collaborative  analysis and  discussion  with
peers, students can better internalize and ultimately take ownership of reading strategies (Pressley, et al, 1992;
Biancarosa  &    Snow, 2006).  When     internalized   and used    frequently, strategy   use can lead  to  large positive
effects on  text comprehension     (Anderson,   1992).  The     strategies we  support  (described  in  detail below)   are
designed to help students identify the general structure of texts as well as critical discipline-specific elements
such as main and supporting ideas, how scientific arguments are constructed in text, what counts as scientific
evidence, etc. (Gomez, Herman, & Gomez, 2007). In addition, the strategies should help students know how to
reflect on, analyze, and organize text so that elements can be examined and critiqued for understanding and
communication (Herman et al, 2008). Finally, students should also know how to summarize a text to integrate
new and prior knowledge into one holistic representation of their understanding. This summarization strategy
helps students communicate their understanding of the gist of what they have read, and to make the connections
between new and prior knowledge explicit (Kintsch, 1998).
         The  reading   strategies implemented      in  these   science classrooms    are intended   to increase  reading
comprehension and science learning by developing students' metacognitive reading skills to increase active and
conscious processing of text. Though there are many conceptualizations of metacognition in the literature, we
focus on developing students' conscious control of their cognitive processes (i.e., self-regulation) (Pressley,
2000),  including  planning,  selecting,  and   using   appropriate    strategies; monitoring   reading  comprehension;
analyzing the effectiveness of reading strategies; and changing reading behaviors when necessary (Ridly, Shutz,
Glanz, & Weinstein, 1992). We conjecture that increases in metacognitive reading skills will allow students to
comprehend more challenging text. Over time, as teacher support fades and reading strategies are internalized,
students will be   able to   read  challenging   texts  more    independently.     Ultimately, these   conscious  reading
strategies will develop into reading skills (Afflerbach, Pearson, & Paris, 2008). Next we describe each of the
three classes of reading strategies in detail.

Annotation
Text annotation is a strategy to make an author's message more explicit to the reader. Students are taught how
to identify and mark important information, and disregard irrelevant information. Students typically annotate
(by marking   on   the text)  one  or   more   text elements    such   as  difficult vocabulary   words  and    embedded
definitions; main ideas/arguments and related supporting ideas/evidence; and headings, transitional words, and
other  signposts. Initially, teachers   explicitly  model     this annotation   process,   but  over   time reduce   their
scaffolding for  annotation  so  that students   can   independently    annotate   texts. Figure  1 is  an  example  of  a
student's annotation from one of the two texts used in the study described later.

                                                     858   ·  © ISLS
                                              ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

                                Figure 1. Example of a Student's Annotation.

Double-Entry Journals
A double-entry journal (DEJ) (See Figure 2) is a reader-response log that provides a structure for students to
monitor and document their understanding of science texts. The DEJ provides students with an organizational
tool that suggests  corresponding categories  of  information     that students extract from the text, rearrange,
paraphrase, and use to reflect on their understanding. The variety of DEJ structures allows teachers to focus
students' reading on an important idea or skill that is particularly relevant for a given text (vocabulary, main
ideas with supporting ideas, relating information in the text to prior knowledge, etc.), thus coupling the DEJ
(and students' attention) to the targeted content learning goal.

                                Figure 2. Example of a Double-Entry Journal.

Summarization
Summary writing is a critical scientific skill. It requires the reader to effectively digest new information and
communicate   it in a way that makes  sense   to her  as   well  as to an external audience. Summarization  is a
particularly difficult task when students are trying to make sense of texts that exceed their nominal reading
level, as is the case for many high school students. In summarizing, students must comprehend the text, identify
main ideas, differentiate secondary ideas, integrate new knowledge with prior knowledge, and condense the
information in a succinct and logical way.

Reading Strategies, Science Learning, and Scientific Literacy
Being a competent science learner requires students to learn about science from texts in many forms, including
readings, graphs, charts, and other representations of phenomena, processes, and data. Reading to learn science,
though certainly not the only competency that accounts for success in school science learning, is nonetheless a
constitutive element of students' success in high school classrooms and beyond. In fact, almost any definition of
scientific literacy includes the ability to read texts to understand scientific phenomena and thought (Norris &
Phillips, 2003). Teachers and students make the strategies science-specific by the tasks they engage in with the
strategies. For example, though a double-entry journal could be used in a History class to analyze the causes of a
particular war, it is used in science to help students better understand how good scientific arguments require
explicit forms of evidence. In this sense, though the forms of the strategies are generic, our work has been to
deeply couple them in function to science learning objectives and scientific literacy.

The Present Study
Few studies to date have focused on evaluating an ongoing program whose goal is to boost science achievement
by focusing on science-specific applications of reading comprehension strategies in intact science classrooms.
Most studies of reading strategies have been episodic and somewhat uncoupled from classroom learning goals.
Furthermore, few studies have taken place at the high school level (Cromley & Azevedo, 2007), and almost no

                                                  859  ·  © ISLS
                                                 ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

studies have linked strategy use to domain learning. Strategy interventions have not typically been designed to
be discipline specific but rather generic, in the sense of being applicable across disciplines. In this work, we also
want to provide an empirical (not just theoretical) base for the design of strategy supports for learners. We want
evidence that the annotation, DEJ, and summary activities that we prescribe are effective in increasing science
learning. To do so requires revision of the design of strategies, which were initially based on theoretical models
of what  students   should attend   to  in readings. An  important    goal  of this  work  is to better understand   the
connection (both theoretically and empirically) between reading comprehension and domain achievement. Our
approach  is   to support science   teachers  as  they contextualize   the  reading  comprehension    strategies  in the
discipline of biology.

Research Questions
         1.    Is proficiency with the reading strategies related to science achievement?
         2.    Does  proficiency    with the reading   strategies  predict achievement    above  and  beyond   on-entry
               reading ability?
         3.    Can the empirical results in this study inform the refinement of science-specific reading strategy
               design?
Participants
All of the work reported here took place during the 2008-2009 school year at a large suburban high school
abutting Chicago, IL. Approximately 2,950 students attend the school with 48% being Caucasian, 36% Black,
11% Hispanic. Thirty-four percent of the students are classified as low-income based on eligibility for free or
reduced lunch. Approximately 70% of graduates in recent years attended college. In 2005, the school adopted
the broad goal of integrating literacy across the content areas. Starting in 2007 administrators and instructional
leaders (including a co-author who is chair of the science department) met with our research team to develop a
literacy initiative specifically for  the  science department.     Based   on what  we  learned  from   our prior work
focused on embedding literacy in science classrooms (Herman et al, 2008), we worked with a pilot group of
biology teachers to introduce ways to couple literacy activities to science learning goals. During the 2008-2009
school year, the intervention expanded to every biology classroom. All biology teachers were provided with
ongoing professional development and coaching (by a co-author who had been a high school science teacher at
an earlier research site). Fifteen science teachers and approximately 860 students participated in the study.

Design of the Assessment
Teachers and students in all participating classrooms used the three reading strategies throughout the fall of the
2008-2009 school year (Annotation, Double-Entry Journaling, and Summarization). In January and June of
2009, we administered a one-day assessment of strategy proficiency and science achievement. 752 students
were present on both dates and completed both sets of assessments. The design of this assessment was informed
by our   prior work  (Herman    et  al, 2008), in  which  we   used  a point-in-time   assessment  to gauge   how  well
students were independently able to use the literacy strategies while reading science texts, and the resultant
effect on science achievement. It is worth stressing that the assessments described here measure both students'
independent    understanding    of, and  proficiency   with,   the reading  strategies as  well  as  their  independent
understanding of the science content in the readings.        The   format  of  the January and   June assessments    was
identical: Students were randomly assigned one of two readings ("Learned Behavior" or "Coral Reefs") and
randomly assigned (within classrooms) to use one of the three strategies while reading the text. Finally, students
completed a 10 item multiple choice science assessment that was based on the content in each of the readings.
Students used the same class of strategy during both assessment days but the reading and science assessments
were crossed so that if a student completed an annotation of the Behavior article in January, they would be
assigned to complete an annotation of the Coral article in June. Though we designed and administered two
assessments    four months   apart   in  order  to understand      something   about growth    trajectories in strategy
acquisition, that is not the focus of this paper and space limits prevent us from presenting the longitudinal
analysis. Instead, the assessment results are grouped together for the analyses presented here.

Coral Reefs and Learned Behavior
The two readings were chosen from the students' biology textbook. They represent two genres of science texts
that students are exposed to: The Learned Behavior text is a more traditional expository reading, whereas Coral
Reef is a magazine-type article, representative of the type of chapter inserts that are included in the textbook. In
addition to genre differences, the texts were chosen because neither of those topics would be covered in the
science classrooms for the duration of the study, thus reducing the likelihood of prior knowledge effects on the
science achievement assessment.

                                                     860  ·  © ISLS
                                                ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

Science Achievement Assessment
For each reading, 10 multiple-choice items were developed. To develop the candidate items, we first analyzed
some of the science learning objectives for students that were encapsulated in the content of the texts. We then
used those science learning objectives to generate individual items that would assess students understanding of
the science content. The construction of this assessment was disciplined by two constraints: 1) As much as
possible, we did not want prior knowledge to allow students to answer any of the items so as to better couple
success on the items to successful reading of the passage, and 2) We wanted classes of items that varied in
difficulty and we wanted that difficulty to be approximately the same across passage assessments. To ensure
that the effects of prior knowledge were minimized, we designed a measure that listed the major concepts from
each reading and asked students to rate their familiarity and understanding using a Likert-type scale. We gave
the prior knowledge measure to 54 students, and piloted the candidate items on 98 students who would not be in
the classrooms of the study, but who had covered the same biology content the prior year. These students did
not have access to the Behavior or Coral readings; they only completed the multiple-choice items. Based on
those results, we altered the item stems, the distracters, and the answer choices. Examples of the items that
made up the assessment at three levels of difficulty (Recall, Application, Synthesis) are presented below.
           1. (Recall)       Which of the following is not associated with operant conditioning?
           2. (Application)  How does a slow growth rate impact the survival of the coral reef?
           3. (Synthesis)    Coral polyps would be prevented from obtaining food in the presence of:

Scoring
To measure strategy proficiency, two of the authors developed a rubric for each reading and for each strategy.
Thus, for the Coral article there was a separate rubric for Coral annotation, Coral DEJ, and Coral summary. The
rubrics were designed to measure those elements of, say, an annotation, that were deemed by the researchers to
be important for correctly answering one or more of the 10 science achievement questions. Figure 3 is a list of
examples of the elements that were used in the different rubrics.
     Annotation ­ Did the student...?
               · Box the vocabulary word mutualism?
               · Double underline the main idea: "Coral reefs make up a natural ocean habitat that is rich in
               diversity."
   DEJ ­ Did the student include...?
               · Main   idea #1: "The four   major types   of learning  are habituation, classical conditioning,
               operant conditioning and insight learning."
               · Supporting idea #2: "Many animals can alter their behavior as a result of experience. Such
               changes are called learning."
   Summary ­ Did the student...?
               · Make a connection between runoff from clear-cutting forests and the blocking of light for the
               habitat?
               · Use the vocabulary word mutualism?

                                    Figure 3: Example Elements From Scoring Rubrics
           Two of the coauthors scored all student strategy work. To ensure the reliability of scores, the two
investigators scored 20 identical student work samples to determine the inter-rater reliability of rubric-based
scores. When scores were disparate (less than 85% agreement), the scorers talked through their understanding
of the rubric and student work. The rubrics were then modified to reflect this shared understanding. The scorers
then processed    another   independent sample  of  strategy   examples,    and inter-rater reliability increased to
acceptable levels. This reliability check was done for each of the six rubrics.

Results
Descriptive statistics for all measures are in Table 2. The reading percentile is the national percentile rank on a
standardized test of reading for each student. This percentile is used as a covariate and represents on-entry
reading achievement. The students vary widely in reading ability but the mean of 66.91 indicates on average
they are above the 50th percentile nationally on reading. The strategy proficiency scores indicate a wide range of
proficiency. For each element, a student may receive a 0 or 1 (except for a few items on the annotations that
allowed for a 0, 1, or 2). The strategy proficiency scores represent the total score across all the elements in a
particular rubric (i.e., the Behavior annotation). It is worth noting that in some cases not one student was able to
receive all possible points on the strategy rubrics. The Coral science achievement assessment was slightly more
difficult than the Behavior assessment, even though we made every effort to make the two assessments equally
difficult.
Correlations were calculated so that we could determine, for all students who completed a Behavior annotation

                                                    861  ·  © ISLS
                                                 ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

in either January or June, whether their strategy score was correlated with science achievement. Every strategy
for both readings was correlated with performance on the science assessment. The correlations were significant
(p<.01 in   all cases). Correlations  for    Behavior   ranged  from   .23 for Annotation    to .42  for  both  DEJ    and
Summary. For Coral the range was from .35 for both Annotation and DEJ to .33 for Summary. The correlations
are more consistent (within each reading) for DEJ and Summary than they are for Annotation. The Behavior
annotation correlation was the smallest (.23) though it was still significant.
Stepwise Regressions were performed to determine whether strategy proficiency predicts science achievement
even  after entering  prior   reading on   a  standardized   exam   as a   covariate in   Step  1. The  results of  these
regressions are highlighted in Table 3. In each model, strategy proficiency predicted unique variance in science
achievement above and beyond what reading alone predicts. Because reading is presumed to be a consistent
predictor of performance on most academic outcomes, including science, these results may indicate the value of
the reading strategies as a means of raising both science achievement and reading comprehension.                 In some
cases, the amount of variance explained by strategy proficiency above and beyond reading was not large (2% of
the variance for Behavior Annotation; while in other cases the effect was larger, as in the case of Behavior
Summary     (7%  of the  variance).   Because   we  included    a "strong"   covariate, these   numbers   are   somewhat
encouraging  in  that they   suggest  that proficiency   with   the strategies might  be  helping   students  learn more
science, even if they are struggling with reading.
t-tests and ANOVA: We conducted an analysis of each element of each rubric independently of each other to
determine if particular items on the rubric "mattered more" in predicting science achievement. In prior work
(Herman et al, 2008) we found an inconsistent relationship between annotation score and achievement. In this
study, annotation   score    did predict achievement.    In  follow-up   analyses to  our  main    study, we  essentially
conducted a simple differential item analysis. For example, on Behavior Annotation item #3, students would
receive either a 1 or 0 depending on whether they identified a main idea in the Behavior reading by underlining
it. We analyzed the total science comprehension score to determine if there were differences in that score based
on whether students received a 0 or 1 on item 3. We grouped all students into two groups for each item and then
compared the science score for each group. We used t-tests when the items were scored 0 or 1 and a One-Way
ANOVA when scored 0,1, or 2. Though we realized that by using more than 20 comparisons, we were likely to
allow  for  increased likelihood   of Type    I errors, we   were   primarily  interested in exploring    patterns  in the
predictive utility of elements of the rubrics. So, for Behavior Annotation, there were 30 items on the original
rubric and our empirical analysis indicated that only 8 of those items differentiated students reliably on their
total science scores. Once we identified those 8 elements, we recalculated the correlation of strategy proficiency
with achievement based on those 8 items instead of the original 30. Though we would expect the correlation to
increase because our method necessarily would lead to less variance in the predictors, we wanted to gauge how
strong those    correlations would  be   for possible   future revisions of  the  annotation   format. In  this case,  the
correlation rose from .19 to .36. In all cases, for both readings and all 6 strategies, the correlations rose with the
lowest being .32 and the highest being .43. For each strategy we now have an empirically based subset of items
that better discriminates the total science score (not each question on the science test but the mean on the 10
items for each student). The number of revised elements for each strategy compared with the total number of
elements for each, is as follows: Behavior Annotation 8/30, DEJ 12/16, Summary 7/12, Coral Annotation 17/27,
DEJ 8/18, and Summary 8/18. In each case, a substantially fewer number of items does a better job of predicting
the science score.

Table 1: Descriptive Statistics of Variables in the Study
                             N     Possible Range     Actual Range     Mean    Std. Deviation

Behavior Annotation       210            0-37             2-37         20.66         6.07

Behavior DEJ              212            0-16             0-14          5.06         2.74

Behavior Summary          187            0-12               0-9         3.91         2.30

Coral Annotation          209            0-36             1-34         15.70         7.28

Coral DEJ                 209            0-18             0-14          6.74         3.03

Coral Summary             189            0-18             1-15          6.26         2.98

Behavior Assessment       856            0-10             0-10          6.34         2.05

Coral Assessment          844            0-10             0-10          6.06         2.08

Reading Percentile        856          1-100             1-100         66.91         28.01

                                                     862   ·   © ISLS
                                                ICLS 2010     ·  Volume 1

Table 2: Regressions for 6 models: Predicting science achievement from strategy proficiency and reading.
 Behavior                       Models*                    F           Adjusted     R2              Adjusted   R2
                                                                       (Reading only)           (Reading + Strategy)

    Model 1*           Reading Achievement +Annotation    41.07                .27                       .29
    Model 2*           Reading Achievement +Double-Entry Journal63.71          .37                       .40
    Model 3*           Reading Achievement +Summary       42.33                .25                       .32
 Coral

    Model 4*           Reading Achievement +Annotation     36                  .23                       .26
    Model 5*           Reading Achievement +Double Entry Journal46.65          .31                       .33
    Model 6*           Reading Achievement +Summary       59.37                .37                       .39
*p<.02 for each predictor in each model

Discussion
Several findings from this study are worth highlighting. Students who successfully used reading comprehension
strategies while reading  a  science  text performed      better on  a measure     of science  achievement.  That  is an
important  finding for  the  adolescent    literacy and    science   education     research community    as well  as  for
practitioners who might wonder about whether the support of reading in high school science classrooms is
possible, practical, and useful. This study indicates it is useful to regularly incorporate explicit instruction in
reading comprehension strategies in science classrooms, not as a way to primarily improve students' reading
abilities, but as a means of increasing science achievement. Science teachers (and other content-area teachers)
need better ways to support reading in the disciplines. All too often in science class, readings are ignored or
marginalized.  Teachers  are not to   blame   for   this. Most   schools    of education    provide high school  science
teachers with almost no preparation for supporting reading in science. Teachers need to know and be able to
scaffold a variety of effective reading comprehension strategies that can help increase science learning.          This
kind of work requires extensive, practice-based, and ongoing professional development.
         This study also shows that reading plays an important role in science achievement. The regression
models indicate that reading achievement is a significant predictor of science achievement. This finding, though
not unexpected, is important because it adds to the understanding of how reading achievement matters for
various formats of science assessment, for a variety of learning goals and science text genres. A demonstration
of how much reading matters can be a powerful way to spur science teachers to acknowledge and ultimately
take some ownership of students' reading abilities in science. We have seen in prior work (Authors, 2007) that
science teachers do take ownership over reading when they have a repertoire of teaching strategies that they can
utilize and  when,  as in this  case, they    can   see   the   significant connection  between     reading and  science
achievement. The measure in this study is very similar to other classroom measures of science achievement. We
acknowledge that the measure used is not a "pure" measure of science achievement; it is also a measure of
reading comprehension. However, we suggest that many classroom assessments of science learning are reading-
dependent in meaningful ways.
         Student proficiency   with  any   of the   strategies   was related   to  student  performance  on  the science
assessment. This is worth noting, particularly because that relationship holds even when on-entry reading ability
is a covariate in the regression models. Strategy proficiency predicts unique variance in science achievement
even when controlling for reading. Based on the adjusted R2 s, reading achievement and strategy proficiency
account  for between   26%  and  40%  of   science   achievement.     In  prior work   (Authors, 2008),  we  found   that
proficiency with annotation, though correlated with science achievement, did not predict science achievement
when    accounting for  on-entry  reading.    We    suspect     that the    reason  annotation  inconsistently   predicts
achievement might have to do with the variety of ways that students have learned to annotate. It is possible that
only certain elements of annotations matter to comprehension because students may not be actively engaged in
completing all the elements of an annotation with all readings. To better understand whether this is true, we
conducted some further analyses of our data and identified the subset of elements of the annotation that most
differentiated student science achievement. For example, as we mentioned earlier, for the behavior annotation, 8
of the 30 elements significantly differentiated students who did better or worse on the science achievement. The
prior research indicated that annotation strategies have utility if they help students recognize and leverage the

                                                    863    ·  © ISLS
                                                ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

structures of text for understanding. But, the results of the preliminary analysis presented here indicate that
perhaps  only  the  content-focused   steps in  annotation    (like marking     main ideas  or  differentiating specific
evidence that supports a particular argument) is important in increasing science learning, and that the more
conceptual-focused steps (like circling a heading or subheading) are less useful. There is some evidence that the
revised elements are more content focused than conceptually focused. The empirical evidence about strategy
efficiency is very  important because   any    intervention   that  stresses reading   comprehension    will have  to be
implemented in real classrooms by busy science teachers. It will require ongoing effort to support schools so
they routinely use comprehension-focused, discipline-specific reading strategies in science. Teachers need to be
sure they help students learn science. We have provided initial evidence that they do.
         Perhaps the major challenge to improve reading in the domains in high school is not discovering new
strategies that work but rather researching ways to impact school practice through the kind of research described
here. Learning science research can be an important resource in the transformation of science instruction. Much
is known about how to teach early elementary reading, and many schools have now put into practice what was
only a research agenda a decade or two ago. We do not know nearly as much about high school reading, but we
have some good ideas to put into place. Learning scientists need to collaborate closely with schools to make
more routine what we know to be effective. Explicit attention to comprehension-focused reading strategies is
probably one piece of a good solution to the challenge of supporting reading to learn competencies. This study
makes   some  progress  in providing    evidence  about   the  utility of  strategies, but  also goes    beyond that  by
examining how the instructional versions of strategies might be altered by empirical evidence. This could be the
most important, if preliminary, contribution of this work. The reading strategies movement was based in large
part on a theoretical model of how strategies could help readers. In the case of annotation, it was based on a
largely theoretical assertion   that readers   could  better  leverage   the   structures  of  texts in  order  to better
comprehend text. Good readers seem to better leverage the structure of texts. So, we (and others) designed
annotation supports based on that insight. But now we are able, in part by the empirical analysis presented here,
to begin to revise and better understand how to link reading activity support to specific science learning. This is
an important future direction of this work.

References
Afflerbach, P, Pearson, P. D., & Paris, S.G. (2008). Clarifying differences between reading skills and reading
         strategies. The Reading Teacher, 61, 364-373.
Alexander,  P.  A., &   Jetton, T.   L. (2000).   Learning    from   text:   A  multidimensional     and developmental
         perspective.  In M. L. Kamil, P. B. Mosenthal, P. D. Pearson, & R. Barr (Eds.), Handbook of reading
         research, Vol. 3 (pp. 269-284), Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Anderson, V. (1992). A teacher development project in transactional strategy instruction for teachers of severely
         reading-disabled adolescents. Teaching & Teacher Education, 8, 391­403.
Biancarosa, C., & Snow, C.E. (2006). Reading Next--A Vision for Action and Research in Middle and High
         School Literacy: A Report to Carnegie Corporation of New York (2nd Ed.). Washington, DC: Alliance
         for Excellent Education.
Collins, C. (1991). Reading instruction that increases thinking abilities. Journal of Reading, 34, 510-516.
Cromley, J. G., & Azevedo, R. (2007). Testing and refining the direct and inferential mediation model of
         reading comprehension.    Journal of Educational Psychology, 99, 311­325.
Gomez, L., Herman, P., & Gomez , K. (2007). Integrating text in content-area classes: Better supports for
        teachers and students. Voices in Urban Education, 14, 22-29.
Herman, P., Gomez, L. M., Gomez, K., Williams, A., & Perkins, K. (2008). Metacognitive support for reading
        in science classrooms. In Proceedings of the 8th international conference on International conference
        for the learning sciences-Volume 1 (pp. 342­349).
Kintsch, W. (1998). Comprehension: A paradigm for cognition. New York: Cambridge University Press.
National   Center  for Education   Statistics. (2005).  The    Condition     of Education     2005   (NCES   2005­094).
         Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.
Norris, S. P., and Phillips, L. M. (2003). How literacy in its fundamental sense is central to scientific literacy.
         Science Education, 87, 224­240.
Pressley, M. (2000).    What  should  comprehension     instruction  be  the   instruction of?  In M. L. Kamil, P. B.
         Mosenthal, P. D. Pearson, & R. Barr (Eds.), Handbook of Reading Research, Vol. 3 (pp. 545-563),
         Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Pressley, M., El-Dinary, P.B., Gaskins, I., Schuder, T., Bergman, J., Almasi, J., et al. (1992). Beyond direct
         explanation:  Transactional  instruction  of reading   comprehension     strategies.  The   Elementary    School
         Journal, 92, 511­555.
Ridley, D., Schutz, P., Glanz, R., Weinstein, C. (1992). Self-regulated learning: The interactive influence of
         metacognitive awareness and goal-setting. Journal of Experimental Education, 60, 293-306.
Wittrock, M. C. (1990).  Generative   processes of comprehension.      Educational   Psychologist,   24, 345-376.

                                                    864  ·   © ISLS
