                                                  ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

           Making Knowledge Building Moves: Toward Cultivating
                Knowledge Building Communities in Classrooms
                 Katerine Bielaczyc, Learning Sciences Lab, NIE Singapore, kateb369@gmail.com
                    John Ow, Innova Primary School, Singapore, john_ow_eu_gene@mac.com

           Abstract: A major emphasis within the Learning Sciences has been to explore ways to
           create classroom cultures that mirror disciplinary cultures. The central focus of our own
           research has been on how teachers and students navigate the epistemological shift from
           traditional  didactic  classrooms   to   classrooms    that  function   as  knowledge    building
           communities (Scardamalia, 2002; Scardamalia & Bereiter, 2006).          We ground our inquiry in
           Ideas First, a design-based research program focused on creating a knowledge building
           community in science within a Singapore primary school (Bielaczyc & Ow, 2007; Ow &
           Bielaczyc, 2007, 2008). In Ideas First we view engagement in the disciplinary practices of
           science  through the   theoretical  lens   of  epistemic  games    (Collins &  Ferguson,    1993;
           Morrison & Collins, 1995).      In order to support reflective discourse among teachers and
           students around epistemic game play, we have created a set of dialogic tools centered on
           specific types of knowledge building moves.       We illustrate the design features of the tools
           and their role in fostering participation in knowledge building communities in science.

Education in the Knowledge Age calls for socializing students into the world of work with knowledge (Bereiter,
2002). A major emphasis within the Learning Sciences has been on investigating ways to create classroom
cultures   that mirror  disciplinary cultures,   thus socializing   students  into  working  with  knowledge   in  ways
consistent with disciplinary norms and practices (e.g., Gresalfi & Cobb, 2006; Herrenkohl, et. al., 1999; Songer,
2006).     Such   a framing    is founded   on   theoretical   perspectives   emphasizing    learning as a   process  of
enculturation, with a focus on learning to be rather than simply learning about (Sawyer, 2006; Thomas &
Brown, 2007).
           In our own research, we have been interested in how teachers and students navigate the epistemological
shift from   traditional didactic  classrooms    to classrooms    that function  as   knowledge building    communities
(Scardamalia,    2002;  Scardamalia  & Bereiter,    2006).   For  the  past several years we   have been  engaged  in a
design-based research program in a Singapore primary school.            Ideas First is a two-year science program co-
designed with primary school teachers that has been operating in fifteen grade 3 and grade 4 classrooms since
2006  (Bielaczyc    &   Ow, 2007;   Ow   &  Bielaczyc,    2007;  2008).     The  program  is based  on  the vision of a
knowledge building community where students work to advance the science understanding of the classroom
community through engaging in collectively building knowledge in response to problems of understanding.
           Knowledge building communities involve not only participating in knowledge building practices, but
also  engaging   in reflective   discourse on  participation   (Bielaczyc   & Collins,  1999;  2006).  Such  meta-level
discourse among participants is critical for agency, identity, and creativity within a dynamic community whose
goal is to continually advance at the edges of the community's understanding. In Ideas First we have introduced
several means of supporting reflective discourse.     In the present paper we describe a particular set of tools meant
to support inquiry into specific types of knowledge building moves among both teachers and students. We
illustrate the  design   features of the   tools and  their  role in   fostering participation in  knowledge   building
communities in science.

The Need for Dialogic Tools to Support Inquiry into Knowledge Building
Creating disciplinary cultures in classrooms is challenging because enculturation necessitates an immersive
approach.   If the classroom currently reflects a traditional didactic culture then change must occur along many
dimensions of social and technological infrastructure (e.g., Bielaczyc, 2006; NRC, 2007). When the teachers are
themselves new to such a culture, classroom change becomes even more challenging.            In Ideas First we chose to
work with teachers across all the grade 3 and 4 classes within the school in order to foster a community of
teachers that could support each other locally, as well as connect to teachers and other educational stakeholders
in the international knowledge building community1.         In order to foster teachers' development as a knowledge
building community and agents of change, as designers we wanted to create supports for critical, reflective
discourse --- tools that provided both a lens for looking at the work of the knowledge building community and
that helped participants develop a language for talking about it.
           Like many designs, we have found that classroom videos provide a powerful means of reflection (e.g.,
Goldman, et. al., 2007).    Further,  Knowledge     Forum,   the  online  environment   designed  by  Scardamalia  and
Bereiter to support knowledge building (Scardamalia, 2004), also provides a means of visualizing not only
students' work with disciplinary content, but also processes of knowledge building.          Knowledge Forum records

                                                                                                                         !
                                                      865  ·  © ISLS
                                               ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

participants' work with ideas using the View feature, a public space where knowledge objects (multi-media
content within the database that is represented via icons such as Notes, Rise-Above's, and Build-On's), their
interconnections, and other organizational representations of the knowledge objects (e.g., timelines, maps) are
visually displayed.  The processes of knowledge building are thus captured in a visual form as the participants'
work evolves.
         However, while viewing rich visual spaces such as videos and Knowledge Forum where the work of
the community occurs in all its "blooming, buzzing confusion" is important, we have found that it can be very
difficult for teachers (and students) to "see" the critical events and features (refer to Frederiksen, et. al, 1998 for
similar findings in teacher video clubs). Thus we wanted to complement the reflections on classroom videos and
Knowledge Forum by creating a set of tools that focused on critical aspects of knowledge building.     We thought
that a powerful focal point for discussion would be "knowledge building moves," a way of conceiving possible
actions to advance knowledge within a given problem space.        Further, we wanted to create tools that could be
used by both teachers and students to engage in inquiry about critical aspects of knowledge building.      It should
be noted that Knowledge Forum has a growing suite of tools (the Analytic Toolkit) that provide representations
of knowledge building activities within the database, thus supporting rich, reflective discourse (Zhang, et. al.,
2009). However, because computers are not readily accessible to students and teachers in their classrooms, we
constrained our designs to mobile, physical artifacts that students and teachers could easily share.
         As stated earlier, we felt that it was critical to work together with the community to develop not only a
lens for seeing, but also a language for discussing new concepts.      In the early years of the project, when we
spoke with teachers about socializing students into working with ideas, it seemed that the notion of "working"
was taken as some laborious set of tasks or indicative of routines or procedures.    Hence, it became important to
find ways to convey work with ideas in knowledge building communities as creative and playful.          One useful
framework  for supporting  discourse   grounded in     playfulness and creativity is  epistemic games  (Collins  &
Ferguson, 1993; Morrison & Collins, 1995).    Using this framework, we have created a set of tools for engaging
teachers and students in inquiry into knowledge building moves.     We describe these tools in more detail below.

Knowledge Building Communities and Epistemic Game Play
In creating the theoretical lens of epistemic games (Collins & Ferguson, 1993; Morrison & Collins, 1995),
Collins and his colleagues are concerned with characterizing the ways in which members of a community of
practice work to construct knowledge. Epistemic games refer to strategic play with disciplinary knowledge and
are based on the study of disciplinary communities such as Physical, Biological, and Social Scientists (e.g., the
Cost-Benefit-Analysis  Game,   the   Systems-Dynamics       Game).  The  overall  goal is  to support  learners  in
developing epistemic fluency, developing an understanding of the moves, constraints, and strategies for working
with various forms of knowledge.
         In Ideas First, we view epistemic game play as being of two major kinds.      The first concerns science
representational games involving target structures such as classification trees and graphs.   The second concerns
knowledge building games involving goal states such as the creation of knowledge useful for explaining a
problem  of understanding. The first kind correspond to those described by Collins and Ferguson (1993) where
the game involves constructing a fixed representational target or epistemic form, such as playing a Multi-factor-
Analysis Game   with  an And/Or     Graph.  The second      are those where there  is  no specific epistemic  form
targeted, such as the Theory-and-Evidence Game (Collins, in press; Morrison & Collins, 1995).
         Although we do not use the actual term "epistemic games," we do frame knowledge building in Ideas
First in terms of game play and knowledge building moves. Scientists advance their understanding of problems
in many ways.  One way we represent    play with ideas  is the "Progressive-Investigation Game" (Figure 1).    This
representation is meant to capture a type of knowledge building progression that occurs both in the offline
setting and online in Knowledge Forum.      Carrying the game metaphor further, we discuss with teachers the
similarity to sports teams where both full-length games and targeted practice sessions are a continual part of a
player's development.  Similarly, Ideas First involves a constant cycling of action and reflection in learning to
play knowledge building games in science.      In order to support teacher and student inquiry into knowledge
building moves we have created two specific tools that isolate parts of the full Progressive-Investigation Game
for practice and reflection, Think Cards and hypothetical game-configurations.
         Think Cards can be thought of as concrete "game pieces" to facilitate game play (Figure 2).            To
provide consistency between offline and online game play, the cards are based on Knowledge Forum Notes
(Scardamalia, 2004).  The Think Cards are used to support one sequence of knowledge building moves that
might be used to advance understanding of a problem --- generate an explanation for a problem and then gather
new information  that  can  be used    to improve this    explanation.   Think   Cards physically    reify students'
explanations (My Idea is...), the new information that they bring to their inquiry (New information...), questions
that drive their inquiry (INTU stands for "I need to understand"), and improvements that they make to their
explanations (A Better Idea is...).

                                                                                                                        !
                                                   866  ·  © ISLS
                                               ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

                                                  Our Problem

                                    Initial Ideas + Questions (I Need to Understand's)

                                             Gather New Information
                                                    from

                        Investigative Work                            Exchange Ideas with Others
                        · Experiments
                        · Research authoritative resources

                                Improved Ideas + Questions (I Need to Understand's)

             "#$%&'!()!!*+'!,-.#/!0123!20!4+'!56&2$&'..#7'89:7'.4#$-4#2:!;-<'=!

         Hypothetical game-configurations are used to reflect on the knowledge building moves made possible
by a particular configuration of knowledge objects.    The configurations consist of "snapshots" of hypothetical
student work in Knowledge Forum, meant to capture game play at a fixed point in time in order to engage the
community in asking: given this configuration, what types of knowledge building moves would best contribute
to advancing our knowledge? Some configurations focus on single moves, such as presenting a possible initial
explanation generated  in response  to   the problem   the   students  are working   on.  Students  then   generate a
knowledge building move meant to advance this initial idea.     There are also more complex game configurations
that present not only a possible initial explanation in response to a problem, but also provide a series of possible
knowledge building moves.   In this case, students both evaluate the quality of the provided moves and generate
a possible next move that contributes to the progressive improvement of ideas. In all cases, students each work
on the same  hypothetical  game-configurations    so   that  they  can then   compare   and   contrast their proposed
knowledge building moves in whole-class discussions about issues such as what makes a "good contribution"
and what does it mean to advance the community understanding.
         Our design   argument is   that in  full-blown   game  play   in  spaces  such  as Knowledge     Forum   and
classroom discourse, it is difficult for beginning learners to see critical events and features, thus making it
difficult to develop the necessary epistemological perspectives on community practices and an understanding of
the moves, constraints, and strategies for working with various forms of knowledge (i.e. epistemic fluency).
The Think Cards are used in the early months of Ideas First.      After students have moved into full-game play in
Knowledge   Forum,  the hypothetical   game-configurations     are introduced   as   a means  of examining    specific
elements of  epistemic game   play, permitting    further practice and    reflection on  participation in community
knowledge   building.  The  continued    use across  grades   3 and    4 makes  it   possible to highlight   particular
knowledge building moves such as how to advance an explanation or how to synthesize ideas, which are then
related to student work in Knowledge Forum.       We provide more detail on our use of the Think Cards as a
reflective tool in the Ideas First program in the remainder of the paper.

Think Cards: Learning to Make Knowledge Building Moves
The Think Cards are used in the first two units of Grade 3 (months 1 - 3).     This is students' first formal science
experience in primary school.  The unit opens with a whole class discussion of "How do Scientists make sense
of the world?" and highlights the underpinnings of Ideas First, such as working as a science community to
understand questions that we have about the world and how, like Scientists, we keep working to improve our
ideas and explanations.   The Think  Cards    are used   to  support  actions consistent  with this framing,  but are
limited to the initial idea-new information-improved idea sequence of knowledge building moves.           The goal is
to challenge the prevailing classroom culture where students' written responses tend to be viewed as static
entities that either match a predetermined "model answer" or not.     Instead, the first Think Card, My Idea is... , is
used to encourage students to write down their initial idea, with teachers setting the classroom norm of respect
for others' ideas and not worrying if one's idea is correct.  These ideas are then shared in the public space (via
the Whiteboard, or in small-group discussions) in order to make visible the diversity of ideas that are now

                                                                                                                        !
                                                   867  ·   © ISLS
                                               ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

available as resources for the whole community.       Because of curricular time constraints2, students work on a
problem of understanding that is provided to the whole class (e.g., How do we know if something is a "living
thing"?).  However    students  are encouraged     to continually   record   their own   questions  (the      I Need   to
Understand... section at the bottom of the cards) and to use the processes modeled with the class problem to
advance their understanding of these questions.
          The New  Information...   Card   is used   to  introduce  a  possible knowledge    building  move      toward
progressively improving an initial idea.  Rather than using resources to "find the answer," the focus is on using
books, videos, the Internet, and other people as resources to improve initial ideas.       In many classes, students
begin bringing resources from the public library and home to share with the class.       Class discussions center on
issues such as why certain resources are useful (with some classes discussing the trustworthiness of science
content in sources such as children's cartoons and television shows) and the mechanics of note-taking, which is
a new skill for these 9 year-olds.  Students also discuss the practice of citing resources (including people) in
order to return to sources if necessary.

                                                                                                 To support the
!                                                                                                concept of game
                                                                                                 play and break from
!                                                                                                the practice of
!                                                                                                filling inworksheets, each
!                                                                                                Think Card is a
!                                                                                                bright colour andthe backside of the
!                                                                                                cards are printed to
!                                                                                                resemble a deck ofplaying cards.
!
                                                           !
                 (front view)                                     (back view)
                                                           !
                                    "#$%&'!>)!!9?'-.!"#&.4!*+#:@!A-&?.!

          The use of the Think Cards occurs over several weeks.       The initial idea cards lead into research with
various resources to  collect  new  information    centered  on the   class problem,   but also including     individual
questions.  Students generate as many New Information Cards as they wish, and share them with the class
through whole-class and small-group discussions.        This, in turn, leads to access and exchange of information
across cards. This work culminates in A Better Idea is... Card, where students work to synthesize their learning
into an improved  explanation   of  their  initial idea.   This knowledge    building   move  opens   up    a   space for
discourse  concerning the meaning     of   idea    improvement.  For   example,    are we  interested in     looking   at
improvement in terms of comparison to the initial idea, or solely with regard to the quality of the end product?!
          The small, mobile nature of the Think Cards make it easy for children to work with their ideas ---
jotting down notes in the library or during discussions, spreading their cards out to examine the collection of
ideas, literally "exchanging ideas" with others, etc.    We believe that it is important that a child can physically
accompany the written form of his or her idea into a group discussion, thereby disrupting the conception that a
written idea is a static response to a question when the child holding the Think Card is asked by peers to further
elaborate the idea or the child defends the idea when it is challenged.      The Think Cards also make visible the
diversity of ideas that students generate for a particular problem of understanding and that can be collected from
various resources, and the multiple pathways possible in moving from initial ideas to construct new knowledge.
          Many of the visual affordances (in contrast to the physical) that we discuss here are also available in
Knowledge Forum.     Such similarity is seen as critical in order to create a consistent developmental trajectory
within a semiotic space where knowledge and sources can be questioned and problematised --- from physical
knowledge objects in a child's hand that co-located agents can act upon (months 1 - 3 of Ideas First), to
"concrete" knowledge objects in the virtual space of Knowledge Forum that can be acted upon by multiple
agents (months 4-24 of Ideas First), to broader disciplinary knowledge worked upon by members of the science
community.

Teacher Reflections on the Use of Think Cards
Over the course of the year, teachers in both the Grade 3 and Grade 4 levels meet for bi-weekly reflection

                                                                                                                          !
                                                    868  ·   © ISLS
                                                 ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

sessions. One of the Grade 3 sessions during Unit 1 focused specifically on the use of Think Cards, with the
eight teachers all writing written reflections and then sharing their perspectives in an open discussion.        Here we
briefly illustrate their descriptions of classroom experiences.
          One teacher described the Think Cards as a "tool to initiate children into the Ideas First culture," and
highlighted that their use "Helps the teacher reinforce the idea that "all ideas are important" by encouraging
them  to  write down    their thoughts,  whether or not  they   think  they are right."    Other descriptions related to
culture building included "Students get to experience the processes real Scientists go through in the work," and
"A Better Idea Is... Card is good as pupils start to rephrase the main content's ideas with vocab and language
like scientists. "
          The teachers' reflections indicated that they used the Think Cards not only to help students participate
in knowledge building practices, but also to engage in reflecting upon the nature of their participation and the
ways in which knowledge is built.       Based on initial analyses of the teacher responses, two categories emerged
concerning   the   ways the   Think Cards  helped   to  support  student  reflection on    knowledge   building:  how   to
engage with ideas and advance understanding and how students can serve as resources for each other.                    We
briefly describe these two areas below.

How to Engage With Ideas and Advance Understanding
Based on interviews with the teachers of this school over the four years of the project, the typical classroom
experience for these students involves answering questions (either verbally or on worksheets) and receiving
positive  or negative   feedback    with an  explanation.      The underlying    processes   for developing     their  own
explanations are rarely made visible, beyond "studying" or "working harder."         Learning that there are processes
that can be undertaken to advance one's understanding is thus critical for helping students learn how to engage
with knowledge.      The teachers describe how the Think Cards introduced students to specific approaches to
advancing their ideas and enabled students to see the growth of their ideas:

          The cards allow pupils to take step-by-step approach in researching their ideas and problems.

          Helps students to appreciate their own work and observe how they had "grown" in their
          understanding of a problem.

          When pupils put their 3 cards together, they can see how their ideas have grown from rather
          vague and haphazard to something more detailed and specific to the problem or question.

One teacher told of how using the Think Cards to reflect on their growth of understanding helped her students to
"value the process":

          I saw a shift in their attitudes toward the cards.      When we first started out with the Think
          Cards they were asking me, "Why are we doing this?"          And then, um, I had one session with
          them where they laid out their cards together after they completed one topic.         And I got them
          to sort of like celebrate, or appreciate, the work that they had done individually and at the
          same time go around and see what their other friends have done. So, um, and to particularly
          look for how they had grown in their understanding of the problem.         So, from there they saw
          that there was value to what they are doing.       So by the time I gave them the second set of
          cards they quite readily worked without any more of these questioning.

          Through examining their work with Think Cards --- coming to understand that an idea can be a starting
place rather  than   a terminal  answer,  observing    that knowledge    can  be  constructed    via multiple   pathways,
discussing the similarities and difference between what they do and what scientists do --- the intention is for
students  to better    understand not   only the  processes    of  knowledge    building,   but  also  their    agency for
participating in such practices (what Scardamalia (2002) refers to as "epistemic agency").
          Although the teachers found it helpful that the step-by-step approach of the Think Cards provided an
entry point  into  the  processes of  knowledge   building,    the teachers  also felt  it was   important  that  such  an
approach did not lead to students following this sequence in a routinised manner, but instead led into more
versatility in knowledge building.   For example:

          Miss H: I think at this stage when they first just started in this I think they need a little,
              some steps. So by the second set of cards they are quite comfortable.        ...But I think that,
              um, as they get the hang of this, that the other Thinking Phrases3 can start coming
              through.   They   need not  follow  this, um,    steps, steps they  have  to  follow,  later on
              [inaudible] start using other Thinking phrases.

                                                                                                                           !
                                                    869   ·   © ISLS
                                                 ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

       Researcher-Facilitator: So you already foresee a time ...
       Miss H: Yeah.     Because I don't want them to just be thinking this way.         First the yellow
             [My Idea is card], then the purple [New Information card], then the, the, yeah... I think
             in real life we don't do this, um, all the time.   We need them to be very versatile in their
             thinking as well, not just thinking sequentially but perhaps concurrently with other
             issues that are popping up.

It is critical when using supportive processes to guide student introduction to epistemic game play that the
processes not be reduced to simple steps to be followed, but instead are viewed as moving students onto a
trajectory leading to greater creativity.

How Students Can Serve as Resources for Each Other
Working together and serving as resources for each other are critical aspects of playing epistemic games in
knowledge   building communities.    With     regard   to how   to serve  as resources  for each  other, the  teachers
described  ways  of  using   the ideas    of others  in   one's own   explanations  or  contributing to  each  other's
advancements, as well as strategies for synthesizing ideas and resolving conflicts.     One of the ways they did this
was by connecting student use of the cards to the various design principles of Ideas First4.   For example:

       I   strongly feel that the  Think     Cards  help  in Principles  3--"Working    together to  improve
       ideas."
             - Students share ideas aloud, teacher writes on board
             - Other students who do not have the idea will write in their Think Card and see their
                 ideas GROW.

       It [Think Cards] is handy and enables pupils to pass them around to share their ideas.

       If ideas written on board has misconception, getting second or third student to rephrase the
       idea   promotes   Principle  No.5--"Moving         ahead...and  help..." [The   community    can  only
       move ahead if we help all of the members of our community to move ahead] where pupils
       themselves    clarify their peers'    idea.  If this  happen  where   2  pupils help one  another   in
       clarifying his/her peer's ideas, tr [teacher] will write both names in brackets, to acknowledge
       their contribution.

Although the Think Cards focus on "My Idea" and "My Better Idea," the teachers indicate that they keep the
focus on our ideas through keeping ideas visible as public resources for all and through encouraging peers to
exchange their ideas and help each other.     Such a focus is related to Scardamalia's   (2002) notion of "collective
cognitive responsibility," a shared responsibility for advancing the community's understanding.

Supporting Teacher Reflections
In addition to supporting student reflections on knowledge building processes, working with the Think Cards
also supported teacher reflections on pedagogy.        For example, in the written reflections, one teacher raised his
own I Need to Understand questions for the other teachers to consider:

           INTU: How do we assess where we as teachers are in terms of the learning of our students?
           As a community, I feel that we have to move on as a class to create meaning of the lessons
           and the knowledge that we have built upon. However, how do we determine the cut off time
           to move on to a different of the lesson if we are constrained in terms of time?

Further, the teachers got into a discussion about teaching problems that came up in their classes.       One example
involved students who write "textbook entries" on their cards rather than their own ideas.           Another concern
involved students who "got all the key science ideas in the first Think Card" and then they didn't know what to
do for their New Information card so they wrote copious notes from other resources.         These teacher exchanges
led to examining more deeply the types of classroom practices and contexts that needed to be created to support
knowledge building.
       The teachers' discussion of their experiences touches upon the interplay of the nature of disciplinary
practices, pedagogy  and   classroom   enactments,     and   student participation and  understanding.   We   feel that
continued engagement in dialogue centered on such interplay is critical in order to support teachers in the
creation of classroom knowledge building communities and toward an ever-deepening understanding of what
Hogan and Corey (2001) call the "composite culture":

                                                                                                                        !
                                                     870   ·  © ISLS
                                                     ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

          The "composite culture" represents the classroom culture of science that students actually
          experience,   which    is   a   mixture  of    ideals  of    professional     science  practice...    and
          pedagogical   ideals...    as filtered  through    the realities    of classroom     life  and  scientific
          practice. Finally, students' perspectives feed back into shaping the composite culture of
          the classroom. (p. 216)

This is also consonant with teacher education research on supporting the professional development of beginning
elementary   science   teachers   through     focused   dialogue   regarding     "(1)   engaging     in  science,  (2)   organizing
instruction, and (3) understanding students" (Mikeska, Anderson, and Schwarz, 2009, p. 678).                         The teacher
discourse  indicates   that Think    Cards    can serve  as  a   tool  to  support   dialogue    at  the  intersection   of science
knowledge building practices, classroom actions, and student understanding.

Conclusion
The   use  of  Think    Cards    and    hypothetical   game-configurations        permits    guided      practice  and   reflection
concurrently with engagement in playing full versions of epistemic games such as the Progressive-Investigation
Game.    These tools are meant to work in conjunction with Knowledge Forum and video-based reflections in
order to help teachers and students to problematise their participation in knowledge building communities. The
advantages provided by the Think Cards include physical possession, which creates a strong sense of ownership
and the ability to accompany one's ideas into social interactions in order to engage in extended discourse.
Students are easily able to exchange ideas and lay out the cards in various configurations in order to see how
different ideas are    related.  One      disadvantage   over   Knowledge      Forum     is that physical    limitations    make    it
difficult for students to see how their ideas fit into the overall structure of the work of the whole class, and
students are limited in the ease of creating different "views" on the knowledge base.
          Beverly Caswell, a Canadian teacher who worked with the knowledge building communities model in
her elementary   science    classes     for many   years,    describes    how    as  her students    learned    the  processes      of
knowledge building that "it is almost as if they are thinking `finally someone is letting us in on the rules of the
game of science'" (Caswell & Bielaczyc, 2002). The work described in the present paper concerns ways to put
Ideas First classrooms on a trajectory consistent with more skilled and creative playing of the epistemic games
of Science.   The research contributes to the growing literature on ways to create classroom cultures that mirror
disciplinary cultures.  Think Cards and hypothetical game-configurations scaffold scientific knowledge building
processes,  contributing    to  work    with  pencil-and-paper     based   scaffolds    (e.g., McNeill    &  Krajik,     2009)  and
computer-based scaffolds (e.g., Bell & Linn, 2000).          The work presented here captures only a small slice of the
Ideas First  design  and    of  our  work   in  facilitating a   shift from    didactic  classrooms      toward    classrooms   that
function  as knowledge      building    communities.     In  future   work    we  plan  to  extend   our  analysis   to  classroom
discourse around the epistemic game play described here, along with a more in-depth examination of the ways
that students use the Think Cards and game-configurations in relation to their work on Knowledge Forum.

Endnotes
(1)  Refer to www.ikit.org
(2)  In Singapore,  the school   year comprises   four 10-week   sessions.    In this school   there were  2-2.5   hours of Science
     scheduled  per week    in Grades   3 and 4  and an  exam   period  at the   end of every  10-week    session.  There   is also a
     national curriculum specifying science objectives to be covered in preparation for the Primary School Leaving Exam
     (PSLE), a national high-stakes exam given at the end of Grade 6.
(3)  Thinking Phrases are based on the scaffolds found in the Knowledge Forum software.               In Ideas First, the Thinking
     Phrases  include: My   Idea is, New    Information, A  Better Idea   is, INTU,   Evidence   for this Idea, Pulling  Our   Ideas
     Together, and A Different Idea is.
(4)  Scardamalia (2002)     outlines 12   design principles  for knowledge     building  communities.     In Ideas   First  we  have
     consolidated these into five key guiding principles.    The teacher quotes refer to two of these five principles: Principle
     3: We work together to improve our ideas and Principle 5: The community can only move ahead if we help all of the
     members of our community to move ahead.

References
Bell, P. & Linn, M. C. (2000). Scientific arguments as learning artifcats: Designing for learning from the web
          with KIE. International Journal of Science Education, 22(8), 797-817.
Bielaczyc, K. (2006). Designing social infrastructure: Critical issues in creating learning environments with
          technology. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 15, 301-329.
Bielaczyc, K. & Collins, A. (1999) Learning communities in classrooms: A reconceptualization of educational
          practice. In C.M. Reigeluth (Ed.), Instructional Design Theories and Models, Vol. II.                      Mahwah NJ:
          Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Bielaczyc, K. & Collins, A. (2006). Fostering knowledge-creating communities. In A. M. O'Donnell, C. E.
          Hmelo-Silver, & G. Erkens (Eds.), Collaborative learning, reasoning, and technology.                       Mahwah NJ:

                                                                                                                                       !
                                                         871  ·   © ISLS
                                                   ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

         Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, pp. 37-60.
Bielaczyc,   K.  & Ow,    J. (2007)  Shifting   the social    infrastructure: Investigating  transition  mechanisms       for
         creating     knowledge    building   communities     in   classrooms.   In  Proceedings     of the   International
         Conference for Computers in Education.
Caswell, B. & Bielaczyc, K. (2002) Knowledge Forum: Altering the relationship between students and scientific
         knowledge. Education, Communication and Information, 3, 281-305.
Collins, A.  (in press).   A study   of  expert   theory formation:   The   role of  different model    types and   domain
         frameworks. In M.S. Khine and I. Saleh (Eds.). Models and modeling: Cognitive tools for scientific
         enquiry. Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Springer.
Collins, A. & Ferguson, W. (1993). Epistemic forms and epistemic games: Structures and strategies for guiding
         inquiry. Educational Psychologist, 28(1), 25-42.
Frederiksen,  J. R.,  Sipusic,  M.,  Sherin,  M.,  and   Wolfe,   E.  (1998).  Video   portfolio  assessment:   Creating   a
         framework for viewing the functions of teaching. Educational Assessment, 5(4), 225-297.
Goldman,   R.,   Pea, R.,  Barron,   B., and  Derry,  S.  (Eds).   (2007).  Video   research   in the Learning     Sciences.
         Mahwah, New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates
Gresalfi, M., & Cobb, P. (2006). Cultivating students' discipline-specific dispositions as a critical goal for
         pedagogy and equity. Pedagogies, 1, 49-58.
Herrenkohl, L.R., Palincsar, A.S., DeWater, L.S., and Kawasaki, K. (1999). Developing scientific communities
         in classrooms: A sociocognitive approach. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 8, 451-493.
Hogan,   K., &   Corey,   C. (2001).    Viewing    classrooms   as cultural   contexts for  fostering   scientific literacy.
         Anthropology & Education Quarterly, 32(2), 214--243.
McNeill, K. L. & Krajcik, J. (2009). Synergy between teacher practices and curricular scaffolds to support
         students  in  using  domain     specific and domain     general knowledge     in writing  arguments    to  explain
         phenomena. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 18(3), 416-460.
Mikeska, J., Anderson, A., & Schwarz, C. (2009). Principled reasoning about problems of practice. Science
         Education, 93, 678-686.
Morrison, D. & Collins, A. (1995) Epistemic fluency and constructivist learning environments. Educational
         Technology,    35   (5),  39-45.   Reprinted    in   B.  G.  Wilson     (Ed.) (1996)     Constructivist   learning
         environments: Case Studies in Instructional Design. Englewood Cliffs NJ: Educational Technology
         Publications, 107-119.
National Research Council. (2007). Taking Science to School: Learning and Teaching Science in Grades K-8.
         Committee on Science Learning, Kindergarten Through Eighth Grade. Washington, DC: The National
         Academies Press.
Ow,  J.  & Bielaczyc,   K.   (2007)  Epistemic     perturbations:  Using   material  artifacts to  cultivate  a knowledge
         building  culture   in   classrooms.   In  Proceedings    of   the   International Conference    for   Computer-
         Supported Collaborative Learning.
Ow, J. & Bielaczyc, K. (2008). Designing artifacts for "epistemological perturbations" ­ Changing the bias of
         learning environments for Knowledge Building. Paper presented at the Eleventh Annual Knowledge
         Forum Summer Institute, Toronto, CA.
Sawyer, R. K. (2006). Introduction: The new science of learning. In R. K. Sawyer (Ed.), Cambridge handbook
         of the learning sciences (pp. 1-18). NY: Cambridge University Press.
Scardamalia, M. (2002). Collective cognitive responsibility for the advancement of knowledge. In B. Smith
         (Ed.) Liberal education in the knowledge society. (pp. 67-98). Chicago: Open Court.
Scardamalia, M. (2004). CSILE/Knowledge Forum®. In Education and technology: An encyclopedia. (pp. 183-
         192) Santa Barbara: ABC-CLIO.
Scardamalia,   M.  &  Bereiter,   C. (2006).  Knowledge       building: Theory,   pedagogy     and technology.     In R.  K.
         Sawyer (Ed.), Cambridge handbook of the learning sciences (pp. 97-115).Cambridge University Press.
Songer,  N.B.    (2006)  BioKIDS:    An    Animated      Conversation   on  the  Development      of  Curricular   Activity
          Structures   for Inquiry   Science.   In R. Keith   Sawyer    (Ed.), Cambridge     Handbook    of  the   Learning
          Sciences. New York: Cambridge University Press. P. 355-369.
Thomas, D., & Brown, J. S. (2007). The play of imagination: Extending the literary mind. Games and Culture,
          2(2), 149-172.
Zhang, J., Scardamalia, M., Reeve, R., & Messina, R. (2009). Designs for collective cognitive responsibility in
         knowledge building communities. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 18(1), 7­44.

Acknowledgements
We would like to thank the Ideas First Team --- both the researchers and teachers who made this work possible.
This work    was   funded    by a Singapore     MOE   grant   to  the first   author through   the  National    Institute of
Education's Learning Sciences Laboratory (R8019.735.PM07).

                                                                                                                              !
                                                      872   ·  © ISLS
