                                                 ICLS 2010   ·    Volume 1

          Multiple Conceptual Coherences in the Speed Tutorial:
                             Micro-processes of Local Stability
Brian W. Frank, University of Maine, 5709 Bennett Hall, Orono, ME 04469-5709, brian.frank@umit.maine.edu

          Abstract: Researchers working within knowledge-in-pieces traditions have often employed
          observational   approaches   to   investigate  micro-processes     of learning.  There    is growing
          evidence from this line of work that students' intuitive thinking about physical phenomena is
          characterized more so by its diversity and flexibility than its uniformity and robustness. This
          characterization implies that much of the dynamics of students' thinking over short timescales
          involve processes that stabilize local patterns of thinking, later destabilize them, and allow
          other patterns to form. This kind of "change" may only involve dynamics by which the system
          of intuitive knowledge settles into various states without changing the system structure itself. I
          describe a case study in which a group of college students shift their thinking about motion
          several times during a collaborative learning activity. Instead of focusing on micro-processes
          of change, I describe these dynamics in terms of mechanisms that contribute to local stability
          of students' conceptual coherences.

Introduction
Conceptual change research in the seventies and eighties largely began focused on characterizing the singular
and often flawed ideas that children and students espouse about domain-specific phenomena (Driver & Easley,
1978; Posner, Strike, Hewson, & Gertzog, 1982; Carey, 1986). From this perspective, it was largely assumed
that unitary knowledge structures­naïve theories (McCloskey, 1983), alternative frameworks (Clement, 1983),
or ontological categories (Chi, 1992)­describe important aspects of novice misunderstandings and that these
misunderstanding must give way to other structures in a progression toward expertise. In contrast, more research
in the past two decades has focused on characterizing the diversity of ideas that children and students employ
for making sense of physical phenomena and the nuanced contextuality of these varied ideas across time and
setting (Strike & Posner, 1992; Smith, diSessa, & Roschelle, 1993; Hammer, Elby, Scherr, & Redish, 2004).
From this    perspective, it has largely  been   assumed     that a substantial component    of  expertise involves   the
gradual  refinement  and     repurposing  of existing   knowledge­phenomenological         primitives   (diSessa, 1993),
conceptual and epistemological resources (Hammer, 1996), or even pieces of ontological knowledge (Gupta,
Hammer, and Redish, accepted).
       Both of these perspectives have largely made change a central problem to be explained by research.
Much   of the prior  research  has focused   on  broad   processes     and conditions for  change,  while  the latter has
focused on micro-processes of change. In this paper, I focus on describing student understandings as reflecting
multiple  local  coherences  (Hammer     et al, 2004;   Rosenberg,     Hammer,  &   Phelan, 2006;   Scherr  &  Hammer,
2008). This specific term is intended to capture the notion that understanding and behavior are often quite
variable, while still exhibiting stabilities that are local to moments and settings. While much of this existing
work has focused on epistemological coherences, I focus here on describing local coherences that concern the
substance of students' thinking. This perspective shifts attention away from seeking only explanations of change
and toward explanations of how understandings cohere in specific moments and settings. Locally coherent
patterns  of student thinking  are to  be   explained   in terms    of mechanisms    that stabilize these  patterns. This
perspective   is explored    through   an   analysis of    students'   multiple conceptual   understandings    during   a
collaborative learning activity in an introductory college physics classroom.

Interpreting What Distance Means in the Speed Tutorial
Before  discussing   the  theoretical and   epistemological    considerations   for this work, I want   to motivate   this
discussion through an example of student reasoning that is the focus of this study. Two vignettes below are
taken from a student discussion during a collaborative learning activity in introductory college physics. The
students are in a tutorial--a common instructional format in introductory physics classrooms where students are
expected to work together through a conceptual worksheet. In this particular tutorial (a modified version of a
tutorial from McDermott, Shaffer, and the Physics Education Group at the University of Washington, 1998), a
group of four college students discuss "tickertape" representations of motion.
          Tickertape refers to a long strip of paper that can be used to create a record of an object's motion by
attaching the paper to the moving object. They are commonly used in physics classrooms to teach students
concepts about velocity and acceleration. The record of the motion is produced as the paper is pulled through a
tapping device that marks the paper at a constant rate. In this tutorial, strips of tickertape represent the motion of
a cart that was recorded prior to class (see Figure 1 for a cartoon schematic). Each student has been given a

                                                     873   ·  © ISLS
                                               ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

small strip cut from the entire tickertape that represents the same amount of time (i.e., has the same number of
dots) but represents different speeds (i.e., have varying length).

                Figure 1: Cartoon Schematic for How Tickertape Strips were Made Prior to Class

           Below, the students discuss how the amount of time taken to generate each of their different strips
compares, and incorrectly decide (as many groups initially do) that the shorter strips represent less time.

         Beth:    Obviously, it takes less time to generate the more closely spaced dots.
         John:    So you are saying it takes less time to make the shorter segments?
         Beth:    Yeah.
         Kate:    How can you tell?
         Beth:    You can tell because it's a shorter distance.
         Paul:    It's a shorter segment.

         The students discuss this conclusion for several minutes, pointing out other features of the strips that
support  this conclusion.  They  soon  move    on to  the next  part  of the  worksheet   that  involves doing  some
calculations based on distance measurements. After finishing these calculations, the students are prompted by a
specific question in their tutorial workbook to reflect upon their assumptions in doing these calculations.

         Kate:    I think we also assumed in that these were made by the speed at which the paper
                  traveled through the tapper, which was different for each paper.
         John:    Right, cause if you move it really fast then [quick movement of hand]
         Beth:    That's true! It could depend on how fast the ribbon was pulled [moves hand]
         Kate:    We're assuming that umm-
         Beth:    That the length is proportional to-
         Kate:    -The speed at which the ribbon was pulled through.

         These two vignettes involve student understandings that are substantively quite different. In the first,
students interpret distance as conveying information about time. In the second, students interpret distance to
mean speed.
         It seems natural, given the obvious change in students' interpretation of what distance means, to ask,
"What caused the students to change their thinking?"      This focus seems especially relevant since they changed
their understanding from an incorrect one (thinking that the distance indicates time) to a correct one (that the
distance indicates  speed). We  might  consider   several plausible   accounts   of what  caused the change:   (i) the
particular question from   the worksheet  triggered   them  to think  meta-cognitively    about what they  had  been
doing, (ii) engaging in the measurement exercise enabled the students to attend to and coordinate new aspects,
and (iii) Kate was privately thinking the correctly the entire time and only now found a way to have her ideas
introduced and considered. Each of these answers may hold some truth in explaining the change in students'
collective understanding. The question about change, however, may be misleading.
         It turns out that the students don't change their thinking on the matter this one time. Several minutes
after the end of the above transcript, Beth brings up again the idea that the shorter strips take less time. Kate,
who initially introduced the idea that the speed causes the different distances, seems to now agree with Beth. As
the tutorial goes on, the group works to regenerate their understanding that distance must be related to the speed
and not the time. However, this is not the last change. As the students go back to a previous page to erase their
wrong answers,   one of   the students is again   convinced  of their earlier  idea. It's not  entirely clear that the
students ever resolve the issue completely during the instructional period. Instead, their understanding seems to
vary between these two distinct ways of making sense of the strips of paper as representations of motion.
           For the researcher, trying to understand the cause of just a single moment of change in the students'
thinking now becomes a problem of explaining multiple changes back and forth. The seemingly straightforward
question, "What caused the students to change their thinking?" may not only be difficult to answer, it may be
misleading in its premise.  For starters, there might not be a simple or single causal explanation for any of these
transitions. In addition, the apparent change in the students' thinking might not reflect change to the structure of
students' intuitive knowledge at all. Instead, the changes we observe might only reflect dynamic transitions
among   competing   understandings that   each exhibits   some  local stability. Understanding   the local stabilities

                                                   874  ·  © ISLS
                                                  ICLS 2010    ·   Volume 1

themselves becomes a central problem for researchers to address. The aim of this paper is to describe how the
students' initial understanding may be stabilized through a variety of different mechanisms.

Theoretical Orientations
The shift in perspective I am advocating coincides with an underlying assumptions that distinct patterns in
student thinking reflect dynamic stabilities and that these stabilities require explanation.The stability of student
thinking need not be due to the existence of a robust belief or mental category, but rather due to howreal-time
activity creates self-sustaining patterns of thought. The notion of real-time activity has often been discussed
dichotomously with respect to human behavior and learning--either encompassing individual, cognitive activity
(e.g., connectionism) or as distributed, social activity (e.g., activity theory). In this section, I briefly discuss
relevant aspects of these individual and activity perspectives.

Activity among Knowledge Agents
From individual cognitive perspectives, complex knowledge systems approaches describe activity as occurring
among fine-grained knowledge structures. Minsky (1986), for example, conceptualized the individual mind as a
society of mindless "agents"--numerous in kind and in their interactions. Agents, like schemata more generally
conceived (Bartlett, 1932/1995; Rumelhardt, 1980), can be thought of as cognitive elements for perceiving,
doing, and remembering. These pieces come together in various ways to generate and represent thinking. One
kind   of knowledge    piece  that has  been   discussed     quite extensively  is  diSessa's  (1993)   phenomenological
primitives--bits of knowledge reflecting our intuitive sense of mechanism. In the above transcript, we might
think of the students' inference about the shorter strips taking less time as resulting from the intuition that less
distance implies less time. This bit of knowledge for relating space and time is part of how the students interpret
and make sense of the strips as representations of motion.
          Beyond just describing kinds of knowledge, diSessa distinguishes between two properties of intuitive
knowledge    systems   that   he  calls cuing     priorities   and reliability  priorities. These   two    properties drive
mechanisms     that activate   and   stabilize ideas   in  particular  contexts.   Phenomenologically,     cuing   priorities
describe  the  likelihood  that  a given   piece  of  knowledge      will activate in  a given    context, while   reliability
priorities describe the likelihood that a given piece will remain active in a given context. In the above example,
we see the idea "shorter strips take less time" becoming focal in the conversation and then persisting for several
minutes beyond the transcript.
          Structurally, if one thinks of knowledge elements in terms of a network, reliability is related to the
number of activation pathways leading away from and then back to a given knowledge element. In other words,
a given   idea can  be made    more  stably    active (in  a   given setting)  because  other "nearby"     ideas support its
sustained  activation.  Thus,    the relationships    and    interactions   among   many    ideas serve    as  one kind  of
mechanisms by which patterns of thinking are self-sustaining over a period of time. With the transcripts above,
we whether other ideas arise during their conversation that help to support their continued thinking that the
shorter strips take less time, as well as how the context supports the cuing of those ideas.

Activity among Participatory Agents
From   a  more  distributed   and  social  perspective,   activity-theoretical  and other   situated approaches    describe
activity as occurring among persons and artifacts, not among entities of the mind. In many respects, this view
represents  an  oppositional    stance  to the    above   knowledge-based      accounts. Lave   (1988),    for example,  in
describing the variety of mathematical practices, denies the existence of mental constructs such as arithmetic.
Despite this dichotomy, there are those who do attempt to capture both knowledge and participation views in
their accounts of students' thinking (e.g., Roschelle, 1998) or have advocated for their commensurability.
          One major difference between knowledge- and participation-based accounts concerns the typical unit
of analysis. The unit of analysis for situated perspectives is often described as the entirety ofpersons-in-settings
(rather than individuals or individuals' knowledge). It is more focused on observable unfolding social activities
(than knowledge use) and how these activities arise within social settings that are defined by the activity (and
not by platonic outsider descriptions). Beyond just focusing on humans, these perspectives focus on describing
how  material   artifacts mediate    aspects   of that  activity   (Engestrom,   1987),  provide    affordances   for action
(Greeno, 1998), and shape semiotic fields (Goodwin, 2000). In the vignettes above, the students do not only
have different understanding. They also interact with each other and their settings in quite different ways.
          Different patterns of action and social collaboration, taking place within changing material settings, can
be understood to constrain and support activities that also differ in terms of the substance of the ideas to which
activity is oriented. Embodied cognitive perspectives, for example, emphasize how human understandings have
a strong basis in bodily action (e.g., Thelen & Smith, 1994). Pointing is an action that might support ideas for
understanding objects and their spatial relations, while dynamically moving one's hand through space might
better support   ideas    for understanding     trajectory     and  cause   and  effect  relations.  Similarly   for  social
collaboration,  establishing   joint attention    as  part of  collaborative   action   might  afford different    epistemic

                                                       875   ·  © ISLS
                                                 ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

activities than establishing mutual attention. Such social cues help individuals to frame (Scherr & Hammer,
2009) activities.
        Taken together, the affordances of artifacts and the patterns of participation that take shape around
them serve as mechanisms by which activities stabilize in settings. By carefully considering the substance of
ideas to which these activities orient as well, the analytical task undertaken in the next section is to explain the
stability of students' understanding in terms of both knowledge- and participation-based mechanisms.

Explaining the Local Stability of Reasoning
The goal of this section is to develop an explanatory account of the stability of the students' initial thinking in
terms of real-time processes. I describe several knowledge- and participation-based mechanisms that plausibly
contribute to the stability of students' thinking and connect these claims to specific evidence.

Knowledge Based Mechanisms

Contextual Feedback from Setting
One way in which the students' initial thinking that "shorter strips take less time" stabilizes is due to how
particular micro-features of    the context  support the   continued  activation of underlying   intuitive knowledge.
Several aspects of the particular context in which students discuss their ideas support the persistence of the idea
that less distance implies less time: the specific language of the worksheet question, the salience of length
differences among the tickertape strips, and a congruence of part-whole relationships on the strips.
        The particular question from the worksheet reads, "How does the time taken to generate one of the
short segments compare to the time to generate one of the long ones?" Beth immediately states, "Obviously, it
takes less time to generate the more closely spaced dots." The particular phrasing of the question not only draws
attention to the distance features of the strips, it uses the words "shorter" and "longer" to do so. These specific
words are relevant, because they are used flexibly in everyday language to both refer to distance and time (but
no other concepts). The ambiguity of these words closely ties with the intuition that less distance ("shorter")
implies less time ("shorter"). The students repeatedly use those words while discussing their initial ideas.
        The students' understanding is also supported by features of the tickertape strips. By far, the most
salient feature of the strips is that they are different lengths. One can observe this when standing far away,
without closely   inspecting the    details of where the    dots are located. The   salience  of this feature supports
students' initial and sustained attention to distance features of the strips, which has been shown to preferentially
cue the idea that less distance implies less time over other competing ideas when students are asked to made
judgments about duration (Frank, Kanim, Gomez, 2009). In the transcript, after Beth initially gives her answer,
the students explain that they can tell its less time because the strips are shorter. As they explain this, the
students can be seen reaching toward the strips and indicating distances on the strips with their fingers and
pencils. These statements and gestures show that students are closely attending to this salient feature in support
of their initial understanding.
        A second feature of the strips that contributes some stability arises from the fact that each of the strips
has the same number of dots. When inspecting the strips, students do not only attend to the total length of the
strips, but also to the length of the spaces between dots. Because each strip has the same dots, this means that
the longer strips are made up of longer pieces, and the shorter strips are made up of shorter pieces. As students
shift their attention from the entire length to the length of the parts (or vice versa), students see the same
information. Shorter strips or shorter parts imply a shorter amount of time. Evidence that this shift in attention
does not disrupt the students' thinking, and may in fact stabilize it, comes from a part of their conversation that
happens shortly after the end of the first transcript above.

        Kate:     When we are talking about segments, are we like not thinking about how long the total
                  paper is? Are we just looking at the marks. Are we supposed to be considering
        John:     I'm guessing they like mean from here to here. [pointing with pencil between marks]
        Kate:     Like I wonder why like the papers are all different lengths.
        Beth:     Cause none of these papers are the exact same si-ize. Except for these two [pointing]
        Paul:     Right because I think [moving hand toward the center] they all have the same amount
                  of dots [pointing to several locations on one of the strips].
        Beth:     Oh-oh
        Paul:     I think they all have six dots.
        Beth:     Oh do, they?
        Kate:     Is that true? 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 [pointing to successive dots on a strip]
        Paul:     So, it's a shorter amount of time for a shorter piece of paper

                                                     876  ·  © ISLS
                                                 ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

         Kate asks if they are supposed to be looking at the distance between the "marks" or the total length. As
the students  coordinate  between     these two  features  (realizing that there are  six dots  on each), the students
maintain their understanding that the shorter strips take less time.

Structural Feedback from Other Knowledge
The  students' initial  understanding  is   also stabilized through   the recruitment of  other ideas that support  its
persistence. Two specific ideas arise together with the idea that the shorter strips take less time. One is ht at
bunched up means faster, and the other is faster implies less time.
         Students attend to the length of the entire strip and to the length of its parts, but they also attend to the
"density' or overall proximity of the dots to each other. These students, as well as many others, describe the
bunched up patterns as "faster" and the more spread out patterns as "slower". The words "faster" and "slower"
used here  is  another  example    of ambiguous    and   flexible use word   meaning,   similar to  how   "longer" and
"shorter" are  used  in reference  to the   distance and  time.   The students notice  "more   dots happening  in  less
space" and describe this pattern as "faster". However, the same word is used by these students to describe a
greater speed and also a lesser the amount of time, and therefore provides some ambiguity about its meaning.
         Both immediately before and after the students discuss that the shorter strips takes less time, several of
the students refer to the shorter strips (with the more closely spaced dots) as faster.

         Beth:   Nobody has the exact same rate
         John:   [pointing to the shortest strip] So I guess that's the fastest.
         ... (and then later in their discussion)...
         Beth:  How do you know how to arrange ­
         Kate:  Ahh. The shorter the segments the faster the speed
         John:  Yeah.
         Paul:  Also shorter the paper, it's the same thing.

         Here we see the students using the word faster to identify shorter segments. The idea bunched up
means fast can be understood to work together with another idea that arises. In this case study, and many others
described elsewhere (Frank, 2009), we see evidence that students discuss the idea that faster implies less time.
Beth explicitly discusses this idea during their discussion at a slightly later time when she says, "Wouldn't yours
be going slower than mine, because it took more time to make that same?" Her statement implies that a shorter
strip goes slower because it takes less time, which she and the other students had established earlier as being
known because the strip was shorter (bunched up). A single strip is thus conceived of as being short, bunched,
and fast, with the words "short" and "fast" having multiple meanings that overlap.
         These three elements of intuitive knowledge­less distance implies less time, bunched up means faster,
and faster implies less time­ are all connected through their linguistic and conceptual overlap. Ideas of less
distance and less time are bound by a linguistic overlap with the words "longer" and "shorter". Less distance
and bunched are bound by their conceptual overlap with a spatial sense of proximity. Bunched and less time
(and even notions of speed) are bound by their linguistic overlap with the word "faster" and "slower". This
network of ideas can be understood to exhibit stability through the mutual relationships among its parts.
         These  knowledge-based       mechanisms      describe    how  relationships  among     specific  elements  of
knowledge and contextual features provide some stability to their understanding, contributing to its persistence
over time. In the following section, I describe aspects of activity that provide stability in different ways.

Participation Based Mechanisms
The previous section largely focused on mechanisms that concern how knowledge elements remains active due
to interactions with features of context and with other elements of knowledge. In this section, I discuss how the
students' thinking is stabilized through processes by which students interact with each other and with artifacts.

Feedback among Interactional Behaviors
Students' collective interactions with each other and with various artifacts around them show distinct patterns
that are relevant to understanding their activity. For the first fifteen minutes, the students collectively move in
and  out  two  broad   clusters of interactive   behavior.  These  behaviors  largely occur  together among    all the
individuals, with some exceptions. The two distinct patterns are (i) behaviors oriented toward their worksheets
(see Figure 2)- a pattern described by Scherr and Hammer (2009)- and (ii) behaviors oriented toward the strips
at the center of the table (see Figure 3).

                                                     877  ·  © ISLS
                                                ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

                          Figure 2. Student Behaviors Oriented toward the Strips

                          Worksheet
                         ....

                          Figure 3. Student Behavior Oriented toward Worksheets

         These behaviors support important aspects of the students' activity, which establish and stabilize a
setting for their discussion. The tickertape-oriented behaviors are characterized by patterns of interaction that
involve directing gaze, gesture, and bodies toward the strips at the center of the table. Students lean in, look
inward, and position their hands at the center of the table. The students' clustering in this behavior is
dynamically stable in the sense that any one student's behavior is coupled to the behaviors of the others. As
students lean toward the center and point to strips and locations, other students look in that direction, and mirror
these actions by leaning in and pointing to features as well. While individual students opt in and out, the
collective structure of participation persists over much longer time scales. The worksheet-oriented behaviors are
characterized by different patterns of interaction: hunching over, looking down, and using hands to write and
point to worksheet locations. This pattern also exhibits a dynamic stability.
         What is striking about the students' behavior during this time is the remarkable synchrony with which
they move in and out of these two patterns. It is a highly coordinated (but not centrally directed) activity of
noticing and describing patterns and then writing down answers to specific questions. This activity of
establishing joint attention to community objects may be understood to couple to the substance of their ideas as
well. Their initial understanding during this time concerns inferences drawn from noticing and comparing
features of the strips (e.g., short distance means short times and bunched up dots means fast). These
externalized behaviors for establishing joint attention are part of the dynamic by which the students access ideas
and employ strategies used for noticing, describing, and comparing patterns across the strips.
         Importantly, during this time, the students' neither discuss aspects of the physical motion of the strips,
nor do they engage in any significant moments of mutual attention, as they do later. The above behaviors
contrast with their later behaviors, where they orient their behaviors to each other--sitting up right, looking to
each other, and gesturing in animated ways.

Material Affordances and Constraints
The two patterns of collective behaviors above, which help to characterize the students' initial activity, take
place in a particular material setting that provides affordances for these behaviors. The students themselves play
a role in constructing this setting. In particular, during the time that the students' initially persist in thinking that
the shorter strips take less time, the strips are located and arranged at the center of the table. The students moved
the strips to this location and arranged them in order by length at the very onset of the tutorial. This centralized
location allows the students to    collectively orient to  the strips  and sustain an activity of pointing  out   and
describing features of the strips.
         The arrangement in the side-by-side fashion serves two purposes. First, it offloads much of the task of
noticing and remembering  to  the    setting. Second,  the   arrangement   has affordances for  particular  kinds  of
gesture. Students gesture in various ways (pointing with a finger, indicating a space with two fingers, etc), but
all of the gestures are deictic. These embodied actions may support students' ideas for thinking about objects
and spatial relations among parts (the density of dot, the number of dots, etc.)

                                                   878  ·   © ISLS
                                               ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

         The anchoring of their activity to the strips as material artifacts and the dynamic stability of their
collective behaviors feed into many of the knowledge-based mechanisms described in the previous section.
Their  individual  behaviors couple  to  each other    and   to material   objects. These   behaviors  help   to sustain
particular patterns of attention and action upon the strips. These behaviors support their use of specific intuitive
knowledge. In one sense, we can think of the stability of students' thinking as coupled to a physical stability of
the world. The strips, once placed at the center of the table, remain put until some actively moves them again.
Similarly, the students have located their worksheets so that they are closely hugged to their bodies, making it
easy to coordinate their dual activity between noticing and describing, and filling out their worksheets. The
students seamlessly move back and forth between these two patterns of behavior repeatedly during the first ten
minutes of tutorial. Their careful attention to just the visual properties of the strips (i.e., not to any sense of
motion)   in order to answer  specific  worksheet  questions    takes place  in a   dynamic   setting that supports   its
persistence.
         Just as students' thinking and behavior during the first episode contrasted with their later thinking and
behaviors, the students' material setting later is different as well. Their later understanding happens in a setting
where the students have separated and decentralize the strips. This change to their material settings provides
new opportunities for embodied action and participation that did not occur before. In the second vignette, where
Kate explains how the strips were made, Kate can be seen lifting a strip off the table and physically enacting the
pulling of the strips by the cart. In doing so, the other students in the group look to Kate. The students engage in
a new pattern of mutual attention as they discuss aspects of the physical motion which made the strips. This is
the first time they engage in significant mutual attention, and is part of the dynamic by which they in articulate
and listen to more complex ideas.

Discussion
The primary goal of this paper is to characterize the stability of a single group of students' initial thinking
during a collaborative learning activity in terms of a variety of micro-processes that together help to sustain one
possible understanding for several minutes. A full analysis of these dynamics would also need to include an
account of the mechanisms that contribute to their later thinking as well, but is beyond the scope of this paper.
Given the dynamic changes apparent in their understanding during the tutorial, I claim that it is productive to
focus on explaining the local persistence of understanding, rather than to begin with focus on causes of change.
         One distinguishing feature of this analysis is its focus on explaining this stability both in terms of how
elements of students' intuitive knowledge are reliably activated in the setting and in terms of how students'
interactional behaviors dynamically constitute and stabilize aspects of this setting. I claim that the students make
their initial inference about the tickertapes based on a shared intuition thatless distance implies less time. There
is evidence that each of the students makes sense of the situation using this idea at various times, and often
times they do so together. I describe how particular features of the context (as characterized by the existence of
specific features on worksheet question and on the strips themselves) contribute to activation of that knowledge,
and also describe how other knowledge recruited to make sense of the situation provide a stable "network" of
ideas for making sense of the patterns they notice. This network of ideas, however, arises within a social context
of discussing patterns and writing down answers to worksheet questions. During their initial discussion, the
students orient their gazes, gestures, and bodies toward the collection of the strips at the center of the table and
toward the worksheets in front of them; but they do not engage in behaviors of mutual attentionuntil much later.
This activity of noticing and describing patterns to be written in their worksheets is both stabilized by the
students' specific  behaviors in  this  activity (to which      they collectively   orient) and  by   the  location  and
arrangement of material artifacts that are central to the activity.
         This  characterization, while  focused  on  explaining     the stability of  the   students' initial pattern of
thinking, does provide insight into the dynamics of their subsequent understanding as well. Instead of seeking
explanations in terms of "causes" for the change, we can, instead, see how the various constraints imposed by
their activity change. These changes in the constraints of their activity provide opportunities for new patterns to
take hold with their own local stability. The students' new thinking co-evolves with changes to their patterns of
attention (now to physical mechanisms involved in the motion), changes to the location of material objects (the
strips become   separated and    within several  of  the  students   hands  off   the table), and to   the  patterns  of
interactional behavior (now they look at each other as they articulate complex ideas). Just as there may be not
single cause for the local stability of the students' thinking, their may be not single explanation for why the
students' thinking  changes  either. Across the   entire  tutorial,  there are  many   changes  that   are more-or-less
continuously changing over time. Coming to understand which aspects of activity are merely ephemeral and
which continue to exert influences is a major goal of further research in this direction.
         Beyond this particular case, considering students' intuitive thinking as reflecting multiple conceptual
coherences may be useful for describing stabilities of thinking and behavior that seem to persist on longer time
scales (e.g., Why do students appear to hold on to robust misconceptions?). It may be possible to both account
for the variability of student understandings while also describing how, in particular contexts, it can settle into

                                                   879  ·  © ISLS
                                                ICLS 2010   ·   Volume 1

patterns indicative of common and robust misconceptions. This program might be achieved through careful
attention to the multitude of cognitive and social mechanisms that contribute to the local stability of reasoning
as it occurs within activity.

References
Bartlett, F. C. (1932/1995). Remembering; a study in experimental and social psychology. Cambridge [Eng.]:
         The University press
Carey, S. (1986). Cognitive science and Science Education. American Psychologist, 41(10), 1123-1130.
Chi, M. T. H. (1992). Conceptual change within and across ontological categories: Examples from learning and
         discovery    in science. In R.  Giere (Ed.),   Cognitive   Models   of  Science: Minnesota   Studies  in the
         Philosophy of Science (pp. 129-186). Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press.
diSessa, A. A. (1993). Toward an Epistemology of Physics. Cognition and Instruction, 10(2/3), 105-225.
Driver, R., & Easley, J. (1978). Pupils and Paradigms: A review of literature related to concept development in
         adolescent science students. Studies in Science Education, 5, 61-84.
Engestrom, Y. (1987).     Learning by expanding:       An activity-theoretical approach to developmental research.
         Helsinki: Orienta-Konsultit.
Frank,  B.W   (2009).  The  dynamics  of   variability in   introductory physics students'  thinking: examples from
         kinematics. Unpublished Doctoral Dissertation. University of Maryland, College Park, MD
Frank, B.W., Kanim, S.E., & Gomez, L.S. (2008). Accounting for variability in student responses to motion
         questions. Physical Review Special Topics - Physics Education Research, 4, 020102
Greeno, J. G. (1989). A perspective on thinking. American Psychologist, 44(2), 134-141.
Goodwin, C. (2000). Action and embodiment within situated human interaction. Journal of Pragmatics, 32(10),
         1489-1522.
Hammer, D. (1996). More than misconceptions: Multiple perspectives on student knowledge and reasoning, and
         an appropriate role for education research. American Journal of Physics, 64(10), 1316-1325.
Hammer, D., Elby, A., Scherr, R. E., & Redish, E. (2004). Resources, framing, and transfer. In J. Mestre (Ed.),
         Transfer of Learning: Research and Perspectives. Greenwich, CT: Information Age Publishing.
Lave, J. (1988). Cognition in practice: Mind, mathematics, and culture in everyday life. Cambridge, England:
         Cambridge University Press.
McCloskey, M. (1983). Naive Theories of Motion. In D. Gentner & A. Stevens (Eds.), Mental Models (pp. 299-
         324). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
McDermott, L. C., Shaffer, P. S., & the Physics Education Group at the University of Washington (1998).
         Tutorials in Introductory Physics. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Minsky, M. L. (1986). Society of Mind. New York: Simon and Schuster.
Posner, G. J., Strike, K. A., Hewson, P. W., & Gertzog, W. A. (1982). Accomodation of a scientific conception
         Toward a theory of conceptual change. Science Education, 66, 211-227.
Roschelle, J.  (1998).   Beyond   romantic versus sceptic:    a microanalysis of  conceptual   change in kinematics..
         International Journal of Science Education, 20(9), 1025-1042.
Rosenberg, S. A., Hammer, D., & Phelan, J. (2006). Multiple epistemological coherences in an eighth-grade
         discussion of the rock cycle. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 15(2), 261-292.
Rumelhart, D. E. (1980). Schemata: The building blocks of cognition. In R. J. Spiro, B. Bruce & W. F. Brewer
         (Eds.), Theoretical Issues in Reading and Comprehension (pp. 38-58). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Scherr, R.E.,   &  Hammer,     D.  (2009).  Student    Behavior   and    Epistemological  Framing:    Examples from
         Collaborative Active-Learning Activities in Physics. Cognition and Instruction, 27(2), 147 ­ 174.
Smith, J. P., diSessa, A. A., & Roschelle, J. (1993). Misconceptions Reconceived: A Constructivist Analysis of
         Knowledge in Transition. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 3(2), 115 - 163.
Strike, K. A., & Posner, G. J. (1992). A revisionist theory of conceptual change. In R. Duschl & R. Hamilton
         (Eds.), Philosophy of Science, Cognitive Psychology, and Educational Theory and Practice (pp. 147-
         176). Albany, NY: SUNY.
Thelen, E., & Smith, L. B. (1993). A Dynamic Systems Approach to Development. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Vosniadou,  S., &  Brewer,    W.  F. (1987). Theories   of   Knowledge    Restructuring  in Development.  Review   of
         Educational Research, 57(1), 51-67.

Acknowledgments
The research described here was conducted at the University of Maryland. I'd like to thank Rachel Scherr,
David Hammer, Joe Redish, Andy Elby, Ayush Gupta, Luke Conlin, Renee Michelle Goertzen, and Michael
Wittmann   for  their helpful  conversations.  The  research    has been   funded in part   by the National Science
Foundation    under    Grant   Nos.   REC-0440113       and     REC-0633951.     Any    opinions,  conclusions,    or
recommendations expressed in this material are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of
the National Science Foundation.

                                                    880   ·  © ISLS
