                                                ICLS 2010    ·   Volume 1

Gaining an Insider Perspective on Learning Physics in Hong Kong
             Jan van Aalst, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, SAR, China, vanaalst@hku.hk

          Abstract: This study provides an exploration of physics teaching and learning in a classroom
          in Hong    Kong.  The  goal  of  the study    was   to understand    how  to  develop  Bereiter  and
          Scardamalia's knowledge building approach for Asian contexts in away that is sensitive to
          Asian values. The paper reviews some aspects of learning physics in Asia from a Confucian-
          heritage perspective, and   then   reports a   case  study   of physics   learning with  Knowledge
          Forum. Participants were 82 Form 4 (Grade 10) students taking two successive versions of a
          physics  course. Data  collected   included   classroom     observations, measurement    of physics
          learning, reflection, epistemic beliefs, attitudes toward science, and use of Knowledge Forum.
          The findings open up a number of questions for further research.

Introduction
Work in classrooms based on the major educational approaches produced by the learning sciences is still at an
early stage in Asian contexts, particularly approaches that make extensive use of collaboration, inquiry, and
classroom    discussions. However,  to   advance  from   this  position   does  not merely   involve adapting  Western
approaches to Asian contexts, which may lead to misinterpretations of how learning occurs there (Biggs, 1996).
Rather, the premise of this paper is that it would be useful to develop an insider perspective on the learning
sciences, based   on a  study of the  values   underpinning      educational practices,  review of   research on Asian
classrooms,   extensive   classroom observation,  and    a   critical examination   of perspectives  from  the learning
sciences. With an insider perspective, we may then develop educational approaches in ways that build on Asian
values  and   accomplishments,   without     inflicting  what   Ann    Brown    called "lethal  mutations" (Brown   &
Campione, 1996).
          This paper reports on a two-year exploration of this kind focusing on the teaching and learning in two
successive Physics courses (Form 4 or Grade 10) taught by the same teacher; the context for this exploration
was a research program on knowledge building (Scardamalia & Bereiter, 2006). The researcher reviewed the
literature on cultural influences on science education in Confucian-heritage countries (mainly China, Korea,
Japan, Taiwan, Singapore, and Malaysia), used ethnographic methods to observe classes, and measured wide
range of variables thought to be relevant to knowledge building. Assessments measured physics knowledge,
reflection on knowledge, attitudes towards science, and epistemic beliefs. Assessments of physics knowledge
included  capabilities considered   important  by the    Physics  Education     Research (PER)   community--detailed
knowledge    of concepts,   and  ability  to develop    explanations    that refer  to  physics principles and   causal
mechanisms. The goal of the paper was to benchmark performance by the classes studied against international
studies of   physics learning and   knowledge    building,    and to   gain  an understanding   of  how to evolve  the
knowledge building approach. Suggestions for development are outlined in the conclusion section.

Cultural Considerations
External examinations are important in the West and influence teaching, but they have far greater cultural
significance in the East. From the Han Dynasty (206 BC-220 AD) to the end of Imperial China, the Keju, a set
of government examinations was used to select people from all walks of life for government positions (Amano,
1990). Preparing oneself for these examinations involved years of effort and commitment, but when a person
passed them it led to upward social mobility and was a matter of great pride and advantage for their family. As
an ancient Chinese idiom states, "Although studying anonymously for 10 years, once you are successful, you
will be well-known in the world." The influence of Confucianism has decreased throughout the 20th century,
but the emphasis on effort and accomplishment and their relationship to honor and social mobility have endured,
producing societies that remain more hierarchical than in the West. Scholars have observed that moral self-
perfection and social development are the most important educational goals, ahead of intellectual achievement
(Gao, 1998; Lee, 1996; Li, 2009). Lau and colleagues concluded from a recent study of management issues in
science classes in China, Israel, and Australia that Chinese teachers were more likely to mention that "learning
to respect authority was a significant outcome of education" (see Lewis, Romi, Qui, & Katz, 2005, p. 731).
          In present-day Hong Kong, students present themselves for the Hong Kong Certificate of Education
Examination (HKCEE) at the end of Form 5 (Grade 11). Consistent with the above cultural influences, these
examinations have a high standard. For example, of 29,713 students taking the 2008 Physics examination, only
4.6% received an `A', 30.4% between `A' and `C', and 77.6% any passing grade (Hong Kong Examination and
Assessment Authority). HKCEE results are very important for social mobility. Many employers require at least
five passes for clerical positions, and HKCEE results are taken into consideration, besides university results, in
applications to postgraduate programs. Standards in other Asian jurisdictions are similar. In a study of Chinese

                                                     881   ·  © ISLS
                                               ICLS 2010   ·   Volume 1

teachers (Gao & Watkins, 2002), one teacher commented that performance on matriculation examinations is
"the most important even the only aspect by which the school assesses my teaching" (p. 65). These authors
assert: "If the performance of students is not as good as expected, their teachers, principals and the head of the
local   government education    department   are  all  punished"   (p.  71).   Clearly, in   implementing   innovative
educational  approaches,  teachers  cannot  afford to   jeopardize  examination    results.  Although  in Hong  Kong
substantial curriculum and assessment reforms are in progress, there is no evidence that the high standards will
be adjusted.
          These conditions have a profound impact on classrooms. For example, Gao (1998) found that in China
many teachers teach a three-year physics course in two years, reserving the final year for review and practice for
the examination.   Teachers  may   also schedule   extra   lessons and  homework     during  school  vacations. These
practices are used because although daily teaching focuses on understanding of physics, this is not thought to be
sufficient for the level of precision and detail at which students are examined. Asian teachers prefer didactic
approaches, but disagree these are teacher-centered. One Chinese teacher interviewed by Gao and Watkins
(2002) said, "If the teacher focuses on encouraging students, setting questions to challenge them, directing them
to explore new knowledge, I don't think that means teacher-centered" (p. 73). Chinese teachers also say that
classroom learning is not the whole of student learning, that after class student learning becomes more active
(Gao, 1998). Several studies conclude that Taiwanese students have few opportunities to discuss their ideas in
class (Aldridge & Fraser, 2000; Wallace & Chou, 2001). Aldridge and Fraser refer to a 1984 study on child
rearing  in Hong  Kong,  which   concluded   that  attitudes  towards   filial piety (respects  for one's parents  and
ancestors) was correlated positively with strictness and discipline and negatively with the expression of opinions
and independence (p. 214). According to some scholars, Chinese students prefer to learn (comprehend) new
material before raising questions about it and discussing it with others (Li, 2009).
          Nevertheless, pedagogical approaches have begun to involve more activities and discussions. In a study
of Taiwanese and Australian students, Aldridge and Fraser (2000) found that Taiwanese students focused more
on the learning task, and the Australian students on the social interactions; although the Taiwanese students
perceived their learning environment as more task oriented, they rated it more positively than the Australian
students. Wu and Huang (2007) concluded that Taiwanese low-achieving ninth grade students in an interactive
environment "did not receive direct support from the teacher that could constantly draw their attention to the
content, [and] had fewer opportunities to listen to or engage in thoughtful discussions about concepts" (p. 747).
These studies suggest that in Asian contexts it would be difficult to implement a constructivist approach in a
Western sense, and that substantial teacher guidance is needed in addition to activities.
          It is important to note that international studies of achievement in science such as the TIMSS and PISA
consistently place Asian countries well above the international average (Leung, Yung, & Tso, 2005). Clearly,
innovative educational approaches should not jeopardize such positive outcomes. Whereas Western observers
have considered learning in Chinese classrooms as rote and the positive outcomes as "paradoxical" (Biggs,
1996),  scholars  now  believe that a  memorization-understanding       strategy  proposed   by Ferrence  Marton   can
account for the paradox (Chan & Rao, 2009). Preparation for Chinese examinations requires a high degree of
practice and memorization, which is facilitated by conceptualization. However, although the results are strong in
terms of subject knowledge, the various strategies used to prepare students for examinations may contribute to
"learned helplessness" and keep students reliant on teachers. This is why learning how to learn has become an
important emphasis in curriculum reforms in Hong Kong (EMB, 2000). At the same time, in the 21st century,
people need to be able to collaborate and deal with novel situations.     Perhaps the learning sciences can make a
contribution  to  innovate   learning  approaches  in   Asian   schools   by    developing   new    approaches  to the
memorization-understanding strategy that support the development of higher-order thinking and collaborative
skills.

Methods

Participants
Participants were 82 students from two successive cohorts of a Form 4 (Grade 10) physics course, taught by the
same teacher at an English Medium of Instruction (EMI) school in Hong Kong. The school was classified as
medium academic achievement based on previous HKCEE results. Lessons were conducted in Cantonese, but
all learning materials were in English, and students completed all assignments and tests in English.

Goals and Design
The study is based on the first year of a two-year physics course; topics taught in the first year included heat and
temperature (3 months), mechanics (5.5 months), and waves (1.5 months). The goal of the teacher's work was to
explore   how  to  improve   on  her   previous  efforts   to promote    knowledge    building   (Scardamalia,  2002;
Scardamalia   &   Bereiter, 2006),  an  approach   that  involves   collaborative    inquiry and  discourse aimed   at
advancing   collective knowledge    in  a community.     The  use  of   Knowledge    Forum®,    a   web-based  inquiry

                                                   882   ·  © ISLS
                                                 ICLS 2010    ·  Volume 1

environment,    is an  important  aspect  of  this. Specifically, the   teacher aimed   to  develop    more collaborative
discourse in both the classroom and Knowledge Forum, and to improve the integration of the use of Knowledge
Forum with classroom learning.
           In the first cohort (Class A, 2007 to 2008), students used Knowledge Forum to discuss their own
questions   about  physics   content (e.g., a discussion   to   examine    why  Eskimos    live in  igloos, which  would
intuitively seem cold dwellings). They also used it for discussions about two short projects, in which they
collaborated in small groups: designing a solar cooker, and studying motion of their own bodies on a ride at a
local amusement park. Both of these projects were heavily guided by the teacher. In the second cohort (Class B,
2008 to 2009) some modifications were made to this design: An interactive white board (IWB) was installed to
facilitate easier  crossing  between  classroom     talk and  work  in  Knowledge    Forum,     and the  amusement   park
projects were replaced by projects in which groups of students designed their own experiments to investigate
motion through a resistive medium. However, the teacher's workload was heavier that year, and Knowledge
Forum was started three months later than in the previous year.

Data Collection and Analysis

Classroom Observations
To   gain  an  understanding   of the  classroom    ethos  and   discourse,  the researcher     observed  double  lessons
conducted in the physics lab once to twice per month throughout the project; approximately 400 photographs
and 20 hours of video were collected. To facilitate discussions with the teacher, several short movies (5-7
minutes    each)  were  produced  from   these materials.     Choices  about what   to  emphasize    in  these  reified the
researcher's interpretation of what was happening that was relevant to knowledge building. These movies also
were discussed with several other teachers and researchers working on knowledge building in South-East Asia.
Interpretations   were  also revised  based   on extensive    reading   of the  literature on   teaching and   learning  in
Confucian-heritage contexts (summarized earlier). Thus, interpretations were triangulated in several ways.

Assessments of knowledge, learning process, epistemic beliefs, and attitudes
Extensive data were collected to measure what students were learning and to explore its relationship to work on
Knowledge Forum, epistemic beliefs, and attitudes towards science. As much as possible, instruments were
used that have been used widely in Western contexts, and that were validated for Hong Kong students. Some
additional assessments consisted of assignments designed by the teacher or researcher. Due to space limitations
only results for the mechanics unit are discussed here, see Table 1 in the results section.
           Force Concept Inventory (FCI): This survey remains very popular in the PER community and has been
administered to thousands of students (Hake, 1998; Hestenes, Wells, & Swackhamer, 1992). Several items that
related to circular motion and projectile motion (which were not part of the curriculum) were removed.
           Learning reflections: At the end of the mechanics unit students were asked to write a short essays to
respond    to two  questions:  "What  is  your big   learning   about   mechanics?"  and    "What   is the  most  difficult
question you now have about mechanics, and what would you need to know to understand it?" Most students
wrote up to one page for each question. Protocols from the heat and temperature unit from Class A were used to
develop three scales with acceptable inter-coder reliabilities: Content Knowledge, Everyday Applications, and
Self-Awareness. Content Knowledge refers to students' ability to recall the main points of what they had learned
about physics concepts and phenomena; at the highest level of the 1 to 4 scale students needed to reveal insight
into this  knowledge    (e.g., point  out   inter-relationships  between    ideas). Content     Knowledge    is a general
indication of physics knowledge, whereas the FCI provides detailed information about students' conceptual
understanding.    Daily Applications  similarly  assessed     students' ability to  use their   knowledge   of  physics  to
explain phenomena from daily life. This ability is needed for the HKCEE, in which students are required to
answer questions about a short newspaper article that involves physics knowledge. Self-awareness is a measure
of students' ability to identify the strength and weaknesses of their knowledge and how they were able to learn.
For simplicity of presentation, we converted the results to percentages.
           In-class tasks: Two tasks were designed to assess students' understanding and explanations during the
unit. A Graphing Task was given after the first lesson on motion graphs; students were asked to draw s-t, v-t,
and a-t graphs relating to riding a bicycle around the school, and to state their main idea, something they
wondered about, and something they wanted to raise for discussion. At the end of the mechanics unit, students
used a cartoon involving a horse and cart, in which the horse argues that it is impossible to get the cart moving,
and were asked to state, with reasons, whether they agreed with the horse (Explanation Task, N3).
           Epistemic beliefs: It is assumed that the knowledge building can lead to more sophisticated views about
knowing and knowledge. Therefore, epistemic beliefs were measured using a Chinese version of the Epistemic
Belief Inventory (28 items on 7-point Likert scale, see Schraw, Bendixen, & Dunkle, 2002). The questionnaire
was validated using 484 Hong Kong students taking Form 3 and Form 4 science courses. Exploratory and
confirmatory factor analysis revealed three factors with acceptable reliability: Innate Ability, Simple Knowledge,

                                                      883   ·  © ISLS
                                              ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

and Quick Learning (alphas 0.75, 0.68, and 0.66). Li (2009) suggests that Chinese learners do not hold Native
Ability beliefs but the relatively clear factor structure suggests that Hong Kong science students do hold them.
Preliminary analysis showed that there were no statistical differences between pre-test (start of the school year)
and post-test (end) results; therefore, only the post-test data are reported.
       Attitudes Toward Science: A 14-item questionnaire (5-point Likert scale) was used to measure attitudes
towards science such as anxiety and interest at the end of the year. It was validated using 101 Form 4 science
students taking science (Chronbach alpha 0.93).
       Contributions    to Knowledge  Forum:    Six   indicators  of contributions     to Knowledge    Forum  were
measured (see Table 1 for details). These have been used widely in previous studies involving Knowledge
Forum.

Results and Discussion

Classroom ethos and discourse
The four pictures in Figure 1 are intended to illustrate the learning environment that was observed and then
enhanced by introducing an IWB.

                                      Figure 1: Classroom Environment

       At the top left, the students gather around the teacher, who is demonstrating an experiment involving
conservation  of energy; the concept  has already     been studied,  but   this  time there is not enough   time or
equipment for  the students to do the experiment   in    small groups. Although      the students are not doing  the
experiment themselves, the teacher's explanations and questioning lead them to consider the "critical details" of
the situation (Viennot, 2003); students may demonstrate their engagement by replying to some questions in
unison. The picture at the top right illustrates a social practice that the teacher has cultivated, in which students
first explore ideas in their small groups, and then come to the front of the room to share and explain their ideas
to the class. In the picture, the student is preparing her board work before explaining it to the class. Chinese
learners tend to consider things privately before sharing their own thoughts publicly and avoid the possibility of
"losing face" (Li, 2009), so this kind of practice is difficult to achieve. The teacher developed the practice over
approximately one month in quite a structured way. First, students developed their ideas in the privacy of their
groups, and two students were called to the front to present their group's ideas. Over time it became more
spontaneous, and the presentations led to dialogue, in which other students questioned the presenters or helped
them improve their explanations. At the lower left, the teacher reinforces the main points in a short and focused
presentation. During  a  discussion driven by    students'   ideas   there    often are  blind alleys and  multiple

                                                  884  ·  © ISLS
                                                 ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

explanations; although the students mostly figure out the correct explanations, there is a danger that minor
points became salient for students or that flawed explanations are remembered. Thus, the teacher reviews what
has been accomplished and what is most important to remember; in this, she is using the ideas and writing
contributed by students as the raw material for her own explanations. Finally, the lower right shows something
typical of Western classrooms. There is no obvious focal point in the classroom, and many things are going on
simultaneously. At such moments we typically find the teacher assisting students (e.g., getting materials for
them, help to fix problems).
        With this brief depiction I want to suggest that a learning environment developed in which student
ideas and working to getter to develop and improve explanations were central. In this environment, students had
much work to accomplish independently, but the teacher played an essential role in providing the supports
needed to make their efforts worthwhile (Hmelo-Silver, Duncan, & Chinn, 2007). These developments occurred
in both classes and are important to knowledge building. However, there were two problems. (1) In Class A it
was  difficult  to connect   work   on  Knowledge   Forum      with  the classroom    discourse; students   worked on
Knowledge    Forum    after  school  and   the  database   was   not  accessible to   them during  their  small-group
discussions. This problem was addressed for the second cohort by installing an IWB, and making one laptop
computer available during class to each small group for reviewing the Knowledge Forum database. (2) The
approach required considerably more time, and made it more difficult to cover the curriculum. Perhaps fuller
integration of Knowledge Forum and classroom discourse may address this problem to some extent, if some of
the work to develop explanations can be moderated and completed successfully in Knowledge Forum.

Descriptive Statistics
Descriptive statistics are shown in Table 1.

               Table 1: Descriptive Statistics
                   Measure                       Class A (2007 to 2008)       Class B (2008 to 2009)
                                                     M               SD          M           SD
                   FCI pretest                      32.8           18.7          29.6        12.8
                   FCI posttest                     47.0           15.5          47.1        21.0
                   FCI normalized gain              0.16           0.33          0.26        0.28
                   Content Knowledge                55.6           18.1          42.7        16.3
                   Everyday Applications            61.5           14.6          59.2        19.8
                   Self Awareness                   66.1           18.1          61.6        17.0
                   Graphing Task (bicycle)          53.6           19.2          36.7        11.3
                   Explanation (N3)                 50.0           31.6           --          --
                   Innate Ability posttest          3.28           1.25          3.77        1.26
                   Simple Knowledge posttest        4.23           0.91          4.17        1.05
                   Quick Learning posttest          2.59           0.93          2.81        1.12
                   Attitude to Science posttest     4.17           0.45          3.69        0.57
                   Notes Created                    21.5           9.33          10.2        4.88
                   % Notes Linked                   70.9           11.7          68.0        18.3
                   % Notes Read                     5.81           2.94          18.3        16.6
                   Views worked in                  9.14           2.29          4.73        0.90
                   Revisions                        4.79           4.64          5.63        8.21
                   Scaffold Uses                    20.3           27.1          8.78        4.95

        The following observations can be made: (1) The FCI results were consistent with previous research
for traditional teaching.  For  example,   Hestenes et   al. (1992)  studied  results from 612   Arizona  high school
students and obtained a mean pre-test score of 27% and a posttest score of 48%. In a meta-analysis including
1113 high school students, Hake (1998) referred to normalized gains (gain divided by maximum possible gain)
as  small. However,   Hestenes   et al. also  found that    posttest results frequently exceeded   60%   if an "active
learning" approach was used (normalized gain > 0.45). Suppapittayaporn, Emarat, and Arayathanitkul             (2010)
also obtained a normalized gain of 0.45 for Grade 10 students in Thailand who used an approach that combined
peer learning with structured inquiry. These studies suggest that although the normalized gains that we observed
were consistent with traditional teaching, larger values should be possible with a research-based active learning
approach like knowledge building. (2) The results for the three learning reflection scales and two in-class tasks
are included mainly to pilot test these instruments. They had appropriate properties for use in future design
experiments (e.g., mean, SD, and discrimination). In both classes, mean scores were highest for Self-Awareness
and lowest for Content Knowledge. (3) In both classes, epistemic beliefs ranged from Innate Ability (strongest)
to Quick Learning (weakest). This finding is somewhat surprising because the literature suggests that Chinese

                                                     885  ·  © ISLS
                                                  ICLS 2010    ·  Volume 1

learners  do  not have   strong  beliefs  in native   ability, but  rather believe    in  effort  Li, 2009).  (4) Indexes  of
participation in Knowledge Forum in Class A were low compared to other studies (Niu & van Aalst, 2009; van
Aalst, 2009),  which    suggests   that the  use of Knowledge       Forum   was   not  optimal.    The   improvement   in the
Percentage of Notes Read from 5.81% to 18.3% can be attributed to the new strategy to use laptop computers
during class to access Knowledge Forum. Other differences between the cohorts are spurious due to the later
start of Knowledge Forum.

Analysis of Correlations
To test for predictive relationships among the variables, the measures of contribution to Knowledge Forum were
combined using exploratory (principal components) factor analysis, and path models were constructed for each
cohort. For Class A, Notes Created, Percentage of Notes Read, Views Worked In, Revisions, and Scaffold Uses
were factorable into a single factor, ATK Productivity (KMO = .771), which explained 62.8% of the variance of
the five included variables. For Class B the indicators were less factorable (KMO = .618). There were two
factors that explained 69.5% of the variance, the first being similar to ATK Productivity, and the second having
the highest factor loading for Percentage Notes Linked. But the second factor was not clearly interpretable as
some   of its marker    items   had factor  loadings    exceeding   0.30   on the   first factor. This   result suggests  that
contributions to Knowledge Forum in Class B were more complex than in Class A--although less extensive.
Only the ATK Productivity factor was used for the path models.
          Due to the small sample sizes the path models are used only in an exploratory sense, and only the most
promising predictive relationships are reported. These need to be considered suggestive and would need to be
verified in a study of a substantially larger sample. The most interpretable results were as follows:

·   ATK Productivity was the strongest predictor of Content Knowledge in Class A (weight w = 0.54, p < .001),
    but it did not predict the FCI normalized gain (p > .10). This suggests that writing notes with ideas relevant
    to the subject made a strong contribution to general content knowledge, but was insufficient for gains in
    detailed conceptual knowledge, such as measured by the FCI. FCI gains were only a weak predictor of
    content   knowledge      (p  <  .10), which    suggests    that  the two   measures     captured   different  aspects  of
    knowledge. In Class B, ATK Productivity did not predict Content Knowledge or FCI normalized gains, but
    this can be attributed to the lower ATK Productivity scores.
·   In Class A Content Knowledge (w=-0.48, p < .001), and in Class B Everyday Applications (w = -0.43, p <
    .01) were strong inhibitors of Self-Awareness. This can be explained if high-performing students on Content
    Knowledge/Everyday         Applications  were   less    reflective--perhaps   more     sure  of   themselves--than   low-
    performing students. Verbal responses from the Graphing Task support this interpretation.
·   Only weak relationships between the epistemic belief measures and other variables were found. In Class A,
    Quick Learning predicted a decrease in Attitudes towards Science (w = -0.35, p < .05), and Innate Ability
    predicted performance on the N3 explanation task (w = 0.33, p < .05). The first result is expected because
    physics   does   not involve    quick learning;   the   second  result may  again     indicate  that students   who  were
    confident in their knowledge and attributed this to their ability were more likely to be able to provide
    correct   explanations.   In Class  B,  epistemic   belief   measures  did  not   predict   any   other measure,  but the
    poorer    result on  the Graphing     Task was    a strong   predictor  of slightly   less  favorable   Attitudes toward
    Science (w = 0.49, p < .001). Thus, limited success on academic tasks early in the unit may be a stronger
    inhibitor of attitudes towards science than epistemic beliefs.

Digging into the In-Class Tasks
The idea with the in-class tasks is that they can easily be incorporated into teaching and provide additional data
points regarding students' knowledge, explanations, and problem solving as a unit unfolds. It is therefore worth
looking   more  deeply   into   what they   reveal  about    student thinking.  The    following    informal    analyses were
completed only for Class A.
          For the Graphing Task, scores from the graphs were used to divide the class into below median and
above median groups. Verbal responses were then analyzed for each group, using the following categories:
procedural,   graph   feature,  conceptual   question,   higher-order    thinking,    and  problem    posing.   For example,
`procedural'  referred   to procedures    such as  how    to use  motion   detectors   and  formulas,    and  `graph  feature'
indicated that a student had correctly described a graph feature. A question was coded higher order thinking if it
sought  understanding    at  a  conceptually   higher   level, for   example,  if   a student   said  s/he  needed  a clearer
understanding   of   the relationships    among   the   graphs   or introduced    a   conceptual   issue that   had not  been
considered before, such as whether a vertical section of a v-t graph could be exactly vertical. Responses for "I
would like to raise ..." were coded problem posing if they raised a conceptual problem.
          The results indicated that: (1) Above-median students wrote shorter responses (40 words on average,
compared with 60), and more often used formulas or symbols. (2) Almost all students provided at least one
correct description of a graph feature. (3) The below median asked many conceptual questions (15, compared

                                                        886  ·  © ISLS
                                                  ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

with 7 for the above median group). This result is encouraging because it suggests that below-median students
were engaged with the concepts to be learned, even if they did not understand them deeply at the time. (3)
Above median students made more procedural statements and problem statements. (4) Both groups asked few
statements coded as higher-order thinking.
          Students' responses to the N3 Explanation Task were divided into four categories: agreement with the
horse (incorrect); disagreement without providing an analysis based on physics principles, or with an incorrect
analysis; disagree   with  a mostly    correct analysis (minor   errors), and  disagree with  a  fully correct analysis.
Results showed that almost all students came to the correct conclusion (which is common sense), but relatively
few used physics principles to construct their argument (14 of 41 students). Nevertheless, ten students provided
a completely   correct    argument.  Although    these  results  are somewhat     disappointing for an  active   learning
approach--the issue that was probed is fundamental to understanding Newton's third law--there was scope for
the diffusion of accurate knowledge within the class. Knowledge Forum can facilitate this diffusion.

Conclusion
The goal of this study was to explore how knowledge building could be developed in a way that is sensitive to
Asian values and practices. It was argued briefly that although the influence of Confucianism has been declining
in the 20th century, the major goals of education in Asia continue to be self-improvement and upward social
mobility, and that the HKCEE is a difficult examination. To cope with the level of difficulty, students use an
approach that combines efforts to understand with memorization and extensive practice, and teachers reserve
extensive instructional time for practice for the examination (Chan & Rao, 2009; Gao, 1998). In this kind of
cultural context, although students may interact with each other, it is unlikely that the teacher would implement
a primarily   activity-based    approach--whole-class     teaching   and  teacher guidance  remain   important   (Wu  &
Huang, 2007). The four pictures in Figure 1 depicted the mix of teacher guidance and student agency achieved
in the two classes of this study. The approach the teacher developed included didactic whole-class instruction,
eliciting the  ideas of   students, student-student    talk, the  teacher's work   to  emphasize   critical details, and
independent work by students. It is proposed that this environment is a significant step towards an interactive
learning environment suitable for Hong Kong schools.
          The study used a variety of measures to study students' performance, and led to many insights into how
knowledge building may be developed or studied in Asian contexts. I briefly reiterate three points.
          First, although result in terns of conceptual knowledge were acceptable in the setting studied, and
consistent with research on traditional physics, future work must aim for larger gains.       There are good reasons to
think that mean posttest scores of approximately 60% are possible (Suppapittayaporn, et al., 2010; Hake, 1998;
Wells et al., 1992). As a PER-based approach, knowledge building must ehnace the extent to which students
develop   conceptual  knowledge.    The   instructional apprioach    was  focused  on  conceptual   knowledge,   but  the
processes started in the classroom may require extension. It is hypothesized that further development of the
approach   the teacher    began  to implement    in Class    B, which    involved  creating a more   seamless    learning
environment in which the use of Knowledge Foeum was integarted with classroom events, is nececsary.
          Second,  the    study suggested  how    this  may   be  accomplished.   Productivity  in  Knowledge     Forum
(writing and reading notes) made a significant contribution to general physics knowledge, but not to conceptual
knowledge. As the path weight for productivity in Knowledge Forum was relatively high, it may not be possible
to enhance conceptual knowledge by increasing productivity alone. It is hypothesized that a direct effect from
Knowledge Forum on conceptual knowledge may be possible if relational aspects of work in Knowledge Forum
are increased (i.e., notes that establish linkages, synthesize progress, and identify rise-above ideas).     This would
require explicit attention to the development of sophisticated uses of Knowledge Forum (van Aalst, 2006).
          Finally, the study showed that these Asian students did have epistemic beliefs, but that these did not
interact with the variables studied, particularly contributions to Knowledge Forum. One possible explanation is
that other beliefs such as filial piety masked such interactions. But it is also possible that the level of work on
Knowledge     Forum  and   other   activities  were not   sufficient to  cause changes   in epistemic   beliefs. Further
research would be useful to shed additional light on this question.

References
Aldridge,  J.  M., &  Fraser,   B.  J. (2000).  A   Cross-Cultural   Study  of Classroom    Learning   Environments   in
          Australia and Taiwan. Learning Environments Research, 3, 101-131.
Amano, I. (1990). Education and examination in modern Japan. Tokyo, Japan: University of Tokyo Press.
Biggs, J. B. (1996). Western misperceptions of Confucian-heritage learning culture. In D. A. Watkins & J. B.
          Biggs   (Eds.), The   Chinese  learner:   Cultural,   psychological  and contextual   influences  (pp. 45-67).
          Hong Kong: CERC and ACER.
Brown,    A.  L., &  Campione,      J. C. (1996).   Psychological    theory   and  the design   of  innovative   learning
          environments: On procedures, principles, and systems. In L. Schauble & R. Glaser (Eds.), Innovations

                                                      887  ·  © ISLS
                                                  ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

          in leaning:    New    environments  for  education    (pp.  289-325).   Mahwah,     NJ: Lawrence    Erlbaum
          Associates.
Chan, C. K. K., & Rao, N. (2009). The paradoxes revisited: The Chinese learning and changing educational
          contexts.  In C.  K.  K.  Chan   &  N.  Rao (Eds.),   Revisiting the Chinese  learner:   Changing   contexts,
          changing education (pp. 315-349). Hong Kong: Springer/Comparative Education Research Centre.
Education and Manpower Bureau (EMB) (2000). Learning for life, learning through life: Reform proposals for
          the education system in Hong Kong (Report).
Gao, L. (1998). Cultural context of school science teaching and learning in the People's Republic of China.
          Science Education, 82, 1-13.
Gao, L., & Watkins, D. A. (2002). Conceptions of teaching held by school science teachers in P.R. China:
          Identification and cross-cultural comparisons. International Journal of Science Education, 24, 61-79.
Hake, R.    R.  (1998).  Interactive engagement    versus   traditional  methods:  a six-thousand-student    survey of
          meachanics test data for introductory physics courses. American Journal of Physics, 66, 64-74.
Hestenes, D., Wells, M., & Swackhamer, G. (1992). Force concept inventory. The Physics Teacher, 30, 141-
          158.
Hmelo-Silver, C. E., Duncan, R. G., & Chinn, C. A. (2007). Scaffolding and achievement in problem-based and
          inquiry learning: A response to Kirschner, Sweller, and Clark (2006). Educational Psychologist, 42,
          99-107.
Lee, W. O. (1996). The cultural cntext for Chinese learners: Conceptions of learning in the Confusian tradition.
          In D. A. Watkins & J. B. Biggs (Eds.), The Chinese learner: Cultural, psychological and contextual
          influences (pp. 25-41). Hong Kong: CERC and ACER.
Leung, F. K. S., Yung, B. H. W., & Tso, A. S. F. (2005). Digging below the surface: Secondary analysis of
          TIMSS data for Hong kong and its implications for educational reform. Canadian Journal of Science,
          Mathematics, and Technology Education, 5, 329-360.
Lewis, R., Romi, S., Qui, X., & Katz, Y. J. (2005). Teachers' classroom discipline and student misbehavior in
          Australia, China and Israel. Teaching and Teacher Education, 21, 729-741.
Li, J. (2009). Learning to self-perfect: Chinese beliefs about learning. In C. K. K. Chan & N. Rao (Eds.),
          Revisiting the   Chinese   learner: Changing    contexts,  changing    education (pp.   35-69).  Hong Kong:
          Springer/Comparative Education Research Centre.
Niu, H.,  &     van  Aalst, J.  (2009). Participation  in   knowledge-building     discourse: An   analysis  of online
          discussions   in mainstream   and   honours social   studies  courses. Canadian   Journal  of   Learning and
          Technology/La Revue Canadienne de l'Apprentissage et de la Technologie [online], 35(1). Retrieved
          from http://www.cjlt.ca/index.php/cjlt/article.
Scardamalia, M. (2002). Collective cognitive responsibility for the advancement of knowledge. In B. Smith
          (Ed.), Liberal education in a knowledge society (pp. 67-98). Chicago, IL: Open Court.
Scardamalia, M., & Bereiter, C. (2006). Knowledge building: Theory, pedagogy, and technology. In R. K.
          Sawyer    (Ed.),  The Cambridge     handbook   of  the learning  sciences  (pp.  97-115).  New   York,   NY:
          Cambridge University Press.
Schraw, G., Bendixen, L. D., & Dunkle, M. E. (2002). Development and validation of the Epistemic Belief
          Inventory (EBI). In B. K. Hofer & P. R. Pintrich (Eds.), Personal epistemology: The psychology of
          beliefs about knowledge and knowing (pp. 261-275). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Suppapittayaporn,    D.,   Emarat, N.,  &  Arayathanitkul,   K.  (2010).   The effectiveness  of  peer instruction and
          structured inquiry    on conceptual  understanding    of force   and motion: a   case  study from   Thailand.
          Research in Science & Technological Education, 28(1), 63-79.
van Aalst, J. (2006). Rethinking the nature of online work in asynchronous learning networks. British Journal of
          Educational Technology, 37, 279-288.
van  Aalst,  J. (2009).  Distinguishing  knowledge    sharing,  construction,  and creation  discourses.  International
          Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 4, 259-288.
Viennot, L. (2003). Teaching physics. Dordrecht, the Netherlands: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Wallace, J., & Chou, C.-Y. (2001). Similarity and difference: Student cooperation in Taiwanese and Australian
          science classrooms. Science Education, 85, 694-711.
Wu,  H.-K.,    &  Huang,    Y.-L.  (2007). Ninth-Grade    Student   Engagement    in Teacher-Centered     and Student-
          Centered Technology-Enhanced Learning Environments. Science Education, 91, 727-749.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by two grants from the Research Grants Council of Hong Kong (Grant Nos. HKU
752508H and HKU 741007H). The author thanks the teacher and students for their hard work and opening their
classroom to this classroom research, and to Katerine Bielaczyc, Carol Chan, Jianwei Zhang, and John Gilbert
for their visits  to the   classroom   and  their comments     on  what  they  observed.   Permission   to publish  the
photographs in Figure 1 is also gratefully acknowledged.

                                                     888  ·   © ISLS
