                                                   ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

    First-Year Engineering Students' Environmental Awareness and
     Conceptual Understanding with Participatory Game Design as
                                          Knowledge Elicitation

        Melissa Dyehouse, Nicole Weber, Jun Fang, Constance Harris, Annette Tomory, Johannes Strobel,
                        Purdue University, 701 West Stadium Ave., West Lafayette, IN 47907
Email: mdyehous@purdue.edu, nrweber@purdue.edu, jfang@purdue.edu, harris11@purdue.edu, annette@golden-
                                             tech.com, jstrobel@purdue.edu

         Abstract:  The    purpose of  this  paper  was   to  investigate first-year undergraduate  engineering
        students' awareness and conceptual understanding of environmental issues and to examine how
        effective a participatory  game     design  strategy  was  to elicit their understanding.  Respondents
        (n=1,394) completed baseline environmental awareness surveys and 24 respondents participated in
         the game design process consisting of four workshops and online activities. The game design
        component    was   focused    on  life cycle  analysis   (LCA)    including  environmental   impacts   of
        engineering   design.  Observations    and  artifacts were collected  from   workshops   and     interviews
        were conducted. Results showed that students had a general awareness about environmental issues
        but lacked awareness about LCA, pollution, and wetlands. Additionally, the participatory game
        design process showed that students struggled with applying the newly gained understandings of
        LCA in the game designs. The participatory game design provided a wealth of information on
        students' understanding and also served as an effective platform for knowledge elicitation.

Introduction
         According to the Accreditation Board for Engineering and Technology (ABET) criteria for accrediting
engineering programs, engineering graduates must have the "broad education necessary to understand the impact of
engineering solutions   in a  global, economic,     environmental,    and societal   context" (ABET,     2009; p.   2). One
implication of this is that engineers need to be able to recognize the importance of environmental and ecological
issues in engineering and to gain an understanding of what this means to them as an engineer. For example, life-
cycle analysis (LCA) is a means by which to quantify the environmental impacts of a product (Blanchard & Reppe,
1998). The issues embedded within LCA are central to the design, manufacturing, use, and disposal of engineered
products.
        Sustainability issues play a role in all disciplines of engineering, from the consequences of the products'
design to the manufacture and eventual use and disposal of the product. For this reason sustainability concepts need
to be incorporated into all engineering disciplines (Boyle, 2004). Apart from programs in environmental engineering
however, sustainability concepts are not well-integrated into the engineering curriculum (Crofton, 2000; Azapagic,
Perdan, &   Shallcross, 2005). There   is also   a  lack of   knowledge   about how   much    first-year undergraduates   in
engineering programs actually know about environmental issues and how they obtained their knowledge.
        The purpose of this study is to investigate first-year undergraduate engineering students' awareness of the
concept of LCA and environmental issues, and examine how students' understanding can be understood within a
participatory co-design of an educational game. Additionally, baseline data will provide information on (a) how
influential previous educational and demographic factors are for students' environmental awareness, and (b) which
environmental issues still need attention within the first year engineering undergraduate curriculum.
        It is necessary that engineering students of all engineering disciplines be aware of environmental issues and
that they understand the relevance of environmental issues in engineering design. For this reason, our study focused
on  the participatory   design process    as   a means    of  increasing   students'  awareness   and    understanding    of
environmental issues  particularly in  regards   to the  engineering  design  process  as well  as the   assessment   of  its
effectiveness as a knowledge elicitation strategy.
Research questions
The core research was guided by the following questions:
·   What is the environmental issues awareness of first-year engineering students?
·   What are the predictors of students' environmental awareness?
·   How does the game design process enhance students' awareness and understanding of life cycle assessment and
    sustainable engineering?

                                                      897   ·  © ISLS
                                                 ICLS 2010  ·   Volume 1

The secondary research was guided by the question: How effective is the participatory game design as a knowledge
elicitation strategy to shed more light on students' understanding of environmental and sustainability issues with
engineering?

Literature and Theoretical Framework
Participatory Design
         Participatory design (PD) was deployed in this study as a design and knowledge elicitation feature. Rooted
in  the Scandinavian  workplace   movement,    "participatory   design   of  computer  applications  is about  the  direct
participation of those who will be affected by the development of a particular computer application in the decision-
making, design and/or development process" (Törpel, 2005, p. 177). PD is particularly focused on the exchange of
skills, values and perspectives during the development on potential working settings (Greenbaum & Kyng, 1991;
Kensing & Blomberg, 1998). In this study, students are collaborative co-designers of an educational game from
which other students can both give feedback in the design and benefit from the process.
         The concept of PD, used primarily in product design, has long roots in educational design (Strobel, 2006)
and research practice as well: Jonassen, Wilson, Wang, & Grabinger (1993) reported that instructional designers
learned far more by designing CAI (computer-assisted instruction) than the target audience will probably ever learn
by using the designed CAI. Additionally, the rich teach-back literature (Johnson & Johnson, 1987) shows learners
are especially successful when teaching newly acquired knowledge and skills to other learners. Nevertheless, there
are few  research s tudies and reports discussing   how    participatory  design   helps shape the  educational   process,
benefiting students when engaged as designers and end-users. In addition, the authors are only aware of a few
studies utilizing participatory design as a strategy for knowledge elicitation (e.g., Kafai, Franke, Ching, & Shih,
1998).
Environmental Education and Stewardship
         Public  education  on environmental     issues is  essential, as   public opinion  plays  a major    role  in the
development and implementation of environmental policy. Popular perceptions and misconceptions surrounding
environmental problems must be understood in order to make educational efforts most effective (Holl, Dailey, and
Ehrlich  1995). According   to Holl et al.  (1999), educational    effectiveness   requires teaching   the  links between
different issues, the relationship between individual actions and environmental quality, and tailoring the information
on these environmental problems and solutions to a more local or individual context.
         Ecological literacy and  more broadly   environmental    literacy   consists of three interrelated  components:
knowledge, affect, and behavior (Bruyere, 2008). That is, one must know about ecology, show concern for the
natural environment, and act in a way that is consistent with this knowledge and concern. It follows then, that for
students to have sustainable engineering literacy they must have knowledge about the subject, show concern for the
natural environment, and show behavior consistent with this knowledge and concern, for example by developing
technology  with  the ecological  footprint in mind. Several    studies  on  environmental    behavior  have  found  links
between awareness, attitudes, and behavior or behavioral intentions, suggesting that as awareness about an issue
increases, so will subsequent attitudes or behaviors (Cottrell, 2003).
Game Design as an Educational Tool
         Computer games are an emerging and popular area of development (Danielsson & Wiberg, 2006) and seen
as  "an important teaching   tool because   they can    provide a  compelling    context  via  interactive, engaging   and
immersive activities" (Gunter et al., 2008, p. 511). Despite the hype, whether games actually help learning remains a
controversial topic (Gunter et al., 2008; Rieber, 2005; Shaffer, 2006). Becker (2007) observed that "design of games
for learning is one of the biggest challenges that instructional designers have had to face" (p. 43). Other research
studies have shown    that few games   have  demonstrated    that they   can successfully   teach academic   content   in a
classroom teaching (Gunter et al., 2008; Rieber & Noah, 1997). Frietas (2008) reported that commercial games,
which focus on fun and entertainment, often lacked the principles of good learning design. Educational games,
which were created as collaborative efforts between educators and instructional designers, often resulted in boring
play (Lim, 2008; Prensky, 2001). Other research studies, however, began to highlight the use of students as potential
educational game designers and the positive effect this experience would have on student learning (Danielsson &
Wiberg, 2006; Lim, 2008). Lim (2008) argued that students would be more likely to engage in the learning process,
because they would be empowered to make decisions and take action by designing or co-designing their learning
experience.

Methodology
Research Design and Data Analysis

                                                    898   ·  © ISLS
                                                     ICLS 2010  ·   Volume 1

          In the study's research design, participants are asked to co-design an educational game with the researchers
in a  process called   participatory    design,  with  both    quantitative  and qualitative   research methods   employed.
Quantitative  methods    were  used   to   measure baseline    data about   participants'  knowledge  and   understanding of
environmental   and ecological     issues.  The baseline  survey    was combined    with   academic data   obtained from  the
University's  Registrar    Offices  (i.e., semesters of  high   school  math   courses)  and demographic    data (permanent
residence zip code). Students' permanent zip code data were matched to average household income data in the U.S.
Census bureau from the most recent census year (2000). Qualitative methods were used as a formative measure of
participants' changes in understanding through the game design process. To analyze qualitative data, two raters used
the method of content and constant comparison analysis (Glaser & Strauss, 1967) to group common themes and
reveal discrepancies among participants' responses.
Procedures and Project Implementation
        Participants were 1,394 first-year engineering students who were enrolled in the ENGR100 course and who
completed and returned the initial baseline survey. The sample consisted of 1,109 males and 285 females. Of those
students, 1,250 were U.S. citizens and 144 were international students. The survey was administered in August 2008
and  encompassed    student    demographic       information,   as   students'   initial  understanding  of  ecological  and
environmental engineering (return rate = 82%).
        For the game design component of the study, all of the ENGR100 students that participated in this survey
were sent an email recruitment letter in October 2008. For the purpose of avoiding bias and increasing reliability and
validity in the data collection process, participants were selected based on a stratified sampling strategy, so each
participant team had     a mix   of demographic    background.    Twenty-four    students  participated in  the game  design
component, developed by the research team and consisted of four workshops, an online wikispace environment, and
two online activities (Figure 1). The game design workshops provided a venue in which study participants could
interact amongst themselves and be observed by research team members, the wikispaces facilitated team member
communication, and the online activities supplemented information presented in the workshops. Research team
members also used the workshops to develop observation data, collect team artifacts, such as drawings, reflections,
and provide teams with assistance when needed.
        The   themes     of  the workshops      varied  within   the game    design  process.   The  first  workshop  lasted
approximately   one  hour,     and   focused    on   Life  Cycle    Assessment    (LCA)     content  knowledge,     includ ing
introductions/assessment (10-15 minutes), a presentation by LCA content experts (30-40 m.), and a group activity
(10-15 m.). The second workshop lasted approximately 70 minutes and consisted of a review of LCA (5-10 m.), a
presentation of game design concepts (30-45 m.), and small group discussions (20-30 m.). The design of the third
and fourth workshops were structured as "working sessions." Each team used their workshop time to develop game
prototypes and provide one another with peer evaluation.

                                       Figure 1.   Workshop Activities and Timeline

Data Collection
          Prior to the game design workshops, the research team administered a baseline survey, which consisted of
several components: (a) demographic information, (b) an environmental survey (Azapagic et al., 2005) assessing
students' level  of awareness       and    understanding  of   sustainable   development    in general  and  about   specific
environmental   top ics, consisting   of   four subscales:   environmental   issues (14   items), environmental   legislation,
policy and   standards   (7 items),  environmental     tools,  technologies  and  approaches    (12 items), and   sustainable
development (13 items), (c) asking students to rate the importance of sustainable development, and (d) a survey
about  environmental       knowledge       from  the   National    Environmental    Education     &  Training    F oundation
(NEETF)/Roper Questions, 1997-2000 (Coyle, 2005).

                                                         899  ·  © ISLS
                                                 ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

          Data collection for the game design process was centered on a series of game design workshops, which
consisted of four face-to-face workshops and two online activities. Six teams of four students participated in the
workshops and the following instruments were utilized to collect data and to triangulate the results of qualitative
analyses.
   ·     Check-In Assessment: Participants' reflection on their basic understanding of LCA concepts.
     ·    Activity Handouts: Students reflected on activities, such as discussions and brainstorming that occurred
          during the workshop.
   ·      Artifacts: The artifacts include the game prototypes and instructions.
   ·     Peer Assessments: Each group evaluated the game paper prototypes developed by the other teams based
         upon a rubric developed by the research team.
   ·     Audio: Includes discussion of workshop activities and final interview data.
   ·      Video Data: These videos contain research team debriefing discussions held upon workshop completion.

Quantitative Results
          In the results, we will first look at the findings of the baseline survey, describing specifics of the following:
self reported perspectives concerning sustainable development and environmental awareness, cultural and previous
research comparisons, and predictors of environmental knowledge. Then we will discuss the effects of the game
design  process on environmental     and  life cycle analysis   understanding,   and  the way  that students integrated
environmental knowledge into the game design itself.
         In the baseline   survey,   one of  the questions     asked students   to rate the  importance of   sustainable
development for themselves, as an engineer, for the country, for society, for population growth, and for future
generations. The percentage of students who responded "important" or "very important" was calculated for each of
the categories (Table 1).

Table 1: Percentage of students' ratings of the importance of sustainable development for each category

                  Category                  Percentage of "Important" or "Very Important" Ratings
                  Future generations        68.5%
                  Your country              68.2%
                  Population growth         67.1%
                  You as an engineer        66.2%
                  The society world-wide    65.8%
                  You personally            61.8%

          One finding was that that approximately 35% of students did not rate sustainable development as important
for any category. This indicates that engineering students may not fully grasp the importance or applicability of
sustainable development in engineering or the broader society.
Environmental Awareness
         Within the baseline survey, 12 multiple-choice items were analyzed to determine students' awareness of
environmental issues and to find any gaps that may need attention within the curriculum. Table 2 displays the
percentage of students who responded correctly for each question. It appears that students are most familiar with the
definition of biodiversity because 92.5% of students answered this item correctly. Five other items with percentages
of correct responses in the 80-89% range indicates that students are mostly familiar with the concepts assessed in
these items as well, which include electricity, renewable resources, ozone, household waste, and extinction. The
item that students had the least knowledge about was "What is the most common cause of pollution for streams,
rivers, and oceans," with   only 30.3%    of   students answering    correctly. In addition, only half  of the st udents
responded correctly for items asking about the source of carbon monoxide pollution and the benefit of wetlands
(55.2% and 55.7%, respectively). It is puzzling that environmental knowledge is particularly low when it comes to
the impact of everyday behavior of end users (question 2 and 4). This knowledge assessment indicates that although
students may be familiar with or have a good understanding of some environmental concepts, that there are still
some important concepts they have little knowledge about.

Table 2: Percentage of students responding correctly for each item

Item                                                                  Correct Response                      % Correct
                                                                                                            Responses

                                                     900   ·  © ISLS
                                                      ICLS 2010  ·    Volume 1

1. There are many different kinds of animals and plants, and they live in   Biodiversity                              92.5%
many different types of environments. What is the word used to
describe this idea?
2. Carbon monoxide is a major contributor to air pollution in the U.S.      Motor vehicles                            55.2%
Which of the following is the biggest source of carbon monoxide?
3. How is most of the electricity in the U.S. generated?                    Burning oil, coal, and wood               80.9%
4. What is the most common cause of pollution of streams, rivers, and       Surface water running off yards, city     30.3%
oceans?                                                                     streets, paved lots, and farm fields
5. Which of the following is a renewable resource?                          Trees                                     82.1%
6. Ozone forms a protective layer in the earth's upper atmosphere. What     Harmful, cancer-causing sunlight          85.4%
does ozone protect us from?
7. Where does most of the garbage in the U.S. end up?                       Landfills                                 78.4%
8. What is the name of the primary federal agency that works to protect     Environmental Protection Agency           79.9%
the environment?                                                            (the EPA)
9. Which of the following household wastes is considered hazardous          Batteries                                 84.1%
waste?
10. What is the most common reason that an animal species becomes           Their habitats are being destroyed by     82.7%
extinct?                                                                    humans
11. Scientists have not determined the best solution for disposing of       Stored and monitored                      69.2%
nuclear waste. In the U.S., what is done with it now?
12. What is the primary benefit of wetlands?                                Help clean the water before it enters     55.7%
                                                                            lakes, streams, rivers, or oceans

          Next, the   self-reported  levels  of knowledge     for  four   environmental   subscales were      analyzed.  Students
reported the highest level of knowledge on the Environmental Issues subscale (mean = 1.73). The Environmental
Issues subscale consists of general environmental issues, such as global warming and air pollution. Students reported
the lowest self-reported knowledge on the Environmental Legislation, Policy and Standards subscale (mean = 0.30);
the subscale consists of specific policy and legislation questions. Finally, students still scored lower than average on
the Environmental Tools, Technologies and Approaches subscale and the Sustainable Development subscale (mean
= 1.16 and 1.07, respectively).
Comparison of Self-Report and Objective Knowledge
         Previous research found that "most Americans believe they know more about the environment than they
actually do" (Coyle, 2005; p. vi). To test this concept, Pearson's r correlation coefficient was calculated for the total
awareness test score and the average self-reported awareness about environmental issues score (from environmental
issues subscale questions). A significant (p < .001) correlation was found between the two variables. The higher a
students' reported knowledge about environmental issues, the higher their actual knowledge as measured by a test of
environmental issues; however the correlation was low to moderate (r = 0.202), indicating that strength of the
correlation is weak.
Predictors of Environmental Knowledge
         To determine what variables best predict the average awareness score of environmental sustainability, a
regression analysis was performed. Standard multiple regression was considered the optimal method for answering
the research question because (a) the independent variables (IVs) are correlated and there are unequal numbers of
cases in cells and (b) regression can use several continuous and dichotomous IVs to represent the best prediction of
the dependent variable (DV). Hypothesized variables thought to predict environmental knowledge included gender,
income, previous environmental education, environmental issues subscale score, environmental policy/legislation
subscale score, environmental tools/applications subscale score, sustainable development subscale score, number of
semesters high school math, and number of semesters high school science.
         Two variables were recoded into binary variables for better interpretation: income (low/high) and previous
environmental   education   (none/some).     The variable     national/international   students was omitted       due to the low
number of international students (n=144) as compared to national students (n=1,250). Additionally, the variable for
income, although included in the model, only includes national students. Only four of the independent variables
contributed significantly to prediction of environmental knowledge. These significant predictors are: (a) average
self-reported knowledge     of environmental     issues    (!=0.22,    p  < .001), (b)   average self-reported     knowledge  of
environmental tools/applications (!=0.14, p < .01), (c) gender (!=0.16, p < .001), and (d) number of semesters of HS
math classes  (!=0.08,   p  <  .01), where   !  indicates   the  streng th  of the relationship  between      the  dependent and
independent variable.

                                                          901  ·  © ISLS
                                                   ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

Qualitative Results
Students' Environmental Understanding in the Context of Participatory Game Design
         To   determine  what  environmental    awareness    students  gained  while  participating  in  the game   design
process, a  content  analysis was   performed   on  the qualitative   data,  particularly the design artifacts,  workshop
observations, and follow-up interviews. The main finding that emerged was that all of the respondents (n = 14)
appeared to have an understanding of what LCA is, the uses of LCA, and the types of factors to consider in LCA
calculations when responding to open-ended questions. It appeared that students understood the complexity of LCA
and that many variables must be considered in calculating the environmental impacts of a product. For example, the
most common theme that was found in the analysis of open-ended questions was consideration of the different
factors involved in LCA. For example, typical comments were, "Deciding which factors are most/least important"
and "...they [LCAs] are multifaceted [and] there is not one factor alone that determines whether one product or
method is better." In contrast, all of the observers noted that of the participant teams, little to no knowledge of LCA
was demonstrated at the beginning of the workshop.
         At the end of the workshop, participants were asked to provide their main understanding of LCA. Out of
the ten  respondents,  all provided  either a  general  descriptive   definition or an  explicit definition  of LCA.  The
following are examples of the two types of descriptions that participants provided.
    ·    Explicit (n = 7). A definition was considered explicit if a student specifically defined LCA. An example of
         a participant's explicit definition is, "The effect manufacturing of products has on the environment, and
         how to change the environmental impact of products by redesigning them."
    ·    General descriptive (n = 3). A definition was considered general descriptive if a student described some
         uses of LCA but did not specifically define the term. An example of a participant's general descriptive
         definition is, "My main understanding is that it is to show how you can save energy by using and building
         more energy proficient items."
Integration of Environmental Information into the Game Design
         Another focus of the qualitative analysis was to determine which teams embedded to what extent LCA
information   into the game  design. The   results show   that  only  one of the  three teams  explicitly embedded   LCA
information into the game design while the other two games had a vague reference to "improving the environment."
         For example, team 4 was one of the teams that did not integrate LCA information within the game.            The
only decision the player must make is whether to build/expand a business or take a mission card, which could
possibly be a response to the LCA criteria embedded. The mission cards allow the players to help the environment.
However, this is unclear; for this team, content dissemination in the game was not consistent with the comments
made by the individual group members. For example, team members made comments regarding having the player
choose different options that have different LCA emphases the game reflects more about luck than choices.
         Another example of a team that did not integrate LCA into the game design is team 1. In this case, players
are supposed to make choices for their character with the goal of "saving the environment" and "choosing the better
option," yet there are only two statements regarding environmental issues: "Player will be presented with an option
based on their role...the player has to choose between improving his/ her business or saving the environment.        Each
decision has pros and cons that the player must weigh before choosing the `better' option." Because Team 1 does not
have data regarding personal definitions of LCA it is not clear whether the situation is similar to that of team 4,
where the method of content dissemination in the game does not match what the individuals in the team articulated.
The incorporation of LCA into the game became difficult to assess, and should be kept in mind for future research.
         In contrast, team 2 embedded the LCA thought process into the game while developing the game, merging
the concepts  well.  Team   2 members   discussed   how   the   game  would    incorporate decisions that   must be made
regarding the raw materials found in the environment. Although participants used the vague term "eco-index" it
appears  that they  were   thinking about  the principles  of   LCA,  as  they determined   the  process  of the game  by
discussing how the player will need to make choices regarding the building of the community while considering the
environmental impact such as raw materials and "eco- index."
         One of the reasons that students may have refrained from adding LCA into their game design was because
they found the complexity of the LCA process difficult to incorporate into a game. Although a major theme that
emerged from the students' written responses was the importance of taking into account the wide variety of factors
in calculating LCA, this also appeared to be one of the main difficulties that students expressed. For example,
several students listed the most difficult knowledge of LCA as the need to take into account many different factors
and environmental impacts. For example, typical student responses to an open-ended question asking about the most
difficult aspects of LCA are: "Considering the wide range of impacts that a product can have," and "...[taking] into
account all that affects the environment."

                                                      902  ·   © ISLS
                                                   ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

Conclusions and Implications
         The purpose of this study was to investigate first-year engineering students' awareness of environmental
issues and to examine how students' understanding of Life Cycle Analysis changed after participating in the process
of co-designing an educational game. Results revealed that students show a lack of awareness about several aspects
of environmental   issues,   and that all  of the  students    wh o responded    to the  open-ended   questions   gained    an
understanding of LCA and the majority were able to define the term accurately and in detail.
         Although participants responded correctly to the majority of environmental awareness questions, there were
still some issues where students exhibited misunderstandings. For example, only 30% of students knew the most
common    cause of  pollution of  streams,   r ivers, and   oceans. On   a national survey,  a  majority  of  the sample    of
Americans also answered this question incorrectly (Coyle, 2005), indicating that there is a need to promote greater
awareness   about water  pollution. Additional    areas  of  concern   are items relating to   carbon monoxide     pollution,
benefits of wetlands,    and nuclear  waste   disposal,   as these  issues  might   have  implications for    distributin g or
manufacturing certain products, and engineers should develop an awareness and understanding about these issues.
         Additional results   showed   that  there are  four   predictors  of environmental    awareness:  (1) the  level   of
awareness   about environmental    issues,   (2) the  level of  awareness  about   environmental  tools,   technologies and
approaches, (3) gender, and (4) the number of semesters of high school math courses. Not surprisingly, the largest
predictor of environmental awareness is a students' self-reported awareness of environmental issues. Next, gender
was the second largest predictor of environmental knowledge, followed by students' self-reported knowledge on the
environmental tools, technologies and approaches subscale. Finally, the smallest predictor was the number of high
school math courses taken, which was unexpected given that the number of semesters of high school science courses
taken was not a significant predictor of environmental awareness. Thus, there may be a variable correlated with the
number of semesters of high school math that was not measured and serves to predict students' environmental
awareness.  In addition, future  research   with  non-U.S.   citizens  should  use  additional measures    of environmental
awareness because the survey used in this study may not be appropriate for international students. Lastly, students
reported the lowest levels of awareness on the environmental legislation, policy and standards subscale especially as
compared to the more general Environmental Issues subscale.
         This study also examined how students' environmental awareness and understanding of the LCA concept
changed following the game design process. Although individual participants demonstrated an understanding of the
factors involved in LCA, they often did not fully incorporate their understanding into the game design. Only one of
three teams   explicitly embedded     LCA     information    into the  game   design. Although    participants  showed      an
understanding of environmental issues as they pertain to engineering, they may have perceived LCA as too complex
or lacked the time to successfully incorporate LCA into the game, indicating that additional planning time for game
development is needed.
         These results contribute to the research on first-year engineering students' environmental awareness. The
participatory game design provided rich data about students' understanding of LCA and served as an effective
platform for knowledge elicitation. It is apparent that first-year undergraduates in engineering lack awareness about
many  environmental   issues. Because     of the  increased    importance  of sustainability in engineering,   the need     for
engineers in all disciplines to understand sustainability issues in engineering is necessary. The game design process
was a method that warrants additional research to determine the effects on students' understanding of LCA and the
importance of sustainability in engineering. Future research is needed to focus more on the group processes within
teams as well as how to moderate the game design process so as to better lead to participants' understanding of
environmental issues in engineering and an educational game that can be used to teach others.

References
Accreditation  Board  for    Engineering   and   Technology     (ABET).    (2007).  Criteria for accrediting    engineering
         programs: Effective for evaluations during the 2009-10 accreditation cycle. Retrieved Oct. 22, 2009, from
         http://www.abet.org/forms.shtml
Azapagic, A., Perdan, S., & Shallcross, D. (2005). How much do engineering students know about sustainable
         development?    The  findings  of   an   international   survey  and possible  implications   for the  engineering
         curriculum. European Journal of Engineering Education, 30(1), 1-19.
Becker, K. (2007). Pedagogy in commercial video games. In D. Gibson, C., Aldrich, & M. Prensky (Eds.), Games
         and  simulations  in online  learning:    Research    and  development  frameworks     (pp. 21-47).  Hershey,  PA:
         Information Science Publishing.

                                                        903  ·  © ISLS
                                                    ICLS 2010  ·    Volume 1

Blanchard,   S.,  &  Reppe,  P. (1998).  Life  cycle analysis    of a  residential  home  in Michigan   (Rep.   No.  1998-5).
          University of Michigan: Center for Sustainable Systems.
Boyle, C.A. (2004). Considerations on educating engineers in sustainability. International Journal of Sustainability
          in Higher Education 5(2), 147-155.
Bruyere, B.L. (2008). The effect of environmental education on the ecological literacy of first-year college students.
          Journal of Natural Resources and Life Sciences Education, 37, 20-26.
Coyle, K. (2005). Environmental literacy in America: What ten years of NEEFT/Roper research and related studies
          say   about environmental    literacy   in the    U.S.   The  National   Environmental    Education   &    Training
          Foundation, Washington, DC.
Cottrell, S.P.   (2003). Influence   of  sociodemographics         and  environmental    attitudes on   general  responsible
          environmental behavior among recreational boaters. Environment and Behavior, 35, 347-375.
Crofton, F.S. (2000). Educating for sustainability: Opportunities in undergraduate engineering. Journal of Cleaner
          Production, 8, 397-405.
Danielsson,   K.,  &  Wiberg,   C. (2006). Participatory    design  of  learning media:   Designing    educational  computer
          games with and for teenagers. Interactive Technology & Smart Education, 3(4), 275-292.
Freitas, S.D. (2008).  Learning in immersive worlds: A review of game based learning. Joint Information Systems
          Committee          (JISC),          London.          Retrieved           Oct.       27,         2009,          from
          http://www.jisc.ac.uk/media/documents/programmes/elearning_innovation/
Glaser,   B.G.,  &  Strauss, A.L.  (1967). The    discovery    of  grounded   theory:  Strategies  for qu alitative research.
          Chicago, IL: Aldine Publishing.
Greenbaum, J., & Kyng, M. (Eds.). (1991). Design at work: Cooperative design of computer systems. Hillsdale, NJ:
          Lawrence Erlbaum.
Greenbaum, J., & Stuedahl, D. (2000). Deadlines and work practices in new media development. Proceedings of
          IRIS 23, Laboratorium for Interaction Technology, University of Trollhattan Uddevalla, 2000.
Gunter, G.A., Kenny, R.F., & Vick, E.H. (2008). Taking educational games seriously: Using the RETAIN model to
          design  endogemous     fantasy into  standalone   educational   games.      Education Technology     Research  and
          Development, 56, 511-537.
Holl, K.D., Daily, G.C., Daily, S., & Ehrlich, P.R. (1999). Knowledge and attitudes toward population growth and
          the environment: University students in Costa Rica and the U.S. Environmental Conservation, 26, 66-74.
Holl, K.D., Daily, G.C., & Ehrlich, P.R. (1995). Knowledge and perceptions in Costa Rica regarding environment,
          population, and biodiversity issues. Conservation Biology, 9, 1148-1558.
Johnson L. & Johnson N.E. (1987). Knowledge elicitation involving teachback interviewing. In A. Kidd (Ed.),
          Knowledge elicitation for expert systems: A practical handbook (pp. 91-108). New York: Plenum Press.
Jonassen,  D.H.,   Wilson,   B.G., Wang,   S., &   Grabinger,    R.S.  (1993). Constructivistic  uses  of expert systems   to
          support learning. Journal of Computer Based Instruction, 20, 86-94.
Kafai, Y.B., Franke, M.L., Ching, C.C., & Shih, J.C. (1998). Game design as an interactive learning environment for
          fostering   students'  and  teachers'    mathematical     inquiry.   International  Journal     of  Computers   for
          Mathematical Learning, 3, 149-184.
Kensing, F., & Blomberg, J. (1998). Participatory design: Issues and concerns. Computer Supported Cooperative
          Work, 7, 167-185.
Lim, C. (2008). Spirit of the game: Empowering students as designers in schools? British Journal of Educational
          Technology, 39, 996-1003.
Rieber,   L. (2005).  Multimedia    learning   in games,    simulations, and   microworlds.   In   R.  E. Mayer   (Ed.), The
          Cambridge handbook     of multimedia learning, (pp. 549-567).       Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Rieber, L.P., & Noah, D. (1997). Effect of gaming and graphical metaphors on reflective cognition within computer-
          based   simulations.  Paper  presented     at the  annual    meeting   of the  American     Educational   Research
          Association, Chicago, IL.
Prensky, M. (2001). Digital game-based learning. New York: McGraw Hill.
Shaffer, D.W. (2006). How computer games help children learn. New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
Strobel, J. (2006) Participatory design strategies for eLearning: A design-based research approach in the field of
          Educational  Technology.    In   J.  Multisilta   (Ed.).  Proceedings    of the workshop     on    human   centered
          technology. Pori Publications, Tampere University of Technology.
Törpel, B. (2005). Participatory design: A multi-voiced effort. 4th Decennial Conference on Critical Computing:
          Between Sense and Sensibility, Proceedings, 21-25, Aarhus, Denmark, pp. 177-181.

                                                        904  ·   © ISLS
