                                                 ICLS 2010    ·   Volume 1

Social Software and Knowledge Building: Supporting Co-Evolution
                         of Individual and Collective Knowledge
 Joachim Kimmerle, University of Tuebingen, Adenauer-Str. 40, 72072 Tuebingen, j.kimmerle@iwm-kmrc.de
Ulrike Cress, Knowledge Media Research Center, Adenauer-Str. 40, 72072 Tuebingen, u.cress@iwm-kmrc.de
Christoph Held, Knowledge Media Research Center, Adenauer-Str. 40, 72072 Tuebingen, c.held@iwm-kmrc.de
Johannes Moskaliuk, University of Tuebingen, Adenauer-Str. 40, 72072 Tuebingen, j.moskaliuk@iwm-kmrc.de

         Abstract:   This   paper  presents   a framework       model  that   defines   learning   and  knowledge
         building   as a co-evolution     of cognitive  and     social systems.    This    model   brings  together
         Scardamalia and Bereiter's theory of knowledge building and Nonaka's knowledge creation
         theory.  We   demonstrate     how   learning and   knowledge       building    may  occur    when   people
         interact with  each  other,  using  shared   digital artifacts   such  as tag  clouds   (that  result from
         social-tagging activities) or wikis. For both technologies, we provide illustrating data from
         two  pilot studies.  As   an example,   we refer   to  the  learning   processes   that take  place   while
         searching  for  information   in tag   clouds. In  addition,   we   illustrate processes  of   knowledge
         building   by  referring  to  users  working    on     a wiki.   In  conclusion,   the   differences    and
         similarities between these technologies are assessed, regarding their potential for knowledge
         building.

Introduction
Recent developments of software technology have made new tools available, which are of great importance for
computer-supported     collaborative   learning  and    knowledge      building.   They    provide new     opportunities  for
learning and knowledge building, because they are capable of facilitating the interplay between individual and
collective processes. These technologies are associated with social-software systems. Social software is a term
for software systems that support human communication, collaboration, and interaction in large communities
(Kolbitsch & Maurer, 2006). They facilitate the establishment and maintenance of self-organizing communities
and  social  networks  (Köhler   &    Fuchs-Kittowski,   2005;    Wasko    &    Faraj,  2005).   Social software  is  mainly
associated with Internet communities, but may also be applied in educational contexts (Notari, 2006; Wang &
Turner, 2005). We believe that social software has a great potential in the field of learning and knowledge
building.
         For  a  long  time,  psychological   and   educational      research   have   examined    individual   learning and
collaborative  knowledge    building   as two   separate   things    (for  an early    systematic  model    of  collaborative
knowledge building cf. Stahl, 2000). We propose that software tools are now able to support "interdigitation"
and, so  to  speak, a  "merger"    of individual and    collective   knowledge     processes.    This  new  development   of
software  technology   also  calls for a  new   theoretical framework,       in order   to focus  on   the tight conjunction
between individual learning and collective knowledge building, in the sense that the knowledge of individuals
and of a community may cross-fertilize and mutually support the development of each other. The aim of this
paper is  to provide   such a theoretical  framework.    For    this purpose,   we  will   present and  bring   together two
theoretical approaches.
         The first approach is Scardamalia and Bereiter's (1991) theory of knowledge building. It deals with the
mechanism through which a community of learners will manage to develop knowledge jointly. This approach
was already based on the use of computer technology, and it emphasized the impact of epistemic artifacts on
knowledge building. So it appears to be quite a suitable theory to explain how social software can support the
development   of  collective  knowledge.     The second    approach     is Nonaka      and Takeuchi's    (1995)   knowledge
creation theory. Its focus is on the building and transfer of tacit knowledge. This approach is very popular in
literature on knowledge management, but has hardly received attention in educational research and the learning
sciences. Although Nonaka's model does not explicitly mention computer support and the creation of artifacts,
we believe that the major underlying ideas of this model are very useful to explain some details of knowledge
building with social software.
         We will finally present our own co-evolution model of cognitive and social systems. The model takes
into account social processes that are facilitated by a collaboratively developed technical artifact and, at the
same time, cognitive processes of the individual users. Our model demonstrates how these social and cognitive
processes   will mutually   influence  each  other. It  is  a   theoretical  framework     which   integrates  many   of the
processes that have been described by the theory of knowledge building and the theory of knowledge creation.
After a more general description of what we mean by "co-evolution" of cognitive and social systems, we will
provide two examples of social-software technologies, and present some empirical data to demonstrate how
these technologies can support this process of co-evolution. For this purpose, we will describe the use of social-
tagging systems and the application of wikis. Each of these technologies creates a unique kind of artifact, which

                                                      9  ·    © ISLS
                                                       ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

supports,   in   its own   specific  way,    those  processes    of  knowledge      building  which    we have    described.   In
conclusion, we will assess the differences and similarities between these technologies, regarding their potential
for knowledge building.

Theories of Knowledge Building and Knowledge Creation
Scardamalia    and     Bereiter   have proposed     a  theory  of   knowledge      building (Bereiter  &  Scardamalia,    1996;
Scardamalia & Bereiter, 1996, 1999, 2003). Knowledge building is defined as a socio-cultural process, which
takes  place   in    a community     and   aims    "at  producing   something      of value  to  the   community    ­ theories,
explanations, problem formulations, interpretations, and so on, which become public property that is helpful in
understanding the world" (Scardamalia & Bereiter, 1999, p. 276). Scardamalia and Bereiter consider knowledge
building  as   a collective   creation  of   public knowledge.      They  compare     learning  in classrooms    to learning   in
knowledge-building communities, such as research laboratories (Bereiter, 2002), and conclude that knowledge
building  should     be rendered   possible   in   all communities.     Educational   software,  such  as CSILE     (Computer-
Supported Intentional Learning Environments) or Knowledge Forum, can support knowledge building. These
environments     provide   shared   databases   as  collaborative   design    spaces.  Here, all participants  may   contribute
their own   theories,     models,  examples,   visualizations,   notes,  and   other  epistemic  artifacts. The   design  space
supports mutual citing and referencing, in order to initiate a dynamic and self-organized process in which ideas
are formulated, discussed, revised, or rejected. The design space visualizes this collective improvement of ideas.
Accordingly, there is a set of requirements that have to be fulfilled to make successful knowledge building
possible (Hewitt & Scardamalia, 1998; Scardamalia, 2002). All members of a community should contribute to
the  advancement       of knowledge,    and   learners  in a  community       should  be concerned     with authentic    real-life
problems. Advancing knowledge should be regarded as an improvement of ideas, not a search for a perfect or
true solution. Learning is regarded as a discourse-oriented process, in the sense of common problem solving.
         Nonaka's       knowledge-creating      theory    (Nonaka,   1991,    1994;    Nonaka    & Takeuchi,     1995)   is also
concerned   with     innovation.   This theory   emerged      from  research   on  knowledge     management,    and   it regards
knowledge dissemination as one of the aims of any knowledge organization. But the authors assume that within
an  organization     only  little knowledge     is available   in   the form   of  explicit knowledge.    Most    knowledge     is
contained in the experience of individuals, and as such it is tacit knowledge (Polanyi, 1966). Tacit knowledge
can  hardly  be   expressed    verbally, so   this  type  of  knowledge   is  difficult  to transfer  to others.  But effective
knowledge creation requires such a transfer. In order to describe how a transfer of tacit knowledge takes place,
the authors refer to four processes, which build on each other in a dynamic way: socialization, externalization,
combination, and internalization. Socialization is a process in which the experience of an individual is shared.
Tacit knowledge can only be communicated from one person to the other through direct experience. Experience
may be transferred by observation and imitation, and, as a result of this transfer, the observer acquires new
knowledge, but this remains tacit. So a process of externalization is necessary. It consists of the articulation of
tacit knowledge and the transfer from tacit to explicit knowledge. At this stage, new concepts are formulated
using tacit knowledge. When knowledge has been made explicit, then it can be combined, in order to develop
new   knowledge      within   an  organization.  So,   combination   refers   to connecting   and  giving   a new   structure  to
explicit knowledge. Such combination is supported by interpersonal sharing of knowledge. Explicit knowledge
will  then, once     more,   become    tacit knowledge     through   a  process    of internalization. This   conversion    is an
individual   process,     in  which    explicit  knowledge       becomes      part of  that  person's    personal   knowledge.
Internalization will occur through learning by doing. Nonaka has formulated the idea of a knowledge spiral in
which socialization, externalization, combination, and internalization succeed each other. The spiral allows the
inter-individual     transfer of  knowledge     and,   at the  same     time, the  creation  of  new   knowledge,    through    a
combination of externalized knowledge which was previously tacit.

Co-Evolution Model of Cognitive and Social Systems
The   authors    of  this  paper   have  introduced     a  theoretical   model     of individual   learning   and collaborative
knowledge    building     (Cress   &   Kimmerle,    2007,     2008;  Kimmerle,     Moskaliuk,    &  Cress,  2009;   Moskaliuk,
Kimmerle, & Cress, 2008). In this model, collaborative knowledge building is described as an interplay between
cognitive systems and a social system. Just like Scardamalia and Bereiter, we think that knowledge building is a
central issue in modern knowledge societies. Consequently, our model is basically predicated on the ideas of
Scardamalia and Bereiter. But our considerations go beyond those of these authors, as we focus equally on
individual learning processes and on the collective development of knowledge. And as far as social software is
concerned, epistemic artifacts are not only considered as a means to an end, but also as an end in itself, because
we are convinced that collective knowledge manifests itself in shared digital artifacts. The model borrows, so to
speak, from systemic and from cognitive approaches. Its main assumption is that knowledge building can only
be understood if the interplay between individuals and the collective is taken into account. From a systems-
theoretical point of view ­ in the sense of Luhmann (1995) ­ the cognitive systems of individuals are different
from a social system, which is (in our theory) represented by a shared digital artifact (Cress & Kimmerle, 2008).

                                                           10  ·  © ISLS
                                               ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

Cognitive systems  and  social  systems have    different  kinds  of operations. Due   to their different modes   of
operation, both systems cannot simply merge. But one system can affect the other one in its development by
irritating it. Each system can provide its own complexity for the development of the other.
         The co-evolution model of cognitive and social systems (Cress & Kimmerle, 2008) is based on this
systemic view, and it describes learning processes and knowledge-building processes as reactions of a system to
irritations. Irritations are interpreted, in the sense of Piaget (1977), as cognitive conflicts, and the assumption is
that cognitive systems will develop when people solve such cognitive conflicts. A cognitive conflict exists when
people's  prior knowledge    and  information    which    they  receive  from   their  environment  are   somewhat
incongruent. Cognitive  conflicts can be     solved  by processes  of  equilibration. There are two  types   of such
equilibration processes: people will either assimilate information, i.e. they simply add new information to their
prior knowledge; or they will accommodate their prior knowledge to new information. In either case, people
will somehow    have to internalize information     from  their environment.  In this  way, their cognitive  system
becomes more complex. This development of a cognitive system refers to what is traditionally called learning.
These two processes represent two types of internalization from the social system, i.e. both assimilation and
accommodation support the development of cognitive systems. The model states that processes which take place
in a cognitive system by means of internalization will take place analogously in a social system by means of
externalization. Through externalization, a cognitive system can bring that person's own individual knowledge
into the shared artifact. People do not only internalize information from their environment into their cognitive
systems, but also externalize their knowledge. This means, just as individuals can learn by internalizing new
information, social systems can also learn by incorporating information, and social systems can develop new
knowledge  by   assimilation or accommodation       respectively. They  can  develop   by just  adding new   content
(assimilation) or by changing their own structure (accommodation). We propose that emergent effects usually
occur through such accommodations of artifacts. This external accommodation leads to a higher complexity of
the shared digital artifact and, accordingly, to new equilibration processes in other people's cognitive systems.
Thus, the users' knowledge supplies the artifact's content, and the artifact itself provides its users with new
information and releases new cognitive conflicts. What is important here is that the processes of internalization
and externalization, or of individual learning and knowledge building respectively, are not independent from
each other. It is always a matter of internalization and externalization, i.e. of continuous exchange processes
between cognitive systems and the social system. In this way, there exists a mutual development of cognitive
and social systems, and this is what we refer to as co-evolution (cf. Figure 1).

          Figure 1. Co-evolution of cognitive systems (`CS') and a social system, i.e. an artifact (`A').

We can now apply the four processes, as they were described by Nonaka, to this model of knowledge building
with shared artifacts. For this purpose, we translate the processes of making tacit knowledge explicit, and vice
versa, into processes of externalization and internalization. This will help us to understand exchange processes
between cognitive systems and the social system in more detail. Externalization can then be described by those
processes which   Nonaka  has   labeled externalization    and  combination.  When     people  introduce  their own
knowledge into a shared digital artifact, they will have to articulate their knowledge, i.e. they need to couch
their cognitive concepts in words. For this purpose, they have to translate their knowledge into a form that is
generally understandable  and   intelligible to all. People   have to  consider  the  information which   is already
available in an artifact in order to integrate their own thoughts adequately. Internalization combines the two

                                                    11  ·  © ISLS
                                                 ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

processes which Nonaka calls internalization and socialization. When people incorporate information from a
shared digital artifact, they "dig around" for information by browsing the artifact. In this way, they gather and
collect relevant information, which they have to transfer into their own cognitive structures. In the following we
will explicate these processes by referring to two concrete examples of shared digital artifacts. The first example
­ social tagging ­ considers the process of internalization, the second example ­ wikis ­ will take a closer look
at externalization.

Examples of Social-Software Supported Knowledge Building
We  present  our notions    by  providing   two  examples   that  use new   software    technology.   The  first one   will
illustrate the interplay between individual and collaborative processes by analyzing social-tagging activities and
the processes which may be supported by social tagging. Then, we will describe how wikis can contribute to
knowledge    building.  For  both   technologies   we    point  out  their potential    as learning  environments,     and
demonstrate the processes of internalization and externalization. For this purpose, we provide some empirical
data from two pilot studies: processes of internalization (individual learning) will be illustrated by a reference to
searching for information in tag clouds; processes of externalization (knowledge building) will be demonstrated
by quoting contributions of people who worked on a wiki.

Social Tagging
Social tagging has become a standard feature of many social-software tools, and it has potential to play a role in
learning scenarios  (Marlow,     Naaman,   Boyd,   &  Davis,   2006). The   term  tagging   describes  the annotation    of
digital resources with keywords (Golder & Huberman, 2006). These resources are primarily objects in virtual
environments, like the Internet or intranets, and they may include web sites, photos, videos, research papers, or
other pieces of digital information. The keywords (or tags) may be chosen by its users, and they represent the
users' associations   concerning  the  objects.  Tagging    is used  on  platforms   which  offer file   sharing within   a
community, or which support users in organizing their own stored resources. The labeling of items with tags
may facilitate search processes and the retrieval of information on these platforms, not only for individual users,
but also for the benefit of others. The term social tagging refers to this social context in which tags are used, and
in which all members of a community may benefit from them. Most of the social-tagging systems allow each
user to tag all available resources individually and independently. In this way, all tags in a community that
concern a particular object may be aggregated, and a large set of metadata for that resource may come together.
This accumulated collection of tags (or metadata) represents the users' connections, concepts, or categorizations
for items, and builds a jointly created artifact of keywords that refer to a specific resource. The World Wide
Web provides loads of information and many opportunities for acquiring knowledge. This can take place as an
individual and independent learning process, beyond formal educational settings. Users may browse through the
information  space  of the   Internet, and  access  information   on  virtually any  topic  of interest.  Limitations    lie
mainly in the overwhelming amount and inconsistent quality of that information. Social-tagging systems can
help to overcome these problems and provide a tool for structuring and filtering information.
         When dealing with social-tagging systems, individuals have the opportunity to externalize their own
knowledge and, at the same time, they also may internalize information. In the process of externalization, users
add tags  to specific  resources  and  describe   the  object  with their  own  set  of keywords.    For this   activity of
creating tags, users   have  to  articulate their  own   cognitive  concepts   of an    item, and transform     them   into
keywords. When people add tags, they externalize their knowledge about a resource. They focus on the essential
concepts  of  an item,  and  may,   consequently,     elaborate  on  the   resource  more   thoroughly.   The   additional
cognitive effort which  is   involved  here  will induce   processing   of information   in such  a  way   that individual
learning takes place.  The   creation  of  tags and   externalization of   cognitive concepts   can  lead  to knowledge
building (Budiu, Pirolli, & Hong, 2009): the artifact of metadata develops in a step-by-step incremental process
of individual  tagging. All  individual    tags of a   community    are  summed     up  in one  accumulated     artifact of
keywords.  A   single  user  has only  a  marginal   influence  on  the  whole  product.   The  artifact depends    on   the
tagging  activities of numerous    people,   and   tag clouds   will  only  emerge   from   a  large  quantity   of added
keywords. As the artifact grows, it represents the most important related concepts and connections that concern
a resource or a keyword.
         In the process of internalization, people integrate new information into their cognitive systems. In a
social-tagging environment, users will browse a web site in order to explore relevant resources. For this purpose
they may use tags as an orientation and searching device. The jointly created artifacts of metadata, typically
visualized as tag clouds, help them to navigate through the information space and find relevant information
related to the tags. In this process of browsing, the users of the system will become aware of the keywords that
were   annotated by    other users.    In this  way,  the  users incorporate    information   about   the  concepts    and
categorizations of an object, and learn how other users have classified that resource. Moreover, the artifact of
tags may show interconnections between resources and concepts that may previously have been unknown to the
individual user. The information which is represented in the metadata of tags can lead to knowledge acquisition

                                                      12  ·  © ISLS
                                                 ICLS 2010      ·  Volume 1

and a change in the cognitive structures of individuals. People can be made aware of new information and
incorporate the community's concepts and categories (Fu, 2008). These concepts and connections may differ
from individual cognitive structures, and if they do, individual knowledge may increase and new understanding
may   develop.  This  process   of  learning   may  be    defined    as assimilation     or  accommodation     of  knowledge.
Assimilation   describes   the  process   of merely     adding    new    pieces    of information    to previously    existing
knowledge. This happens when people acquire additional facts about a subject, but do not significantly change
the underlying structure of the cognitive concepts involved. For instance, when users learn new tags and related
concepts which are in accordance with their prior knowledge about a certain resource, this will extend their
factual knowledge, but they will not form a new concept of this subject. The following example will illustrate
this process. The data are taken from a pilot study with university students. Participants had to find out what
"EMDR (eye movement desensitization and reprocessing)" means, by searching and browsing for information
only with the help of tag clouds and, at the same time, they had to think aloud. The following transcript from the
thinking-aloud audio protocols (translated from German) is an example of assimilation:
         "Yes, this is a form of psychotherapy, I know that, that's why I click on `therapy' [...] yes,
         exactly,  and there   is `treatment', there    I  will get  it in  more   detail [...] okay,  now,   here is
         `trauma', it has something to do with that [...] and with `anxiety' [...] and it could also be
         about `stress' [...]".
         This participant expanded his knowledge, but he relied very much on his prior knowledge (that EMDR
is a form of psychotherapy). So he specified his knowledge: later, he knew what this therapy is used for (the
treatment   of post-traumatic     stress disorder). Previously       existing     knowledge     was  supplemented,    but  the
knowledge structure did not have to be changed. In contrast to this process of assimilation, accommodation
takes place when a qualitatively new understanding of a subject develops and prior knowledge is transformed. If
other people use very different tags from those that this particular user would have applied, then it is obvious
that specific resources or tags are related to very different concepts. So users may learn that their associations on
a subject or topic were incorrect, and may change their cognitive concepts accordingly. Another sample from
the thinking-aloud protocols of the pilot study will illustrate the accommodation process:
         "I think it is about an eye movement disorder [...] okay, here is `movement', I click on that
         [...] now there is `desensitization' [...] now `reprocessing' remains as the biggest tag [...]
         and,  yes, `treatment'   [...]  and now   it's about     `behavior'   and  eh?   Hm,   `trauma'?  Now    I'm
         confused, somehow I can't see any connection. But I would click on that, on `trauma', yes. It
         somehow stands out from the crowd [...]".
         Even   though   this  participant   did   not  find    out  (in   the  given    time)  that EMDR      is  a  form of
psychotherapy,    she  did understand     that her  prior     knowledge     was    not   adequate,   which  is an    important
prerequisite for accommodation. Another participant had a similar experience, but her gain of knowledge went
even further:
         "[...] `anxiety'? I'm irritated now [...] I don't understand [...] I just see that it has something
         to do  with  `psychiatry'   and  with `clinical'   [...]  I see,   it seems  it  is about  psychology    and
         psychotherapy, and, although I first thought it was an eye disease [...]".
         The process of co-evolution of cognitive and social systems takes place when individuals use tags for
browsing and navigating the Internet, and stumble across relevant information and resources. These cognitive
processes of internalization and the retrieval of new information may prompt users to tag the discovered new
resources   themselves.  In    this way,   the  individuals'      concepts     and  categorizations    are externalized   and
incorporated into the artifact of metadata, and the whole system evolves (Fu, 2008). All members in a social-
tagging community offer and obtain knowledge, and a continuous process of advancing knowledge takes place.
The   community    constantly  adds   new    resources  and   new    tags   to  the artifact,  in this way  developing    new
information,   new  interconnections,    and new   ideas.  Anyone       can contribute    and  participate in this process of
improvement, which takes up the viewpoints of many different people; the collective as a whole is responsible
for the advancement of knowledge.

Wikis
A wiki is a web page that allows users to change its content online (Leuf & Cunningham, 2001). It is easily
accessible and can simply be used by everyone (Désilets, Paquet, & Vinson, 2005). In a wiki, people may easily
revise all parts of the text, add, change, or delete anything at their discretion (Raitman, Augar, & Zhou, 2005).
In that way, people can form communities that work collaboratively on a certain topic and create new content
(Köhler & Fuchs-Kittowski, 2005; Moskaliuk & Kimmerle, 2009). Wikis may be used in educational contexts
(Notari, 2006; Wang & Turner, 2005) ­ schools, universities, but also informal learning settings. A wiki lends
itself, for example, to collective work on a scientific topic in school or a university class, particularly if people
tend to have controversial opinions on that topic. In a wiki, those involved can introduce their own points of
view on equal terms. Participants may express opposing opinions, addressing each other, and they incorporate
their own   perspective  into  a  coherent   text. But     such   processes    of  knowledge    acquisition   and  knowledge

                                                        13  ·   © ISLS
                                                ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

exchange will not only take place in formal settings but also in informal contexts, for example, when people try
to deal  with and   develop   a  topic  through   the Internet.   This  is a    way   for them     to increase  their own
understanding, and they are able to acquire new knowledge. In addition to their individual learning, they also
develop some collective knowledge.
         Individuals may acquire new knowledge when they internalize information from the wiki. In order to
incorporate information from the artifact, they will have to start off by browsing for information in a more or
less target-oriented manner. When they have found some relevant information, they will have to transfer it into
their own cognitive system. They will have to treat this information in some way or other to fit it into their own
existing knowledge. So this internalization process allows people to increase their individual knowledge and
gain new insights. This type of individual learning may, again, either take place in the form of assimilation or
accommodation.   When    people  assimilate   information,   they simply   acquire    knowledge    without   developing  a
different quality of understanding. Accommodation will occur when they incorporate new information in such a
way that it modifies their prior knowledge. In an accommodation process, people transform knowledge with the
aim  of  better  understanding   new    information.    In  addition   to  this individual   learning,   as   a result  of
internalization, there is also a supplementary form of knowledge generation: people will not only internalize
information as it is, but also develop knowledge that is completely new, knowledge that was originally neither
part of the digital artifact nor a component of their individual knowledge. This supplementary knowledge may
develop  when   people  have  internalized   new  information,  which     will  then, in  turn, interact with   their prior
knowledge. This is the way in which a process of emergence is enabled. In such a situation, collaboration is a
prerequisite for emergent knowledge. People on their own will not be able to develop this kind of knowledge;
they need stimulation by other people. So knowledge processes enabled by a wiki are not simple knowledge-
sharing processes, but collaborative processes of knowledge development.
         When people want to contribute to a wiki, they will have to externalize certain aspects of their own
knowledge. People who introduce their own knowledge to a shared digital artifact will have to put some effort
into articulating that knowledge. That means they have to transform cognitive concepts into written language.
Ideally, people  will express   their thoughts in  a way   that can  easily  be  understood     by others.   They  need to
consider pre-existing information in the artifact to make sure that they integrate their own thoughts adequately.
When people contribute to a wiki article, this will not only support the development of the wiki itself, but also
its contributors' individual learning: people who externalize their knowledge will have to elaborate on it. This
cognitive effort helps people to process their own knowledge more deeply, and this, in turn, will broaden their
understanding (cf. the self-explanation effect; Chi, Bassok, Lewis, Reimann, & Glaser, 1989). When individuals
have externalized  their own    knowledge,   the  resulting information    continues   to  exist independently     from its
contributors. This information may, in turn, be picked up by other users, who may develop it further.
         When people introduce knowledge into a wiki, there are two options for incorporating this information
into the artifact. The information is either assimilated or accommodated. It is a matter of assimilation when
information is simply attached to a text that already exists. In this case, new information is not connected to
earlier information. Assimilation means that the previous arrangement of the artifact remains unchanged. An
example will illustrate this process. The data are derived from another pilot study in which participants had to
deal with  a  wiki text  about  causes  of   schizophrenia.   The  original  wiki   text  was   rather  one-sided   ­ only
presenting biological causes, such as inheritance ­ and some participants only added information to the text that
argued along the same lines, even though they had access to a variety of information sources; for example, the
original text stated that an inherited disposition caused schizophrenia, and a participant wrote:
         "This is supported by a study of the University of Göttingen about the genetic influence on
         suffering from  schizophrenia.   The  results  show   that the   probability  of  being   afflicted with
         schizophrenia is increased when someone is consanguineous with a schizophrenic person. The
         probability of being afflicted with schizophrenia is 9.35 % for children. Another study with
         monozygotic twins shows that...".
         This contribution may be considered an essential addition, because it is important to provide empirical
data for  claims and   statements.    But it contains   only  supplementary     information;    it does  not   provide  an
alternative point of view. In a well-organized wiki, however, the process goes beyond such a simple assimilation
of information.  An   efficient wiki  community    will endeavor    to interpolate    new  information   evenly.   A  wiki
reflects accommodation if newly-introduced information is not just added to some existing text, but this text is
also re-arranged in a new way. Accommodation has taken place if the article has been re-organized or new
aspects  have been  integrated  into  existing information.   A further   example     (by another  participant) from    the
same study illustrates this accommodation process:
         "Beyond   biological   causes,   another  potentially  interesting    reason  is  the  interrelation   of
         schizophrenia and the social environment. A study collected data about people's social class,
         their profession, education, income, and social situation (period of 2 years) as well as stress
         and  personal   living conditions   that have  negative   psycho-social    effects. The   results   were
         unambiguous: schizophrenic persons come from a low social class, have experienced inferior

                                                     14  ·  © ISLS
                                                   ICLS 2010     ·  Volume 1

         education,    earn     less  money    and    are  under    considerable    psycho-social     strain.  As   a
         consequence,       it  may    be  concluded      that  a   negative    social   environment     contributes
         fundamentally to the onset of schizophrenia."
         People working on a wiki will not only improve their individual knowledge, but may also contribute to
the development of collective knowledge at the same time. Thus, wikis support individual learning, and they
may  be  an     attractive  tool  for  knowledge-building       purposes,  as   described   by  Scardamalia    and    Bereiter.
Collaboration    with  a   wiki  has  the  primary  goal   of   advancing  knowledge.      Processes  of externalization   and
internalization  are  going    on all  the time.   In this way,     both individual    and collective knowledge     are  being
developed constantly. The cognitive systems of individuals as well as the social system are continuously being
enhanced and advanced, due to these processes of equilibration. All the people involved here can introduce
information, and this information may be treated by each member of the community on an equal footing. A wiki
community    gets  together    when   there is  a  need   for jointly  developing   solutions  to some      problem which   its
members     have   in common.       An idea   that is  introduced    to  the  artifact will  stimulate   and  inspire another
community    member      to incorporate,    develop,   and    improve    this idea. In  this way,  concepts    and  ideas  are
developed, and the community and all the individuals involved can expand their knowledge.

Conclusion
In this paper, we have elaborated on a framework in which knowledge building is defined as a co-evolution of
cognitive and social systems. New knowledge may develop when people interact with each other via shared
digital artifacts. It is assumed that collective knowledge becomes manifest in these shared artifacts. In order to
illustrate these processes, we have demonstrated how they work, referring to two examples of social-software
technologies: social-tagging systems and wikis. These allow different degrees of influencing and manipulating
artifacts. Social tagging gives individuals only little scope for manipulating the whole artifact and its content.
They  can   only   add some     new   keywords     or add  a    tag which  has   already   been used.    If many   users have
participated, resulting in a tag cloud which is already rather large, one individual contribution will probably not
change this tag cloud very much. In such systems, it is not each individual's tagging behavior that will directly
define the artifact. Instead, the artifact represents the accumulation of all the tags, giving each user equal impact.
Regarding wikis, there are many opportunities for individual users to influence the artifact's content. They may,
at their discretion, revise, change, or delete any part of a wiki article. If a user deletes some content, it will not
be part of the shared artifact any more. The current state of a wiki does not represent the sum total of all these
activities, as  is the case    with   tagging  systems.    Instead,  a   modified   wiki   represents only   the most   recent
interventions. This means that one person who modifies content in a wiki has the opportunity to make the whole
text coherent. So in a wiki, a user can directly deal with incongruities.
         To what extent a certain tool is conducive to knowledge building, depends very much on the potential
of that technology to induce cognitive conflicts. In social tagging, productive conflicts are primarily caused by
differences between a person's internal conceptual structure and that provided by the artifact. Individuals may
solve this conflict mainly by changing their own individual knowledge structure. Wikis provide a high potential
both for    the development      of  cognitive  conflicts  and   for  solving  them.   The   content  of a   wiki  may   differ
fundamentally from its users' previous knowledge and understanding. If they want to improve the wiki text,
they need to connect new content by re-organizing and re-conceptualizing it in order to adapt it to the content
that already exists. This course of action will necessarily lead to the development of the shared artifact and to
knowledge building.
         To sum it up, this paper shows the potential of social software for learning and knowledge building.
Social-software tools open up specific opportunities to combine individual and collective learning processes.
Such tools   are   particularly   relevant  for  knowledge-building       purposes   when    they provide    opportunities  to
influence and manipulate shared digital artifacts and when they have the potential to induce cognitive conflicts.
Future developments of such technologies may benefit from taking these considerations into account.

References
Bereiter, C. (2002). Education and mind in the knowledge age. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Bereiter, C., & Scardamalia, M. (1996). Rethinking learning. In D. Olson & N. Torrance (Eds.), Handbook of
         education and human development: New models of learning, teaching and schooling (pp. 485-513).
         Cambridge, MA: Basil Blackwell.
Budiu, R.,   Pirolli, P.,  &   Hong,   L.  (2009). Remembrance        of  things tagged:    How   tagging   effort affects tag
         production and human memory. Proceedings of the 27th International Conference on Human Factors
         in Computing Systems, pp. 615-624, New York, ACM Press.
Chi, M. T. H., Bassok, M., Lewis, M., Reimann, P., & Glaser, R. (1989). Self-explanations: How students study
         and use examples in learning to solve problems. Cognitive Science, 13, 145-182.
Cress, U., & Kimmerle, J. (2007). A theoretical framework of collaborative knowledge building with wikis ­ a
         systemic and cognitive perspective. In C. A. Chinn, G. Erkens, & S. Puntambekar. (Eds.), Proceedings

                                                        15    ·  © ISLS
                                                ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

        of the 7th Computer Supported Collaborative Learning Conference (pp. 153-161). New Brunswick,
        NJ: International Society of the Learning Sciences.
Cress, U., & Kimmerle, J. (2008). A systemic and cognitive view on collaborative knowledge building with
        wikis. International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 3, 105-122.
Désilets, A., Paquet, S., & Vinson, N. G. (2005). Are wikis usable? WikiSym 2005 ­ Conference Proceedings of
        the 2005 International Symposium on Wikis, pp. 3-15.
Fu, W. (2008). The microstructures of social tagging: A rational model. Proceedings of the ACM Conference on
  Computer Supported Cooperative Work (pp. 229-238). New York: ACM.
Golder, S.   A., &   Huberman,    B.  A.  (2006).  Usage   patterns    of collaborative  tagging systems.   Journal   of
        Information Science, 32, 198-208.
Hewitt, J.,  &   Scardamalia,    M.  (1998).  Design    principles  for   distributed knowledge    building   processes.
        Educational Psychology Review, 10, 75-96.
Kimmerle, J., Moskaliuk, J., & Cress, U. (2009). Learning and knowledge building with social software. In C.
        O'Malley, D. Suthers, P. Reimann, & A. Dimitracopoulou (Eds.), Computer Supported Collaborative
        Learning Practices: CSCL2009 Conference Proceedings (Vol. 1, pp. 459-468). International Society of
        the Learning Sciences (ISLS).
Köhler, A., & Fuchs-Kittowski, F. (2005). Integration of communities into process-oriented structures. Journal
        of Universal Computer Science, 11, 410-425.
Kolbitsch,  J., &   Maurer, H.   (2006). The  transformation   of  the  web:   How emerging   communities     shape  the
        information we consume. Journal of Universal Computer Science, 12(2), 187-213.
Leuf, B., & Cunningham, W. (2001). The wiki way. Quick collaboration on the web. Boston: Addison-Wesley.
Luhmann, N. (1995). Social systems. Stanford: Stanford University Press.
Marlow, C., Naaman, M., Boyd, D., & Davis, M. (2006). HT06, Tagging Paper, Taxonomy Flickr, Academic
        Article, ToRead. Proceedings of the 17th Conference on Hypertext and Hypermedia (pp. 31-40). New
        York: ACM Press.
Moskaliuk, J., Kimmerle, J., & Cress, U. (2008). Learning and knowledge building with wikis: The impact of
        incongruity between people's knowledge and a wiki's information. Proceedings of the International
        Conference     for   the  Learning   Sciences   2008,   Vol.   2  (pp.  99-106).  Utrecht,   The   Netherlands:
        International Society of the Learning Sciences.
Moskaliuk, J., & Kimmerle, J. (2009). Using wikis for organizational learning: Functional and psycho-social
        principles. Development and Learning in Organizations, 23(4), 21-24.
Nonaka, I. (1991). The knowledge-creating company. Harvard Business Review, 69, 96-104.
Nonaka, I. (1994). A dynamic theory of organizational knowledge creation. Organization Science, 5, 14-37.
Nonaka,  I., &   Takeuchi,  H.  (1995).  The knowledge     creating company:     How  Japanese   companies    create the
        dynamics of innovation. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Notari, M. (2006). How to use a Wiki in education: Wiki based effective constructive learning. Proceedings of
        WikiSym'06 - 2006 International Symposium on Wikis 2006, pp. 131-132.
Piaget, J. (1977). The development of thought: Equilibration of cognitive structures. New York: Viking Press.
Polanyi, M. (1966). The tacit dimension. Garden City, NY: Doubleday.
Raitman, R.,    Augar, N.,   &   Zhou,  W. (2005).   Employing     wikis   for online  collaboration in  the  e-learning
        environment: Case study. Proceedings of the 3rd International Conference on Information Technology
        and Applications, ICITA 2005 II, art. no. 1488944, pp. 142-146.
Scardamalia,    M.  (2002). Collective  cognitive responsibility   for the advancement    of knowledge.    In B. Smith
        (Ed.), Liberal education in a knowledge society (pp. 67-98). Chicago: Open Court.
Scardamalia,    M.,  & Bereiter,  C.  (1991).  Higher   levels of   agency  for  children in knowledge     building:  A
        challenge for the design of new knowledge media. The Journal of the Learning Sciences 1, 37-68.
Scardamalia,    M.,  &  Bereiter,  C.  (1996). Computer     support    for knowledge-building    communities.    In   T.
        Koschmann      (Ed.), CSCL:    Theory  and  practice   of  an  emerging   paradigm.  Mahwah,     NJ:  Lawrence
        Erlbaum Associates.
Scardamalia,    M., &  Bereiter, C.  (1999).  Schools   as knowledge     building organizations. In  D.  Keating &   C.
        Hertzman     (Eds.),  Today's   children, tomorrow's    society:   The  developmental  health   and   wealth  of
        nations (pp. 274-289). New York: Guilford.
Scardamalia, M., & Bereiter, C. (2003). Knowledge building. In Encyclopedia of education (2nd ed., pp. 1370-
        1373). New York: Macmillan Reference.
Stahl, G. (2000). A model of collaborative knowledge-building. In B. Fishman & S. O'Connor-Divelbiss (Eds.),
        Fourth International Conference of the Learning Sciences (pp. 70-77). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Wang,   C.-M.,   &  Turner,  D.  (2005).  Extending   the  wiki paradigm     for  use in the classroom.  International
        Conference on Information Technology: Coding Computing, ITCC 1, pp. 255-259.
Wasko,  M.   M.,   & Faraj,  S.  (2005).Why   should I  share?  Examining      knowledge  contribution  in networks   of
        practice. MIS Quarterly, 29, 35-58.

                                                     16  ·  © ISLS
