                                               ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

 Contingent Identification in a Biomedical Engineering Classroom

                   Vanessa Svihla, University of California, Berkeley, vsvihla@hotmail.com

       Abstract:     This study,   set in a  university biomedical   engineering  capstone    design course,
       explores    how    students identify  as  engineers,  finding  this process  to be    contingent and
       dynamically negotiated. Biomedical engineering, as a degree program, serves as a legitimate
       pathway    towards   engineering   and   medical  school,  making   identification with  engineering
       particularly contingent. Living narratives provide glimpses into experiences students have in
       their design course, which aligns more closely with authentic engineering practice than their
       previous coursework. As a result, the design course is a significant opportunity for students to
       consider    themselves   to  be    engineers. Framed    by   changes  in  accountable   disciplinary
       knowledge and navigation (Stevens, O'Connor, Garrison, Jocuns, & Amos, 2008) within the
       interdisciplinary   context  of  biomedical   engineering   and  the varied  goals  of  students    for
       choosing the major (engineering vs. health sciences), students' identification as engineers
       emerges    as particularly  contentious.  Leadership   and   underrepresentation   are considered   in
       relation to identification, navigation, and accountable disciplinary knowledge.

Everything I have learned comes into play.... All I can say is that I think like an engineer. I see things from many
different angles. I calculate. I am much more realistic.

I mean, like a surgical procedure? I mean, that's not considered any sort of technical...? Like, a surgical
procedure?  And,  like, taking  readings    in a rat's  stomach?   I mean,  something   that  nobody   else has  even
ventured to do in this course?!

Background
These two   quotes   from   students   express   tensions  between    two  predominant    and  legitimate   pathways
(biomedical engineering and medical school) students pursue while yet positioned as "BMEs"- students in
biomedical engineering. This paper explores how students working in teams in a university capstone biomedical
engineering course   contingently    express   their identification  with  engineering    as  they   learn to   design.
Ethnographically-collected lived narratives (Ochs & Capps, 2001) provided glimpses into student experiences
during this process, highlighting tensions and dimensions of contingency in students' identification as engineers,
and how   this intersects with  their  learning. These   are viewed   through three dimensions     for understanding
pathways through engineering education: accountable disciplinary knowledge (ADK) - that is, the work and
practices that count as engineering at a given point; navigation of pathways; and identification with and by
engineering (Stevens, et al., 2008). Additionally, underrepresentation and leadership are considered in terms of
how they might intersect with these dimensions of ADK, navigation, and identification.
       The capstone model provides a fertile ground for observing learning and related shifts in identification,
taking learning to be an "experience of identity"(Wenger, 1999, p. 215). The social process of engineering
design (Bucciarelli, 1994) and learning to design in a team involves the coordination of many lenses. The
capstone design course introduces new identity spaces for the students: They may form a team identity as they
develop a sense of belonging in a consequential manner to their team (Guzzo, 1986). They negotiate various
design decisions (Bucciarelli, 1994), learning by explaining perspectives (Webb, Troper, & Fall, 1995) and by
comparing to team mates' perspectives (Phelps & Damon, 1989). Within a team, each member assumes roles
such that in total, all steps are accomplished, but not by all team members (Goldschmidt, 1996). Gunther,
Frankenburger, and Auer (1996) caution that though enacted roles have been noted, understanding how and why
roles form is largely unexplored for design contexts. By exploring students' identifications as engineers, we may
shift focus to understanding some of the dimensions students face along their paths towards or away from
engineering. Additionally, understanding how individuals from underrepresented groups identify as engineers
may elucidate some of the experiences that contribute to their (dis)engagement (Heyman, Martyna, & Bhatia,
2002; Seymour & Hewitt, 2000).

Setting and Participants
The  participants of this study    were   undergraduate  senior  biomedical  engineering   students    enrolled in the
capstone, year-long design class at a large public southern university. Six case study design teams were drawn
from  two iterations of   the course   (2006-07  and  2007-08).  Design    teams were  composed    of  four    students,
organized by course instructors, and persisted across two consecutive semesters. Teaching assistants played a
large role in facilitating learning, spending approximately 100 contact hours with teams. The course comprised a
two-month   redesign project   followed   by   eight-month  industry-sponsored   project, during which     teams were

                                                   913   ·  © ISLS
                                              ICLS 2010    ·  Volume 1

mentored by faculty advisors and sponsors. Course instructors used team rankings of sponsored projects to
match teams to sponsors; when multiple teams ranked a project highly, the sponsors were asked to "hire" based
on resumes submitted by the students. The projects came from hospitals, industry, government, and universities,
and while they varied in terms of difficulty, all were real-world, complex, and ill-structured.

Methodology
Guided initially by theories (Fetterman, 1989) related to design process (Jonassen, 2000; Schön, 1983) and
learning (Hatano & Inagaki, 1986), I entered the design studio as a non-participant observer (LeCompte &
Schensul, 1999) intending to study design learning     and to model how innovative design products might arise
(Svihla, 2009). As I built rapport and reconciled my etic understandings of practices in relation to these theories,
I transitioned to a participant observer role (e.g., discussions of statistical analysis, assisting with presentation
preparation decisions), and began co-constructing emic understandings related to the practices and experiences
of specific student design teams. Adopting an ethnographic approach (LeVine, 2007) to understanding students'
experiences learning to design afforded an opportunity to consider concurrent shifts in identification.
         Given the diversity of projects, comparison was of primary importance, allowing me to select cases by
comparison,  spontaneously   use comparisons    as  a  means    to understand,  and  comparing  across  cases (Vogt,
2002). For each class iteration, I collected qualitative data related to three case study teams, providing six case
study teams. Teams    were  selected   with  input from   the   professors and teaching  assistants, who   listed their
highest and lowest performing teams, which teams sought out resources and which did not, and were invited to
suggest  teams   they thought  might   be  interesting to  study   for other  reasons. These  data   along with   peer
evaluations  and a  survey  of  interactions  formed   a   matrix  yielding   three levels (high,  medium,  and    low
performing), from which teams with all or most members consenting into the study were selected.
         Teams were observed as they met together and with mentors. Meetings were audio rather than video
recorded due to limitations posed by the settings: much of the design activity took place in a room with only one
available electrical outlet, and this was commonly in use by a student; additionally, not all sponsors were
comfortable with video recording of materials covered by Intellectual Property. Informal interviews/discussions
emerged during observation, either instigated by myself or by the students. Such conversations were used for
member checking and clarification, though the latter was rarely needed as the students tended to assume that I
had insufficient understanding of their projects, and would often teach me and ask if I had questions.
         Field notes and transcriptions of interactions were reviewed multiple times and initially analyzed as
team  narratives of designerly  solutions   (Cross, 2001)    to impasses   in design  process (Svihla, 2009;  Svihla,
Petrosino, & Diller, 2009). Initial analysis of transcripts involved grounded coding, allowing themes related to
initial research goals to emerge, then seeking counterexamples. This process uncovered other persistent themes
related to leadership and underrepresentation in relation to the adoption of designerly perspectives. Transcripts
were  re-analyzed   using  the  framework    presented   by   Stevens   and   colleagues   (2008), framing  students'
experiences by accountable disciplinary knowledge (ADK), navigation, and identification.

Navigation
Though the focus of this study is on how students identify during their capstone design experience, it is useful to
consider both unofficial and programmatic aspects of navigation preceding the capstone course. The majority of
students are admitted   to the  degree  as   freshmen  when     they are   admitted to the university, and  therefore
recognized  as   "BMEs"    from  their first day   at  the university.   The  program   is competitive  even  within
engineering, with the 100 highest ranking students admitted each fall. This ranking is articulated as follows: "To
be competitive for admission to the Biomedical Engineering program a student needs to be very strong in the
following areas: 1) Class Rank and 2) SAT composite score. Incoming First Year students are ranked based on
their scores in these areas and then the students at the top of this list are offered admittance to the Biomedical
Engineering degree program." Reflecting on this rather general process that selects them for membership as
BMEs, one student expresses a matched generality: "When I joined BME I just picked it out of a list. It wasn't
until three years into the program that I realized it was exactly what I wanted to do with my life."
         After two years of core curriculum, students select a track: Biomedical Imaging & Instrumentation,
Cell & Bio-molecular Engineering, Computational Biomedical Engineering, and Pre-medical Engineering. Most
students opt for Cell & Bio-molecular Engineering track. These official pathways mask the unofficial navigation
students undertake, which comprise myriad experiences: internships of varying relevance, engineering clubs and
camps in high school, and participation in social (formal and informal) aspects of being a BME.

Identity, Identification
Wortham (2004) describes the process of social identification as possessing characteristics or behaviors that
allow others to classify an individual according to a socially agreed-upon category. This process is interactional
(Gee, Staff, & Paul, 1999) and contextualized by metadiscourses (in this case, biomedical engineering students

                                                   914  ·   © ISLS
                                               ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

and their various mentors), but also backgrounded by other social identifications that become relevant. I employ
an understanding    of  identity that is social, negotiated, and  double-sided, meaning  that  an  individual  may
position herself or himself in a certain manner, but this occurs within social contexts such that the individual
may or may not be recognized or be positioned by institutions, organizations, or others (Holland, Lachicotte,
Skinner, & Cain, 1998; Skinner, Valsiner, & Holland, 2001). Considering practices of identification (Becker &
Carper, 1956) affords a focus on the actions and behaviors related to positioning. I adopt this double-sided
understanding of identification to explore how students negotiate and coordinate multiple identities as they
transition from problem-set engineering to engineering design.

Accountable Disciplinary Knowledge
         In their framework for understanding pathways through engineering education, Stevens and colleagues
(2008) refer to accountable disciplinary knowledge (ADK) as one of three dimensions. This term encompasses
that which is counted as engineering knowledge relative to the context. As the context shifts, the ADK shifts.
Reflecting on the core coursework, one student describes a burgeoning awareness both of his chosen discipline
and a sense that some of the ADK of the core coursework was of less relevance for his future:

         "What do you need to know that's actually going to be useful in the future? Because, I mean,
         some classes, you kind of ­ especially when in the first couple of semesters for BME, we kind
         of got to see what we were going to be doing in the future. See, I mean, and I didn't do it as
         much at first, but then I kind of realized, like, you know, there's certain classes that we have
         to take as part of the core curriculum that really aren't ­ parts of it I don't think matter as
         much. So some stuff you just learn for the test and then there's some stuff you learn for life."

In core engineering coursework, ADK includes problem sets, whereas in the design courses, which reflect the
professional engineering design studio, this includes actions that reside within the educational context despite
originating from the professional context, as well as actions recognizable as professional. This semi-professional
setting is captured    is a student's  description of  the  design class as "working   more    in the  'real world'
environment, and getting the chance to apply what we've been studying in the classroom." The design projects
were punctuated by tools (e.g., Gantt charts, Pugh charts) borrowed from the design studio but used such that
the timing may not have highlighted their relevance, as evidenced by statements that the tools "detracted from
the progress of the project," and "have actually hindered us." Other tasks, such as meetings with industry
sponsors and progress reports for sponsors greatly reflected the professional design studio, requiring students to
negotiate professional relationships, and sometimes choose between a professional goal and a classroom goal.
Such   professional connections,    which  sometimes     deviate from  the course   structure, can  be motivating
(Magleby, Sorensen, & Todd, 1991), as expressed by a student: "We were very motivated in this project by our
sponsors, who both impressed on us the potential for our device and made many valuable contributions to its
design." These relationships may offer points of entre to engineering or provide students with examples of
professional practice, allowing them to focus on what lies beyond their coursework (Stevens, et al., 2008).
         Lectures given during the capstone design course touched on the nature of BME: In one lecture the
course  professor,  Dr.   Davies (a pseudonym)    described  his role in helping  to define this  relatively young
discipline ("BME is a new breed"), and encouraged the students to "be a part of the definition." These lectures
served as touchstones for students to decide whether they fit with this definition, ("You are probably motivated
by the practical") and to highlight the shift in ADK that accompanies the transition to capstone design:

    !    "Engineering is doing"
    !    "Solving new problems in new ways"
    !    "Engineering is opportunity to be creative and come up with new ideas"

These   lectures included   discussions   about  differences between   science  and  engineering,  and    positioned
engineers as "doers." Students were told that "engineering is design" and that as mathematics is used as a tool
by scientists, science is a tool of engineering. The nature of science was represented as unproblematic (e.g., "In
science, there is always a right answer") and this was reflected in the engineering science courses completed
previously, filled with problem sets with right answers. In an engineering program in which approximately 30%
of the students plan to go on to medical school, this divide between ADK for college and for their professional
futures may lie along multiple dimensions.

Leadership and Underrepresentation
Within the design teams, students negotiated their roles. Some teams appointed leadership roles, some leaders
delegated  further  roles,  and  some  teams allowed   leadership  to be an emergent   property.  In  some   teams,
emergent leadership subsumed prior leadership roles: in each case, this occurred in conjunction with shifts in

                                                   915  ·  © ISLS
                                             ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

relevant expertise: leaders appointed    during the preliminary  project initially maintained  their roles       in  the
sponsored project, but as the ADK within the team changed, leadership shifted. In one team, this shift was
explicitly recognized by the team as a whole; in the other two teams, no one claimed new leadership roles, yet in
both specific individuals came to be recognized within the team as the person to check with on major decisions,
though in one case (expanded upon in the second case study below, team 3.4) this role was contested.
         In all case study teams, underrepresented groups, specifically women and Latinos, served in non-
leadership roles. In several case study teams students from underrepresented groups were the first to promote
designerly ADK.     Two case  studies highlight  how  leadership  and identification with    engineering or      health
sciences promoted types of ADK and intensified or mitigated a sense of underrepresentation. Data presented
here are brief due to page limitations, however, analysis of the fuller corpus of data supports these findings.

Team 3.2: Shifts towards Designerly Accountable Disciplinary Knowledge
         In team 3.2, Tom, Greg and Cynthia all planned to become biomedical engineers at the beginning of
the design class, whereas Addai explained his interest as "consulting or energy policy ... Of course I might wind
up working in BME, although I would be a little surprised at that." The design project involved creating a way
to measure movements in a patient's limb, and was sponsored by a physical therapist who described himself as
"naïve" to the nuances of the project and "not an engineer!"
         Tom led his teammates by deliberately not "micromanaging" so as not to risk ending "up doing almost
nothing as far as my real contributions to the engineering." Tom identified strongly with engineering, and
expressed this as part of his past, both in high school and in an undergraduate internship, as well as in his future
plans to get a PhD in biomedical engineering:

         "I feel the senior design is sort of just one in a series of such projects. So like in high school, I
         did these robotics competitions that every year [...] My friend and I started this club, so we
         tried to recruit as many of the nerdy kids [as] we could, and there was like 30 of us, 50 of us,
         at various levels of involvement, different schools."

         Tom's identification with engineering, beyond "nerdy" was tied to a deeper understanding of design
process than many of the students expressed: "There's all these different solution paths, right? There's all these
different ways that I can come to a solution. And then there's not even one ending. There's a lot of different
places to go and then even more ways to get there. And so you're trying to choose a path." Although Tom
embraced the complexity of the design space, he struggled to lead his team towards choosing "a path" because
of a theoretical/engineering science framing initially adopted. Tom invited his team mates into this problem
space by   offering an exemplar  that  was  accessible, as evidenced  by  many     conversations following       it, an
example of which is presented below:

         Cynthia: I seriously just learned more than I did in my entire semester of physics.
         Tom: Very difficult.
         Addai: It's such a weird notion that you can be moving-
         Cynthia: Yeah.
         Addai: -and have the same vector sum as not moving.
         Tom: Right.
         Cynthia: That is a weird thing.
         Tom: That's, that's the whole problem with these accelerometers.

         Overcoming this "problem with these accelerometers" required creativity, as Tom explained and "one
of the things that spawns creativity and innovation is having so many different perspectives work at once." Not
every team member can productively be a leader, and it is important to explore the experiences of the less vocal
team members. Cynthia, who rarely spoke during team meetings, explained mid-way through the project that
she felt she had less to contribute than her team mates. Cynthia contributions, which helped to steer the team in
designerly directions by invoking the customer needs and practical requirements of the sponsor, did not reflect
the ADK associated with their prior coursework, but her team mates recognized that her contributions did reflect
the ADK of the design course. Tom, in particular, valued Cynthia's contributions, though this was not apparent
to Cynthia until later in the design project, when the shifts in team ADK meant that her design perspectives
were of particular relevance. These shifts were brought on, to some extent, by the need to generate a prototype
that would help them convey to their sponsor some of the theoretically challenging aspects of the design goals
(Svihla, et al., 2009). Their sponsor expressed satisfaction with their final project: "I really see even more
clearly that it's a viable possibility to create this thing and before, it was, before, I had a dream list of three
things or four things that I would like to see become three dimensional and I think this is phenomenal! Because
it really is- they're bringing a lot more data to this than has ever even been questioned." All members of team

                                                 916  ·  © ISLS
                                               ICLS 2010    ·  Volume 1

3.2 expressed satisfaction with the design experience, including Cynthia ("I had a great experience!") and
decided to pursue graduate degrees in engineering, even Addai, who explained "It is a shame that this class is
the first course I've ever taken in my almost 5 years here where I have thought I know what       a biomedical
engineer is, and I wouldn't mind being one."

Team 3.4: Tensions between Pathways
       Team 3.4 was led by Steve, who completed an internship working with medical testing studies on
animals, a connection he leveraged to position the project as more of a medical project. Steve and Dillon both
planned to attend medical school, whereas Daniela and Bob planned to become engineers. This divide was a
significant one for the team, particularly given that what their sponsor desired was for the team to demonstrate,
through animal testing, the feasibility of placing an existing externally-used sensor internally to monitor
chemical changes related to a medical condition. During their weekly team meetings with their teaching
assistant, Michelle, it became increasingly apparent that the team was not designing anything. Michelle urged
them to adopt a design/engineering perspective, and tensions emerged across these disciplinary identifications.
Several interactions highlight these tensions, as Daniela struggled to interject a design perspective. In the first
example, Daniela posed the question to Michelle, turning to face her and speaking to her as she interjected this
dissonant perspective:

Daniela: I just, um, something bothers me. The fact that we are putting the sensor on the stomach during
       surgery, but then we're gonna, the surgery only lasts one to two hours and we're gonna take it off and
       the patient is gonna be, well, the surgery is gonna be over and there's not gonna be any monitoring
       afterwards, and I'm thinking well, there's higher chance of sepsis, I mean shock, afterwards, right? So,
       should we think about leaving the sensor, or... cause I don't really?
Dillon: Seriously, that could be, like, the next project.
Steve: Yeah, I think that, like are you talking about in real life? Like...?
Daniela: Yeah, like, so using it.

       Steve's question about how the device would be used ("Are you talking about in real life?) not only
challenged the design perspective Daniela attempted to adopt, but also demonstrated a disconnect in
perspective; Steve framed this as a school problem even though they were asked to solve a real-world problem.
The response Daniela received from her team mates seemed like an attack, but Daniela did not appear to take it
personally, though whenever she posed these dissenting design ideas, she tended turn her body towards
Michelle and to speak facing Michelle, as if this was how she gained voice. As they continued this conversation,
it became increasingly clear that there was a lack of agreement about what they were doing. They retreated into
an explanation of what they were "supposed" to be doing, also highlighting a lack of design perspective:

Bob: I thought the project was to do an internal sensor that you left in?
Daniela: So we are gonna?
Steve: I think that that's, be-
Daniela: How long are we gonna leave...?
Bob: I'm not sure, uh.
Steve: I think that would be something left up to surgeon or something, honestly, likelikelike, our project, I
       think it's kinda outside the scope of our project.
Bob: If we left it up to the surgeon and whoever actually designs the sensor?
Steve: Yeah, whoever is really doing this.
Bob: `cause we're not supposed to be designing anything.
Steve: Yeah, we're just seeing if you can do it. We just have two types of sensors and we're gonna see if we can
       do it- we're gonna see if a [specific type of] patient- whether or not the [chemical] levels can be
       measured or change to a degree that we, they show up, or the...
Bob: Using currently available sensors.
Daniela: I don't even know if it's okay to just leave it there.
Steve: It's all right.
Daniela: These are, I mean, sort of? Days?
Dillon: They're not gonna want to cut them open again and just take it out.

       Bob and Daniela's comments express, to varying degrees, dissatisfaction with the direction their
project was headed, but these practical, engineering perspectives were quashed by Dillon and Steve who
together, positioned these questions as peripheral or irrelevant. Later, Bob and Daniela discussed their project
and the lack of design or even engineering focus:

                                                   917    ·  © ISLS
                                             ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

Bob: Well, this project is definitely nothing like the hard-core engineering I thought engineering would be like,
        where you go, and designing a machine, to go through those, or doing material analysis? But this is a
        lot more like a bioinformatics problem with the evaluation method, doing statistical analysis of various
        sensors, correlating how they work.
Daniela: It's not really- we're not designing it, I mean, anything. It would be more design if we had to design the
        sensor, which I thought we were gonna have to do, but he didn't want, the company doesn't want us to.

Michelle leveraged this dissatisfaction to challenge Steve again to adopt an engineering perspective:

Michelle: You have to remember how you talked about all the technical aspects. I mean, most groups are having
        that problem anyway, and I think, like, that would be a good project for this class.
Steve: A grade.
Michelle: I mean, if that's not what he wants-
Bob: The sponsor said `no.' He doesn't even want us to try.

        This exchange highlights tensions between the ADK of the design course/perspective, and the ADK in
the project Steve thought would satisfy the sponsor. Steve identified with his prior animal studies experiences,
denigrating the designerly perspective as "a grade." He enthusiastically valued the opportunity to position the
design project as a continuance of his prior experiences: "The whole senior design course was worth it to me
because we went through this process where something, I'm gonna be doing time and time and time again." This
is starkly contrasted with his frustration with the designerly ADK:

Steve: It's just my biggest, my biggest frustration with this is just, like this, like this is the project, likethis is the
        project we were given. I mean if, if like Dr. Davies, and I don't mean to be disrespectful, I mean, if
        somebody didn't want us to do this project it shouldn't have been accepted. It shouldn't have been given
        to us.

        Steve constructed a science problem space and phrases such as "project we were given" indicate that a
lack of flexibility with regard to that problem space. That statement in particular is troubling because it is the
designers' job to define that problem space. Whether he recognized it or not, they did, in fact, create a problem
space, but one that was framed as a science rather than engineering problem.
        Steve brought the focus back to the novelty of their project's science goals, at least in terms of the
course. The novelty that excited Steve, troubled Michelle and Dr. Davies because it was effectively a substitute
for a design project. As Steve expressed this, Daniela once again turned to Michelle and expressed a dissenting
designerly perspective:

Steve: I mean, like a surgical procedure? I mean, that's not considered any sort of technical...? Like, a surgical
        procedure? And, like, taking readings in a rat's stomach? I mean, something that nobody else haseven
        ventured to do in this course?!
Daniela: Well, we're not designing anything.

        Because of concerns Dr. Davies met with the team. He explained to them:

        "Now, in BME, we have to be careful a little bit. It's really easy to get off and to, uh, do life
        sciences kind of things that are not engineering, and nearly any project can, uh, have
        identified some appropriate engineering dimensions for it and, uh, I think this is an important
        part of your education experience. [...] I encounter this in my own research and can identify
        all sorts of neat medical things to work on. The question is, What can you really uniquely
        contribute as an engineer? Somebody across the street, this brilliant life scientist, is not gonna
        be able to put on the table?"

        Though the sponsor was very impressed with what the team accomplished, not all team mates felt
enthusiastic about the experience: "There was no design portion to the sponsored project. The design portion
was assigned by Dr. Davies halfway through the project," and furthermore, this aspect was "created to fulfill
graduation requirements."

Discussion
Viewing these   cases of  design team   lived  narratives through   the dimensions of accountable         disciplinary
knowledge, navigation, and identification provides ways to understand how differing pathways create tensions
in capstone design, but not earlier. When the ADK is no longer the domain of problem sets, but instead reflects

                                                 918  ·   © ISLS
                                                 ICLS 2010    ·  Volume 1

the professional design    studio, students who    have  no     intention of  becoming  engineers   have  opportunity  to
exploit the lack of designerly perspective brought on by having an official pathway containing no previous
design experiences (Figure 1). Given that many students, as part of their unofficial navigation, have worked in
laboratories doing   what  Dr.  Davies    termed   "life sciences   kind   of   things that  are not   engineering" it is
unsurprising that a team leader might consider such activities to be the ADK of the design studio, and to see
them as valuable in the future. This is expressed by Steve, reflecting on the animal testing his team undertook: It
"was worth it to me because we went through this process where something, I'm gonna be doing time and time
and time again." Steve expected to find the ADK of medical school to have more in common with his prior
coursework ADK than that of the design course, and this made the design aspects very artificial ("A grade.").

 Figure 1. Changes in accountable disciplinary knowledge along pathways towards engineering and medicine.

         In contrast, Tom, whose unofficial navigation included very different experiences, desired to adopt
designerly ADK, though he struggled to do so. That it was such a challenge even given his desire and his team's
desire to engage with design highlights what an opportunity Steve had to steer his team towards a "life sciences
kind of thing." Given that official navigation pathways lack early design experiences, it is left to those with
design experience from unofficial navigation to be the chauffeurs of designerly perspectives. In these case study
teams, this role was filled by women. Thus gender emerged as a complex dimension because these women who
helped to shift their teams from problem-set ADK to designerly ADK, viewed these designerly perspectives as
somehow weaker than problem-set ADK. This perspective is warranted by their prior experiences in courses
that emphasize engineering science. Though women were not the chauffeurs of designerly ADK in all case
studies, gender is an important aspect to consider, given that problem-set ADK holds a privileged position
garnered through    prior  experiences;   this, taken  with   the degree   to   which  team  mates,  especially those  in
leadership roles recognize the need to make such a shift, may explain, in part, why Daniela's repeated appeals
for designerly perspectives were left largely unheard, whereas Cynthia's were adopted.
         The  official  navigation  creates   a  space   in   which those    who  champion   designerly   ADK   may    be
positioned   within a  design   team   as having    productive,   disruptive,   or  irrelevant perspectives.  When     the
chauffeurs of designerly ADK are from groups underrepresented in engineering, there is the potential to widen
or narrow gaps, depending on whether those perspectives are treated as productive, disruptive, or irrelevant.
         Institutional  identification of students    as BMEs     from    the first day  has   been noted  as beneficial
elsewhere (Stevens, et al., 2008). Taking identification as double-sided, it is relevant to consider students may
identify themselves as engineers or as pre-medical, and that for those who identify themselves as engineers prior
to the capstone design, official navigation offers few opportunities to reconcile what this means. Adoption of
designerly ADK depends much, therefore, on endorsement by team leaders and unofficial navigation.

Implications
The focus on engineering science in prior coursework and accompanying accountable disciplinary knowledge
places much of the burden of becoming an engineer upon the capstone design course. The open-ended nature of
the design   projects, the lack of  prior design    experience,   and  the   legitimacy of  BME     as pathways  to both
engineering and medical school means that students may steer their projects towards or away from engineering
design projects. If students so not see design as relevant to the pathway they have selected, they are unlikely to
engage with   a project   as designers,   and   may even      discourage  their team   mates from   adopting  designerly
perspectives. For these students, identification as engineers is contingent indeed.

References
Becker, H., & Carper, J. (1956). The development of identification with an occupation. The American Journal
         of Sociology, 61(4), 289-298.
Bucciarelli, L. L. (1994). Designing Engineers. Cambridge, Mass: MIT Press.
Cross, N. (2001). Designerly Ways of Knowing: Design Discipline Versus Design Science. Design Issues,
         17(3), 49-55.
Fetterman, D. M. (1989). Ethnography: Step by step. Newbury Park: CA: Sage Publications.

                                                    919     ·  © ISLS
                                             ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

Garrison, L., Stevens, R., & Jocuns, A. (2008). Gender, institutional structure and learning in an engineering
         college.
Gee, J., Staff, G., & Paul, J. (1999). An introduction to discourse analysis: Theory and method: Routledge.
Goldschmidt, G. (1996). The designer as a team of one In N. Cross, H. H. C. M. Christiaans & K. Dorst (Eds.),
         Analysing design activity (pp. 65-91). Chichester, UK: Wiley.
Gunther, J., Frankenberger, E., & Auer, P. (1996). Investigstion of Individual and Team Design Processes. In N.
         Cross, H. H. C. M. Christiaans & K. Dorst (Eds.), Analysing design activity. Chichester: Wiley.
Guzzo, R. (1986). Group decision making and group effectiveness in organizations. In P. S. Goodman (Ed.),
         Designing effective work groups (pp. 34-71). San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Hagström, T., & Kjellberg, A. (2000). Work values and early work socialization among nurses and engineers.
         Health effects of the New Labour Market. New York: Kluwer Academic.
Hatano, G., & Inagaki, K. (1986). Two courses of expertise. Child development and education in Japan, 262­
         272.
Heyman, G., Martyna, B., & Bhatia, S. (2002). Gender and achievement-related beliefs among engineering
         students. Journal of Women and Minorities in Science and Engineering, 8(1), 41.
Holland, D., Lachicotte, W., Skinner, D., & Cain, C. (1998). Identity and agency in cultural worlds. Cambridge,
         MA: Harvard Univ Press.
Jonassen, D. H. (2000). Toward a Design Theory of Problem Solving. Educational Technology Research and
         Development, 48(4), 63-85.
Kidder, D. L. (2002). The Influence of Gender on the Performance of Organizational Citizenship Behaviors.
         Journal of Management, 28(5), 629-648.
LeCompte, M. D., & Schensul, J. J. (1999). Designing & Conducting Ethnographic Research (Vol. 1). Walnut
         Creek: AltaMira Press.
LeVine, R. (2007). Culture, behavior, and personality: an introduction to the comparative study of psychosocial
         adaptation. Chicago, IL: Aldine De Gruyter.
Magleby, S., Sorensen, C., & Todd, R. (1991, November). Integrated product and process design: a capstone
         course inmechanical and manufacturing engineering. Paper presented at the Frontiers in Education
         Conference.
Ochs, E., & Capps, L. (2001). Living narrative: Creating lives in everyday storytelling: Harvard Univ Pr.
Phelps, E., & Damon, W. (1989). Problem Solving with Equals: Peer Collaboration as a Context for Learning
         Mathematics and Spatial Concepts. Journal of Educational Psychology, 81(4), 639-646.
Schön, D. A. (1983). The Reflective Practitioner: How Professionals Think in Action. New York: Basic Books.
Schreuders, P., Rutherford, B., Cox, K., & Mannon, S. (2006). Gender differences in biological engineering
         students.
Seymour, E., & Hewitt, N. (2000). Talking about leaving: Why undergraduates leave the sciences: Westview
         Press.
Skinner, D., Valsiner, J., & Holland, D. (2001). Discerning the dialogical self: A theoretical and methodological
         examination of a Nepali adolescent's narrative. Forum: Qualitative Social Research, 2(3). Retrieved
         from http://nbn-resolving.de/urn:nbn:de:0114-fqs0103187
Stevens, R., O'Connor, K., Garrison, L., Jocuns, A., & Amos, D. (2008). Becoming an Engineer: Toward a
         Three Dimensional View of Engineering Learning. Journal of Engineering Education.
Svihla, V. (2009). How differences in interaction affect learning and development of design expertise in the
         context of biomedical engineering design. The University of Texas, Austin.
Svihla, V., Petrosino, A. J., & Diller, K. R. (2009). Learning to design: Interactions and collaboration    Paper
         presented at the AERA, San Diego.
Vogt, F.  (2002).  No ethnography   without comparison:    the  methodological significance  of comparison    in
         ethnographic research. In G. Walford (Ed.), Debates and developments in ethnographic methodology
         (Vol. 6, pp. 23-42). Oxford: Elsevier.
Webb, N. M., Troper, J. D., & Fall, R. (1995). Constructive activity and learning in collaborative small groups.
         Journal of Educational Psychology, 87(3), 406-423.
Wenger, E. (1999). Communities of practice: Learning, meaning, and identity: Cambridge Univ Pr.
Wortham, S. (2004). The interdependence of social identification and learning. American Educational Research
         Journal, 41(3), 715.

Acknowledgments
This paper was greatly improved by comments from reviewers and Reed Stevens.

                                                 920  ·  © ISLS
