                                           ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

       A Visualization of Group Cognition: Semantic Network
                          Analysis of A CSCL Community
       Li Sha, The University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam Road, Hong Kong, lishahn@yahoo.com
    Christopher Teplovs, Ontario Institute for Studies in Education, University of Toronto, Canada,
                                        chris.teplovs@utoronto.ca
     Jan van Aalst, The University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam Road, Hong Kong, vanaalst@hku.hk

         Abstract: This paper reports our progress in using the Knowledge Space Visualizer
         (KSV)   as  a tool  for  formative   assessment   of  online   discourse. Whereas    social
         network  analysis   has  been used   in research  on  computer-supported      collaborative
         learning, it only examines the social structure of discourse participants, and does not
         provide information about the content of the discourse. We discuss two types of
         networks   as they  relate to online   discourse:  structural  and  semantic.  The   initial
         findings indicate   that the  KSV    can   be   used  to visualize  a Knowledge    Forum
         database, and can provide a fine-grained semantic analysis that may enable teachers
         and students  to  locate the  key ideas    around which    collective learning   may  takes
         place.

Introduction
Sawyer (2006) identifies knowledge building as one of five major educational models produced by the
learning sciences. As an educational framework, it aims to make the processes by which experts create
new knowledge more prominent and feasible in schools (Bereiter & Scardamalia, 1993; Scardamalia &
Bereiter, 2006). One of the most important features of the model is that students' effort is directed at
advancing  the  collective  knowledge   in  a   community     (Scardamalia,   2002). Students   are   not just
attempting to understand things for themselves, but aim to add something new to what is known in the
community.   In  most   implementations    in   schools, students   use Knowledge      Forum®,    a   software
environment specifically designed to support knowledge building, to share and collaboratively improve
and synthesize   ideas (Scardamalia,    2003).   Knowledge     Forum    also provides   a trace of    how  the
community's ideas develop over time.
        Although    considerable  progress  has  been    made  in  the  last decade  to   develop  innovative
classroom  practices   based on   the knowledge-creation      model  in a  variety of  school   subjects  (see
www.ikit.org and kbtn.cite.hku.hk), advances in assessment of electronic discourse have lagged. We
believe that the development of a suite of assessment tools is urgent, particularly tools that teachers and
students can use to self-assess and reflect on the nature of their work on Knowledge Forum. Previous
studies have used content analysis to examine a variety of issues including knowledge advancement
(Hakkarainen, Lipponen, & Järvelä, 2002; van Aalst, 2009; Zhang, Scardamalia, Lamon, Messina, &
Reeve, 2007), but these methods are too labor-intensive to inform how students can improve their own
knowledge-creation efforts. Analysis tools have been available for the last decade which students and
teachers can use to examine participation patterns, such as note writing and reading and social network
analysis (Burtis, 1998; de Laat, Lally, & Lipponen, 2007). While these techniques provide information
about the social structure of students' collaborative discourse, they reveal little about how ideas are
developing. They do not, for example, provide insight into questions such as "are the ideas of students
becoming   more   coherent   with one  another   other   over  time?"  Computer-assisted   visualizations  or
representations that capture both social and semantic features of the online discourse appear to hold
much promise tools for self-assessment and reflection on knowledge-creation efforts at the community
level.
        The goal of this paper was to consider the nature of such representations and to explore the use
of one  visualization  and   assessment   tool,  the   Knowledge   Space   Visualizer  (KSV;    Teplovs   and
Scardamalia, 2007; Teplovs, 2010). This work is part of a larger project, which will study the formative
assessment  practices  by  teachers   and  students,   and will   seek  to develop   a  theory  of  formative
assessment that uses data embedded in online environments like Knowledge Forum. However, in the
present paper we report our initial exploration into the nature of the representations and what they
reveal about the extent to which knowledge creation was occurring.

Background

Formative Assessment

                                                929  ·  © ISLS
                                             ICLS 2010   ·   Volume 1

In various forms, assessment drives educational practice (Biggs, 1996). It is therefore important for
innovative educational approaches from the learning sciences to demonstrate that quality outcomes are
obtained. However, it is equally important to understand how collaborative processes contribute to
such outcomes. For example, how do we know whether discourse in Knowledge Forum is likely to lead
to collective knowledge advances? How does new knowledge diffuse in a database?
       We use the concept of formative assessment to frame our work: assessment that is used by
students and the teacher to enhance learning, while the learning process still is in progress (Scriven,
1967). Interest in formative assessment received a new boost after the major review by Black and
Wiliam  (1998),    who    showed   substantial   positive   impacts   of   formative assessment     on learning.
However, these practices seem to focus on such the provision of feedback on student work (e.g., tests
and projects) and in-class questioning. Several authors have criticized the theoretical underpinnings of
formative assessment (Perrenoud, 1998; Taras, 2005), and Black and Wiliam (2009) have recently
proposed a theory of formative assessment that refers to self-regulated learning and situates formative
assessment   in   an   overall pedagogical    framework.     Most   authors   treat  formative   assessment    as
something that stands apart from the learning process. We rather consider it as a form of inquiry and as
part of knowledge creation itself. Regardless of whether students are assessing their own work or
whether they are advancing community knowledge by, for example, determining if forest fires are
caused by human activities, the underlying process is the same:            they use available evidence to ask
questions   and   test hypotheses.  This perspective     requires that   students have   data   about  their own
inquiry, which they can use to reflect on their progress and plan future actions. Such data are available
but very complex. Students and teachers need sufficiently simple representations that can inform their
reflection.

Latent Semantic Analysis and the KSV
In the last decade, much attention has been given to "assessing" information on the Web to improve the
performance of search engines. One example is Google's use of the PageRank algorithm to analyze the
structure of the Web to identify the most influential Web pages, in combination of an index of the
relevance of a Web page to a query (Brin & Page, 1998; Maslov & Redner, 2008). Latent Semantic
Analysis (LSA) is another approach to the problem that uncovers the underlying semantic structure
(meanings) of a network of documents (Landauer, 2007).
       LSA is a vector space approach. One constructs a matrix (a table) in which the columns are
types documents (e.g., books, chapters, essays, paragraphs, or computer notes) and the rows different
terms (words    or phrases);   the entries   are the  numbers  of   occurrences   of the terms   in each of   the
documents. This matrix generally has a very large number of dimensions (e.g. when the "documents"
are all the novels written in English or the entire Web), so mathematical techniques are used to produce
a matrix of more manageable dimensions that is a reasonable representation of the whole vector space.
The most common technique is Singular Value Decomposition (SVD). To make an assessment, one
then constructs and compares vectors in the SVD. Vectors can contain information about the terms in a
document, about the documents that use a specific term, or a combination. Geometrically, vectors are
"similar" if they can be said to point in the same general direction, and if their lengths are comparable.
For example, if the cosine of the angle between two vectors is 0.866 (in which case the corresponding
angle is 30 degrees), the vectors can be said to point in the same general direction; if the length of one
is 1.45 and the other 1.52 (rather than, say, 4.45 and 0.15) that would provide another indication of
their similarity.
       The Knowledge Space Visualizer (KSV; Fujita & Teplovs, 2009; Teplovs, 2010) is a Java-
based tool   that  was   developed  to visualize     networks  of   Knowledge     Forum  notes.  It uses visual
representations as well as quantitative network metrics to characterize idea-based networks. Exhaustive
similarity measures between notes are recorded as latent semantic links between notes.              These links,
and the explicit semantic links afforded through referencing, rising-above and building-on functionality
of Knowledge Forum, are then made available to the KSV. The KSV is capable of recreating the two-
dimensional representation of collections of notes in Knowledge Forum, but it also provides computer-
assisted positioning algorithms to facilitate the visualization of networks of notes.

Collective Knowledge Advancement
According to Bereiter and Scardamalia's knowledge creation theory (Bereiter, 2002; Scardamalia &
Bereiter, 2006), students in a knowledge creation classroom work progressively and collaboratively on
a number of shared topics, and their collaborative inquiries lead to the advancement of individual and
collective  knowledge.    Knowledge    advancement       is treated as   a community     rather than   individual
achievement   (Scardamalia     &   Bereiter, 2006).   Collective  knowledge   resides  in conceptual    artifacts
(ideas and theories) in the community's discourse rather than inside individual minds. Also, according

                                                  930  ·  © ISLS
                                               ICLS 2010   ·   Volume 1

to Stahl's (2006) notion of group cognition, collective knowledge is interactively achieved in discourse
and cannot be simply attributable to any particular individual mind.
         These   ideas   suggest   that    any   theoretical    exploration,   or  practical   assessment,     of  the
advancement of community knowledge depend on the degree to which researchers and teachers are
able  to accurately   describe   and evaluate       the content    of  discourses    occurring   in a   collaborative
knowledge creation community. However, despite emphasis and progress in developing collaborative
inquiry in CSCL research, little attention has been given to the assessment of collective learning (van
Aalst  &  Chan,   2007). Thus,     little is known      about  the   nature of collective  knowledge       and group
cognition, and in practice teachers are still limited in their ability to assess how collective knowledge
actually is formulated and advanced, although CSCL researchers and classroom teachers have put great
efforts to design various technology-enhanced collaborative learning environments.

Network analyses of CSCL
There are at least two significant factors underlying the above issues. First, research on CSCL often
epistemologically focuses on individual learning outcomes rather than collective knowledge growth
(Stahl,  Koschmann,    & Suthers,   2006).     Perhaps    this problem    can  be  attributed  to   the influence   of
cognitivism,   which   stresses  individual      learning  and    personal   cognition.  Second,    methodological
alignment   with  the  social nature      of collaborative    learning   has  led  many   researchers    to   examine
interactions and participation patterns, using social network analysis (SNA; de Laat, Lally, Lipponen &
Simons, 2007; Cho, Gay, Davidson, & Ingraffea, 2007). SNA considers a CSCL community as a
network in which individual learners are represented as nodes, and the relationships between learners
are represented as edges connecting those nodes. The edges indicate collaborative actions such as note
reading, building-on, and referencing other notes. Current studies on the application of SNA to CSCL
research converge at two basic aspects: network properties of a CSCL community, and participatory
characteristics of individual learners. The first of these is mainly concerned with the issues such as
network density of a collaborative learning community, and emergent cohesive cliques. The second
aspect  seeks  answers   to the  following    questions    (de  Laat,  et al,  2007):  Who    is involved     with the
collaborative learning task? Who are the active participants? And who is participating peripherally?
Current SNA studies rely primarily on mathematical computations of the frequency of ties between
learners, and ignore the content of artifacts notes and the connections in meaning between the notes
(Stahl, 2006).
         For  formative  assessment,      it  is necessary     to locate  and   describe  knowledge      creation   in
collaborative discourse. In network models of cognition, knowledge is represented as a network in
long-term   memory,   in which     nodes     correspond    to the  cognitive  units  (in the  form  of  concepts    or
schema), and the relations between the cognitive units are represented as links (Bruning, Schraw, &
Norby, 2004). By analogy, group cognition can be defined as a network of the conceptual artifacts
collectively  created in a   collaborative    learning    process.   As  information   units,  conceptual     artifacts
(Bereiter, 2002; Scardamalia & Bereiter, 2006) are the objects of collaborative work on knowledge
creation, which take the form of notes created and posted by individual learners in Knowledge Forum.
This implies that collective knowledge and group cognition can be studied and assessed from the
perspective of network analysis. Therefore, we differentiate two types of networks existing in a CSCL
community: networks of people and networks of notes. The former can serve to assess the interactive
and  participatory  patterns  of   students,     the   latter can    function as   a representation     of  collective
knowledge and group cognition.
         However, as noted earlier, most research has concentrated on the patterns of social interaction
between students rather than networks of conceptual artifacts. Of course, one may argue that a social
network of people in a CSCL community operationally corresponds to a profile of the network of notes
created  by  those people.   Social  networks       of people   only  capture  at  most   two  features    of notes ­
authorship or readership. Most SNA studies in CSCL examine patterns of social interaction between
the CSCL participants, rather than the relation between students' ideas embedded in the notes from the
perspective   of  collective  knowledge       and    group    cognition.  Therefore,     comprehensive      formative
assessments of collaborative learning must entail a multi-faceted network analysis of notes generated in
a CSCL discourse. Stahl (2006) pointed out that the meaning of the group-level constructs such as
group   cognition  constitutes   a network       of  semantic   references    within  the group     interaction,   and
collaborative learning can be viewed as the interactive construction of this referential network. In this
sense, collective knowledge and group cognition produce a semantic network of conceptual artifacts
(notes), that is, a network system based on shared meaning (Doerfel & Barnett, 1999).
         We   may  ask   what  a   semantic   network      of notes  looks   like, how   researchers    or classroom
teachers can identify the semantic networks of notes that emerge in a CSCL process, and what is the
role of semantic network of notes in assessing collective knowledge advancement and group cognition.

                                                    931  ·    © ISLS
                                            ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

This paper introduces our preliminary attempt to address these issues related to formative assessments
of CSCL. Taken together, the above analyses of the distinction between the network of people and
network of notes suggest that networks of notes can be established in two manners. Furthermore, we
propose two sub-types of network of notes: structural (physical) network and semantic network. A
structural network of notes or people refers to a visible network of notes or people whereby the linkage
between notes or people is physically established by any one of the collaboration operations, such as
note reading, building-on, and referencing in a Knowledge Forum database. An inquiry thread (Zhang,
et al., 2007), defined as a series of notes that share a problem and constitute a conceptual stream in a
collaborative inquiry, manifests the limitations of the studies on the spatial threads of notes, as well as
structural network of notes in understanding the formation and advancement of collective knowledge
and group   cognition in a   collaborative  inquiry   discourse. An  inquiry thread   represents a semantic
connection   between  notes  by content analysis    of  each individual   note, namely,   and  therefore is a
semantic  network  of  notes  from a   network    analysis   perspective.  Similarly, Manca,    Delfino,  and
Mazzoni (2009) introduced a semantic coding scheme aiming to obtain a relatively complete picture of
social interactions among people in a web forum that the structural (physical) network construct cannot
provide. However, these methods require manual coding of note content, which is very labor-intensive.
Because  of  the two  considerable drawbacks--the        amount  of labor  involved   and their  reliability--
teachers may hesitate to use them for formative assessment. Our study is an attempt to meet this
challenge, and uses the KSV, an innovative visualization and assessment tool of collective knowledge,
to automatically  identify the  emergent    semantic   networks  of notes   under a   pre-set condition  with
reference to semantic closeness between them, and the as structural networks of notes in a CSCL
discourse. !

Research Context and Methods
The KSV was used to study part of a Knowledge Forum database created by a class of 41 Form 4
(Grade   10) students  taking   physics at    a  secondary   school  in   Hong   Kong.   The   database   had
approximately    880  notes, which   were     distributed  over   several  views  (shared     workspaces)   in
Knowledge Forum. The teacher had several years of prior experience with Knowledge Forum, and was
attempting to align her classroom teaching more with the knowledge-creation model, particularly by
encouraging student-to-student classroom talk. The students' presentations and the talk that followed
appeared to break with the more typical classroom discourse in Asian classrooms in which students do
not ask  many    questions (Li, 2009).  The     curriculum  consisted of   three  units of  study: heat   and
temperature (3 months), mechanics (6.5 months), and waves (1.5 months).
         In this classroom it was difficult to integrate the use of Knowledge Forum on a daily basis.
Rather, it was used during specific periods to follow up classroom learning and to support the two
projects. For example, during the heat and temperature unit, the class as a whole discussed thermal
questions such as how to keep a drink warm as long as possible (Linn & Hsi, 2000) and why people
lived in igloos,  which  are  made   from    ice and   would   intuitively seem   cold. Students   also  used
Knowledge Forum to discuss their solar cooker designs, and in this, they were asked to refer to physics
concepts and phenomena such as the greenhouse effect and methods for focusing energy from the sun
on a beaker of water at the center of their solar cooker. During the mechanics unit, students similarly
used Knowledge Forum to discuss puzzlements about Newton's laws and their analysis of motion on
rides at an amusement park. Although the amount of work in Knowledge Forum was not as extensive
as in some published studies, the computer notes that were generally focused on the tasks at hand and
contained explanations in which students used relevant science ideas, although a substantial number of
notes dealt with the logistics of projects.

Results
The Knowledge Forum database had several comprehensive views for two units of study: heat and
temperature,  and mechanics.    Each unit    had several  sub-topics. For   example,    the students studied
mechanics by discussing how the cable car works in the view called `Cable Car'. This view was
spatially separated from the `Mechanics' view.!

Two Types of Network of Notes
Two kinds of network were generated with the KSV. Figure 1 shows structural networks, and Figure 2
semantic networks. The directional lines in the structural network represent links between notes by
note building-on. The lines in the semantic networks in Figure 2 are non-directional, suggesting that
the notes are linked to one another in meaning, which is reciprocal. The color of node denotes a
participant in Knowledge Forum (electronic version of the paper).

                                                932  ·  © ISLS
                                         ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

        Mathematically, semantic closeness between notes in KSV is quantified as the cosine between
vectors representing  their content. High  cosine   values  denote  semantically similar  note content
(Teplovs & Scardamalia, 2007). The KSV allows us to set a link visibility threshold. When the cosine
between any two notes exceeds this threshold, the KSV joins the notes with an edge (shown in Figure
2). The lower the threshold is, the more semantic links between notes in the network are displayed. In
this study, the semantic coefficient was set at 0.75. Semantic links between notes are invisible in Figure
1 because KSV allows users to choose either of the two types of network.

                     Figure 1. Obtained structural network in the Cable_car view

                     Figure 2. Obtained semantic network in the Cable_car view

        Visually, the number of lines in the structural network is obviously much less than that in the
semantic network, implying that many notes are linked to one another semantically but not structurally.
This finding can be quantitatively reinforced by the contrast of the network properties between them.
The Cable_car view contains 52 notes, 2391 words in total. The average size of note (i.e., words/notes)
is 45 words. There are 22 lines (physical note links) in the structural network, which correspond to 22
physical actions (i.e., note building-on or referencing) that took place while the students collaboratively
worked on that topic in Knowledge Forum. There are 281 links in the semantic network. In SNA,
degree refers to the number of lines incident with each node in a graph; network density is defined as
the ratio of the actual number of lines to the maximum possible lines, with a value falling within the
range between 0 and 1 (Wasserman & Faust, 1994). The density of the semantic network is .212; the
density of the structural network is .017, much less than the former. This finding implies that for a
collection of notes in the Cable Car view, its semantic network is much cohesive than the structural
network. The notes that are not linked to one another by a physical collaborative learning action are not
necessarily disconnected with each other semantically.

Visualization of Group Cognition
In the  design of a  KF database, the  notes embedded     within  a  view often  converge at the same
discussion topic. For example,   the  Heat view     was intended  to be   a workspace where    students

                                             933  ·  © ISLS
                                         ICLS 2010  ·    Volume 1

collaboratively learned the concept of heat. In practice, a classroom teacher may want to examine how
student online discussions in Knowledge Forum unfolded around the shared topic.

                    Figure 3. Obtained semantic networks within the Heat view

Table 2: The main overlapping words in each sub-semantic network

Sub-networks     Main overlapping words
N1               clothes (24) body (17) air (16) energy (14) warm (10) feel (6) transfer (6) cold (5)
                 theory (5) trap (5)
N2               ice (11) live (7) house (4), outside (3)
N3               ice (16) energy (14) lemon (12) tea (11) loss (9) heat (8) specific (7) water (6)
N4               heat (10) copper (9) water (7) specific (6) energy (5) capacity (5) conductor (3)
N5               free (10) conduct (5) electrons (5) electron (5) metal (4) energy (4) shell (4) atom (3)
                 heat (3)
N6               air (17) copper (9) water (9) gravity (7) flame (6) electrons (6)
N7               theory (33) air (23) energy (22) heat (20) liquid (13) ice (12) water (11) density (11

                 Figure 4. Sub-topics in the semantic network of notes in the Mechanics view

        Figure 3 shows    that the KSV  revealed    that  there were  seven clusters   of notes within the
general semantic network   of  the Heat view.    These   clusters can  also be viewed     as semantic sub-
networks. Table 2 shows the major theme for each semantic sub-network. For example, the students
who wrote the notes within N1 primarily were trying to understand the concept of Heat by connecting
it to the daily life phenomena such as clothing from the perspective of heat transfer. Shared meaning of
the notes in N3 seems to converge on heat transfer in liquids such as lemon tea, and water. Similar
findings can be seen from the semantic network of another view in the same KF database shown in
Figure  4 (Mechanics). Three   themes  in the view    Mechanics    can be   identified by  latent semantic

                                             934  ·  © ISLS
                                           ICLS 2010   ·   Volume 1

analysis: Roller   Coaster,   Cable Car,   and  Abyss.     Similarly,   this finding  suggests  that   students
collectively worked on several sub-topics under the Mechanics view.
        We conducted an inquiry thread analysis (Zhang et al., 2007) on the Heat view, and found
seven inquiry threads (i.e., principal problems). Four themes identified in the inquiry thread analysis
correspond to the first five semantic networks (i.e., sub-discussion topics) shown in Table 2. This
provides  some  preliminary    evidence  that  the  KSV    can reliably uncover    sub-discussion   topics that
emerge in the discourse of collaborative knowledge creation.

Conclusion
This study demonstrates a combination of computer-assisted content analysis and network analysis for
formative   assessments    of CSCL,    which   is   aligned  with   the appeal    for developing    innovative
methodologies for analyzing participation and discourse processes in CSCL (Lipponen, Rahikainen, &
Hakkarainen, 2002).
        We can draw at least the following tentative conclusions. First, semantic network analysis
offers an alternative approach for examining the relationship among the computer notes in a CSCL
community in terms of shared meaning making, other than the traditional network analyses that mainly
concentrate on the participation patterns of students. This expands the scope of formative assessments
of collaborative learning by empirically revealing and conceptualizing two kinds of network of notes
(i.e., structural network vs. semantic network). Second, various sub-discussion topics uncovered by
latent semantic analysis in the heat view reveals the complexity of collaborative learning dynamics.
This  finding implies  that   collective learning   in this class   unfolded   by  breaking  down    a general
concept/theory (e.g., Heat, Mechanics) into a number of sub-discussion topics (i.e., inquiry threads).
Third, the notes with a certain semantic closeness may illustrate the workplace whereby collective
knowledge might be forged due to the shared meaning of those notes. The overlapping words in a
semantic network to some degree facilitate the visualization of the key meanings of the conceptual
artifacts of group cognition. For the purpose of formative assessment of collective learning, the use of
the KSV as an assessment tool provides a fine-grained semantic analysis that may enable teachers and
students to locate the key ideas around which collective learning may takes place. It was found in this
study  that identification of  the  sub-topics  within   a view  is generally   aligned  with  inquiry  thread
analysis (Zhang et al., 2007). However, thread analysis used in that study was time consuming, because
the theme of each thread of notes (shared topic) required labor-intensively content analysis of each
Knowledge Forum note. Fourth, many current studies in assessment of CSCL use a whole CSCL
community    as unit  of analysis,  which   might   be   appropriate   when   research  is to  assess  student
participation patterns by SNA throughout a CSCL process. Our study suggests that individual views as
unit of   analysis be appropriate   as   well  for  assessing  the  processes   of collaborative    knowledge
construction and creation.
        Our   preliminary     analyses   using the   KSV    have    yielded   some    findings regarding   the
characteristics of semantic network and the potential for further exploring the role of this kind of
emergent networks in assessing how knowledge creation proceeds collaboratively in a Knowledge
Forum database. Thus far, we still know little about the role of these emergent semantic networks in
formative assessments of collaborative knowledge creation. The present study is just starting point
along this direction. We believe that in order to have efficient and productive formative assessments of
CSCL, semantic network analysis should be adopted along with other types of analysis such as content
analysis of the notes within a selected semantic network.

References
Bereiter, C., &    Scardamalia,  M.    (1993).  Surpassing   ourselves:   An   inquiry  into   the nature  and
          implications of expertise. Chicago, IL: Open Court.
Biggs, J. (Ed.). (1996). Testing: To educate or to select? Education in Hong Kong at the crossroads.
          Hong Kong, China: Hong Kong Educational Publishing Company.
Black,  P., &   Wiliam,  D.   (1998).  Assessment    and   classroom    learning. Assessment   in   Education:
          Principles, Policy, & Practice, 5, 7-74.
Black,  P., &   Wiliam,  D.   (2009).  Developing    the   Theory   of Formative   Assessment.     Educational
          Assessment, Evaluation and Accountability, 21(1), 5-31.
Brin, S., & Page, L. (1998). The anatomy of a large-scale hypertextual Web search engine. Computer
          Networks and ISDN Systems, 30, 107-117.
Burtis, P. J. (1998). Analytic toolkit for Knowledge Forum. Toronto, ON.
Cho, H., Gay, G., Davidson, B., & Ingraffea, A. (2007). Social networks, communication styles, and
          learning performance in a CSCL community. Computers & Education, 49(2), 309-329

                                                935  ·  © ISLS
                                            ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

de Laat, M., Lally, V., Lipponen, L., & Simons, R-J. (2007). Investigating patterns of interaction in
         networked learning and computer-supported collaborative learning: A role for Social Network
         Analysis. Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 2, 87-103.
Fujita, N. and Teplovs, C. (2009). Automating the Analysis of Collaborative Discourse: Identifying
         Idea Clusters. Paper presented at CSCL 2009.
Hakkarainen, K., Lipponen, L., & Järvelä, S. (2002). Epistemology of inquiry and computer-supported
         collaborative learning. In T. Koschmann, R. Hall & N. Miyake (Eds.), CSCL 2: Carrying
         forward the conversation (pp. 11-41). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Landauer, T. K. (2007). LSA as a theory of meaning. In T.K. Landauer, D.S. McNamara, S. Dennis &
         W.   Kintsch    (Eds.). Handbook    of  Latent  Semantic   Analysis  (pp.  3-34). Mahwah,      N.J. :
         Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Li, J. (2009). Learning to self-perfect: Chinese beliefs about learning. In C. K. K. Chan & N. Rao
         (Eds.), Revisiting the Chinese learner: Changing contexts, changing education (pp. 35-69).
         Hong Kong: Springer/Comparative Education Research Centre.
Linn, M. C., & Hsi, S. (2000). Computers- teachers, peers: Science learning partners. Mahwah, NJ:
         Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Lipponen, L., Rahikainen, M., & Hakkarainen, K. (2002). Effective participation and discourse through
         a  computer     network:  Investigating elementary     students' computer   supported     interaction.
         Journal of Educational Computing Research, 27(4), 355­384.
Manca, S., Delfino, M., & Mazzoni, E. (2009). Coding Procedures to Analyse Interaction Patterns in
         Educational Web Forums. Journal of Computer Assisted Learning, 25(2), 189-200.
Maslov, S., & Redner, S. (2008). Promise and pitfalls of extending Google's PageRank algorithm to
         citation networks. The Journal of Neuroscience, 28, 11103-11105.
Perrenoud,  P.   (1998).  From   formative  evaluation   to a controlled  regulation of   learning processes.
         Towards a wider conceptual field. Assessment in Education: Principles, Policy & Practice,
         5(1), 85-102.
Sawyer, R. K. (2006). The Cambridge handbook of the learning sciences. New York, NY: Cambridge
         University Press.
Scardamalia, M. (2003). Knowledge building environments: Extending the limits of the possible in
         education and knowledge work. In A. DiStefano, K. E. Rudestam & R. Silverman (Eds.),
         Encyclopedia of distributed learning (pp. 269-272). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.
Scardamalia, M. (2002). Collective cognitive responsibility for the advancement of knowledge. In B.
         Smith (Ed.), Liberal education in a knowledge society (pp. 67­98). Chicago: Open Court.
Scardamalia, M. & Bereiter, C., (2006). Knowledge building: Theory, pedagogy and technology. In R.
         K. Sawyer (Ed.), The Cambridge handbook of the learning sciences (pp. 97­115). New York:
         Cambridge University Press.
Scriven, M. (1967). The methodology of evaluation. In R. Tyler, R. Gagne & M. Scriven (Eds.),
         Perspectives on curriculum evaluation. Chicago, IL.: Rand McNally and Co.
Stahl, G.   (2006).  Group     cognition:   Computer     support   for  building  collaborative    knowledge.
         Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Taras, M.   (2005).  Assessment    - Summative    and    formative  -  Some  theoretical  reflections. British
         Journal of Educational Studies, 53(4), 466-478.
Teplovs, C.   and  Scardamalia,   M.  (2007).   Visualizations  for knowledge    building assessment.   Paper
         presented at the AgileViz workshop, CSCL 2007.
Teplovs,   C.    (2010). Visualization   of  knowledge   spaces     to enable concurrent,   embedded     and
         transformative    input  to knowledge   building   processes.   Unpublished  doctoral   dissertation.
         University of Toronto.
van Aalst,  J.,  &  Chan,  K.K.C.    (2007). Student-directed    assessment   of  knowledge  building   using
         electronic portfolio. The Journal of Learning Sciences, 16, 175-220.
van Aalst,    J. (2009).  Distinguishing    knowledge    sharing,   construction, and   creation   discourses.
         International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 4, 259-288.
Zhang, J., Scardamalia, M., Lamon, M., Messina, R., & Reeve, R. (2007). Socio-Cognitive Dynamics
         of Knowledge      Building   in the  Work    of 9-   and  10-Year-Olds.   Educational   Technology
         Research and Development, 55, 117-145.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by a grant from the Research Grants Council of Hong Kong to the third
author (Grant No. HKU 752508H). We also thank the teacher and students whose Knowledge Forum
database we analyzed.

                                                936  ·   © ISLS
