                                             ICLS 2010      Volume 2

         Transformative Play: Games as 21st Century Curriculum
             Sasha A Barab, Melissa Gresalfi, Anna Arici, Patrick Pettyjohn, Adam Ingram-Goble,
              Indiana University, 201 N. Rose Ave, School of Education, Bloomington, IN 47408
sbarab@indiana.edu, mgresalf@indiana.edu, aarici@indiana.edu, ppettyjo@indiana.edu, adamaig@indiana.edu

         Abstract: In this presentation, we will discuss the design history, comparison studies, and
         scaling  research  focused   on   four units    we  have   designed  based    on  our  theory   of
         transformational play. The goal is to both discuss the power of these designs, but also the
         challenges of scaling such innovative learning experiences internationally.      These four units
         (one focused on mathematics, science, language arts, and social studies) are situated in an
         online, multiplayer  videogame     called  Quest   Atlantis,  supporting  over   25,000  children
         worldwide.  Each   presented  unit has  gone    through multiple   iterations of implementation,
         analysis, and redesign, informed by empirical data and our evolving theoretical framework.      In
         reviewing both results from comparison studies and differences in international engagement
         with the units, our accounts will illuminate the theory transformational play, how the theory
         has shaped design and interpretations of findings.

Introduction
We, as a society, are in the middle of a troubling transition in which teachers and schools are held increasingly
accountable for students' acquisition of particular content but, at the same time, are facing a generation of
students who view the curriculum as largely irrelevant to their own lives. This is, in part, because while much of
the world is experiencing significant change in the ways we engage content, most K-12 classrooms continue to
operate with an underlying cultural logic of "print-based" literacies and pedagogies in which the teacher dictates
the learning process and textbooks determine what is true. Given this emphasis, it is not surprising that as
students progress in the American educational system, their academic performance and engagement decreases
when compared with other countries (UNESCO Institute for Statistics, 2007). This is especially true for students
who are disenfranchised from classroom structures that focus on compliance without rationale, position content
as facts to be memorized, and position students as objects to be changed as opposed to empowered change
agents. In fact, a central argument of the papers in this symposium is that such positioning of person and content
is pedagogically ineffective, personally disempowering, and conceptually inadequate if our goal is to prepare
youth for meaningful participation.
         The  concern  with  students' meaningful     participation is not  new;  Resnick   (1987)   stated that the
fundamental challenge facing educators is to align the gap between how learning content occurs in schools and
how it is used outside of schools. Specifically, she concluded that "schooling is coming to look increasingly
isolated from the rest of what we do...the packages of knowledge and skills that schools provide seem unlikely
to map directly ... from school to out-of-school use." While such a perspective inspires new visions of the
possible, realizing those possibilities in the context of schools has proven to be a significant challenge. Our
work attempts to realize some of these possibilities by leveraging the tools and technologies associated with
online videogames (Gee, 2003; Squire & Jan, 2007).        We believe that videogames have the potential to bridge
this gap because they, unlike any other form of curriculum, can offer entire worlds in which learners are central,
important participants; a place where the actions one takes has a significant impact on the world; and a place in
which what you know is directly related to what you are able to do and, ultimately, who you become.
         For the last decade, we have been working to understand the power of videogames for supporting
learning, translating emergent insights into design work from which we have continued to evolve our insights as
they are cycled back into subsequent designs and analyses (Barab et al., 2007; Barab, Gresalfi, Dodge, &
Ingram-Goble, in press). In this symposium we simultaneously advance a theory and report on the curricula we
have designed, with the goal of illuminating for others the possibilities of leveraging game-based technologies
and methodologies   to  support   content  learning in   actual schools. Building  on    this theory and    our  own
experiences designing for and studying student learning, we have begun to build a theory of Transformational
play, which describes a strategy for situating the learner and curricular content within a play context. The idea of
transformational play  highlights relations among     the three  interconnected elements   of  person, content,  and
context. Specifically, transformational   play  involves  positioning  students as empowered      actors who    must
understand and enlist academic content in order to effectively transform problematic scenarios.
         The purpose of this symposium is to overview a series of comparison studies that investigated the
power of transformational play in terms of its instantiation in three designs (one focused on mathematics,
science,  and    language  arts)  situated  in   an   online,   multiplayer  videogame     called  Quest    Atlantis
(http://QuestAtlantis.org. Each unit that will be presented in the session has gone through multiple iterations of
classroom implementation, analysis, and redesign, informed by empirical data and our evolving theoretical

                                                   93     ISLS
                                                ICLS 2010    Volume 2

framework about transformational play. In this presentation, we describe comparison study implementations of
the designed units, first overviewing how the designs were intended to support learner intentionality, content
legitimacy,  and contextual   consequentiality   and then    how  they   supported   such  positioning  in  practice. In
building the latter characterizations, we looked through field notes, captured video, submitted work, interviews,
and in-game   log   files from which   to build  implementation     profiles. Using   these   data forms and  the pre-
determined focus on the elements of transformational play (person, content, and context), one researcher built
initial claims and then worked with another researcher to form these into final arguments as presented below.
The focus here is not to simply demonstrate that our designs scored significantly higher than the controls.
Instead, our  claims  are  theoretically motivated   with the  goal   of shedding    light on mechanism     and further
justifying the value of transformational play as a powerful theory for education.

Taiga Fishkill: Example 1 of Transformational Play
The Taiga Fishkill unit is an interactive narrative set within an aquatic habitat (Taiga National Park) where a
serious  ecological problem    has resulted  in many   fish  dying. Students   are  hired  as environmental  scientists
whose job is to investigate the fish population decline, and propose solutions for the problem. To prepare the
student for this role, the curriculum begins with an over-worked scientist, Abby, asking the visiting player to
make several observations of and corrections to conditions of fish tanks she is using to run some experiments
(see Figure 3). In one tank, the student identifies the dissolved oxygen in the tank as low, causing the fish to
breath near the surface, and in another they observe that a significantly acidic pH has killed some fish. As the
player is scaffolded through resolving each tank's problems, Abby becomes impressed by the player's growing
sophistication at analyzing and solving the problems, and recommends that they may use this understanding to
solve  the fish population   decline problem    at the local  national   park where   Abby    used  to work--thereby,
legitimizing the disciplinary content.
         Experiential consequentiality    is supported  by   creating key    decision points  that  require leveraging
disciplinary formalisms, and enable the player to observe and interrogate the consequences of those decisions.
For example, in investigating the problem, students are introduced to concepts such as erosion, eutrophication,
water quality, and system dynamics. As they are introduced to what these concepts mean, they experience how
these concepts have meaning by making decisions about how to improve water quality. Students, for example,
may decide to target the role of nitrates in the water by asking the indigenous tribes, who are farming near the
water, to stop their activity; they might focus on the role of erosion by asking the loggers to leave the area, or
they might attribute the cause of the fish death to overfishing, and ask the commercial fishing company to close.
After making this decision, students are able to see the consequences of their recommendation by traveling to a
future  world and   considering the  ramifications  of  their decision.  Intentionality is  supported  by   positioning
students as expert helpers who can impact the situation by determining the cause of in the diminishing fish
population. Players are asked to carry out various investigations into the health of the waterway and the impact
of the nearby park activities--and non-player characters treat them as if they have the skills and dispositions to
succeed. More specifically, they interview people with various perspectives on the problem, collect and analyze
data to develop a hypothesis about the problem, propose an informed and practical solution, and examine the
impact of their recommendation--all practices designed to position them in the role of a scientist. Because there
is no clear "right answer," students have to balance between what the data are telling them about the river, their
own values about the park community, and their sympathies that might lie with some community groups. Thus,
their decisions about how to improve the park, and their positioning as an environmental scientist (as opposed to
a student) who makes scientifically knowledgeable decisions, becomes an opportunity to become a scientist.

         Figure 2. Screenshot from Taiga Fishkill showing a popup sequence associated with the fishtank

         A comparison study was conducted with four equivalent classes in a suburban school (see Arici, 2008).
The Traditional condition curriculum was text-based, and activities were teacher-led. The 3D MUVE condition
was virtual-based, and placed the teacher in the role of resource, while students uncovered information within
the larger structure of the Quest Atlantis virtual world. Both conditions were taught by the same teacher,
presented with the same domain content, and assignments were aligned so that they were highly similar in their
tasks. However,   the traditional  condition's  lessons involved    lecture,  class discussion, and  nicely organized
notes, with micro-contexts serving as examples (a new exemplar for each new concept taught, as typically found

                                                    94     ISLS
                                                ICLS 2010      Volume 2

in textbooks). The 3D multiuser virtual environment (MUVE) condition's lessons were embedded within a
macro-context, the  story  of Taiga,   where    all  science   content was     distributed in  the game,  needing   to be
uncovered and solved, within the overarching narrative about the fish decline in a local river.
        The posttest showed significant learning gains for both conditions. However, the QA group learned
significantly more than the traditional group as indicated by a repeated measures analysis of variance [F(1,115)
= 6.53, p < .01]. Further, the delayed posttest, administered at an 8 week delay, showed the 3D MUVE groups
(M = 23.65, SD = 5.85) also scoring significantly higher than the traditional groups (M = 18.4, SD = 6.52)
[F(3,87) = 5.73, p < .001]. Also, twice during the study, students were interrupted from their activities (both
groups doing an equivalent assignment) to respond to a series of questions on their current state of engagement
in the task at hand. Comparison between conditions showed that the 3D MUVE groups (M = 6.50, SD = 2.10)
scored significantly higher engagement and enjoyment than the traditional groups (M = 2.64, SD = 1.94) when
collapsing across group membership [t(104) = 9.73, p < .001]. Further, when asked why you were doing this
activity, 98% of the traditional said because they were required while only 54% of the 3D MUVE students
selected this reason with 46% selecting that they were doing the activity because "they wanted to be doing it,"
not because  required.  Additional   measures   of   engagement     included   the degree   to  which  students opted  to
participate in non-required activities. In the 3D group, 38 out of 51 (74.5%) opted to do the optional quests,
while in the traditional group only 2 out of 54 (3.7 %) did the `extra credit.'
        While these results demonstrated the power of the intervention for supporting important outcomes, it
was also our goal to illuminate why transformational play was a powerful design pedagogy. Toward this end,
our qualitative examination of both classrooms focused in on the positioning of person, content, and context. As
a first example, we contrast two dialogues over similar scientific data to illuminate the power of positioning the
data in terms of a fantastical problem.
 Traditional Curriculum                                        Intervention Curriculum
 G1: What did you get for Site A?                              G1: Okay, no Turbidity. That is good.
 G2: good, ok, good, ok, good, ok.                             G2: I think this one is really bad. I'm pretty sure.
 G3: that's what I got.                                        G1: Now I want to check water sample A. What do I
 G1: For site B, I got ok, ok, bad, bad, ok, bad.              do?
 G2: For Site C, I got good, ok, good, ok, ok, bad.            G2: Just look at each of the chemical indicators, for
 G1: Would 0.3 count as being good?                            A, B, and C. So, like with pH, look up the level at
 G3: I got ok, ok, bad.                                        site C, and then look, it is in a range that is listed
 This continues until they finish all of the list...           here as being `very good' for aquatic life! Oh good!
 G1: Good! So I only missed one!                               Okay, now you do it. The pH...

 G2: Hey, he opened the blinds!                                G1: It  is very  good  for....  Wait... (reading  aloud
 G1: It's sunny!                                               while typing) The chemical indicator for A, B and C
 G3: I'm wearing shorts on Sunday to the thing.                is very good for `aquatic life'.    Okay, so then go on
 G1: What thing?                                               to the next   one,  Dissolved   Oxygen.  Okay,   for  the
 G3: I have practice Sunday.                                   chemical   indicator, D.O.,  the  level is unhealthy  in
 G2: Hey, I   got new   volleyball   shoes and  they   are     sample A. Okay, Location A, it is a very unhealthy
 awesome!   I had  basketball  shoes    earlier which    is    level, but it is fine in the other places. (turning to
 fine, but I didn't want to scuff them. And so I got           friend) And the p is lower case in the 'pH'.
 new Asic shoes, and they are like...                          G2:  Hey,   I   know  why   everything  is worse   at C.
 G3: Really grippy?                                            Because    that is  where   everything  ends   up...  see
 G2: yeah, and I got new knee high socks too.                  (pointing to Y shaped river, with C at bottom)... see,
 G1: I don't get like the questions.                           this is where the rivers come together, so everything
 G2: What are the main water quality concerns at sites         bad ends up going there!
 A and C? (reads question)
 G1: It's like really cold in here.                            G1: Okay. I'm on phosphates, what are you on? Holy
 G2: Mr. Summers, (whining) we need help!                      cow! The phosphates are like so frickin' high!
 G1: Why is he talking to Daniel when he knows we              Can I say they are `bad'? That's like a kindergarten
 need help??                                                   word, but okay.
 G2: My pupils are really big. They are a little smaller       G2: Okay.   Now,    turbidity... Ohh!   That's not   very
 right now, but they are usually really big.                   good. Look at the turbidity.
 G3: you have a freckle on your eye!                           G1: Talking aloud while typing... `The aquatic life
 G2: I love that freckle!                                      might be a little stressed, as shown in sample...'
These contrasting cases illuminate the differences in both the kind of intention that students form as they work
on a context that they are trying to transform, and in the legitimacy of the way content is taken up when it
becomes a tool to be used to solve meaningful problems. This positioning changes the experience of learning
from compliance to engaged participation where the feedback from the context frames participation as opposed
to teacher reprimands.

                                                      95     ISLS
                                               ICLS 2010     Volume 2

          The legitimacy of content was further substantiated because there is an object of refutation, grounding
the conversation in terms of particulars that have substance, instead of what could conceivably be abstracted
content. This is evident Chris and Jake's interaction as they analyze data.
          Chris: "Whoa! Look at the temperature for B! That's WAY over. Way too high!
          Let's go get the third one!"
          Jake: "Okay!" (They each went to get the sample in Taiga).
          Jake: "Now back to the lab. Let's compare it to the first two."
          Just then the bell rang.
          Chris: "Awwww! I'll do the next one at home."
          [while packing up their bags, they continued]
          Jake: "But man, did you see that temperature? Twenty-two degrees CELCIUS!"
          Chris: "No man, that's twenty-two POINT FIVE! Way too high."
          Jake: "That can't be good for the fish."
          Chris: "Yeah! I know!"
This grounding in particulars is bolstered when student choices impact the response of the world, creating an
even stronger sense of situational agency.
          J: At first I thought the Mulus were to blame, because the chief was mean to me, and I didn't like him.
          S: That's because you were mean to him first! [referring to choices the other student made in game]
          J: Yeah, yeah. I know. ... But you have to go more by the information that the charts give you, like the
          water samples and chemicals (indicators) in the water. You need to conduct tests on the water before
          you can really decide what is going on.
Because videogames provide a sense of consequentiality, intentionality involves more than simply caring, and
legitimacy involves more than contextualizing, but instead the contextual responsiveness leads to a way of
acting; leading to the development of what some have called dispositions towards engaging.

Ander City: Example 2 of Transformational Play
The Ander City unit positions students as political arbitrators when a child who lives in the city contacts them
for help.  Their current mayor is up for re-election, and he is running under a campaign of innovation. His
opponent is challenging the mayor's innovative agenda, and claims that traditional methods of running the city
are superior. The problem is that although both candidates completely disagree with each other, they BOTH
claim that they have proof to support their claims. Is someone lying?     Desperate for help, the children of Ander
city hire Questers to become statistical consultants who can help them figure out who really is making the best
decisions for kids.   The unit targets three key ideas in statistics: different statistical tools can reveal different
insights into data; statistical tools can be used opportunistically to support different perspectives; and beliefs can
shape interpretations of results.  In this way, students learn about both how to use statistical tools such as mean,
median, and mode, and also learn how they work as mechanisms for making decisions about the world. In this
unit, intentionality is supported   as players are  positioned  as  central decision makers  in determining   which
candidate is making the best decisions for the town; as students learn more about the decisions the candidates
are making, they can support one candidate or the other through the statistical tools that they choose to leverage.
Legitimacy  is supported   by designing     scenarios  that  allow  for  different recommendations    based on  the
disciplinary tool that is leveraged. By designing the data so that students' choice of tool is directly linked to the
outcomes, we serve to position students' disciplinary decisions as having legitimate impact on the decision that
is made. Finally, consequentiality is supported by allowing students' decisions to impact the final outcome for
the town as to whom is eventually elected mayor.
          Ander City was part of a comparison study that involved comparing two matched curricular units about
statistical data analysis. The units were parallel in that they both targeted the same key ideas (measures of
center, distribution,   sampling,  graphing)   and  included  "contexts"    which  situated students' mathematical
engagement.    The units differed, however, with respect to the details of the contexts (actual situations and
duration of storyline); the form of the unit (paper-based activities vs. online videogame); and the designed
accountability structures (teacher or unspecified external reviewer vs. fictional protagonists.       Two 7th grade
classes were included in the study, both taught by the same teacher. Students in these classes ranged from 12-14
years of age. Although the classes were not tracked, one class' achievement was generally lower than the other,
and the students in the lower-scoring class were identified by the classroom teacher as "less motivated" than the
higher-scoring class. The lower-scoring class used the immersive videogame (Quest Atlantis) for their statistics
unit; the higher-scoring class used the comparison curriculum (comparison).        Results of the comparison suggest
that the Ander City class learned more. Specifically, a repeated measures ANOVA revealed a significant effect
for curriculum, F(1,23)=5.355,      p=.03. These   results  suggest that  students  using Quest Atlantis  improved
significantly more than the comparison class, despite their lower pre-test score.
          The differences between these implementations can be understood in part by considering the extent to
which students were positioned relative to the units. Seen clearly through their submitted work and in whole-

                                                    96     ISLS
                                              ICLS 2010        Volume 2

class discussions,  students in the  Quest Atlantis    classroom    appeared  to   be playing transformationally with
content, while students in the comparison classroom were grounded more profoundly solely in the domain of
mathematics. For example, one of the first decisions that students have to make concerns which brand of bike is
safer--the innovative brand that Mayor Enoch supports, or the traditional brand that the city has always used,
which Mr. Grant prefers. Students collect data on both brands of bikes, and then analyze the data however they
choose. In  the  response  that follows,  we  can   see how     the student was    positioned relative to the activity,
specifically, that the student was acting with intention, in order to take action on a legitimate context, the
outcomes of which were consequential.
1     "I analyzed the data by making a bar graph then added each 10 skids up and came out with speedy
2     spokes for    the answer  as  which  is most     reliable bike  to stop soon    enough  before   wrecking  into
3     something. But I just noticed that the Speedy Spokes skid can be anywhere from 30 in. to 54 in. and the
4     Rollin steady skids were from 43 in. to 55 in. I would much rather be on a Rollin Steady bike because it
5     is more consistent to what we are looking for here in Ander City so you don't run into the cars at stop
6     sign. The reason why I chose range for the analysis is because I just thought that with a more consistent
7     stopping bike that you wouldn't be worrisome about you stopping before the traffic or in the traffic this is
8     why I chose the range for my analysis."
        Evidence that the student was positioned with intentionality can be seen first in the students' use of the
first person in describing her decision: throughout the recommendation, the student positions herself as the
agent, both in terms of describing what she did to analyze the data (lines 1-4), and in terms of her personal ideas
about safety (lines 4-8). More specifically, the student was adopting an intention when she made a decision
about the kind of statistical tool that she could use in order to best represent the potential outcomes of interest. It
is clear that the situation also was legitimate for the purposes of using disciplinary tools to make sense of
situations; specifically, the student was able to discuss what she understood about the two brands of bikes based
on the tools that she used to analyze the data. For example, in considering the minimums and maximums of
both  data sets, she    discovered something  important     about   the  situation that she hadn't previously   noted.
Likewise, it's clear that the student is aware of the potential consequence of her (disciplinary) decision on the
context, when she considers what it means to be safe (being able to predict when you would be able to stop, a
statistic that is revealed by her use of the mean).
        Differences between the ways that students are positioned relative to the content and the context can
also be seen in whole-class conversations that took place around core activities. When the students playing
Ander City were asked to decide which brand of bike was better, they answered in terms of both the contentand
the context, thus revealing their positioning with intentionality as they act with legitimacy on designed contexts
that are responsive to their decisions. Consider the following conversations that took place in two classrooms
taught by the same teacher:
 T:   Somebody explain to me, how on earth, how we as Mayor Enoch people who LOVE him, could look at
      Mr. Grant and think `Gosh, he has some valid points.' How on earth could Mr. Grant POSSIBLY have
      valid points when he agrees totally NOTHING with what Mayor Enoch is saying?
 St: Well it is of course...it could work either way, because, um, Rollin' Steady, you have...I might be getting
      mixed up but you have a more likely that you're going to have a better braking distance, but on the other
      hand, it's also got the HIGHEST braking distance. So=
 T:   =you mean a more consistent braking distance?
 St:  But  its also got a high  braking distance,   so you got,  either  way, you   could be  screwed  either way, it
      depends on what you want.
        This exchange, which took place in the Quest Atlantis classroom, highlights the teacher's consistent
positioning of the students as active decision-makers who have the right and obligation to make sense of the
designed context. The student's response to this query reinforces this positioning, as he is able to think about the
consequences (being screwed--i.e. crashing the bike) of the decision that he might make depending on which
element of his analysis he prioritizes--consistency or average stopping distance.        In contrast, the conversation
that unfolded in response to a similar activity in the comparison classroom reveals different positioning:
 T:   What cool thing did you notice that this data has in common?
 St:  They both have the same median and mean
 T:   Their mean and median is both the same. So, does that mean it doesn't matter which machine my factory
      has?
 Sts: (five second pause)
 T:   So, if you were a factory owner, or someone who's looking at that, does it matter which machine you
      use? They're both the same, right? The mean and the median are the same.
 St:  Not the mean
 T:   well, it has the same average
 St:  It doesn't matter.
 T: Oh, it doesn't matter which one you use?

                                                     97     ISLS
                                               ICLS 2010     Volume 2

         This exchange refers to a very similar activity using quite similar data (two different candy bagging
machines which bag the same average amount of candy, but are different in terms of consistency). However, the
tone of the conversation, specifically with respect to the consequentiality of decisions, is quite different. The
teacher's opening question lacks the emotional valence of the QA example, and, unsurprisingly, the students'
response is likewise relatively context free. Indeed, the students initially conclude that because the data sets
have the   same  average,  they must   be  equivalent, suggesting  that they    had not considered   the relationship
between the context of the data, that is, the implications of offering for sale bags with dramatically inconsistent
amounts of candy in them. In theory, this context should be of significant personal relevance to the students, as
it relates to candy and getting what you pay for. In reality, however, the students were quite distanced from the
context of the problem, and did not act with noticeable intentionality in solving the problem. Instead, they
leveraged  the first tool  they had available   to them   (average), and   left the implications  of their decisions
(consequentiality) unexamined.

Modern Prometheus: Example 3 of Transformational Play
Modern   Prometheus   is  a relatively new    addition to  the Quest   Atlantis  project. Modern   Prometheus   was
developed with the goal of better understanding the potential of converting a classic piece of literature, like
Mary Shelley's Frankenstein, into a transformational play space (see Figure 4). The Modern Prometheus unit
focuses on persuasive writing, as students are asked to convince others to share their perspective on particular
ethnical dilemmas. In particular, students grapple with the role that ethics play in science and technology,
whether and when ends justify means in the battle with a plague, and the importance of companionship. The
unit culminates with students making a decision about whether the Doctor Frank's creation is `human,' and
trying to persuade others about whether or not its life should be saved.
         To support intentionality, players initially receive a letter from their mother, pleading with them to visit
Doctor Frank and assist him with "anything he needs." Stepping off the train as they arrive in the plagued town,
players make their way through the town square, meeting each of the major townspeople and gaining a sense of
the desperation regarding the plague. They speak to people who have lost loved ones, family members, and
friends. This establishes the player as an insider to the story, and also more generally as a citizen needing to care
for the well being of others. Players are positioned as having a legitimate role, working as a writer where they
engage and develop persuasive writing skills.      The play space and motivation to help the doctor provides a
legitimate reason    for becoming   proficient  at writing   persuasively. Players   have  to  reflect on  the town
happenings and their own beliefs, and then use both evidence and their own opinions to craft an argument
supporting or opposing the doctor's experiments that can convince even the most committed dissenters.
         Experiential    consequentiality is threaded  throughout  the  unit.   As  an example,  very  quickly after
making their way to the doctor's lab players engage the first ethical dilemma of the Unit: they decide whether or
not to take a package from the crypt in the cemetery, a task that involves lying to the constable. It is in this
moment that they experience their first sense of consequentiality with the philosophical notion of ends justifying
means. Given the choice they make at this point, they begin to develop a stronger reputation with either the
doctor or with the constable. Likewise, as students begin to write for the paper, they develop a reputation, which
is recognized by characters in the space who refer to his or her skills and accomplishments.

Figure 3. Screenshot from Modern Prometheus World

         We conducted the comparison study research in inner-city, 7th-grade classrooms with over 90% of the
students  in the  implementation    classrooms   receiving    free-and-reduced   lunch.  All data  comes   from  the
classrooms of one teacher. The Control classes went through a persuasive writing unit based off a novel that had
been assigned to the class, called The Clay Marble. Students in the control group spent the first 45 minutes of
the day, (period 1), listing to the teacher's audio recording of the book, while they read or followed along in
their own copies. Later in the day, the students would complete their assignments in the computer lab, where
they followed a worksheet with explicit instructions of what to write. Overall, both units took 10 classroom
days. We initially compared the post-test learning gains of both groups. There were significant learning gains
for the control group from pretest (M=7.16, SD=3.72) to posttest (M=11.22, SD=4.98), [t (31) = 8.75, p < .001],
as well as for the experimental group from pretest (M=8.55, SD=3.77) to posttest (M=14.67, SD=3.52), [t (32) =
14.85, p < .001]. While both groups had large effect size gains (control=1.22, experimental=1.83), as would be
expected from a two-week lesson with an experienced teacher, the repeated measures using Hotellings (1931)

                                                    98     ISLS
                                           ICLS 2010     Volume 2

T2 statistic showed the experimental condition had significantly more learning gains, f(32,31)=11.03,     p < .001.
In terms of student engagement, 86% of students in the experimental group enjoyed or strongly enjoyed the
activity while only 22% did in the control group. Also, when asked if they wish they were doing something else,
71% of the experimental group said not at all while 70% of the control said definitely. Lastly, when asked about
their main reason for completing the activity, 95% of the control students said they wanted to get a good grade
or their teacher required them, while only 30% of the experimental condition that these were their reasons for
doing the activity with most students saying that they did it because they wanted to be doing it. As further
evidence of student engagement, one researcher recorded an average of 10 teacher reprimands to stay on task a
day for the control while there were under three per day for students assigned the experimental condition.
       Given these significant differences, similar to the above two discussions, we were also interested in
better understanding the implementation experiences of the two units. Our goal was to gain insight into the ways
that the classroom system itself is shaped by the two curricula, specifically so that we could understand the
circumstances of this and future implementations. While not all students took up the role to the same extent, by
in large students in the experimental condition were positioned as change-agents who were uniquely skilled to
persuade and care for others in order to help resolve the deadly conflict in Ingolstadt. When interviewed,
students described their intention and position in the curriculum as people who were on a mission to help
change Ingolstadt. When explicitly asked, "What's going in on in Ingolstadt?" students often described the
conflict or situation in terms of a first person role, one who found themselves as positioned within the narrative,
as a protagonist, who is there to fulfill a mission and help a town get rid of the plague. Jose said, "I'm pretty
much there to find a cure and stop people from dying." Another student, Alexus, said: "Um there's like this
plague and people are getting sick and possibly dying and we're trying to go and um like people to stop the
plague." Unlike the treatment condition where participants were positioned by the teacher and curriculum as
change-agents in relation to the task, in the control group the teacher positioned students agents-to-be-changed.
       In this case the teacher simply positioned students in their more common school role as agents who
needed to change their ability to write robust persuasive articles in a short time. In her instruction to the whole
class, the teacher tells students that they need to spend time practicing essay planning, drafting and revising
because of an important upcoming standardized writing test (EOG). Below is an excerpt from an interview with
Tianna, a motivated student who acknowledged her position as an agent-to-be-changed.
     Researcher: Why are you doing this assignment in here?
     Tianna: Because we have a big writing test coming up and they're using them on computers and she
        (Teacher) wanted us to get use them on computers and not just writing like we normally do.
     Researcher: Do you enjoy this assignment?
     Tianna: I do because it helps me like; I know it's going to help me do better on my writing test.     I think I
        will be very prepared this time.
Importantly, it might be argued that this is a more legitimate use of the content than, say, to save a fictional
village from a fictional page, even if in the fantastical scenario it is more consistent with the use of persuasive
writing in the real world. More generally, in terms of the positioning of content of persuasive writing, in the
treatment it was a tool that possessed necessary use-value for allowing a cure to be found.          In contrast, the
control group content uptake was exchanged good grades. The use value was evident in the following interview:
       Kristena said: Right now in Ingolstadt there is a plague going on and it's deadly! And right now our
       character is a person whose    um   whose   she   is immune  to the plague      and right     now she is an
       investigative reporter ... there are some people who think he's [the doctor] crazy and some people
       don't and they still want to cure the plague like, she has to like find evidence for that [supporting the
       thesis of the argument]."
In an interaction the player has with the in-game doctor, we see in his submission the simultaneous legitimacy
of content and the player's belief that his previous actions on an in-game uniform issue had consequences:
       Doctor frank, persuasive writing can change the world in many ways. THe way people write persuasive
       writing makes it powerfull!! For example... when I wrote my persuasive argument about wearing
       school uniforms i wrote to CONVINCE people!! If you have good evidence supporting what your
       thesis is (your side you are on) then people will listen to you even if it a really bad idea.
Lastly, below is a transcript from an interview with a girl who had just completed the final mission in Plague. In
the interview, she explains that from seeing all the people dead, a result from her choice of thesis, she was
reconsidering what it would have been like if she would had allowed the doctor to continue his research.
       Interviewer: What did you find out?
       Girl: Well, I found the creation and Tina and Gene
       Interviewer: do you feel that you made the right decision for doing that?
       Girl: I don't know. I talked to the Fabric Lady and she said that people aren't caring about each other
       anymore, for the good of Ingolstadt. It's kind-a sad because people are starting to die.      Henry died and
       the Constable is coming down with it (the plague) I feel that a lot of people are dying.
       Interviewer: Do you feel responsible for their death?

                                                99     ISLS
                                               ICLS 2010     Volume 2

        Girl: Kind-a, because of my paper, they went [thesis was to stop the doctor] I feel bad for the Doctor.
        Interviewer: Really?
        Girl: People kicked him out of his lab and his house and ... Because they wanted to stop him from
        putting in his experiments. And I think they were too extreme
What is interesting here is the expressed remorse at the consequences of her decision to write a persuasive essay
that was printed and resulted in the doctor's being forced to discontinue his practice.

Conclusions
Games   have  become   one of   the most  popular  forms     of entertainment   in our society,  recently surpassing
Hollywood in annual sales. Games are popular in part because they are fun. However, it is not simply their
entertainment value that should be gaining the interest of educators. Instead, we have argued that it is the way
that games can draw players in, capturing their interests, time, commitment, and passions, which is the real
value of  the medium.    Toward     communicating     the    power of  games,    we   have  developed  a  theory  of
transformational play.  Designing    for transformational    play  involves   establishing  academically  useful and
meaningfully engaging situations where learners adopt goals, have legitimate roles, and develop increasingly
sophisticated relations to disciplinary concepts and those situations in which they have value. In such contexts,
there is a shift from dispensing facts and transmitting content to a commitment to supporting students as they
enter into conceptually illuminating situations where they develop passions and apply content understandings.
        Games allow us to do this in ways that heretofore were not possible. Even when there are appropriate
resources to  support a  field trip to a local  park,  for   example,  it is unlikely for  the experience to cleanly
illuminate the need for particular content understandings, and even less likely that students will be able to
meaningfully transform some problematic aspect of the context--most parks are unwilling to put the future of
their park in the hands of a 10 year old. Indeed, most teachers would be challenged to arrange classroom
materials in a manner that could truly immerse learners in a dramatic narrative in which they act as protagonist,
find legitimate roles, and interact meaningfully and consequentially with the storyline. In contrast, because we
are designers of virtual worlds, we can ensure that game play success requires learning disciplinary content and
that the problems are approachable by young children, even embedding pedagogical scaffolds in the game world
or cuing teachers when just-in-time lectures will likely have value.
        More than a simulation, games support playing, allowing players to become someone and do things
that we are unlikely to do in the "real world." During play, one engages a space of possibility, negotiating rules
and roles and discovering the potentialities for growth within and across the boundaries of fantasy and "reality."
Through play, we transcend the borders of reality, and it is this potential that, in our opinion, gives play the
power to support meaningful learning. In the types of videogames we develop, the learner becomes a character
that engages in storylines and takes on roles that the learner would not in real life. Ironically, it is the act of play
and the   affordances of  the  fictional world  that   legitimizes  disciplinary   content, providing learners   with
opportunities to engage authentic and consequential disciplinary tasks not usually available in schools.

References
Arici, A. (2008). Meeting   kids    at  their  own   game:      A comparison    of  learning   and  engagement    in
        traditional and   gaming contexts. Bloomington, IN: Doctoral Dissertation, Indiana University.
Barab, S. A., Gresalfi, M., & Arici, A. (2009). Why educators should care about games. Educational Leadership
        67(1), pp. 76-80.
Barab, S. A., Gresalfi, M., Dodge, T., & Ingram-Goble, I. (in press). Narratizing disciplines and disciplinizing
      narratives: Games as 21st century curriculum. To appear in International Journal for Gaming and
      Computer Mediated Simulations.
Barab, S. A., Zuiker, S., Warren, S., Hickey, D., Ingram-Goble, A., Kwon, E., et al. (2007). Situationally
        Embodied Curriculum: Relating Formalisms and Contexts. Science Education.
Gee, J. P. (2003). What video games have to teach us about learning literacy. New York: Palgrave/Macmillan.
Hickey, D., Ingram-Goble, A., & Jameson, E. M. (2009). Designing assessments and assessing designs in
        virtual educational environments. Journal of Science Education and Technology, 18(2), 187-208.
Resnick, L. B. (1987). The 1987 Presidential Address: Learning in school and out. Educational            Researcher,
        16(9), 13-20.
Schaffer, D. W., Squire, K., Halverson, R., & Gee, J. P. (2005). Video Games and the Future of Learning. Phi
        Delta Kappan, 87(2), 104-111.
Squire, K., & Jan, M. (2007). Mad City Mystery: Developing scientific argumentation skills with a place-based
        augmented reality game on handheld computers. Journal of Science Educ. and Tech., 16(1), 5-29.
Steinkuehler, C. A. (2006). Massively multiplayer onine video gaming as participation in a discourse. Mind,
        Culture, and Activity, 13(1), 38-52.
UNESCO Institute for Statistics. (2007). PISA 2006: Science competencies for tomorrow's world. Paris, France:
        Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development.

                                                   100     ISLS
