                                                 ICLS 2010    ·   Volume 1

  The Effects of Physical and Virtual Manipulatives on Students'
                             Conceptual Learning About Pulleys
    Elizabeth Gire, Adrian Carmichael, Jacquelyn J. Chini, Amy Rouinfar & Sanjay Rebello, Kansas State
                               University, 116 Cardwell Hall, Manhattan, KS 66506
        egire@phys.ksu.edu, adrianc@phys.ksu.edu, haynicz@phys.ksu.edu, amy.rouinfar@gmail.com,
                                                srebello@phys.ksu.edu
   Garrett Smith and Sadhana Puntambekar, University of Wisconsin, 1025 West Johnson Street, Suite 785,
                                                   Madison, WI 53705
                              gwsmith@wisc.edu, puntambekar@education.wisc.edu

        Abstract:     With   computers    becoming     more      ubiquitous    in our  daily  lives   and   in  our
        classrooms,    questions   of  how  students   interact     and  learn with  physical   experiments     and
        computer simulations are central in science education. We investigated how students' ideas
        about pulleys were influenced by the use of physical and virtual manipulatives. We found that
        there   were    advantages    for each   type    of   manipulative,    and  that   virtual  and   physical
        manipulatives helped students develop correct understandings of different concepts. We also
        found that the order the manipulatives were used affected student learning, with students who
        used real pulleys before the simulation achieving higher scores on questions having to do with
        effort force, the distance the rope is pulled, and mechanical advantage.

Introduction & Background
Laboratory experiments play a critical role in furthering scientists' understandings of how the universe works,
and in light of this importance, it is no wonder that educators have historically placed high value on laboratory
experiences  in science  classrooms.     However,    due to   practical   concerns  of   procuring  laboratory   equipment,
safety concerns, and time constraints, computer simulated experiments are becoming an attractive alternative to
laboratory  experiments.   In light   of  this trend, recent    research   in  science   education  has explored    whether
computer    simulations  (virtual manipulatives)   can   be   as effective  for   learning as experiments    involving real
objects (physical manipulatives) and researchers have begun looking at the circumstances in which these two
alternatives may be best employed.
        Finkelstein   et al. (2005)   investigated  how  physical     versus   virtual manipulatives   supported   students'
learning about circuits.   Students    used either  physical    materials  or  simulations   to examine     combinations  of
resistors, build simple circuits, predict the behavior of specific elements and develop a method for measuring
resistance.  The simulations   were    similar  to the set-up    with    physical materials,  except   that the  simulations
represented  electron  flow  within   the circuit, an  aspect    of  the physical   materials that cannot   not  directly be
perceived. After these experiences, students who had used the virtual manipulatives were able to build physical
circuits quicker than students who had previously used the physical manipulatives.              In addition, the students in
the virtual conditions were able to provide better explanations of circuit behavior and scored better on a related
exam question.   Therefore, Finkelstein et al. suggest properly designed simulations can be beneficial to student
learning when applied in the appropriate contexts.
        Triona,  Klahr   and   Williams    (2007)   investigated     how   physical  and   virtual manipulatives    support
students' learning about the factors affecting how far a mouse trap car will travel.               Students explored these
factors by designing cars to be used for an experiment. Students used either physical or virtual manipulatives
and were allowed to design either a certain number of cars or were allowed to design cars for a certain length of
time, creating four treatment groups.     All treatments were equally effective at increasing students' knowledge
about causal factors for travel distance, supporting students' ability to design cars, and students' confidence in
their knowledge.  Based on these findings, the researchers suggest that simulations may be preferred due to their
other pragmatic advantages.
        Zacharia,  Olympiou,      &   Papaevipidou    (2008)     studied  physical   and   virtual manipulatives    used  in
combination   to learn   about    heat and     temperature.      Students  in   the control   group    used  only   physical
manipulatives,  while   students  in the  experimental   condition    used  physical   manipulatives   followed   by virtual
manipulatives.   The researchers aimed to limit the differences between the physical and virtual manipulatives to
speed of manipulation.    On a conceptual test, students in the experimental group outperformed students in the
control group.   The     researchers   suggest  this  difference     may  be   a  result of   virtual manipulatives   being
manipulated faster than physical manipulatives.
        In  a similar   study (Zacharia    &   Constantinou,     2008),  the   researchers  controlled  for  all differences
between  the  physical  and  virtual  conditions   except for    the mode   in which   experiments    were  performed.    In
particular, the simulations did not model any aspects of the phenomena that could not be perceived with the

                                                     937    ·  © ISLS
                                                ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

physical manipulatives (in contrast to Finkelstein, et al). In this case, the physical and virtual manipulatives
equally supported students' conceptual understanding.
         In   our study,  we  also controlled  for all  conditions  (curriculum, mode     of instruction  and  resource
capabilities) except for the mode of the activities (physical or virtual). Students spent approximately 30 minutes
on each activity, although working with the real pulleys typically took a few minutes longer than working with
the simulation. The design of this study replicates the study performed by Zacharia & Constantinou in a new
domain (pulleys rather than heat & temperature). Furthermore, we not only looked at overall learning during
these activities, but isolated particular concepts and looked at the effect of manipulative type and ordering of
manipulatives on students' understandings of these concepts.

Context and Data Collection
Students   in a university-level  conceptual  physics   lab  performed   two activities to   learn about  pulleys. One
activity involved   working   with  real  pulleys  (physical  manipulatives)   while  the other  activity  involved an
interactive   computer   simulation of    pulleys (virtual manipulatives)   (Figure   1). The  activities  are  part  of
CoMPASS, a design-based curriculum that integrates concept maps and hypertext that students explore prior to
performing    physical or virtual  experiments (Puntambekar,      Stylianou &  Hübscher,    2003   and Puntambekar    &
Stylianou, 2002). During each activity, students answered questions on a worksheet. These worksheet questions
were the   same   for  both  activities. However,  the  temporal   order of  the activities  was   varied creating two
treatment groups. Three sections (N=71) used the physical pulleys first (the Physical-Virtual treatment), while
two sections (N=61) began with using the virtual pulleys (the Virtual-Physical treatment).
         Students answered a set of conceptual assessment questions before the activities (pre-test), after the
first activity (mid-test), and after the second activity (post-test). The assessment questions on the pre-, mid-, and
post-tests  were  identical. The   mid-test scores  allowed   for comparisons    to be  made  between     the effects of
physical manipulatives (PM) and the effects of virtual manipulatives (VM) only, while mid-test and post-test
scores indicated ordering effects.
         The assessment contains 13 multiple-choice questions, with each question weighted equally in the total
score. The assessment questions were developed locally to probe students' conceptual understanding of pulley
concepts, including effort force, work, mechanical advantage, the distance the rope is pulled and the potential
energy of the load. The assessment contained more questions about effort force and work concepts than other
concepts because these are the most central to the topics of pulleys and the most applicable in other science
topics. Figure 2 indicates the distribution of questions for each concept. A question was considered to be related
to a concept when the concept is explicitly mentioned in the problem statement. For example, the question "If
we ignore friction, what will require less effort (force) to lift a box to a height of 1 meter ­ using the pulley
shown or lifting the box straight up?" is considered to be an effort force question.
         A reliability analysis was conducted on effort force and work questions. For the effort force questions
Cronbach's ! = .70. For the work questions, Cronbach's ! = .51. The lower reliability for the work questions
may indicate that students have a harder time constructing correct understandings about the concept of work.
         Open-ended     worksheet   questions  were    coded  and   analyzed   using a  phenomenographic      approach
(Marton, 1986). The conceptual assessments were analyzed statistically. For these assessments, categories of
questions were created based on the physics concept probed by each question (as indicated explicitly in the
question statement). The analysis included comparisons of overall scores and category scores that were made
using a Repeated Measures Analysis of Variance with a between subjects factor of treatment type. P-values less
than 0.05 were interpreted to indicate a statistically significant difference.

                             Figure 1. Virtual (left) and physical (right) manipulatives.

                                                    938  ·   © ISLS
                                            ICLS 2010    ·  Volume 1

Data Analysis

Conceptual Assessment
The overall scores  for the pre-, mid- and  post-tests are shown  in Table 1. Table 2 contains the results     of a
Repeated Measures Analysis of Variance for all the students. Mauchly's test indicated that the assumption of
sphericity had been violated on all the comparisons made, therefore degrees of freedom were corrected using
Greenhouse-Geisser estimates of sphericity. Table 2 also contains information of Mauchy's test and sphericity
estimates.

Table 1: Overall pre-, mid-, and post-test scores on the conceptual assessment. Uncertainties are the standard
error of the mean.

           Treatment           N         Pre-test %                  Mid-test %            Post-test %

Physical-Virtual              71            37 ± 2                    58 ± 2                   66 ± 3

Virtual-Physical              61            33 ± 2                    60 ± 3                   61 ± 3

Table 2: Mauchly's Test, Greenhouse-Gessier Estimates of Sphericity, and Repeated Measures ANOVA for
Overall Score, Force Questions, and Work Questions

             Effect                    Mauchly's Test        Sphericity    Repeated Measures Analysis ofVariance
                                      "2(2)         p             #                 F                      p

           Total Score                                                   F(1.42,184.87) = 173.57        <.001
                                     67.28         <.001         .71
    Total Score*Treatment                                                  F(1.42,184.87) = 2.33          0.12
    Effort Force Questions                                               F(1.45,188.58) = 167.24        <.001
                                     61.40         <.001         .73
    Effort Force*Treatment                                                 F(1.45,188.58) = 4.89          0.02
       Work Questions                                                     F(1.69, 220.09) = 27.69       <.001
                                     25.81         <.001         .85
       Work*Treatment                                                     F(1.69, 220.09) = 15.28       <.001

       The Repeated Measures analysis shows that students' total scores changed significantly between tests.
However, the insignificance of the interaction between total score and treatment condition indicates that the
changes in scores for the two treatments were similar. The scores for the effort force questions alsoshow a
significant change between tests and a significant interaction between the effort force questions and the
treatment conditions indicating that the changes in effort force score were different for the two conditions.
Similarly, the scores for the work questions show asignificant change between tests and a significant interaction
between work score and treatment condition.
       Table 3 shows the results of contrast comparisons for each effect described in Table 2. These
comparisons help locate when significant changes in score occurred. Both treatment conditions resulted in a
change of total score between the pre- and mid-test, but the scores of the treatment conditions changed
differently between the mid- and post-test. Figure 2 shows plots of average score on each exam. The plot shows
that students in the physical-virtual condition had a significantly greater change in score between the mid- and
post-test. Therefore, the students who used the physical manipulatives first continued to progress on the
conceptual assessment after the second activity while the students who used the virtual manipulatives for
showed little further progression, although students in both treatment conditions benefitted from the activities on
the whole.
       On Effort Force questions, both conditions showed a change in score between the pre- and mid-test, but
no change in score was observed between the mid- and post-test. The change in score for the treatment
conditions was significantly different between the pre- and mid-test, with students who initially used the
physical manipulatives showing a larger gain in Effort Force score than students who initially used the virtual
manipulatives.
       On the Work questions, an overall change in score was observed for between pre- and post-test.
However, the changes were significantly different for the different treatments. Students in the virtual-physical

                                                939    ·  © ISLS
                                            ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

condition show a large gain in Work score between pre- and mid-test while the students in the physical-virtual
condition do not show a gain. However, this trend switches between the mid- and post-test, with the virtual-
physical students showing no gain and the physical-virtual students showing a large gain. It seems that students
show a large increase in score on work questions after they have used the pulley simulation.
       For the other questions dealing with mechanical advantage, distance pulled, and potential energy,
students in both conditions showed an increased of score between pre- and post-tests but no interaction effect
was observed for these questions.

Table 3: Contrast Comparisons for Repeated Measures ANOVA

           Effect                 Comparison     F(1,130)        p

                                    Pre-Mid        170.94      <.001
        Total Score
                                    Mid-Post       22.33       <.001
                                    Pre-Mid        1.71         .19
    Total Score*Treatment
                                    Mid-Post       12.04        .001
                                    Pre-Mid        181.30      <.001
    Effort Force Questions
                                    Mid-Post       1.74         .19
                                    Pre-Mid        5.56         .02
   Effort Force*Treatment
                                    Mid-Post       <.001        .98
                                    Pre-Mid        10.83        .001
      Work Questions
                                    Mid-Post       26.27       <.001
                                    Pre-Mid        24.18       <.001
      Work*Treatment
                                    Mid-Post       28.14       <.001

                                               !"#$%                             !"&$%
   Figure 2. Average scores by category on the conceptual assessments. Error bars indicate standard error.

                                               940  ·   © ISLS
                                             ICLS 2010    ·  Volume 1

Questions on Activity Worksheet
While   doing the activities (with physical  pulleys  and virtual pulleys), students  responded to questions     on a
worksheet.  We   report students'  responses on  some  of the   worksheet questions  to aid interpreting   the above
assessment results. Question 4 on the worksheet had to do with the concept of work (Figure 3). Students in both
treatments interpreted the data from the simulation as showing the work being the same for different pulley-
setups. In contrast, students in  the different treatments  disagreed on  how  to interpret the data from    the real
pulley: students  in the Physical-Virtual  treatment said   the work  changed  when    you  changed  set-ups    while
students in the Virtual-Physical treatment were split, with nearly half of the students claiming the work stayed
the same while the other half said the work changedacross pulley set-ups.
         A  similar  trend was seen   on Question  5  on  the worksheet   (Figure 4). Question  5  had    to do  with
comparing work and potential energy for a given puley system. Students in both treatments interpreted the data
from the simulation as showing the work was equal to the potential energy for a given pulley set-up. In contrast,
students in the different treatments disagreed on how to interpret the data from the real pulley: students in the
Physical-Virtual treatment did not come to a consensus about how the work was related to the potential energy
while students in the Virtual-Physical treatment were more likely to say the work was equal to the potential
energy.

                                                            Question WS4: "Based on your data, when
                                                            you changed the pulley setup, how did it
                                                            affect the work required to lift the object?
                                                            Why do you think that is?"

                      Figure 3. Student responses to Question 4 on the activity worksheet.

                                                            Question WS5: "Based on your data, how
                                                            does work compare to potential energy for
                                                            a given pulley system? Why do you think
                                                            that is?

                      Figure 4. Student responses to Question 5 on the activity worksheet.

                                                  941  ·   © ISLS
                                                ICLS 2010    ·  Volume 1

Discussion
The analysis of overall score indicates that there is no overall preferred manipulative for learning about pulleys;
the students' mid-test    scores  (which   isolate each  type  of  manipulative)   are the  same.   Looking  at  changes
between the mid-test and post-test scores, however, indicates that there may be an ordering effect for using both
types of manipulatives, in that the scores of students in the Physical-Virtual treatment continued to increase after
the second activity, while the scores of students who used virtual pulleys first did not increase when the students
switched to physical pulleys.
         In looking at categories of questions, the data show that the different types of manipulative (physical or
virtual) affected different pulley concepts differently. In the Effort Force category, although an increase in score
was observed on mid-test for both treatments, students who used real pulleys scored higher. In contrast, students
showed   no  increase  in score  on  questions about     work after  using  real pulleys,  while students  who   used the
pulley simulation showed significant improvement on work questions.
         Additionally, the Effort Force category showed an ordering effect on category score, while the Work
category did not. Students who used the physical pulleys first showed a greater increase in score between the
pre- and mid-tests, while neither treatment group showed an increase in score between the mid- and post-tests.
In contrast, students who used virtual pulleys more often answered questions about work correctly than students
who only used physical pulleys, regardless of whichorder they encountered the manipulatives. In light of these
data, it seems the ordering effect seen in the overall score may be explained by the ordering effect of questions
having to do with effort force.
         In  short, students  obtain  a better understanding      as measured    by  the   conceptual assessment   of the
concept of work with the computer simulation and abetter understanding of effort force with the real pulleys.
         Why should the type of manipulative affect different pulley concepts differently? One possibility isthat
this result is due to a difference in the salience of the physics concepts. The concepts of effort force and distance
pulled are more salient for real pulleys than with virtual pulleys. The real pulleys give students a kinesthetic
experience with effort force and distance pulled; they feel the force they need to exert and how far their arms
move in relation to the pulley, while students who use the virtual pulleys read-off values from a screen. On the
other hand, work is less salient than effort force for real pulleys. Work depends on the combination of effort
force and distance pulled, and this makes the concept of work more removed from the kinesthetic experience. In
order to reason about work correctly, students need to coordinate the experiences that if less force is needed, the
distance pulled is longer in exactly the right proportion so that work is constant across pulley set-ups (assuming
friction is small enough to be neglected). Alternately, students might perceive the energy expended in lifting a
load a certain distance with different pulley set-ups. Both of these types of reasoning are difficult to achieve
through kinesthetic experience. However, all concepts are equally salient in the simulation ­ all quantities must
be read-off the screen (Figure 1).
         Capacity theories of attention suggest that people can only attend to a limited amount of information
(Kahneman,    1973),   and it is also known   that  attention  can  be influenced   by the  salience  of cues, with high
salience cues naturally    attracting more   attention   (Denton  &  Kruschke,    2006).   With  physical manipulatives,
effort force and   distance   pulled  have a  relatively high  salience  and    probably   dominate the  attention of the
learner, while less salient concepts, like work, receive less attention. This explanation is consistent with our data
that Physical-Virtual students have relatively high scores on Effort Force questions and relatively low scores on
Work questions. Students who use the virtual manipulatives probably divide their attention more evenly among
the concepts  due   to their  equivalence  in salience, resulting   in less relative attention  to effort force, distance
pulled and mechanical advantage concepts, resulting in lower scores in these categories and higher scores on
work questions than students who used physical manipulatives. Furthermore, if the simulation is done first, the
initial equivalence in salience among concepts may lessen the impact of the subsequent kinesthetic experience
with the real pulleys, resulting in the continued suppression, or blocking (Kamin, 1968), observed in the Effort
Force, Distance Pulled scores, and Mechanical Advantage categories.
         Furthermore, the students in this study did not receive instruction on how to interpret their data in light
of friction effects and experimental uncertainty. The data show that they did not interpret trends in their real
pulley work   data  in a  consistent  way. This    point is supported  by   the  students' responses  to Question  4 and
Question 5 on the worksheet. Also, Physical-Virtual students had trouble reasoning about work in frictionless
situations on the mid-test. However, after the virtual experiment, all students were much more successful in
reasoning about work in frictionless environments, regardless of the order the activities.
         This study suggests that curricula that include pulleys might ideally use both experiments with real
pulleys and simulations. The data suggest that an ideal ordering might be to have students begin withreal pulley
experiments, focusing on effort force, distance pulled and mechanical advantage. Then students might perform a
set of experiments with the simulation, reinforcing trends found with the real pulleys and exploring the concepts
of work and potential energy in a frictionless simulated environment. Finally, students might finish with a set of
experiments with real pulleys to explore how work and potential energy are related in a situation where friction
is not negligible.

                                                     942   ·  © ISLS
                                                 ICLS 2010   ·   Volume 1

Conclusion
Previous research has demonstrated that virtual manipulatives can be as effective as physical manipulatives in
some circumstances. Our data extends this result to the domain of pulleys and addresses how manipulative types
affect different pulley   concepts.   In looking  at the effect  of  physical and  virtual manipulatives  on      students'
understandings   of   pulleys, we   find  that although   there is no  difference in overall score  between       types of
manipulative,   each  manipulative    has advantages    for different pulley  concepts: physical  manipulatives     better
address the  concepts   of effort force,  distance   pulled  and mechanical   advantage,   while virtual manipulatives
better address the concept of work. The order the manipulatives are used by the students affected conceptual
gains  for the  concepts   of  effort force,   distance pulled   and  mechanical  advantage.  We   suggest   that   these
differences may be attributed to differences in concept salience.

Endnotes
(1) The assessment and  worksheets  can be found  online at http://www.phys.ksu.edu/personal/egire/Resources.html

References
De Jong, T. & Van Joolingen W.R. (1998) Scientific Discovery Learning With Computer Simulations of
         Conceptual Domains, Review of Educational Research, 68, 179-201.
Denton, S.E. & Kruschke, J.K. (2006) Attention and salience in associative blocking.        Learning & Behavior,
         34(3), 285-304.
Finkelstein, N. D., Adams, W. K., Keller, C. J., Kohl, P. B., Kohl, K. K., Podolefskey, N.S., et al. (2005). When
         learning about the real world is better done virtually: A study of substituting simulations for laboratory
         equipment. Physical Review Special Topics- Physics Education Research, 1, 010103.
Kahneman, D. (1973). Attention and effort. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Kamin, L. J. (1968). "Attention-like" processes in classical conditioning. In M. R. Jones (Ed.), Miami
         Symposium on the Prediction of Behavior: Aversive stimulation (pp. 9-33). Coral Gables, FL:
         University of Miami Press.
Klahr, D., Triona, L. M., & Williams, C. (2007). Hands on what? The relative effectiveness of physical versus
         virtual materials in an engineering design project by middle school children. Journal of Research in
         Science Teaching, 44(1), 183-203.
Marton, F. (1986). Phenomenography- a research approach to investigating different understanding of reality.
         Journal of Thought, 21, 29-39.
Puntambekar, S., Stylianou, A., & Hübscher, R. (2003). Improving navigation and learning in hypertext
         environments with navigable concept maps. Human-Computer Interaction, 18, 395-428.
Puntambekar, S. & Stylianou, A. (2002). CoMPASS: Students' use of external representations in science
         learning. In P. Bell, R. Stevens & T. Satwicz (Eds.), Keeping Learning Complex: The Proceedings of
         the   Fifth  International   Conference  of   the  Learning   Sciences  (ICLS) (pp.352-358).    Mahwah,     NJ:
         Erlbaum.
Triona, L. M. & Klahr, D. (2003). Point and click or grab and heft: Comparing the influence of physical and
         virtual instructional materials on elementary school students' ability to design experiments. Cognition
         and Instruction, 21(2), 149-173.
Zacharia, Z. C. & Constantinou, C. P. (2008). Comparing the influence of physical and virtual manipulatives in
         the context   of  the Physics   by  Inquiry  curriculum:    The case of  undergraduate  students'  conceptual
         understanding of heat and temperature. American Journal of Physics, 76(4&5), 425-430.
Zacharia, Z. C., Olympiou, G., & Papaevripidou, M. (2008). Effects of experimenting with physical andvirtual
         manipulatives on students' conceptual understanding in heat and temperature. Journal of Research in
         Science Teaching, 45(9), 1021-1035.

Acknowledgments
Foremost, we would like to thank the students and staff at CoMPASS Group, Wiconsin Center for Educational
Research   for  their cooperation.    We  would   also  like to  thank the  students who   participated  in this   study,
particularly those who volunteered to be interviewed. Their cooperation and candor was critical to this work.
Additionally,   we'd  like  to thank  the  members     of  the Physics   Education Research   Group  at  Kansas     State
University  for  fruitful discussions  and  their thoughtful   suggestions. This  work  was  supported   in part by   the
National Science Foundation under DUE grant DGE 0841414 and U.S. Department of Education IES Award
R305A080507. Any opinions, findings and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect those of the National Science Foundation or the U.S Department of
Education.

                                                     943   ·  © ISLS
