                                                    ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

                   Children Learning Literate Practices in Spriting
            Tara Rosenberger Shankar, 22 Freeman Street, Arlington MA 02474, tara@media.mit.edu

          Abstract:    The  exploratory   empirical   work   presented   here   suggests   that children  engage     in
          conceptual processes through a new activity called spriting (Shankar 2005, 2006) previously
          thought   of  as late-emerging    and  dependent      on writing.    Spriting is a  new   technologically-
          supported    composition    process  that does   not  require  intermediate    mediation   with    a written
          form. The output of spriting is a talkument. In this paper, results are presented from a design
          research study of the impact of spriting on the literacy development of children, ages 5-10, at
          two    different schools.   In  particular, composite    composing      and   editing actions  in    spriting
          presage   a   reversal  of  some  trends    seen  in  written  composition,      such  as  older     children
          producing     longer  compositions.    Furthermore,      this  paper  describes    early   observations    of
          children appearing to make certain literate habits, such as pausing to plan, explicit in spriting
          in ways they had not learned to do yet in writing. Results suggest that spriting could offer an
          alternative way to explore extended forms of literacy and habits of mind before a child is able
          to write.

Introduction
          Learning    how   to  write  has long    been  seen   as a   precursor  to  developing     critical  cognitive skills,
typically lumped under the term "literacy". For example, children who cannot read or write are not expected to
understand     the difference   between   `meaning'    and  `saying'    (e.g.  Olson  &  Torrance,   1985),    understand   that
compositions encode purpose and make things happen in the world (e.g. Bereiter & Scardamalia, 1987), or learn
to recontextualize their oral language skills for a distant and critical audience (e.g. Purcell-Gates, 1991). This
article explores the idea that children are much more capable of shaping their actions and communication in a
literate manner than we have been able to observe given the literate tools available. There is some evidence that
composition tools impact editing practices. Word processors can positively impact more experienced writers'
revision practices (Haas, 1989) and even have a weak effect on children's writing as young as kindergarten
(Jones, 1998). This work introduces a new technological support for composing in order to study the impact on
children with emerging literacy skills.
          In order to put this work in the broad frame intended, some new terms are required. First, I introduce a
new   practice   called  spriting (rhymes   with   writing),  which     refers to using  one's  own     oral   productions  in a
writerly  process   of   composition,     supported   by new    technology.     Pragmatically,   the   spriting  process    goes
something like this: children hold or wear a microphone that plugs directly in to the computer. Using custom
built software called the SpriterWriter (see the interface presented in Figure 1), the child presses a record button
and speaks for as long as s/he wants, and then presses a stop button to end the recording. While the child is
recording,  her/his    speech    productions   appear    as graphic     representations    in  the   software.  The     software
automatically segments the speech productions into "sausages", based on spoken phrase automatic end-point
detection.  These   smaller    sausage   units are  independently    editable  and   are intended    to expedite     review and
editing. Through simple point and click interaction with the graphic representations, the child can aud the work
(a correlate to reading in the aural mode), and apply editing functions (e.g. rearrange by drag and drop; cut,
copy, and paste; delete; insert). Theoretically, the output of a spriting process could be an oral talkument (e.g. an
audio file) or a written document, if the child would transcribe his or her own spriting or was supported by a
technological    process   such   as speech    recognition.  In   practice, children    rarely  transcribed    their spriting  to
writing, more often working very hard to realize their compositions goals as talkuments.
          In short, spriting does not require children to make the additional leap to using a deeply different form
of composition representation such as writing itself. Yet, spriting shares important properties with writing, such
as permanence and shareability, and permits extended processes of planning and editing.
          The introduction of spriting helps make a new distinction in literacy between alphabetic and higher-
level  skills. I refer  to the  knowledge   and  skills  that   bridge  reading   and writing,  and  auding    and   spriting  as
literacy. I borrow     a   term from   Seymour     Papert,  letteracy   (Papert,  1993),   to  refer to the    mechanical   and
presentational skills specific to reading and writing, including the ability to write letters, spell, punctuate, and
design a page. In spriting, I observed many parallels to written mechanics in this new compositional mode.
Children   were    as  concerned     with how   they   said  something--and       frequently    edited  for   these  new   "oral
mechanics"--as      they   were   concerned    with   what  they   said. I  have   dubbed     these  new  material    concerns,
prosodacy, referring to acoustic-phonetic features of the voice, paralinguistic features of speech, and the age-old
art of poetics, composing words pleasing to the ear. This new distinction between literacy and letteracy, pushed
to a radical position, means that it is possible for someone to be highly literate but not know how to read or
write.

                                                        944   ·  © ISLS
                                              ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

        This   paper presents quantitative and  qualitative  empirical data   and observations from   a study done
when I was a doctoral student at the MIT Media Laboratory that show how spriting enabled children, ages 5 to
10, to compose, edit and reflect on their compositions in ways that differ in marked ways from their emergent
writing practices. While the  full scope   of the investigation  was   very   broad, including results  on editing,
collaboration, vocabulary, and singing, and   technology   development   (Shankar    2005), my purpose   here is to
focus only on some very specific results in the children's editing practices.
        My approach in this paper is as follows. First I describe the exploratory research method used, the three
populations of children who assisted this work, and the dataset generated. Secondly, I provide a quantitative
overview of composite composition and editing moves to sketch some overall trends between age groups and
SES, typical predictive indicators of literacy development. Thirdly, I discuss how the introduction of a new
compositional form can produce new insights into the composition process generally, as it permits comparisons
where few  have  existed before. To  do  so,  I present  two learning  stories of children  spriting and how  they
handled the new challenge of integrating moments of pause for thinking. Finally, I conclude with a discussion

                                   Figure 1 The SpriterWriter interface.

                                                  945  ·  © ISLS
                                                ICLS 2010    ·  Volume 1

on implications for literacy learning.

Methodology
I used a design research approach, inheriting from design experiments, which are also intended to evolve new
learning technologies   (Brown,   1992;   Collins, 1992)  and   develop   and  refine new   theories (diSessa  & Cobb,
2004; Edelson, 2002) within real learning environments. Designing certain kinds of tools that challenge many
dear cultural values, like writing, and require complex and sophisticated research, like spriting, might be seen as
a process of evolving the ends of design as much as the means of design. While design work like this should
prepare the way for many small kinds of experiments to follow, we must also allow time for design and cultural
change to evolve contemporaneously. A design experiment approach was one way to allow the ends to evolve
through the influence and needs of the learners themselves.
         I performed initial exploratory and prototyping work with low-income adult learners in East Harlem,
NYC, who were at elementary levels of letteracy learning. This research suggested that spriting can be a useful
tool for supporting certain kinds of learning central to composition and editing. With particular questions and a
spriting prototype, I undertook a thirteen week long study with children ages 5 to 10 at two elementary schools,
here referred to as Umoja and Molière elementary schools, to explore how an improved spriting technology
might contribute to their literacy and letteracy learning. I revised the software in cycles that ranged from a week
to several weeks,  according   to my   observations  of  its   usability and the  enthusiasm  with  which  the  children
embraced it to do their work.
         The design research experiments were conducted at two private elementary schools, both located in
different urban-residential areas of a major city in the USA. The names of the schools and children referred to
are pseudonyms. I call the first school Umoja Elementary, a private school founded upon African principals of
community and culture (Nguzo Saba). The school functions as a one-room school house concept, not assigning
children into grades per se. The students are children of color (Caribbean, African, African-American), low to
middle SES, ages 5 to 10, and represented all the students in the school ­ not a select subset. The group ranged
from 6 students when I began (referred to as the "older" Umoja students), and expanded to 11 students when the
five/six year olds `graduated up' (referred to as the `younger' group) a few weeks later. The Umoja younger
children were learning character formation rules at the time. While STEM activities were creatively realized in
the Umoja curriculum, reading and writing activities were conventionally practiced with vocabulary words lists,
fill-in-the-blank worksheets,  some    personal reflection     writing   prompts, and   occasional stories read  by the
teacher. The children were invited to sprite once per week or more, and were able to decline if they didn't want
to. For these children, choosing to sprite - whether or not they had the time, inspiration, and persistence to
actually compose anything - must be understood as highly motivated and enthusiastic behavior.
         The second school was Molière Elementary, a private French-English bilingual school. I offered an
after school spriting club once a week, to which ten 3rd and 4th grade students responded (e.g. Irish, Russian,
French-Canadian, French, and African families), a club which served to unintentionally self-select students from
families with higher learning and research connections. The children were high SES, ranking in the top half of
their classes in both French and English language exams; their school ranked in the top half of all independent
schools. They  had  already   learned  to read  and  write   in both   French  and English  a wide   variety of  genres,
including daily journaling activities, book reports, written poems and much more. The class was held for one
hour on Thursday afternoons after regular school classes were out in the school computer lab in the basement.
         The Moliere children, on the basis of their older age, longer and more extensive training in genre and
composition forms often taught in schools, would be expected to make more sophisticated spriting products than
both groups  of   relatively younger   Umoja   children.  Differences    between   them  cannot be   attributed to  their
interaction with spriting. However, when certain behaviors, processes or products emerge in common between
the schools--even against the predicted differences, these commonalities should be subjected to further analysis
and interpreted in light of what spriting offers. In sum, how might spriting allow each child to exercise their
current literacy skills, develop new abilities, and challenge themselves in powerful ways?
         By acting as researcher, teacher, and technologist, I was able to exercise great flexibility in focusing
and refocusing literacy activities on the fly, the technology on a weekly basis, as well as the classroom activities
and forms of student participation with each other and with the computer. I judged an activity successful when
the children had   energy and   long-term  focus,   spent   a  lot of  time on  editing, or requested  more   time. The
definition of acceptable spriting work was something that the students and I continuously negotiated throughout
the thirteen weeks   at both  schools  as what  could   both    sustain  their interest and mine.  However,    the  most
unexpected results emerge from observing children's great enthusiasm for activities I did not suggest and was
initially confused by. For example, although I initially framed a talkument as an intermediate product on its way
to becoming a text, the children embraced talkuments as final products. Their energy and interest in making
talkuments in turn encouraged me to adapt the technology to produce a better talkument product and to involve
writing in ways that supported their spriting process rather than the other way around.

                                                    946   ·   © ISLS
                                               ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

        Data collection included video records of all spriting activities, saved daily versions of spriting work,
saved records   of interactions   with the technology,    examples     of the students'  writing  from  their regular
classroom teachers, and detailed field notes. In total, the children from both schools produced a total of 197
compositions.   To narrow   and  balance the   descriptive   analysis, I  chose three to   four solo compositions to
transcribe from each child, a total of 67 compositions. Selection was based on the work's resemblance to or
distinctiveness from written genres; its virtuosity relative to the child's other compositions; and the importance
the child ascribed to it. The latter two factors often led to the same selection, as the work that interested them
most was also the one that they worked hardest at.       These 67 talkuments and all the recordings made in the
process - even if ultimately deleted - were transcribed. Transcription includes notation of (filled) pauses and
breathes, false starts, incomplete  and  unusually  pronounced     words   using embedded    XML     marks, used  for
automated processing purposes, as well as to remind the reader that this is an imperfect and partial translation of
speech, impossible to capture fully in all of its material repleteness. When children are trying the hardest to
transform thought, feeling and intention into words is when their speech is most fragmented (Chi, 2000). The
transcription attempts to draw attention to these periods of intense linguistic construction.
        Since the time when I performed this work, podcasts, moblogging and other voice publication methods
have emerged as legitimate and authentic purposes for real-time voice composing, making this work all the
more  relevant  as the  means  of distribution of such    work are   emerging.  Understanding    the importance  that
children attribute to spriting and talkuments becomes even more critical for how it might inform current literacy
practice and pedagogy, and how it might presage future literacy trends.

Overview of the Composition and Editing Actions
        Looking across the 67 transcribed talkuments including both individual and collaboratively composed
talkuments, there is strong evidence that all children, ages 5-10, composed at length, reviewed and edited their
work. Considering that at the time the youngest children were working hard to write their names, this result
alone, when compared to standard letteracy development comparisons across the same ages, is a striking result.
Within this general trend, there are indications of developmental differences. In order to see these
developmental trends, the data is organized in to three different groups descending in average age: Molière
Table 1 Record and Play composing moves, Recording lengths, and Total Words.

                          Record    Play       Record        Recording
                          Actions Actions    then Play       Len. Each     Talkument Len.
                           (#)      (#)      Consecu.          (sec)          Total (sec.)       Words Total
       Moliere          N  31        31         30              31               32                   32
                   AVE    18.29      31         8.7            37.2             349.3                359.2
                     SD    17.7     30.3        7.2            34.4             216.6                276.4
  Umoja older           N  25        22         21              25               25                   24
                   AVE     8.6      17.2        4.5             46               273                 222.3
                     SD    6.1      14.3          4            47.8              214                 168.2
Umoja younger           N  10        10         10              10               10                   10
                   AVE     9.8      30.3        6.2            44.4             358.9                256.2
                     SD    6.3      25.6        4.6            30.5             268.1                207.2

children (ages 8-9), the older Umoja children (ages 6-8, 10), and the younger Umoja children (ages 5-6).
        In Table 1, the average number of Record and Play actions per talkument are presented for each group.
The Molière children, as predicted by their older average age, made an average of 18 recordings per talkument,
and listened to their spriting on average 31 times per talkument. The Umoja children made more or less the
same number of recordings per talkument.
        While the Molière children tended to make more recordings, they also tended to make slightly shorter
recordings (37 sec on average in  Table 1 column "Recording Len. Each"), tending towards a more bricolage,
piecemeal construction process than all the younger Umoja children. This "bits and pieces form a whole" style
emerged after a few weeks in a couple of the Moliere children who desired extreme control over their talkument
product. Most children at both schools tended towards long spoken expositions, with a few gross post hoc edits.
        As presented in Table 1, total talkuments lengths ranged from 270 to 360 seconds for all children--
with the youngest children producing the longest talkuments! This is exactly the opposite of what one would
predict in writing, and an extremely important insight into what spriting can offer literacy development ­
composition length is no longer a bellwether indicator of literacy development. Length of talkument, however,
does not predict the number of words used. Older children had more fluency with spoken language and greater
grasp of compositional planning, thus averaging a little more than one word per second (359 words in 349
seconds) while the youngest averaged approximately 2/3 a word per second (256 words in 358 seconds).

                                                   947  ·  © ISLS
                                              ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

         Older children tend to have composition plans that exceed a single recording action. In Table 1, the
`Record then Play' column indicates the sequential relationship between recording and playing actions. The
Molière children immediately listened to only 8.7 out of the average 18.29 recordings they made, while the
younger Umoja children listened immediately to 6.2 out of an average 9.8 recordings--2/3 of all their
recordings. I observed the older children make several recordings consecutively and then listen to a group of
them, while the younger children composed in a record-listen-record-listen cycle, the next move inspired by
what they have just heard. Interestingly, the youngest children also listen more often to their own recordings--in
Table 1 their record-play ratio is 1:3 compared to the older children's 1:2. Thus, there are indications of a
developmental trend towards making shorter, more numerous recordings that are listened together as composites
(not individual recordings), in a review cycle that occurs less frequently.
Table 2 Average editing moves per talkument.
                          Delete               Move                                 Split
         Moliere     N      30                  17                                   14
                  AVE       11.8                8.8                                  9.1
                   SD       11                 12.6                                 20.6
  Umoja older        N      20                   4                                   10
                  AVE        8                  4.8                                  3.2
                   SD       6.6                 4.9                                  3.2
Umoja younger        N       9                   5                                   7
                  AVE       9.9                  3                                   5.1
                   SD       10.5                 2                                   4.7
         Children engage in editing moves through spriting even before they know how to write. As they get
older, they engage in even more editing moves. Table 2 shows that the younger Umoja children delete and move
content, and make splits. The Molière children make on average 12 deletions and move sausages nearly 9 times
per talkument, and they make finer edits by splitting content when necessary. The standard deviation for split
edits is very high because children used splits in only certain talkuments and certain situations. The older Umoja
children fit somewhere in the middle of these two groups as they begin to compose lengthy and purposeful
talkuments. Spriting might be treated now as a complementary process to writing in the elementary years, both
spriting and writing processes eventually to equalize in length and complexity.

Manifestations of Planning Processes in Spriting
         The spriting process affords new insights into composition generally, and might provide new insights
into the general theory  of composition   process--heretofore    examined   only   through the  window  of writing
behavior. For example, planning processes in spriting are very different from what children seem to experience
when writing. In spriting, several children learned that planning is a time for pausing.
         I encouraged the children to take intentional moments for thinking. This kind of thinking activity is
often called "planning" in the writing process literature, but has unfortunately been co-opted in most school
settings with highly structured activities for purposes of global planning (e.g. outlines, templates, concept maps,
et cetera) that should occur "first" in the composition process. Though these devices can be useful, they do not
supplant the need for thinking throughout the composition process, sometimes called "local planning" in writing
composition   research. Ironically, the  value of  these   kinds  of  global    planning  devices might  be    more
recognizable, and even   more  necessary, in the  spriting process   than   in the writing process, when children
discover for themselves how useful broad composition plans are when writing mechanics are not the primary
obstacles.
         Many children become frustrated when spriting--and even frightened away from trying to sprite--by
the immediacy of the task. They find that the words they expect to be there are not there. They fall into a silence
they find uncomfortable, even unbearable. Because children talk easily when they respond to adult questions or
when they converse with their friends, they seem to expect that words will always emerge to accomplish the
task they have set for themselves. When they watch television, they see people who always know what to say.
They see politicians answer questions no pause. We have few public models of people pausing to think before
talking. Therefore, it is not surprising that children, even if they have very little experience writing or spriting
literate compositions, do not expect that thinking could take time.
         In writing, the time to get something down on paper or screen is much longer than speech (300% to
400% longer even for an expert typist). Therefore, the time spent thinking and planning comes for `free' while a
child struggles with mechanical production. I saw many children struggle initially with the fact that they could
not say everything they wanted to in one long, synchronous recording, as they felt they did when writing. They
would get frustrated at their self-perceived lack of fluency, erase everything and start over again. The idea that
thinking is doing something    had  not seemed  to  occur  to them   before.   Writing  may  be less conducive   to

                                                  948  ·  © ISLS
                                                    ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

cultivating   the  habit  of mind    to pause  to  think during   composition.    Spriting   seemed to  help students   learn
aspects of composition that they may have performed implicitly while writing, due to the slower mechanics, but
had not realized they did so in such a way as to use this cognitive skill flexibly.
          In spontaneous speech, Frieda Goldman-Eisler (1958) claims that pauses provide an external window
on internal   cognitive   processes,    and  that pause  lengths  increase  with  task  abstraction and `explicitness'    ­ a
feature correlated with how familiar/unfamiliar the conversants are with each other. When I began the design
research, I believed that pauses, filled (e.g. um, uh) or empty, should be reduced and minimized respectively as
a feature of editing a talkument from intermediate to final product. I learned from the children that pauses ­ both
filled with a delightful variety of sounds and empty ­ could be indispensably important to a talkument.               Next, I
tell two learning stories of how pauses were important in spriting. Neither describes the general case of learning
to pause but instead complicates the notion of what pausing to think should be. These stories demonstrate that a
single, global    approach   to pauses   in  spriting (pedagogically,    technological  support, etc.)  would   not  only  be
difficult to achieve in practice, but might also be undesirable.

Madeline Likes Her Pauses
          In the fourth week of spriting class at the Molière Elementary, I devised an activity intended to focus
the children on editing, and in particular to remove what I considered long and unnecessary pauses. They were
to create a talkument with three short stories. If any story exceeded four spriting lines in length, they were to
edit it down. They could consult with friends to figure out what might be eliminated. The best story was to be
placed  first in   the composition    (by   dragging  and   dropping).   Although  complicated,  the   children understood
these directions and produced some material that was amongst their best work for the entire spriting class.
          Eight-year-old girls, Madeline and Emily, finished quickly and were the first to listen to each other's
compositions. I instructed them also to point out long silences to their partner. Emily must have commented to
Madeline that her composition had too many long silences. Madeline motioned me over to discuss this.
          My composition has many long silences. Do I have to remove them? She said. Actually, I like the
silences.
          Why is that? I asked.
          When I talk I often use long silences.
          Well, just because your talk has long silences doesn't mean you want your composition to be exactly
the same. The person listening to this will not be able to look at your face when hearing your talkument, they
can only hear your voice. Sometimes when you aren't saying anything, your face says something instead. But in
a talkument you can't use your face. So make sure that the silences are useful.
          Clearly I didn't get her point, so she tries to restate it differently.
          I also use a long pause before something scary. So, I prefer to keep them.
          It  hits me.    She's referring   to the  use  of   pauses for  dramatic  effect,  a performance     issue an oral
storyteller  would     be very  concerned    with. Using  pauses   for   dramatic effect demonstrates   a mature     sense  of
verbal storytelling. Pauses are not always emblematic in spriting of an internal cognitive struggle to produce
words. If these dramatic pauses were removed--or even shortened--automatically by the spriting technology,
Madeline's mature compositional purposes would be destroyed.
          Due to this and other experiences that demonstrated a usefulness and meaning to pauses that I had not
considered before, I disabled the SpriterWriter's technological support for automatically shortening long pauses.

Niesha's Beats as Pause
          Niesha, an eight-year-old child at Umoja Elementary, had a gift for beats. These beats consisted of lip
smacks,   purses,    sucks,  kisses, clicks, hummed      bars from   songs, and   more,  all merged  together  into  a drum
rhythm that accompanied her spriting. Many of the Umoja children were able to create inventive, spontaneous
rhythms with their voices, whereas none of the Moliere children could. Certainly a familiarity with rhythmic
talk as heard     in rap  and  hip-hop   contribute   to their  able improvisation.  But   Niesha   was particularly   gifted
amongst her classmates. She enjoyed making her compositions a continuous, unbroken weave of rhythm, talk
and song. For example, here is a transcribed excerpt from one of her compositions:

          I  like  (.) hmm   {VOC     mouth    sounds}   (7.4)  I like spaghetti, {VOC     mouth  sounds}    I like
          chicken {VOC mouth sounds} spicy chicken {VOC mouth sounds} I like Chinese food, the
          rice the Chinese rice and the (.) red - no the orange chicken (inaudible) they are so good if you
          eat them your mouth bam! if you eat the orange chickens. {VOC mouth sounds}

          This example is the first in a series of talkuments in which she uses descriptive and journal-like talk
coupled with these drum-like mouth sounds and excerpts from songs to describe foods she likes and its effect
upon her. In between each mention of a food, she made what she called a `beat.' Beats for Niesha include
sounds she makes with her mouth, song excerpts, and small bits of Americana like "Peace", "Ho Ho Ho Merry

                                                         949  ·   © ISLS
                                               ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

Christmas". Her beat is nearly impossible to transcribe to text. The (inaudible) mark in particular, and the {VOC
mouth sounds}, often stands for sections of spriting that simply have no textual equivalent.
        One of Neisha's primary goals was to make long talkuments; she bragged about the great length of her
spriting multiple times to me and to her teacher. How ridiculous our goals for mature writing, such as length,
appear when they are transplanted into another media like spriting in which they are so easily achieved! Her
composition approach was typical of most children at both schools. She first recorded one or two continuous
recordings and  then   edited these by adding  or deleting   a few  major  narrative chunks. I dubbed    this editing
approach "chunk insertions". This composition strategy required great fluency, and children had to devise ways
to plan what to say next while they were recording. Niesha appears to use beats as pausing time. Her nearly
automatic ability to perform beats allowed her to time to construct her next thoughts. The effect of this strategy
is a kind of stream of consciousness flood of verbal and sound images from Niesha's life experience.

Discussion
        The   quantitative descriptive overview   and  qualitative  examples  are  meant to  suggest very  different
kinds of conclusions than those that have dominated literacy research, particularly with respect to the ascribed
importance of writing and text in literacy development. When children are learning to speak, they explore issues
both great and small simultaneously. But only a few years later when they begin school, they focus intensely on
the letterate issues ­ the smallest  units of writing  composition,    and neglect practice of literate concepts for
several more years. The introduction of spriting at beginning levels of letterate and literate development appears
to allow children practice with extended forms of literacy and habits of mind such as review and editing well
before they can properly execute the full character set.
        One specific issue discussed here is the importance of learning a literate habit of mind ­ that is, to
recognize the need to make composition plans. In written discourse, planning comes for free with the longer
written mechanic requirements. But spriting speeds up the composition process to a pace that resembles
spontaneous speech, but lacks most if not all of the social supports. To characterize the importance of pauses in
literacy development, it would be helpful to distinguish two different kinds of learning. The first is actually
learning to do something; for example, learning how to sing. The second kind of learning is to be conscious of
how one actually does that thing. This distinction might be related to Karmiloff-Smith's concepts of implicit and
explicit knowledge (1992), sometimes also referred to as meta-discourse or meta-awareness. She writes that the
ability to do something (implicit knowledge) can disappear for a time as the knowledge of how to do this thing
shifts to making hypotheses about how one actually does this (explicit forms). Although both types of learning
are not required for action (obviously, just learning how to do something is often enough), it is sometimes
critical to know how one actually does it in order to deploy the ability when the usual supports are not available.
Spriting allows students to discover habits of the literate mind that they may already do when writing, but do not
understand or identify as actions involved in composing. Spriting forces them to think about--and potentially
develop new hypothesis for-- how they go about the process of composing. If children have the ability to make
more aspects of the composition process explicit, they can control these skills in both their written and spoken
compositions.

References
Bereiter, C., & Scardamalia, M. (1987). An Attainable Version of High Literacy - Approaches to Teaching
        Higher-Order Skills in Reading and Writing. Curriculum Inquiry, 17(1), 9-30.
Brown, A. (1992). Design Experiments: Theoretical and Methodological Challenges in Creating Complex
        Interventions in Classroom Settings. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 2(2), 141-178.
Chi, M. (2000). Self-Explaining Expository Texts: The Dual Processes of Generating Inferences and Repairing
        Mental Models. In Advances in Instructional Psychology (pp. 161-238). Mahwah: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Collins, A. (1992). Toward a Design Science of Education. In E. Scanlon & T. O'Shea (Eds.), New Directions in
        Educational Technology. New York: Springer-Verlag.
diSessa, A. A., & Cobb, P. (2004). Ontological innovation and the role of theory in design experiments. Journal
        of the Learning Sciences, 13(1), 77-103.
Edelson, D. C. (2002). Design research: What we learn when we engage in design. Journal of the Learning
        Sciences, 11(1), 105-121.
Goldman Eisler, F. (1958). Psycholinguistics: Experiments in spontaneous speech. New York: Academic Press.
Haas, C. (1989). How the Writing Medium Shapes the Writing Process - Effects of Word-Processing on
        Planning. Research in the Teaching of English, 23(2), 181-207.
Jones, I. (1998). The Effect of Computer-Generated Spoken Feedback on Kindergarten Students' Written
        Narratives. Journal of Computing in Childhood Education, 9(1), 43-56.
Karmiloff-Smith, A. (1992). Beyond Modularity: A Developmental Perspective on Cognitive Science.
        Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

                                                   950   ·  © ISLS
                                             ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

Olson, D. R., & Torrance, N. (1985). Language, Literacy and Mental States. Canada; Ontario: Ontario Inst for
         Studies in Education Toronto.
Papert, S. (1993). The children's machine: Rethinking school in the age of the computer. NY: Basic Books.
Purcell-Gates, V. (1991). Ability of well-read-to children to decontextualize/recontextualize experience into a
         written narrative register. Language and Education: An International Journal, 5, 177-188.
Shankar, T. R. (2006) "Speaking on the Record: A Theory of Composition."     Computers and Composition.         In
         C. Ball and B. Hawk (Eds.) Sound in / as Compositional Space:   A Next Step in Multiliteracies.
Shankar, T. R. (2005).  Speaking    on   the Record.      PhD,  Media  Laboratory, Massachusetts   Institute    of
         Technology, Cambridge, MA.

Acknowledgments
My thanks to the three anonymous reviewers for their helpful critiques, and my gratitude to my former advisor,
Seymour Papert, who legitimized my dream and made this work possible.

                                                 951  ·  © ISLS
