                                                   ICLS 2010    ·  Volume 1

         Using Knowledge Space Theory to Analyze Concept Maps
!
            Laura A. Cathcart, Mike Stieff, Gili Marbach-Ad, Ann C. Smith, and Kenneth A. Frauwirth
                                   University of Maryland, College Park, Maryland
         cathcart@umd.edu, mstieff@umd.edu, gilim@umd.edu, asmith@umd.edu, kfrauwir@umd.edu

         Abstract: This study examines use of knowledge space theory as a novel method of analyzing
         concept maps. Concept mapping is a technique for expressing relationships between ideas,
         using two-dimensional node-link diagrams to visually display relationships between ideas. We
         introduced     concept mapping       as  a  voluntary    exercise    in an  upper-level   undergraduate
         immunology course. The students were assigned ten concept maps (for which concept lists
         were provided) at intervals during the semester-long course. We utilized knowledge space
         theory (Folmagne & Doignon, 1988) to systematically analyze and compare concept maps
         drawn    by students   to their     instructor's "expert"  concept    maps.  Using   this novel  analysis
         method, we were able to reveal students' level of understanding of course material, changes in
         student knowledge across time, as well as identify students' alternative conceptions. We found
         knowledge      space theory     a   productive   tool  for systematically    analyzing    and comparing
         students' concept maps across time and to expert's concept maps.

Introduction
Concept  mapping     is a technique      for externally   depicting  students'   internal knowledge    structures. Students
construct concept maps by using labeled linking lines (propositions) to show relationships between ideas or
objects  (concepts).  The  process     of  constructing    a  concept   map    helps students  build   a deeper  and   more
meaningful understanding of content material (Novak & Gowin, 1984). Concept maps are a useful pedagogical
tool because they allow teachers to visualize students' knowledge structures. This allows teachers to structure
lessons to expand upon students' existing knowledge structures (Edmondson, 2000; Marbach-Ad et al., 2007;
Okebukola, 1990). Despite the successful instructional use of concept maps, they have proven difficult to use for
assessing student knowledge.
         In  part  this difficulty is    due  to the various    concept  map     assignments,  instructions and    analytical
techniques or scoring procedures. Some concept mapping assignments ask students to generate the important
concepts for a topic, others ask students to fill in the propositional statements on the linking lines on a pre-drawn
concept map, and still others ask students to construct a map from a list of important concepts. Concept mapping
instructions  might  ask  students    to draw    hierarchical   relationships  and crosslinks  between    concepts whereas
others  simply  ask  students   to connect    concepts    together  using   propositions.  Some    concept  map    analytical
techniques evaluate maps based on the degree of hierarchy and crosslinking between hierarchies, other scoring
procedures are based upon the number of concepts and propositions in the map, and still other methods attempt
to rate the quality of the propositions and crosslinks in the map. Ruiz-Primo and Shavelson (1996) wrote a
review highlighting the myriad array of concept mapping tasks and analytical techniques or scoring procedures.
In their paper,   Ruiz-Primo    and   Shavelson    call   for researchers   to more   carefully design    concept  mapping
assessment   tasks to   align with    cognitive  theories.    They  also stress  the  need  to  establish the  validity  and
reliability of analytical techniques      for concept     map   assessments   before  widespread   implementation     of  the
assessment.
         Many   researchers   (e.g.,   Okebukola,    1990;    Markow    &   Lonning,    1998;  Trowbridge   &  Wandersee;
McClure et al., 1999) have experimented with different concept mapping tasks and analytical techniques to
develop concept mapping assignments that provide effective assessments of student knowledge. Novak and
Gowin (1984) outlined a quantitative scoring procedure for hierarchical concept maps in their original book
introducing the concept mapping technique. In this scoring method, each valid proposition was assigned 1 point,
each hierarchical level of the map was assigned 5 points, and each valid and significant crosslink between
branches was assigned 10 points. The sum of these points established the overall score for the concept map.
Novak and Gowin's scoring technique is useful because it differentiates between simple and complex maps
numerically;   however,   the technique      depends upon     the hierarchical   nature of the  concept   map. In  contrast,
Kinchin, Hay, and Adams (2000) developed a qualitative method of analyzing student's concept maps. The
method   involves  determining     if the  concept   map's    structure is  best described  as  a  spoke, chain,   or net of
propositions connecting concepts. This technique allows for a rapid determination of the complexity of the
concept map. However, it does not account for the quality of the concept map. McClure et al. (1999) conducted
a study in which they attempted to establish the reliability and validity of a relational scoring procedure for
concept maps. The technique involves assigning a numerical quality rating to each proposition in a concept map.

                                                       952    ·  © ISLS
                                                     ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

Similar to Novak and Gowin, the sum of the numerical quality ratings for each proposition was used to represent
the score for the concept map. This technique is useful because it incorporates the quality of each proposition
into  the concept   map     score. However,     the  relational scoring   technique  only   provides  information   about  a
student's knowledge relative to other students. The relational scoring technique does not provide instructors
with information about students' alternative conceptions or concepts that may need further instruction.
          Despite  the    utility  of each  of  the  above  analytical  techniques,   many    questions   remain about    the
theoretical rationale behind such techniques and the validity and reliability of each procedure. There is a need
for the development of alternative procedures for systematically analyzing concept maps to reveal information
about students'    knowledge       structures.  Knowledge   space   theory   (Folmagne    &   Doignon,    1988)  offers  one
potentially useful procedure for systematically analyzing concept maps.             Knowledge space theory (KST) is a
mathematical theory that allows researchers to represent the state of a student's knowledge, referred to as a
knowledge    space,    at a precise   point in  time  using a   series of  assessments.   The first  step in determining   a
student's knowledge space involves carefully designing a set of questions that each measure knowledge of a
discrete concept. The set of questions is administered to the student and scored for correctness. The unique
combination of concepts, represented by the correctly answered questions, comprises a students' knowledge
space. KST is useful to educational researchers because it allows for the systematic comparison of students'
knowledge in a particular domain across time and compared to experts (Folmagne & Doignon, 1988). KST was
originally designed to help researchers examine students' knowledge spaces in mathematics domains, but has
also  been   shown     to  successfully   represent   student   knowledge    in   science   (Taagepera  et al.,  1997).   By
administering the same survey throughout a semester of chemistry, the researchers determined potential learning
pathways.    That  is, students    appeared  to  learn additional  concepts    in  discrete series. Figure 1  illustrates an
example critical learning pathway for chemistry students.
          !

                                                                                          !
             Figure 1. Critical learning pathways for novices and experts. (Taagepera & Noori, 2000).
!
          In the  present   study,    we applied   a modified   KST    framework   to analyze   concept    maps  created  by
students enrolled in an undergraduate immunology course. We focused on examining the composite of students'
knowledge spaces across time and to the instructor's knowledge spaces. In contrast to the KST approach of
identifying  correct   answers    to  assessment    questions,  we built   student knowledge   spaces   by   identifying  the
presence or absence of propositions linking concept pairs on concept maps. Due to the voluntary nature of the
concept mapping assignment, our data was not conducive to comparing change in individual students across
time. Rather,    our   results indicate    that  analysis  of   concept  maps   with  the   KST     framework   permits   the
identification  of the    relative frequency    of  domain  concepts    in a population   of  students  as well  as notable
alternative conceptions. The KST framework is also useful for highlighting similarities and differences between
instructor's and students' concept maps.

Methods
An   instructor  employed      concept   maps    as  instructional aids   in a  team-taught   undergraduate     introductory
immunology course. The course consisted of two 1-hour lectures and one 1-hour discussion per week. Students
were given a brief overview of the concept mapping technique and the instructor demonstrated construction of a
sample concept map at the start of the course. On 10 separate occasions in the course, students were assigned
concept   maps  on   specific  lecture   topics: B   Cell Development,     Germinal   Centers, Major    Histocompatability

                                                        953   ·  © ISLS
                                                 ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

Complex,    T  Cell   Development,     Costimulation,    Cytokines,   Autoimmunity     /   Tolerance,  Alloreactivity /
Immunosuppression,     Vaccines,   and  Immune    Responses    to  Tumors.  For  each    map, the  instructor  provided
students with 11 to 17 concepts (M = 14) central to the corresponding lecture topic to use while constructing
each concept map. Note that several of these concepts were present on multiple concept map assignments.
Students received 1% extra credit towards their final course grade for completing 5 of the concept maps. After
students submitted their concept maps, the whole class received a concept map on the same topic created by the
professor. We analyzed 208 concept maps collected from 89 students enrolled in the course of 98 students. Of
the 89 participants, 52 completed one or more concept maps and 37 completed five or more concept maps.
Table 1 illustrates the total number of concept maps completed for each lecture topic. Due to the voluntary
nature of the assignment, a different set of students completed concept maps for each lecture topic.
Table 1. Number of submitted concept maps for each lecture topic.
!
                      Lecture          Lecture Topic                            Number of
                      Number                                                    Submitted
                                                                                Concept Maps
                             6         B Cell Development                              27
                             6         Germinal Centers                                25
                             8         Major Histocompatability Complex                24
                            11         T Cell Development                              23
                            13         Costimulation                                   17
                            15         Cytokines                                       18
                            21         Autoimmunity / Tolerance                        20
                            22         Alloreactivity / Immunosuppression              27
                            24         Vaccines                                        17
                            25         Immune Responses to Tumors                      10
                      Total = 26                                                Total = 208

         The concept maps constructed by the instructor and students were exclusively network concept maps
that included "a semantic network with concept nodes linked directionally by labeled lines (arrows) to produce
propositions"  (Ruiz-Primo     & Shavelson,   1996,  p.  572). Unlike  hierarchical concept   maps,   network  concept
maps are not arranged in a hierarchical nature (Novak & Gowin, 1984). Figure 2 illustrates an example student
concept map for the B Cell Development lecture topic.
         All of the concept maps were analyzed using the KST framework. We used the propositions in each
concept map in place of the discrete conceptual questions used in traditional applications of KST. For each set
of concept  maps    from  a  lecture topic, every unique    proposition was  assigned    a letter or number   code. All
propositions generated by the instructor (those that appeared on the instructor's map for the topic) were assigned
a number; the list of numbered propositions for each topic was set by the instructor's concept map. This list was
then compared    to  each student's   concept map    to  identify the instructor-generated  propositions  on   students'
concept maps. All propositions generated by the students (those that appeared only on students' maps for the
topic) were assigned a letter. The list of lettered propositions for each topic grew as each student's concept map
was analyzed. This list was then compared to each student's concept map to identify the student-generated
propositions.  Akin   to  the  techniques   used  in traditional   KST,  the    unique combination    of propositions,
represented by numbered and lettered codes on each concept map, represent a student's knowledge space for
that lecture topic.
         In this study,   we   did not focus  on  comparing    individual student's    knowledge   spaces; instead  we
focused on comparing a composite of students' knowledge spaces across time and to the instructor's knowledge
spaces. The   frequency   of  numbered  (instructor-generated)    and  lettered (student-generated)   propositions  was
calculated for each lecture topic. We constructed composite maps (See Figures 3 and 4) for each lecture topic to
help interpret and    visualize  the  changes  across   time   and the  differences between    the   students' and  the
instructor's knowledge spaces. Instructor-generated propositions were highlighted in bold text on the composite
map if they appeared on less than 50% of student concept maps. The threshold was set at 50% indicating the
potential need for instructional intervention in the classroom as opposed to individual student errors. Correct

                                                     954  ·  © ISLS
                                              ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

student-generated propositions that were not indicated by the instructor, were highlighted in CAPITAL text.
Incorrect student-generated propositions were highlighted in ITALICIZED CAPITAL text if they appeared on
more than 25% of student concept maps. The threshold was set at 25% indicating the possible presence of a
shared alternative conception among students as opposed to an individual student's misunderstanding.

                                                                                                                    !
    Figure 2. Example Student B Cell Development Concept Map. Concepts are the ideas enclosed in rounded
             boxes. Propositions are represented as directional arrows labeled with a linking phrase.

Results
Knowledge    space  theory proved   useful for comparing    students'    concept maps   across time   and to  their
instructor's "expert" concept  maps.  Generating  the    composite   maps  for   each concept  map  lecture  topic,
systematically summarized the knowledge spaces represented by the students' concept maps in comparison to
the instructor's "expert"  concept map. By   calculating   the frequency  with   which  the propositions  from the
instructor's concept  map  appeared  on student's concept   maps,    the researchers  were  able to systematically
highlight the differences in knowledge structures between the students and the instructor.
        Despite the uniqueness of each concept mapping lecture topic, we were able to compare students'
knowledge spaces across time, because some of the same concepts appeared in several of the assigned concept
maps for different lecture topics. The B and T cell development concept maps provided a unique opportunity to
compare  the   development  of students'   knowledge     spaces  over the  course  of  the  semester. The   B  cell
development lecture topic concept map was the first map assigned during the semester. The T cell development
lecture topic concept map was the fourth concept map assigned during the semester, after the students had taken
and received feedback for an exam on B cell development. B cells and T cells both initially share similar
development processes that diverge later in the developmental process. However, several of the processes that
regulate the development of B cells are common to T cells as well. This unique situation allowed the researchers
to analyze the change across time of students' knowledge spaces on the common processes in B and T cell
development. Figures 3 and 4 illustrate the composite maps for the B and T cell development lecture topics.
KST analysis of the B and T cell development concept maps revealed both positive and negative changes in
students' knowledge and relatively stable student knowledge structures.
        Comparison of the B and T cell development concept maps revealed an improvement in students'
understanding of some concepts across time. Analysis of the B cell development composite map indicates that
only 30% of the students included information about the interaction of the lymphoid precursor cells with the
stromal cells. The T cell development composite map indicates that information about the interactions between

                                                  955  ·  © ISLS
                                              ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

the lymphoid precursors and the stromal cells appeared in 95% of the students' knowledge spaces. This dramatic
change in the appearance of a proposition indicates a significant improvement in students' understanding across
time.
        KST was also useful for identifying positive changes in students' knowledge, such as student-generated
propositions that were not emphasized by the instructor. More than a quarter of students' concept maps from the
T cell development concept maps included student-generated propositions about the interactions between the
lymphoid precursor cells and the stromal cell effector molecules, IL-7 and stem cell factor. These interactions
were not indicated by a significant percentage (more than 25%) of students on the B cell development concept
maps.  Despite the accuracy of these student-generated       propositions, the instructor had  not included     the
propositions on his "expert" concept map because he was not trying to emphasize these particular relationships
between the concepts. KST analysis proved useful for highlighting improvements in students' knowledge that
would not necessarily have been identified using other assessment techniques.
        Using KST to analyze students' concept maps also allowed researchers to show the change over time in
the frequency of alternative conceptions in students' knowledge spaces. An average of 50% of students' B cell
development knowledge  spaces  indicated a correct     understanding  of the role of allelic exclusion in B cell
development. The appearance of the correct understanding of the role of allelic exclusion had decreased to less

                                                                                                                        !
  Figure 3. B Cell Development Composite Concept Map. Numbers in parentheses represent the percentage of
  student concept maps containing each proposition. Normal text represents concepts and propositions generated
   by instructor. Bold text represents propositions generated by the instructor that appear on less than 50% of
  student concept maps. CAPITAL text represents correct concepts or propositions generated by more than 25%
   of students. ITALICIZED CAPITAL text represents incorrect propositions generated by more than 25% of
                                                students.
!

                                                  956  ·  © ISLS
                                              ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

!
  Figure 4. T Cell Development Composite Concept Map. Numbers in parentheses represent the percentage of
  student concept maps containing each proposition. Normal text represents concepts and propositions generated
   by instructor. Bold text represents propositions generated by the instructor that appear on less than 50% of
  student concept maps. CAPITAL text represents correct concepts or propositions generated by more than 25%
   of students. ITALICIZED CAPITAL text represents incorrect propositions generated by more than 25% of
                                           students.

                                                  957  ·  © ISLS
                                                ICLS 2010    ·  Volume 1

than 25% in the students' T cell development knowledge spaces. A possible explanation for this change is that
on average, students had a weak understanding of allelic exclusion in B cell development. T cell development is
a more    complicated   process   compared    to  B   cell   development     and   perhaps  this exacerbated      students'
misunderstandings of allelic exclusion.
         The technique of KST analysis of concept maps was limited by its ability to detect students' alternative
conceptions at low frequencies. The process of negative selection was correctly indicated in less than 50% of
students'  T  cell development    knowledge   spaces.   Two    incorrect   alternative conceptions    about     the role of
negative selection appeared in more than 25% of students' T cell development knowledge spaces. Our initial
analysis  did not  reveal  alternative  conceptions   about    negative  selection  in  students'   B cell   development
knowledge spaces. Upon further analysis, 10 different alternative conceptions about negative selection were
identified in student' B cell development knowledge spaces; however, all appeared at frequencies less than 25%.
The thresholds set by the researchers limit KST analysis of concept maps, but these thresholds are flexible and
can be adjusted as needed to detect different frequencies of students' alternative conceptions.
         KST analysis of the B and T cell development concept maps also revealed concepts for which students'
understanding did not improve over time. There was no significant change in the appearance of propositions
about the interactions between the two stromal cell effector molecules, IL-7 and stem cell factor, with the
lymphoid    precursor's respective   progenitor  cells, the   pro-B  cells  or  double  negative    cells. On   the  B  cell
development composite concept map, only 26% (IL-7) and 41% (stem cell factor) of students' maps included
propositions relating the stromal cell effector molecules to the pro-B cells. On the T cell development composite
concept map, only 33% (IL-7) and 24% (stem cell factor) of students' maps included propositions relating the
stromal cell effector molecules to the double negative cells. KST analysis revealed problematic concepts for
which student knowledge remained relatively stable and did not improve over time with further instruction.
         By analyzing students' concept maps with KST we were able to extract very fine detailed information
about changes over time in students' knowledge spaces for lymphocyte development. KST analysis highlighted
both targeted and unexpected improvements in students' knowledge across time. Analysis of students concept
maps  by  KST   revealed  alternative  conceptions   and   allowed   us  to  track the changes   in   frequency     of these
alternative  conceptions  as further  instruction was    given    about  the  concepts  over   time.  KST    analysis   also
highlighted  problematic  concepts    for which  students'    knowledge    was   relatively resistant to   instruction  and
remained constant over time.
         The above examples have strong technical content that can obscure the critical viewpoints generated by
this research. The research above used examples of immunology based concepts; however, we propose that the
KST   method   of   analyzing concepts     maps   can   be   expanded   to   any   subject  at the  primary,    secondary,
undergraduate  and   even  graduate   levels. Using   KST      to analyze   concept  maps    enhances    the instructional
usefulness of concept maps for both students and instructors. KST is a powerful technique for analyzing concept
maps to understand a student's knowledge space at a given time, elucidate misconceptions held by a significant
proportion of the students, and identify correct student-generated ideas. KST combined with concept mapping
assignments   has   the  ability to   improve   instructor   clarity   and   students' perception,    increase   students'
understanding of concepts, and assist instructors in constructively addressing students' misconceptions.

Conclusion
Concept mapping is an effective pedagogical technique; however, concept mapping has proven challenging to
use as an assessment. The KST framework is a theory driven, systematic method of analysis that can be used to
evaluate the content of concept maps. We found that analysis of concept maps with the KST framework is a
productive   method  for  examining    change  across   time   in students'   knowledge     spaces. We     also found   that
analysis  of  concept   maps  with  the   KST  framework       effectively  highlights details   of  the   similarities and
differences between students' and instructor's knowledge spaces.
         KST analysis of concept maps is productive because it is sensitive to both the omission of conceptual
ideas from   students'  knowledge   spaces  and  the  addition    of alternative   conceptions  to  students'   knowledge
spaces. The technique also allows instructors to rapidly and systematically identify major themes in students'
knowledge from the vast array of information contained in students' concept maps. The range of analysis times
for each set of concept maps from a lecture topic was between 1 and 4 hours. The analysis time depended on the
number   of  concepts   assigned  for each  lecture  topic   and   the  overall  similarity between   the   students'   and
instructor's concept maps. The median analysis time for the sets of concept maps was approximately 2 hours.
There is the potential for computer software to assist in the analysis of concept maps using KST and shorten the
analysis time. An ideal program would generate a list of all propositions linking two concepts. From this list, the
researcher  could  easily count  the  number  of  propositions    similar  to  the instructor's  and  identify  frequently
occurring alternative conceptions.
         One limitation of using KST to analyze students' concept maps is that the researcher sets the thresholds
for highlighting differences between students' and instructor's concept maps. If the threshold is set too high, it
can reduce the sensitivity of the technique to subtle differences in students' knowledge spaces. The analysis time

                                                    958    ·  © ISLS
                                               ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

of the KST method increases as the thresholds are lowered. Lowering the thresholds also dilutes the major
findings of   the analysis by highlighting   minor, possibly  less important  differences in students'  knowledge
structures. Despite this limitation, KST enhances the pedagogical usefulness of the concept mapping technique
as a formative    assessment  because it provides   instructors with  a productive  framework   for  systematically
analyzing students' patterns of understanding and misunderstanding.
         Future research can expand upon our use of KST for analyzing concept maps to include comparison of
individual student's concept maps across time to identify changes in individual student's knowledge structures.
In addition, more research is needed to establish the reliability and viability of using KST for analysis of concept
maps from a wide variety of subject matters across a range of levels of students. KST analysis of concept maps
should be  compared    to  other established techniques   of measuring   students' knowledge    structures, such as
traditional KST applications and other standardized assessment techniques. We hope that other researchers will
elaborate upon and expand the application of the KST framework for analyzing concept maps to many different
disciplines of study.

References
Edmondson,    K.   M. (2000). Assessing   science   understanding  through   concept maps.   In J.J. Mintzes,  J.H.
         Wandersee, & J.D. Novak (Eds.), Assessing science understanding: A human constructivist view (pp.
         15-40). San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Falmagne, J., & Doignon, J. (1988). A Markovian procedure for assessing the state of a system. Journal of
         Mathematical Psychology, 32, 232-258.
Kinchin, I. M., Hay, D. B., & Adams, A. (2000). How a qualitative approach to concept map analysis can be
         used to aid learning by illustrating patterns of conceptual development. Educational Research, 42(1),
         43-57.
Marbach-Ad, G., Yarden, H., & Gershoni, J. M. (2007). Using the concept map technique as diagnostic and
         instructional tool in introductory cell biology to college freshmen. Journal of Student Centered
         Learning, 3(3), 163-177.
Markow, P. G., & Lonning, R. A. (1998). Usefulness of concept maps in college chemistry laboratories:
         students' perceptions and effects on achievement. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 35(9),
         1015-1029.
McClure, J., Sonak, B., & Suen, H. (1999). Concept map assessment of classroom learning: reliability, validity,
         and logistical practicality. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 36(4), 475-492.
Novak, J.D., & Gowin, D.B (1984). Learning how to learn. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Okebukola, P. A. (1990). Attaining meaningful learning of concepts in genetics and ecology: An examination of
         the potency of the concept-mapping technique. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 27(5), 493-
         504.
Ruiz-Primo, M. A., & Shavelson, R. J. (1996). Problems and issues in the use of concept maps in science
         assessment. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 33(6), 569-600.
Ruíz-Primo, M. (2000).     On the use of concept maps as an assessment tool in science: What we have learned so
         far.  Revista  Electrónica   de Investigación    Educativa,  2 (1).  Retrieved   March   10,  2009   from:
         http://redie.uabc.mx/vol2no1/contents-ruizpri.html
Taagepera, M., Potter, F., Miller, G. E., & Lakshminarayan, K. (1997). Mapping students' thinking patterns by
         the use of the knowledge space theory. International Journal of Science Education, 19(3), 283-302.
Taagepera, M., & Noori, S. (2000). Mapping students' thinking patterns in learning organic chemistry by the use
         of knowledge space theory. Journal of Chemical Education, 77(9), 1224-1229.
Trowbridge, J. E., & Wandersee, J. H. (1996). How do graphics presented during college biology lessons affect
         students' learning? Journal of College Science Teaching, 26(1), 54-57.
!

                                                   959  ·  © ISLS
