                                                 ICLS 2010   ·   Volume 1

Analyzing Equality of Participation in Collaborative Inquiry: Toward
                                       a Knowledge Community

         Abstract:   This    paper  shares   preliminary   findings    from   a   designed-based    study of   the
         Knowledge    Community      and  Inquiry   (KCI)  model      for secondary    science  curriculum.    We
         investigate the impact of the model on students' cooperative knowledge construction and their
         understanding of the science of climate change.         Working closely with a science teacher, we
         co-designed   a 10-week     curriculum   unit with     small  group   and   whole  class   collaborations
         across two participating classrooms. We present detailed analysis of the wiki content created
         by two groups of students, revealing a positive correlation between students' contribution to
         collaborative   inquiry  activities and    their achievements     in   the  curriculum.    This  finding
         suggests the need for increased scaffolding to support symmetric participation in collaborative
         inquiry so that both high and low achieving students benefit from such collaborative science
         curriculum activities.

Purpose of the Study
Typical  classroom   instruction  in science  still focuses     on rote   learning  of content,   performance  of  problem
solving, and coverage of standards and expectations (Slotta & Linn, 2009). Several traditions in the Learning
Sciences, such as inquiry-based learning (e.g. Krajcik, Blumenfeld, Marx, & Soloway, 2000) and knowledge
communities (Brown & Campione, 1994; Scardamalia & Bereiter, 2006), propose pedagogical approaches that
would transform   teaching    and   learning in  science   classrooms.     Despite   its success  in  increasing  students'
understanding  of    topics, inquiry-based    learning    still seeks     strategies to  promote    collective knowledge
construction within   classrooms    (Linn, Clark,   &  Slotta,   2003).   By   the   same  token,  developing  knowledge
communities in classrooms has proven difficult due to lack of concrete guidelines for designing collaborative
activities, as well as the challenges of bridging small-group collaboration with the wider community knowledge-
base, and of sustaining long-term collaborative inquiry (Lehrer & Schauble, 2006).
         This study investigates the effectiveness of a new hybrid model of collaborative inquiry situated within
a knowledge community that enables students and teachers to engage in inquiry activities that are designed to
deeply interconnect with a classroom-constructed knowledge base. To overcome the challenges of developing
inquiry-oriented knowledge communities in secondary school science classrooms, the Knowledge Community
and Inquiry model (KCI) proposes utilizing collaboration scripts (Kollar, Fischer, & Hesse, 2006) scaffolded by
a technology-enhanced    environment     ­ in this  case,  a    wiki.  The KCI     model  builds  on  recent research  that
integrates structured  collaborative    patterns to  complement        collective  knowledge    construction   and inquiry
process to alleviate aforementioned challenges and foster inquiry-oriented knowledge communities (Hmelo-
Silver & Barrows, 2008).
         This research extends prior studies on KCI (Slotta & Peters, 2008) by integrating the model deeply into
a grade  9 science   curriculum    unit concerned   with   climate    change,   and  by  adding   a scripted collaborative
component to the inquiry activities. The purpose of the larger study (now entering its second year of data
collection) is to investigate the effect of the refined KCI model on students' cooperative knowledge construction
and deep understanding of climate change concepts.         The present paper will examine the quality of knowledge
objects constructed by the students and the patterns of students' engagement in collaborative inquiry.

Theoretical Framework

Knowledge Communities
Learning science researchers advocate the notion of "Knowledge Community" to support learning. Of special
interest to this research are the conceptual frameworks of Fostering Communities of Learners (FCL; Brown &
Campione, 1994) and Knowledge Building Communities (KBC; Scardamalia & Bereiter, 2003) that have been
intensively researched in the context of k-12 education. Although the two frameworks differ in their guiding
principles, with FCL following a cycle of "research, share and perform" KBC pursuing idea improvement as a
product of students' knowledge construction efforts, they can be synthesized along three dimensions.
         Distributed cognitive responsibility: Traditional forms of instruction, such as lecture, are not conducive
to helping students integrate knowledge for deep understanding of concepts (Brown, 1997). In a knowledge
community    approach,   students  become    involved  in  articulating    their  own    learning goals and  planning  the
learning activities. Members     of  a  knowledge   community      are    not only   responsible  for the quality  of their
individual learning, but also are held accountable to communicate with other community members to scrutinize
the quality of collective knowledge (Bielaczyc & Collins, 1999). Metacognition and reflection serve to increase

                                                     960   ·    © ISLS
                                                 ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

students'  awareness  of    how   they  learn   and thereby    enable  self-reflection, critical inquiry, and  flexible
application of knowledge in novel situations.
         Community knowledge-base: In a knowledge community approach, knowledge sources are no longer
limited to the teacher and curriculum materials, but include knowledge artifacts identified or created by the
students (Bielaczyc & Collins, 1999). A shared knowledge base promotes a diversity of ideas and facilitates
access  to those   ideas in   order  to encourage   the  continued    growth   of community      knowledge   (Brown  &
Campione, 1994; Scardamalia, 2003). Structured collaborative activities intentionally distribute expertise among
students, requiring them to negotiate their individual knowledge within collaborative groups and organize their
new    understandings in    a common     community     knowledge      base (Brown    &   Campione,    1994). Students'
contributions to the community knowledge base will survive and be extended only if they are deemed important
to the community (Scardamalia, 2003).         Thus  any  artifact  produced  during  such  activities should  carry the
potential to be improved by others.
         Pedagogical and technological scaffolds: To help teachers and students achieve the nuanced flow of
ideas, activities and discourse within a knowledge community, researchers often introduce specific forms of
guidance or scaffolds.    These include collaboration scripts technology tools that guide students' knowledge
building processes or discourse. In KB, for example, technology serves as a repository of ideas as well as a tool
for collaborative knowledge construction (Scardamalia & Bereiter, 1999).

Challenges for Fostering Knowledge Communities in Classrooms
Empirical research provides inconclusive results regarding the viability of the knowledge community approach
in classrooms.  The   few   published   studies  conducted   on   FCL-inspired    classrooms report   major  challenges
regarding instructional design and implementation (Sherin, Mendez, & Louis, 2004). Knowledge community
frameworks propose epistemological more than procedural changes to learning and teaching. How will these
principle translate into design guidelines for classroom practice? Sustained collaboration between researchers
and teachers appears to be one enabling condition.       Studies on knowledge building demonstrate the need for
such partnerships to focus on principles to guide their design and implantation (Zhang, Scardamalia, Reeve &
Messina, 2009).    Despite some empirical evidence of effectiveness, knowledge community frameworks have
not received widespread popularity among researchers and practitioners. A potential explanation for this limited
uptake by the wider community of learning scientists is the high demand of time and human resources that is
required for the design, implementation and evaluation of any knowledge community approach.
         There  is an evident    challenge   to any  application   of a  knowledge   community    model   in secondary
science courses. Knowledge building discourages topic-centered discussions (Bereiter, 2003) in favor of inquiry
problems.  It requires a long time ­ potentially up to 6 months ­ to get the community established sufficiently
well that they could identify conceptually inclusive problems that connect multiple topics together Scardamalia
(2003). Both of these challenges ­ the open-ended nature of topics and the time-intensive aspect of community
development ­ are ill suited to secondary science where teachers must make efficient use of curricular time to
target a  well specified  set of  science topics.   In   one   of the few  published accounts    of a KB   approach  to
secondary science (Van Aalst & Chan, 2007) the authors acknowledge making several compromises and falling
short of a full implementation of KB.
         Considering the challenges that researchers face when studying a knowledge community approach in
classrooms, one appealing approach is to develop new models that integrate Web 2.0 technologies with known
collaboration scaffolds (Slotta & Peters, 2008). Web 2.0 technologies can provide increased awareness of shared
knowledge and help scaffold students in collaboratively constructing new knowledge.           This could facilitate the
application of a knowledge community approach by researchers in a secondary science context.

Scaffolded Collaborative Inquiry
Inquiry-based learning (IBL) approaches support students in the process of constructing, refining, and applying
their understanding of scientific concepts through question-driven, evidence-based, iterative scientific inquiry
processes (Krajcik et al., 2000; Linn et al., 2003).
         Collaboration   is   valued in  IBL.   However,    enacting   collaborative inquiry  within   a  classroom  is
challenging, given the longstanding knowledge transmission culture as well as practical limitations such as time
and teacher to student ratio (Singer et al., 2000). The quality of collaborative work may suffer without sufficient
support, as a result of students' inexperience with fundamental processes such as pooling ideas, distinguishing
between valid and invalid ideas, and settling conflicts (Krajcik et al., 2000; Linn & Slotta, 2009).
         Technological   and     pedagogical  scaffolds  have   been  used  to relieve  complexities  of  collaborative
inquiry.  For example, Singer et al. (2000) propose that by having small groups of students share their inquiry
questions, plans and findings with the whole class, the students can improve the quality of their work.
         Different  forms     of collaborative   design  patterns   that  support  inquiry  have    been  advanced  by
researchers partly driven by the increasing interest in fostering communities of inquiry in classroom. These
patterns can provide detailed description of the steps required for students to complete a collaborative task, such

                                                     961  ·  © ISLS
                                                  ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

as reciprocal teaching (Palincsar & Brown, 1984). While this approach suggests great promise, structuring
collaborative inquiry in classrooms remains an important topic of research.

Knowledge Community and Inquiry (KCI): A Hybrid Model
Knowledge Community and Inquiry (KCI) is a hybrid pedagogical model that integrates the IBL and knowledge
community approaches to facilitate a culture of collective inquiry in classrooms. KCI is being developed to
make knowledge       communities   more   accessible  to secondary    science instruction, including   a new   role for
scaffolded inquiry activities that put the collaborative knowledge-base to use in targeting specific learning goals.
         Design principles for KCI science curricula are: (1) Establishing a shared knowledge-base. Students
identify issues  of  interest related to the   topic of  the unit and   develop knowledge   artifacts--e.g. annotated
resources or web pages--that embody the emerging themes to direct subsequent inquiry investigation. (2)
Collaborative inquiry. Once teachers identify issues deemed important by the class that are suitable for inquiry,
they work with researchers and technologists to co-design scripted-inquiry activities that draw upon the shared
knowledge-base as a resource for the inquiry activities. Decisions about the kind of scripts to be used in the
inquiry activity are made based on the topic of discussion and learning goals identified by the teacher. (3)
Continuing to develop the knowledge-base. The class is engaged in ongoing knowledge integration, connecting
their new ideas and understandings to the existing knowledge-base, which can be used in subsequent inquiry
activities. (4) Technology Scaffolds. Technology plays an essential role in KCI to help students and teachers
visualize collective knowledge, to promote every student's contribution to constructing the shared knowledge-
base, and to enable students to easily find and retrieve elements from the knowledge base. (5) Curriculum Co-
design. Designing curriculum that is accessible to teachers is of prime importance to KCI. Any curriculum
design must address learning goals held by the teacher, including school district or government curriculum
expectations. Moreover, the design team must accommodate the requirements of conventional assessments and
must therefore design activities that yield knowledge artifacts that can be graded for content expectations and
that prepare students for existing exams.

Research Questions
The following questions guided this study:
·   How will an improved KCI model that relates collaborative inquiry activities to shared knowledge-base
    impact students' contribution to the classroom knowledge community?
·   What are the characteristics of students' contributions to the community knowledge-base?
·   How do students' contributions to the knowledge-base relate to their understanding of scientific concepts?
·   How do pedagogical and technological scaffolds impact students' contribution to the knowledge-base?

Methods
Design-based methods bring researchers and classroom teachers together to create innovative approaches to
problems   of  practical and  theoretical value,  allowing     them  to recursively examine  the  interactions  among
multiple design elements to gradually improve the design (Collins, Joseph, & Bielaczyc, 2004). Edelson (2002)
identifies two different objectives for design research: Theory testing and theory development. Considering the
purpose of this study, which is to understand how a KCI-inspired technology-integrated curriculum can support
scientific inquiry  while promoting    a  knowledge    community     in science classrooms, a  design-based  method,
geared toward theory development, is appropriate.

Participants and Settings
Participants of this research are one science teacher and 42 grade ten students in two classes (A and B). The
participating teacher has been actively involved in previous research on the KCI model. Following a co-design
approach (Penuel, Roschelle, & Shechtman, 2007), the teacher joined the research team in August 2008 for
curriculum design, implementation, and evaluation. These meetings continued throughout the unit to refine
materials and address unforeseen situations.

Co-designed curriculum
The curriculum started with an initial knowledge construction activity where students identified useful resources
about climate change then annotated and added them under relevant category in a designated wiki page. To
promote    students' metacognitive    awareness   of  knowledge     community,   a  discussion about   "philosophy   of
science"   was also  conducted  in the   first stage of  the curriculum.   Students  then  identified important issues
related to climate change in Canada that were used to guide small group collaborations. Collaborative inquiry
activities included small-group, cross-group, and whole class collaborations. Students formed regional groups to
investigate  the effects  of  climate  change    within  each   region   with regards  to  three Science   dimensions
(Greenhouse effect, Weather and wind patterns and Ocean circulation). Within the regional groups, students
were assigned to one of the following "specialist roles:" primary industries, secondary industries, environmental

                                                     962  ·   © ISLS
                                                ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

activism and tourism industries. For the final project, specialists from all regions joined new advisory groups to
synthesize the community's knowledge and provide national guidelines for reducing the adverse affects of
global climate change in Canada. All groups were formed across two sessions of the class so that students
collaborated  with some   peers  asynchronously.  For   this iteration, technological   infrastructure consisted   of a
password-protected wiki with sophisticated grouping and permission capabilities, in addition to a collaborative
concept mapping software application. Laptops with wireless Internet connections were used for collaborative
work. The teacher was highly competent in using technology for teaching.

Data Sources
Multiple data sources were used to capture the richness and complexity of the innovation:
·    Contents of  student-created  wiki pages   provided   a measure    of the  quality of students'   ideas and   their
     collaborative knowledge construction.
·    Pre-post semi-structured interviews with the teacher and selected students provided deeper insight into the
     teacher's and the students' perspectives.
·    Classroom observation field-notes were collected to help identify patterns of practice and to corroborate
     data about students' engagement in collaborative activities.
·    Formal classroom assessments done by the teacher were used as one factor in examining the quality of
     students work.

Analysis and coding scheme
        Comprehensive analysis of data is still underway, and indeed a second iteration of the design study is
presently in data collection stages. In this paper, we focus on a portion of findings that examines the effect of
this co-designed   unit  on:  a) The   symmetry   of   students'   contribution  within  their small   groups  (ie,   in
collaborative inquiry); and b) the quality of students' contribution to the wiki. The objective is to understand
how curricular activities promote distributed cognitive responsibility and construction of cohesive and usable
shared knowledge. For this purpose, we analyze the progress of two small groups: those who created the Ontario
and the Prairies regional wiki pages. For any wiki page analyzed, an elaborate process of evaluating every
successive version of the page supports our inferences about collaboration patterns and the growth of ideas
within the page. Our unit of analysis was an independently meaningful and cohesive piece of text added to the
wiki pages. A unit could vary from one sentence to a multi-sentence paragraph.
        Wiki development actions: To measure individual group members' contribution to the wiki pages, we
reviewed  the actions   taken by  students while  they    were  editing a  page, following   a constant   comparative
method,  to  identify recurring  types of  edit actions.   This analysis  sheds  light  on the extent  to which    KCI
curriculum promoted distributed cognitive responsibility by revealing whether students go beyond their personal
contribution  to act  on what  has  been  added  to  their   group work    by other group   members.    The  resulting
categories for coding were: Initiating a new section or major idea (initiate); editing content previously added by
self (edit self); editing content previously added by another group member (edit other); making link to another
wiki pages (link to page); correcting grammatical mistakes or formatting (minor edits).
        Quality of wiki contributions: individual group members' contribution to the wiki pages in progress
was coded using a four-point scale: Unelaborated facts, elaborated facts, unelaborated explanations, elaborated
explanations  (adapted   from    Hakkarainen,   2003).     Another  category    of  "regulatory  notes"   was   added
subsequently to capture wiki entries concerned with planning, monitoring, or reflecting on the group's overall
progress or specific developments.

Findings and Discussion
Two regional groups, "Ontario" and "Prairies," were selected for this detailed analysis based on the teachers'
assessment of their collaborative work. Groups were formed by the teacher and balanced to have both higher
and lower achieving students. The mean for the two classes' final unit marking was 71.16 (SD=15.6). The
Ontario and Prairies groups were selected as cases because they respectively received lowest and highest marks
among  seven    regional groups.  We   hypothesized  that  close  examination   of  these  two groups'  collaborative
inquiry and knowledge construction activity could reveal challenges and advantages in our curriculum design
that could guide our design of more coherent collaborative group work and further refine the KCI model.
        The Ontario group consisted of six students: Cara, Cheryl, Sam, and Chris (from classroom A) and
Sara and Mike (from classroom B). Of these, three scored higher than class mean and three scored lower. The
Prairies group had five students: Wendy, Thomas, and Adriana (from classroom A) and Sheila and Mat (from
classroom   B).   Adriana  was   absent  for the  final   month  of the    curriculum,  which  directly   affected  her
contribution to wiki development.    We decided to disqualify her contributions from our analysis, which were
generally quite minor. In this group, one student scored lower than class mean in the unit and the remaining
three scored higher. On average, students in the Prairies group (mean=79.64) received higher final grades than
the Ontario group (mean=72.9) in the unit.

                                                   963   ·  © ISLS
                                             ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

Collaborative Knowledge Construction
        Using the "wiki development actions" scheme, we coded all versions of the main wiki page for each
region, and all the pages linked to each page that had at least one author from the respective group. Each time a
student clicked on the "edit" button, this was counted as one edit session. The total number of such edits was
tallied as "Total Page Edit" score. Note that it was possible that during and edit session a student took several
actions. Students' individual scores and group means for each item in the coding scheme were then calculated.
Figure 1 shows the distribution of edit actions among students from the two groups.

                          Ontario Group                                Prairies Group

          Figure 1. Students' individual scores for "wiki development actions" in Ontario and Prairies groups

        The Ontario  group  was observed    by one     of the authors throughout   the  unit implementation.  In
classroom A, Cara took a leading role, dividing the work among group members. She also took on a high
proportion of the work, making 25% of the edits herself (in group size of 6). In classroom B, Mike and Sara
made close to the same number of edits, but unlike the classroom A students who often communicated about
their collaborations, Mike and Sara only briefly discussed their collaboration in the beginning of the unit, then
worked independently afterwards. Sam had the lowest "Total Page Edit" count from the Ontario group.       He was
present in all group work sessions, and often engaged his group members in relevant discussions. However, Sam
typically only searched for information or edited the wiki when he was asked to do so by other group members.
        The Prairies group, although   not directly  observed,   demonstrated  a rather more  evenly    distributed
participation in wiki development actions. As we will discuss in the following section of Findings, this group
took a more calculated approach to planning and monitoring their collaborative work.
To examine the overall performance of the two groups regarding wiki development, we compared the mean
score for each action, as illustrated in Figure 2. The Prairies group showed overall higher means in all wiki
development actions. Moreover, students in both groups were more likely to initiate new section of text than to
edit the existing material added by other group members or linking relevant pages to their wiki page. Figure 2
shows  numerical values of  means    for comparison.      These   differences were  not  statistically significant,
presumably due to small group sizes.

         Figure 2. Comparing the means of wiki development actions for Ontario and Prairies groups
        Of great interest to this research was the impact of the co-designed curriculum on students' learning.
Of the four wiki development actions two provided some measure of students' progressively developing the
wiki as a collectively owned artifact rather than adding independent chunks of text to it: Edit Other and Link to
Page.  We thus calculated a "Collaborative Knowledge Construction" score for each student by adding up
her/his "Edit Other" and "Link to Page" scores. A correlation coefficient of 0.83 (Figure 3) suggested a strong

                                                 964  ·   © ISLS
                                             ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

positive relation between students' Collaborative Knowledge Construction score and their final grade in the
climate change unit.

           Figure 3. Relation between students' collaborative knowledge construction score in Ontario and
                                Prairies group with their final grade in the unit

Cohesiveness of co-constructed knowledge objects
       To cover the scientific issues that needed to be addressed in the inquiry activity, students took a divide
and conquer approach to group work. Since the wiki platform we used did not allow for concurrent edits,
students decided to create sub-pages to elaborate on their chosen part of the activity. We were interested to
know if the students finally integrated their knowledge into a cohesive final report.
       Content  analysis  of the wiki  pages  revealed    that students  in Ontario   group  occasionally ignored
existing wiki contents and added somewhat repetitive content to selected pages. For example Sara and Mike
added the following sentences to one wiki page:
        "Ontario is Canada's biggest polluter. Over half of Canada's population lives in Ontario,
       accounting for more waste products and pollutant." (Added by Mike on Dec 18 2008)
       "Ontario has the largest population in Canada, and thus Ontario's GHG emissions will be
       the highest." (Added by Sara on Jan 8 2009)
       Mike's entry was a standalone paragraph on top of the page about "Climate Change Issues" and by the
final version of the page this paragraph was redundant. Sara's entry was an introduction into a section on
"Carbon Emissions" and was well connected to the rest of the section. Nevertheless, the first entry was never
deleted or merged with relevant content to make the page more cohesive and less disconnected.
       We also noticed contradictory wiki entries in Ontario group. Factors that impacted the amount of released green
house gases were discussed in different pages and by different students. The discussion about this issue started by Chris
in the main page where initially green house gases were a sub-section of the main page"
       Chris : Only about 29% of Ontario's energy is taken from fossil fuel sources- the rest is nuclear
       and hydroelectric (as Ontario is full of rivers that are used for hydroelectric energy)."
       Meanwhile, Sara took the responsibility for developing the "Ontario Greenhouse Gases" page by turning the
sub-section heading into a new page which included the following entry related to hydroelectric power:
       "Sarah : "Contrary to popular belief, hydroelectric power may sometimes have more GHG
       emissions than the use of fossil fuels."
       The link to this page was directly located above Chris' contribution on December 18 2008. Later, Chris added
another entry right under his December 18 2009 entry:
        Chris "Since hydroelectricity generates very little air pollution, greenhouse cases in Ontario
       are very rarely from power generation "
       Although his contribution fell under the green houses gases topic, he did not add it to the "Ontario Greenhouse
Gases" page. We assume that Chris did not read this page, otherwise he would have noticed the apparent contradiction
between Sara's and his own contributions and the two of them would resolve it with more detailed evidence.
       In  the Prairies  group,  students  showed    higher    awareness of  their    shared content.  They   often
communicated with each other about their contributions through meta-comments. For example in one occasion
Mat copied Thomas'    contribution to its relevant   sub-page,  "Greenhouse   Gases",   edited  it to decrease the
redundancy, and weaved it into his own sentences previously added to that page. However he did not delete the
text on the main page that was added by Thomas. Mat also left a comment on the main Prairies wiki page:
        Matt: "I put it in the green house gases page and split up your points into jot note form, and
       got rid of some that I've already added there"
       An overall comparison of the two series of wiki pages developed by Prairies and Ontario students revealed a
lack of cohesiveness where contents were compartmentalized into subpages without being outlined and summarized in an
introduction or a summary section. This could be a flaw of our curriculum design, as we did not require the students to
synthesize their wiki work as the collaborative activity concluded. It could be inferred that students closely followed the
instruction given to them, which did not directly asked for a cohesive presentation of collected information.

                                                 965  ·  © ISLS
                                                 ICLS 2010  ·    Volume 1

Quality of contributions
Wiki pages of Ontario group contained more content than those of Prairies group. This could be attributed to the
fact that there were more students in the Ontario group. Table 1 shows the quality of students' individual
contributions to Prairies and Ontario wiki pages. Students in the Prairies group made extensive use of regulatory
notes to communicate division of labor and state of work among themselves. In the Ontario group, on the other
hand, regulatory notes were used only in one occasion to ask for all group members to work harder.

            Table1. Quality of students' individual contributions to Prairies and Ontario wiki pages
                                 Unelaborated    Elaborated      Unelaborated     Elaborated      Regulatory
                                 Fact            Fact            Explanation      Explanation     Notes
          Prairies  Wendy        7               6               6                2               2
          Group     Thomas       6               4               4                1               6
                    Sheila       9               1                                1               2
                    Mat          14              6               19               9               1
          Ontario   Sara         12              10              9                6               3
          Group     Mike         19              9               10               10              2
                    Chris        2               4               2                1               0
                    Sam          3               6               2                0               1
                    Cara         7               8               11               9               0
                    Cheryl       8               10              4                0               0

An   "overall quality score" was calculated for each individual by adding the scores s/he obtained in each of the
five categories of content quality. The relation between overall quality scores and final unit grades also resulted
in a positive   correlation with   a coefficient of 0.72    suggesting    that students whose    wiki entries are more
elaborated are likely to achieve higher marks in the unit.

Conclusion and Significance
        In this paper, we shared our interim findings regarding symmetric participation in collective inquiry
from  the first iteration   of a design-based    research   that examines   a   hybrid  KCI  model.   This new    model
encourages even distribution of cognitive responsibility towards building a deep collective understanding of
science topics and aspires that students would benefit from each other's contributions to the shared knowledge.
Findings shared here, will guide our curriculum design efforts for subsequent iteration of the study in 209-2010.
        From the beginning, we expected to observe non-symmetric participation in the inquiry activities both
in small group and in whole-class settings. It was our intention, thus, to study the patterns of participation in-situ
and design appropriate technological and pedagogical scaffolds to support collaborative activities that maximize
the benefits that a knowledge community can offer for all students. Using a wiki as collaboration venue allowed
us to study and analyze the process of developing a shared knowledge base through inquiry by disclosing
individual student's patterns of participation and their contributions to the final group product.
        Careful examination of wiki development actions revealed that students in both groups were more
likely to initiate semantically and conceptually new section than to edit the existing material or linking relevant
pages to their wiki page (refer to figure for numerical value of means). Upon examining the assessment rubric
given to students for their group work, we realized that the students were not explicitly encouraged to act on
material added by their group members. A level 4 group contribution was described as "....work in class built
on and extended on previous material on wiki" and "material added improved wiki". Yet known characteristics
of knowledge communities require students not only to focus on the quality of their individual contributions but
also monitor and act on material added by other group members. For these students it was their first experience
to make a shared wiki page. "Edit Other" and "Link to Page" wiki development actions in Prairies group
showed higher mean which could be due to Prairies students' self-realization that a contribution made to a
shared wiki became the intellectual property of all group members. This remains only as speculation as we did
not probe these students motivation for group work.
        Our findings suggest that students need to be supported in understanding inquiry processes and in
actively participating in a collaborative activity since uneven participation may lead to achievement differences.
For our next iteration, we are proposing to include two kinds of scaffolds: A reflective self-assessment (e.g.
White  &  Frederickson,     1998), both  for small  groups    and   for   individuals, to assist students  in explicitly
monitoring and improving their participation in co-constructing a shared knowledge base; and a participation
gauge scaffold to visualize contribution level per student.
        Further analysis of the current data will look into the connections that students made between among
knowledge artifacts shared by the class.

                                                    966   ·  © ISLS
                                                    ICLS 2010  ·   Volume 1

Scientific Significance
         Developing knowledge communities in classrooms has proved difficult (Lehrer & Schauble, 2006) and
inquiry-based learning approaches still seek strategies to promote collective knowledge construction within
classrooms (Linn, Clark, & Slotta, 2003).          We build on recent research that integrates structured collaborative
patterns to complement collective knowledge construction and inquiry process to alleviate these challenges
(Hmelo-Silver & Barrows, 2008).

References
Bielaczyc, K., & Collins, A. (1999) Learning communities in classrooms: A reconceptualization of educational
         practice. In C.M. Reigeluth (Ed.), Instructional Design Theories and Models, Vol. II. (pp 269-292).
         Mahwah NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Brown, A. L. (1997). Transforming schools into communities of thinking and learning about serious matters.
         American Psychologist, 52(4),399-413.
Brown, A. L., & Campione, J. D. (1994). Guided discovery in a community of learners. In K. McGilly (Ed.),
         Classroom lessons: Integrating cognitive theory and classroom practice (pp. 229­270). Cambridge,
         MA: MIT Press.
Collins, A.,   Joseph,    D., &    Bielaczyc,   K. (2004).  Design   research:  Theoretical   and methodological   issues.
         Journal of the Learning Sciences, 13(1):15-42.
Edelson, D. C. (2002). Commentary: Design research: What we learn when we engage in design. Journal of the
         Learning Sciences, 11(1), 105-121.
Hakkarainen, K. (2003). Progressive inquiry in a computer-supported biology class. Journal of Research in
         Science Teaching, 40, 1072­1088.
Hmelo-Silver,      C., &    Barrows,    H.  (2008).  Facilitating  collaborative   knowledge    building.  Cognition  and
         Instruction, 26(1), 48-94.
Kollar,  I., Fischer,   F.,   & Hesse,   F. W.   (2006).  Collaboration   scripts  ­ a conceptual   analysis. Educational
         Psychology Review, 18,159-185.
Krajcik,   J., Blumenfeld,      B., Marx,   R., &   Soloway,   E.  (2000).  Instructional, curricular,  and  technological
         supports     for inquiry   in  science  classrooms.   In Minstell,  J. and   Van  Zee, E., editors,  Inquiry into
         inquiry: Science learning and Teaching, (pp. 283-315). American Association for the Advancement of
         Science Press, Washington, D.C.
Lehrer, R., & Schauble, L. (2006). Scientific thinking and science literacy. In W. Damon, R. Lerner, K. Anne
         Renninger, & I. E. Sigel, (Eds,), Handbook of Child Psychology, Sixth Edition, Volume Four: Child
         Psychology in Practice. (pp 153-196). Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons.
Linn, M. C., Clark, D., and Slotta, J. D. (2003). Wise design for knowledge integration. Science Education,
         87(4), 517-538.
Palincsar, A. S., & Brown, A. L. (1984). Reciprocal teaching of comprehension- fostering and comprehension-
         monitoring activities. Cognition and Instruction, 1,117-175.
Penuel, W. R., Roschelle, J., & Shechtman, N. (2007). Designing formative assessment software with teachers:
         An analysis of the co-design process. Research and Practice in Technology Enhanced Learning, 2(1),
         51-74.
Scardamalia,       M. (2003).   Knowledge      society network    (ksn): Toward    an  expert  society for  democratizing
         knowledge. Journal of Distance Education, 17, 63-66.
Scardamalia, M., & Bereiter, C. (2006). Knowledge building: Theory, pedagogy, and technology. In K. Sawyer
         (Ed.), Cambridge Handbook of the Learning Sciences (pp. 97-118). New York: Cambridge University
         Press.
Sherin,  M.    G.,   Mendez,    E.  P., &  Louis,  D.  A. (2004).    A discipline  apart:  the challenges  of 'fostering a
         community of learners' in a mathematics classroom. Journal of Curriculum Studies, 36(2), 207-232.
Singer,  J.,   Marx,   R. W.,   Krajcik,   J., &   Chambers,   J. C.   (2000).  Constructing   extended  inquiry projects:
         Curriculum materials for science education reform. Educational Psychologist, 35(3), 165-178.
Slotta, J.   D.,   &  Peters, V.   (2008).  A  blended  model    for knowledge     communities:   Embedding     scaffolded
         inquiry. Proceedings of the International Conference of the Learning Sciences.           Utrecht.
Slotta, J. D., & Linn, M. C. (2009).       WISE Science:    Inquiry and the Internet in the science classroom. Teachers
         College Press.
van Aalst,     J., &  Chan,   C.   K. (2007).   Student-directed  assessment    of knowledge    building  using  electronic
         portfolios. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 16(2), 175-220.
White, B. Y., & Frederiksen, J. R. (1998). Inquiry, modeling, and metacognition: Making science accessible to
         all students. Cognition and Instruction, 16(1), 3-118.
Zhang, J., Scardamalia, M., Reeve, R., & Messina, R. (2009). Designs for collective cognitive responsibility in
         knowledge-building communities. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 18(1), 7-44.

                                                        967  ·  © ISLS
