                                                ICLS 2010   ·   Volume 1

       The Construction, Refinement, and Early Validation of the
                          Equipartitioning Learning Trajectory
                Jere Confrey, Alan Maloney, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, NC 27606
                                jere_confrey@ncsu.edu, alan_maloney@ncsu.edu

          Abstract.   Equipartitioning, a foundational construct of rational number, is introduced in the
          form of a learning trajectory. Its development is linked to synthesis of research, the conduct of
          clinical interviews, and the development of related diagnostic assessments. Refinement and
          validation of a learning trajectory is described as an iterative empirical process that can serve
          as a prototype for design of other learning trajectories.

          There is perhaps no more important conceptual area in mathematics education than rational number
reasoning. The basis of the multiplicative conceptual field (Vergnaud 1983, 1996), rational number reasoning
underpins algebra, higher mathematical reasoning, and the quantitative competence required in science. Failure
to develop robust rational number construct reasoning and skills in elementary and middle school continues to
plague American students. Rational number reasoning is complex, and mastery represents cognitive synthesis--
understanding,   distinguishing  among,   modeling,   and   interweaving    a remarkable    assortment    of  distinct yet
closely related concepts over many years.
          More than four decades of research in rational number topics have provided us with a robust outline of
the concepts   that comprise   rational number    reasoning.   As described   over years  of research     in the   Rational
Number Project, and recently outlined by Confrey and colleagues (Confrey 2008; Confrey et al. 2009), rational
number reasoning encompasses the constructs of equipartitioning, multiplication and division, ratio, rate and
proportion, scaling, length and area measurement, fractions, decimals and percents. That research and summary
of  rational number   strongly suggests   that while  Rational    Number    Reasoning  is complex,     it will  yield  to a
Learning Trajectories analysis (Confrey et al. 2009).
          Once learning trajectories are developed, it is assumed that they can be deployed as a framework for
curricular   innovations and for   strengthening  teachers'    understanding  of and  instruction   in rational    number.
When coupled with innovative cognitive diagnostic psychometric approaches, learning trajectories may provide
a robust means for teachers to assess students' cognitive progress.
          "Learning   trajectory"  is a term   with roots   in Simon's   (1995)  definition  of "hypothetical      learning
trajectory," a teacher-conjectured path of student learning from beginning to end of an instructional episode.
Learning trajectories are also described in the research literature as predictable sequences of constructs that
capture how knowledge progresses from novice to more sophisticated levels of understanding.                Clements and
Sarama  (2004)    suggested  somewhat     more    predictable,  larger-scale  structures, "descriptions      of children's
thinking as they learn to achieve specific goals in a mathematical domain, and a related, conjectured route
through a set of instructional tasks designed to engender those mental processes or actions hypothesized to
move children through a developmental progression of levels of thinking" (p. 83). Science educators define
learning progressions as "empirically-grounded and testable hypotheses about how students' understanding of,
and ability to use, core scientific concepts and explanations and related scientific practices grow and become
more sophisticated over   time, with appropriate instruction"   (Corcoran et al. 2009, p.  8).  Other  views    of learning
trajectories include the process of developing key conceptual structures (Catley et al. 2004) and that instruction
should trace a prospective developmental (Brown & Campione 1996) or conceptual, corridor (Confrey 2006;
Lehrer &     Schauble 2006), spanning    grades   and ages,    with central concepts  introduced    early  in   the school
experience   and  progressively  refined, elaborated,   and    extended.  We   use  a refined   definition   of  "learning
trajectory" (or "learning progression"):
          Learning  Trajectory:    A  researcher-conjectured,     empirically supported   description     of the
          ordered network of constructs a student encounters through instruction (i.e. activities, tasks,
          tools, forms of interaction and methods of evaluation), in order to move from informal ideas,
          through   successive  refinements    of   representation,  articulation, and    reflection,  towards
          increasingly complex concepts over time. (Confrey 2008; Confrey, Maloney, Nguyen et al.
          2008; Confrey et al. 2009).
          While learning trajectories do not dictate a hard-and-fast order in which topics must be learned for
students to be successful, they permit specification, at an appropriate and actionable level of detail, of ideas
students need to know during the development and evolution of a given concept over time. This information can
be embedded systematically in state curricular standards (Confrey & Maloney in press), can underlie curricular
interventions with varying degrees of explicitness, and guide teachers in responding to and anticipating student
thinking.    Learning trajectories may   form  the  backbone    of  an assessment   strategy   that can   both  document

                                                                                                                p. 1/1
                                                    968   ·  © ISLS
                                                   ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

student  progress   and  identify  individual  and   subgroup    weaknesses     that  can  be specifically   and    efficiently
addressed by teachers.
         The DELTA project (Diagnostic E-Learning Trajectories Approach to Rational Number Reasoning) at
North Carolina State University has the multiple objectives of creating learning trajectories for up to seven
distinct strands of rational number constructs, validating them through empirical study, and then designing
diagnostic assessments, to assist teachers in targeting their instruction to more effectively support students'
cognitive progression through the key rational number constructs across grades K-8.

Methodology for construction, refinement, and early validation of Equipartitioning
learning trajectory.
         To    construct a  learning trajectory,   an exhaustive     collection,  review,  and  synthesis    is conducted    of
mathematics education and cognitive psychology research literature pertaining to topics in rational number.
Synthesis   demands   careful   attention  to making     sense   of  related studies,   explain   higher   order relations   in
complex cumulative findings, or explain old findings by postulating new concepts (Cooper 1998). Once the
initial learning trajectory is identified, additional open-ended semi-structured clinical interviews (Piaget 1976;
Opper 1977) are conducted.       In the case of equipartitioning, these interviews were conducted with 42 urban and
suburban students in grades pre-K to 6, and lasted 30 to 60 minutes each. Interviews presented participants with
various sequences of specific tasks (varying the numbers of items and people in the fair sharing activities) and
followed    up with   particular questions    designed   to  elicit  children's  explanation    of strategies   they  used   to
accomplish the tasks, their justification for their solutions to the tasks, and to probe for multiple strategies for
accomplishing each particular version of each equipartitioning task. The interviews permit filling in gaps in the
learning trajectory.
         The next step in the process1 is to develop paper-and-pencil assessment items, which requires further
clarification of the levels of the trajectory, and piloting of the items. Simultaneously, think-alouds are conducted
to determine the extent to which student responses on paper express the range of student thinking elicited by the
item.  In the DELTA research, 14 items were piloted with 95 2nd-grade students, and 14 think-aloud interviews
were conducted (Wilson 2009).       Based on the synthesis work and the interviews, outcome spaces--the range of
observed cognitive behaviors--are summarized for each level of the learning trajectory.
         Field-testing follows the development of items corresponding to each level of the learning trajectory. In
the equipartitioning research, 125 items were created and administered to approximately 5000 students, grades
K-7, across 4 North Carolina school districts. All the students in these grades in 7 elementary and 3 middle
schools completed the field tests.
         Item-scoring rubrics are then developed in a two-stage process:           a) small teams examine all responses
to an item, draft a rubric, and identify a range of student response exemplars; b) the team presents the rubric and
exemplars   to  the  entire research team,    at which   time    the   correspondence   of  the responses    to  the  learning
trajectory levels is evaluated. For the equipartitioning LT, rubrics comprised a 3- to 6-level scale, depending on
item   format,  that  accommodated      the   range  of  sophistication    of item    responses,   from    non-response     (or
unintelligible) to unequivocally correct or complete.         Responses lacking sufficient evidence to be categorized
were   also  coded.   Other  codes   were    created  to  facilitate   collection of  data  on    particular    strategies  and
misconceptions.

Defining Equipartitioning. Using cases to build an initial learning trajectory.
         A broad variety of mathematics education and cognitive psychology literature bearing on as many
readily  identifiable aspects   of rational   number  reasoning      as possible  was   assembled     into a comprehensive
database    (approximately   650   publications).   The  intent   was   to assemble     an exhaustive    collection   of peer-
reviewed journals, edited books and chapters, and conference proceedings (http://gismo.fi.ncsu.edu/database)
(Confrey    2008; Confrey,    Maloney,     &  Nguyen    2008).      In  examining  this  diverse   database     for studies  of
children's  early   understanding   of  multiplication   and   division,   fraction,  and  ratio,  to identify   evidence    of
common or earliest cognitive roots of the concepts in rational number reasoning, it was noted that investigators
across a diverse range of differently-oriented studies had asked participants in their studies to solve fair sharing
activities. These authors had investigated a variety of mathematical and cognitive topics, including one-to-one
correspondence (Frydman & Bryant 1988), partitioning (Pothier & Sawada 1983), early fraction understanding
(ref), unitizing  (Lamon    1996),  the  partitive  fraction  quotient   construct   (Charles   &  Nason   2000)    (Toluk   &
Middleton 2003), early ratio understanding (Streefland 1991; Confrey & Scarano 1995; Confrey & Lachance
2000), and aspects of fair sharing itself (Hunting & Davis 1991), and the cognitive relationship between fair
sharing  and   counting  competency     in young   children    (Pepper  1991;   Pepper  &   Hunting    1998).   Many     of the
authors  had   observed  that children's    reasoning   in  fair sharing   activities followed     predictable   pathways    of
increasing   sophistication. Early   on,   Pothier and   Sawada     (1983)   explicitly recognized    connections     between
partitioning and rational number ideas, and identified number theoretic properties and properties of particular
simple  geometric    shapes  as  important   components     of children's    developing    reasoning. Students      performing

                                                                                                                    p. 2/2
                                                      969   ·  © ISLS
                                                 ICLS 2010   ·  Volume 1

these fair sharing  activities often  gave    evidence of   reasoning    about  phenomena    predicted by the  splitting
conjecture (Confrey 1988; Confrey & Scarano 1995).
         These fair sharing activities possessed the common feature of generating equal-sized groups or parts,
an objective initially named by the research team as "partitioning."      The partitioning in these cases, however, is
distinct from the kind of partitioning identified in part-part-whole number sense.           Equipartitioning, as it has
been  named   is  partitioning  with  the  specific  objective    of generating    equal-sized  groups. We    explicitly
distinguish the term "equipartitioning" from "breaking," "fracturing" or "segmenting" in which the goal is not
necessarily the  creation  of  equal-sized  groups, and   from   the general    mathematical  term  "partitioning." The
definition of equipartitioning is as follows:
         Equipartitioning:  cognitive    behaviors  that have    the goal  of   producing  equal-sized  groups
         (from collections) or equal-sized parts (from continuous wholes), or equal-sized combinations
         of wholes and parts, such as is typically encountered by children initially in constructing "fair
         shares" for each of a set of individuals (Confrey et al. 2009).
         Four   distinct cases of   fair sharing activities  were    identified as a   means to unify  equipartitioning
(Confrey,   Maloney,   Nguyen   et   al.  2008).   These    four  cases  comprised     the original framework    of  the
Equipartitioning learning trajectory (EqPart LT).     The cases are listed here, each with an example of one of the
familiar contexts:
        Case A:    sharing a collection of m objects fairly among p people, where p is a factor of m. Example: 15
            coins of treasure shared fairly among 3 pirates;
        Case B:    sharing a single (dissectible) whole fairly among p    people.    Example: 1 rectangular birthday
            cake shared fairly among 4 people.
        Case C:    sharing multiple continuous wholes (m) fairly among p people, where m < p, and producing
            m/p as a proper fraction.    Example: 3 circular cakes shared fairly among 4 people.
        Case D:    sharing multiple continuous wholes (m) fairly among p people, where m > p, and producing
            m/p as an improper fraction    or a mixed  number. Example:      9 pizzas shared fairly among 4 people.
         The initial learning trajectory was essentially a simple-to-complex ordering of the cases A-B-C-D, and
accounted   for a  number   of  previous   findings.     For   instance, studies   of  one-to-one correspondence    had
established that dealing was a fundamental strategy for fair sharing of collections. Studies of partitioning and
splitting had already shown that 2-splits of collections or of single continuous whole objects were readily
accomplished by very young (3-4 years old) pre-literate children (Hunting & Sharpley 1991).            It had also been
established that students mastered different levels of splits in a distinct order, but that the order of mastery did
not follow a counting sequence:       students  consistently   accomplish  2-   then  4- and commonly   8-splits before
accomplishing other split-values, and that 3-splits are very difficult, especially on circular shapes.      It was also
clear that non-even splits of circles presented far more difficulty for students than splits based on powers of 2
(Pothier & Sawada 1983; Confrey 1997).

Iterative development of the Equipartitioning learning trajectory.
         Articulating and refining the EqPart LT is an iterative process of research synthesis and empirical
investigation involving    clinical and  think-aloud   interviews,   assessment    item  response analysis, and  rubric
development.    Previous studies used activities of fair sharing collections of discrete items or single wholes with
younger children (pre-K through grade 3), and the more complex tasks of fair sharing multiple continuous items
with older elementary and middle school-aged children. However, no systematic examination of the progression
of children's reasoning across a wide range of ages and across the entire set of four equipartitioning cases had
been conducted. To systematically investigate children's mathematical reasoning in the context of fair sharing
across all four cases, semi-structured clinical interviews were conducted with children grades pre-K through 6.
         The  clinical   interviews were   designed  to  elicit a range   of   student reasoning, including  strategies,
representations, mathematical practices, emergent properties, and misconceptions.            Each interview probed a
variety of task parameters, i.e. evaluating students' ability to accomplish tasks of fairly sharing various numbers
of items for various numbers of people, and to describe the results of reversing the activity, i.e. reassembling the
shares. For each combination of items and people among whom the item(s) were to be shared, students were
also asked to verify that each person had received a fair share, justify how s/he knew this, to name the fair share,
to identify how much of the collection or item(s) each person received, to share the collection or item(s) in at
least one other way, and to identify one nth of the total collection or item(s). Additional questions, designed to
elicit student reasoning about the consequences of, for instance, changing the numbers of persons or items at the
conclusion of one task, were also employed. A typical interview task, for instance Case A, involves providing a
child with a set of plastic "gold" coins, telling her that two pirates have discovered a treasure, and they want to
share the treasure fairly.  The interviewer then proceeds to ask the child several questions as described above.
Once the child had worked through the entire interview for the first number of pirates (2), the interviewer then

                                                                                                            p. 3/3
                                                     970  ·  © ISLS
                                               ICLS 2010   ·   Volume 1

 repeated the questions with a different number of pirates (for example, 3, then 4, or vice versa).           Through
 analysis of these interviews, the EqPart LT was further specified into a more-or-less linear progression of levels,
 systematically moving through the cases.   The interviews were intentionally open-ended: interviewers probed
 student reasoning when the students' responses or comments presented the opportunity, in order to take note of
 unexpected, original, or elaborated student behaviors and reasoning.
         A critical development was the growing recognition of the importance of properties in explaining how
 students' cognitive reasoning progressed.  While each of the cases required its own variety of strategies, across
 the cases particular properties concerning sets of tasks emerged, such as compensation (the recognition that
 increases/decreases in the number of persons sharing results in decreases/increases in share size), composition
 of splits (acting both vertically and horizontally on rectangles to produce multiplicative numbers of shares),
 transitivity (the recognition of equivalence of non-congruent fair shares generated from equal-sized wholes),
 distributivity of equipartitioning over breaking or fracturing of multiple wholes, etc.  Developing proficiency in
 these "emergent properties" led to a re-design of the learning trajectory into a two-dimensional matrix.
         Thus,   early on in the   development of  the   EqPart   LT,   the iterative process employed  to    refine it
 highlighted the  need to differentiate between   variations   in the task  parameters  and the increased     cognitive
 sophistication for the levels of the learning trajectory. By this phase of the work, it was clear that the learning
 trajectory could not be characterized as a simple linear progression of levels of behaviors. The EqPart LT was at
 this point represented in two dimensions:  the "proficiency levels" of the concepts and behaviors on the vertical
 dimension, and the task parameters on the horizontal dimension.        Not all task parameters were applicable to
 each concept level (for instance, "equipartitioning collections" only pertained to collections of discrete items,
 not whole dissectible shapes), nor was every concept or behavior relevant to every task parameter (for instance,
 composing splits on multiple wholes does not apply to single wholes).
         In spring 2009, approximately 120 assessment items with individually narrowed focus, covering all
 relevant combinations of concepts or behavior level and task parameter, were composed and organized into 33
 distinct overlapping forms for 4 grade bands: 10 forms of 6 items each for grades K-1 and 2-3, 8 forms of 8
 items each for grades 4-5, and 5 forms of 8 items each for grades 6-7. Individual forms were designed for
 completion within a single class period, to minimally disrupt teachers' normal instructional schedules. The tests
 were administered to the entire student populations of 7 elementary and 3 middle schools in a rural, an urban,
 and two mixed suburban/rural North Carolina school districts. The research group examined all responses to
 each field-tested item in developing the rubrics. An example of an item and its associated rubric is shown in
 Figures 1 and 2.
                                                                        The blueberry pie
                       Eight family members want to share
                       a whole blueberry pie fairly. This is a
                       drawing of   the blueberry pie.   Use
                       your pencil to show how the family
                       can share the whole pie fairly.

                       Figure 1. Item (Row 3, Task Class D) of Equipartitioning LT matrix
                                           (size reduced from original)

Level                                         Descriptions and Exemplars
              2A. Exhausts whole and creates 8 fair shares.                  2B. Creates 8k equal-sized parts and
                                                                               allocates k parts to each person.
 2                                                                                       Description:Creates 16 equal sized parts and allocates
                                                                                      2 parts to each person.
                                                                               [No exemplar in field test data]
      1C. Creates 8k equal-sized parts      1D. Creates 8 unequal-but does not clearly allocate ksized parts and exhaustsparts to each person.whole.1E. Creates more/fewer than 8 equal-sized parts that exhaust the whole.
 1

                                                                                                          p. 4/4
                                                   971   ·  © ISLS
                                                          Collections
                                                                       2-split (Rect/Circle)
                                                                                             2n split (Rect)
                                                                                                             2n split (Circle)
                                                                                                                                Even split (Rect)
                                                                                                                                                   Odd split (Rect)
                                                                                                                                                                     Even split (Circle)
                                                                                                                                                                                          Odd split (Circle)
                                                                                                                                                                                                              Arbitrary integer split
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       p = n-1p = n + 1;
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  p is odd, and n = 2i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        p >> n, p close to n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              all p, all n (integers)
                                               ICLS 2010  ·           Volume 1

0    Incorrect or unintelligible.

     0I. Insufficient evidence.

     Special Code O: Creates n+1                                                             Special Code P: Creates
     parts instead of n parts (# of                                                          parallel cuts to try to fairly
     cuts versus # of parts) (Here,                                                          split a circle (shape
     makes 8 cuts (9 parts) when                                                             misconception).
     sharing among 8 people
               Figure 2. Rubric, based on student responses, for the item in Figure 1.
        This phase moves the work closer to the aim of deploying diagnostic assessments aligned with the
progression of concepts in the learning trajectory. Each item's responses are examined in detail to determine
whether the item elicits a consistent and interpretable range of student responses that justifies its continued
usefulness for inferring  student   cognitive understanding.                                 Items                             needing                              revision                                  to                      improve                           clarity                                       or
specificity are identified at this point, as are those that should be redesigned or even discarded.

  Table 1. Equipartitioning Learning Trajectory Matrix.               Proficiency levels form                                                                         the                 vertical dimension,
  in the left column of the table. Task classes, listed along the top row, form                                                                    the               horizontal dimension.
   Equipartitioning Learning Trajectory Matrix            A            B                      C               D                 E                  F                 G                   H                    I                        J           K                    L                     M
                   (Grades K-8)

                                        Task Classes!

           Proficiency Levels
   16   Generalize: a among b = a/b
   15   Distributive property, multiple wholes
   14   Direct-, Inverse- and Co-variation
   13   Compositions of splits, multiple wholes
   12   Equipartition multiple wholes
   11   Assert Continuity principle
   10   Transitivity arguments
   9    Redistribution of shares (quantitative)
   8    Factor-based changes (quantitative)
   7    Compositions of splits; factor-pairs
   6    Qualitative compensation
   5    Re-assemble: n times as much
   4    Name a share with respect to referent unit
   3    Justify the results of equipartitioning
   2    Equipartition single wholes
   1    Equipartition Collections

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        p. 5/5
                                                   972  ·  © ISLS
                                               ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

         Item analysis and rubric development also serve a bidirectional role in the empirical process of refining
and validating the  learning  trajectory.   The  outcome    spaces  for individual  items  help  the research  group
determine whether individual items are consistent with and likely to be useful in inferring student progress with
respect to the conceptual level from which the items were originally designed, and whether the item should be
assigned to a different  conceptual  level.  Conversely,  and  perhaps    more  important, the  analysis of  outcome
spaces provides a   form  of test of the  learning trajectory itself.   The outcome  spaces    for different items  of
different cognitive levels are closely examined to ascertain whether the relative complexity and sophistication of
reasoning evidenced   by  the  students   across items   of different   levels are consistent   with the  hypothesis
represented by the levels of the EqPart LT, that of progression of student cognition from less sophisticated to
more sophisticated.

Levels and Task Parameters of the Equipartitioning Learning Trajectory
The Equipartitioning Learning Trajectory is represented in a two-dimensional matrix (Table 1) comprised of the
progression of proficiency levels along the vertical axis (listed from bottom to top), and the task classes along
the horizontal axis (listed from left to right, roughly in order of case A to case C/D tasks). The proficiency
levels and task classes are organized to accommodate the following behavioral and cognitive components of
student reasoning for each equipartitioning case.
    "    The extent to which students successfully accomplish equipartitioning.
    "    Strategies and representations students use to accomplish the tasks, including multiple approaches
    "    Evidence of mathematical reasoning practices, including naming and justifying
    "    Emergent mathematical properties
    "    Predictable patterns of errors: misconceptions and critical barriers

Discussion
         The analysis to date of clinical interviews and assessment item responses permit us to further support
several major conclusions identified previously by Confrey and colleagues (Confrey 2008; Confrey et al. 2009):
    " The EqPart LT is robust for children across the entire age range K-7. Older children in this age range, by
       and large, exhibit the same progression of reasoning about the tasks, strategies, and emergent properties
       as do younger children.
    " Pothier and Sawada's (1983) conclusion, that number theoretic properties and geometric qualities are
       important in (equi)partitioning activities, is strongly supported.
    " These foundations of rational number concepts do not require addition or subtraction operations, and can
       be developed in school in parallel to the development of those operations, rather than subsequent to them.
    " Through Equipartitioning, (partitive) division cognitively precedes multiplication.
    " Multiplication as re-assembly of equipartitioned collections or wholes can readily be conceptually
       developed instead of and earlier than it is typically developed as repeated addition, and that this would
       greatly strengthen children's subsequent multiplicative reasoning.   We   believe that deriving
       multiplication from repeated addition, as currently done in most curriculum, limits the development of
       children's multiplicative reasoning, constraining it inappropriately to additive reasoning, when it should
       be developed as a distinct but parallel conceptual reasoning field;
    " Equipartitioning of multiple whole items leads in the higher levels of the EqPart LT to the distribution of
       equipartitioning over breaking or fracturing of sets or items, offering a foundation for the distributive
       property that can precede the numeric and algorithmic treatment of the property, and thus strengthen
       student flexibility with this critical concept that is essential for algebra, and which bridges additive and
       multiplicative reasoning.
    " Behaviors, mathematical reasoning practices, and emergent mathematical properties that are elicited
       through equipartitioning of collections and continuous wholes, by children as young as 5 years old,
       anticipate the following rational number concepts:
       o Ratio, through two-dimensional `many-to-one' numerical relationships, unit ratios, and ratio units;
       o Fraction-as-number, through the re-unitizing of fair shares to a many-as-one definition of the resulting
         fair share, unit fraction (students readily identify a single share of n fair shares as "1/nth of the whole),
         and possibly the partitive fraction quotient construct;
       o a/b-as-Operator, through the development of "1/nth of" and "n (times) as many" in naming fair shares
         and identifying the referent units for the fair shares resulting from equipartitioning.

Conclusions
         The contributions of the current work include the definition and elaboration of a learning trajectory for
Equipartitioning, a rational number construct that integrates previously disparate cases. This was done through a
rigorous and systematic process of research synthesis, clinical interviews, and extensive analysis of student item

                                                                                                          p. 6/6
                                                   973  ·   © ISLS
                                                ICLS 2010    ·  Volume 1

responses from a large body of assessment items developed to align with the case-based analysis of fair sharing
activities.
         The   development    of assessment items   and   analysis   of  student item responses with   respect to the
learning trajectory levels is an empirical process that serves to validate the ordering and specific content of
levels of the learning trajectory, on the one hand, and the opportunity to correct and re-align those levels with
student responses.
         Our work on learning trajectories in rational number reasoning represents a large-scale design problem.
The work to date on the Equipartitioning learning trajectory provides a prototype for operationalizing the design
of rational number learning   trajectories as frameworks for instruction and assessment.   Additional study of
equipartitioning is underway, directed at development of corresponding diagnostic assessments. Further
validation steps include the field testing of additional items, further elaboration of the EqPart LT proficiency
levels, and the application of different statistical measurement models to prototype assessments.
         A significant opportunity for further work is the construction of supplemental curriculum materials
based on the Equipartitioning learning trajectory. We recall that we define learning trajectories as specifically
involving   an "ordered    network  of  constructs a student      encounters through   instruction..." We   note  that
Equipartitioning is not part of any curriculum of which we are aware. It is notable that older students who have
not  become    proficient  in equipartitioning exhibit   misconceptions    that  could  be remedied    by  systematic
introduction   to equipartitioning.  This  suggests     that   if equipartitioning were  embedded      in elementary
mathematics curriculum, understanding of rational number could be accelerated in major ways.

Endnotes
(1)  The process outlined here is informed by the "BEAR method" (Wilson 2005), adapted to link to our synthesis and
     interview protocols.

References
Brown, A. L., & Campione, J. C. (1996). Psychological theory and the design of innovative learning
         environments: On procedures, principles, and systems. In L. Schauble & R. Glaser (Eds.), Innovations
         in learning: New environments for education. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Earlbaum Associates.
Catley, K., Lehrer, R., & Reiser, B. (2004). Tracing a prospective learning progression for developing
         understanding of evolution. Paper presented at the Committee on Test Design for K-12 Science
         Achievement. from http://www7.nationalacademies.org/bota/evolution.pdf
Charles, K., & Nason, R. (2000). Young Children's Paritioning Strategies. Educational Studies in Mathematics,
         43(2), 191-221.
Clements, D. H., & Sarama, J. (2004). Learning Trajectories in Mathematics Education. Mathematical Thinking
         and Learning, 6(2), 81-89.
Confrey, J.  (1988). Multiplication and Splitting: Their   Role in Understanding   Exponential Functions. In M.
         Behr, C. LaCompagne & M. Wheeler (Eds.), Proceedings of the Tenth Annual Meeting of the North
         American Chapter of the International Group for the Psychology of Mathematics Education (pp. 250-
         259). DeKalb, IL: Northern Illinois University Press.
Confrey, J. (1997). Student Voice in Examining "Splitting" as an Approach to Ratio, Proportions and Fractions
         Paper presented at the 19th Annual Meeting of the International Group for the Psychology of
         Mathematics Education, Recife, Brazil.
Confrey, J. (2006). The evolution of design studies as methodology. In R. K. Sawyer (Ed.), The Cambridge
         Handbook of the Learning Sciences (pp. 135-152). New York: Cambridge University Press.
Confrey, J. (2008). A Synthesis of the Research On Rational Number Reasoning: A Learning Progressions
         Approach to Synthesis. Paper presented at the 11th International Congress of Mathematics Instruction,
         Monterrey, Mexico.
Confrey, J., & Lachance, A. (2000). Transformative teaching experiments through conjecture-driven research
         design. In A. E. Kelly & R. A. Lesh (Eds.), Handbook of Research Design in Mathematics and Science
         Education (pp. 231-265). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Confrey, J., Maloney, A., Nguyen, K., Mojica, G., & Myers, M. (2009). Equipartitioning/Splitting as a
         Foundation of Rational Number Reasoning Using Learning Trajecories. Paper presented at the 33rd
         Conference of the International Group for the Psychology of Mathematics Education, Thessaloniki,
         Greece.
Confrey, J., Maloney, A., Nguyen, K., Wilson, P. H., & Mojica, G. (2008). Synthesizing Research on Rational
         Number Reasoning. Paper presented at the Research PreSession of the Annual Meeting of the National
         Council of Teachers of Mathematics.
Confrey, J., Maloney, A., & Nguyen, K. H. (2008). Rational Number Reasoning Database, from
         http://gismo.fi.ncsu.edu/index.php?module=Search

                                                                                                           p. 7/7
                                                    974  ·   © ISLS
                                              ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

Confrey, J., & Maloney, A. P. (in press). Linking Mathematics Standards to to Learning Trajectories: A Case
         Study from North Carolina, 2008-09. In F. Mosher, J. Confrey & P. Daro (Eds.). New York, NY:
         Columbia University Press.
Confrey, J., & Scarano, G. H. (1995, October 21-24). Splitting reexamined: Results from a three-year
         longitudinal study of children in grades three to five. Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the
         North American Chapter of the International Group for the Psychology of Mathematics Education,
         Columbus, OH.
Cooper, H. (1998). Synthesizing Research. Thousand Oaks, California: SAGE Publications, Inc.
Corcoran, T., Mosher, F. A., & Rogat, A. (2009). Learning Progressions in Science: An Evidence-based
         Approach to Reform. New York: Center on Continuous Instructional Improvement Teachers College­
         Columbia University.
Frydman, O., & Bryant, P. (1988). Sharing and the Understanding of Number Equivalence by Young Children.
         Cognitive Development, 3, 323-339.
Hunting, R. P., & Davis, G. (Eds.). (1991). Early Fraction Learning. New York: Springer-Verlag.
Hunting, R. P., & Sharpley, C. F. (1991). Pre-fraction concepts of preschoolers. In R. P. Hunting & G. Davis
         (Eds.), Early fraction learning (pp. 9-26). New York: Springer-Verlag.
Lamon, S. J. (1996). The Development of Unitizing: Its Role in Children's Partitioning Strategies. Journal for
         Research in Mathematics Education, 27(2), 170-193.
Lehrer, R., & Schauble, L. (2006). Cultivating model-based reasoning in science education. In R. K. Sawyer
         (Ed.), Cambridge handbook of the learning sciences (pp. 371-388). Cambridge: University Press.
Opper, S. (1977). Piaget`s clinical method. Journal of children's Mathematical Behavior, 5, 90-107.
Pepper, K. L. (1991). Preschoolers Knowledge of Counting and Sharing in Discrete Quantity Settings. In R.
         Hunting & G. Davis (Eds.), Early Fraction Learning (pp. 103-129). Heidelberg: Springer-Verlag.
Pepper, K. L., & Hunting, R. P. (1998). Preschoolers' Counting and Sharing. Journal for Research in
         Mathematics Education, 29(2), 164-183.
Piaget, J. (1976). The Child's Conception of the World. Totowa, NJ: Littlefield, Adams, & Co.
Pothier, Y., & Sawada, D. (1983). Partitioning: The Emergence of Rational Number Ideas in Young Children.
         Journal for Research in Mathematics Education, 14(4), 307-3317.
Simon, M. (1995). Reconstructing mathematics pedagogy from a constructivist perspective. Journal for
         Research in Mathematics Education, 26(2), 114-145.
Streefland, L. (1991). Fractions in realistic mathematics education: A paradigm of developmental research.
         Dordrecht, the Netherlands: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Toluk, Z., & Middleton, J. A. (2003). The  Development of Children's Understanding of the Quotient:  A
         Teaching Experiment. unpublished.
Vergnaud, G. (1983). Multiplicative structures. In R. Lesh & M. Landau (Eds.), Acquisition of mathematical
         concepts and processes (pp. 127-174). New York: Academic.
Vergnaud, G. (1996). The theory of conceptual fields. In L. Steffe & P. Nesher (Eds.), Theories of mathematical
         learning (pp. 219­239). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Wilson, M. (2005). Constructing measures: An item response modeling approach. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence
         Erlbaum Associates.
Wilson, P. H. (2009). Teachers' Uses of a Learning Trajectory for Equipartitioning. North Carolina State
         University, Raleigh, NC.

Acknowledgments
         The work  presented  here  was   supported   by NSF  Awards   DRL-0758151   and  DRL-0733272.        Any
opinions, findings, conclusions, or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Science Foundation.
         The authors wish to acknowledge ongoing contributions to the DELTA project by P. H. Wilson, K. H.
Nguyen, G. Mojica, M. Myers, R. Pescosolido, C. Edgington, A. Franklin, and P. Larios.

                                                                                                     p. 8/8
                                                  975  ·  © ISLS
