                                               ICLS 2010    ·  Volume 1

From Show, To Room, To World: A Cross-Context Investigation of
                  How Children Learn from Media Programming

            Thérèse E. Dugan, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, rezza21@u.washington.edu
              Reed Stevens, Northwestern University, Evanston, IL, reed.stevens@northwestern.edu
                 Siri Mehus, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, smehus@u.washington.edu

          Abstract:  We   conducted    a year-long,   naturalistic  study   that investigated   what  actually
          happens   when    children  watch   television.    We   video-recorded     children's  actions   and
          interactions while watching television and simultaneously recorded the video stream from the
          television screen; these data were supported with parent diaries and interviews with parents
          and children.   This paper   describes   two   case  studies, in  which    we  consider    children's
          interactions with others   while watching    television  and  the ways   in which   their  television
          viewing influences other parts of their everyday lives. We find that both children actively
          applied knowledge they obtained from visual media to other contexts. In addition, they both
          shared their media viewing experiences with others, either by directly teaching others about
          what they had viewed or by creating new content based on what they had viewed.

Television viewing remains an activity that consumes a great deal of young people's time (Kaiser Family
Foundation, 2010). Television programming has been criticized for many reasons, including its potential to
influence  children's  behavior   and  absorb  time   that  might   otherwise    have   been used    more  productively
(Buckingham,     1993; Fisch,  2004;  Kirkorian,   Wartella,   &  Anderson,   2008;   Maccoby,    1952).  Zimmerman,
Christakis, and   Meltzoff    (2007)  found   that   viewing  television  was    associated  with   slower  vocabulary
development in children under three years of age. Another recent study (Christakis et al., 2009) found that
audible television  in  a child's  environment    is associated   with  lower levels  of adult   and child  interaction.
Additionally,  Christakis,  Zimmerman,     Di  Giuseppe,      and McCarty    (2004)   suggest   that young  children's
television viewing may have some relationship to attention problems. In response to studies like these, France
banned educational television for children under three (France bans broadcast of TV shows for babies, 2008)
despite the existence of other research that found benefits of children's viewing (Fisch, 2004; Fisch & Truglio,
2001; Kirkorian et al., 2008; Pecora, Murray, & Wartella, 2006).
          This project is informed by studies of how people learn in informal environments and situates itself
among similar research studies investigating social interaction and learning (Stevens & Hall, 1998; Stevens,
2000; Stevens, Satwicz, & McCarthy, 2007). Our study directly examines what happens when children watch
television in order to understand what types of learning may occur.
          In this paper we describe how two children in our study watch and respond to television and YouTube
videos, and how their viewing affects other aspects of their everyday lives. We employ an "in show/in room/in
world" framework (adapted from Stevens et al., 2007) for the description of children's media viewing and
learning. "In show"    refers  to the television,  structure, and  conventions    of  a specific television show.   For
example, some educational children's shows use conventions, such as dialogue in which TV characters directly
address viewers with questions or requests (e.g., to "help" them solve a problem or complete a task), in order to
achieve their learning goals. These characters elicit viewer actions by "talking" directly to viewers and leaving
time for viewers to respond. Typical prompts include asking viewers to repeat words, actions, and phrases, or to
sing along. However, unlike the "in game" designation from Stevens et al. (2007), which was a study of digital
games, the viewers of television shows cannot change the action on screen. All interaction occurs entirely in the
room. "In room" refers to the social and material characteristics of the environment in which the viewing takes
place, particularly the interactions with others that occur there. Finally, "in world" refers to the ways in which
the show and viewer responses elicited by the show or by others viewing in the room manifest in other aspects
of a child's everyday life.

Methods
We collected data for 6 months, followed by 6 months of analysis and follow-up interviews. The study included
16 children, 8 boys and 8 girls, aged between 9 months and 6 years. Children were observed and videotaped in
their homes for 1-2 hours approximately once each week as they watched different types of media (such as
television programming, DVDs, movies, and YouTube videos), and interacted with parents, friends, siblings,
toys, and pets. During each session, a videotape record was created and ethnographic field notes were written.
          A goal in this study was to record as accurately and completely as possible children's actual experience
of watching television in their homes. In order to do this, we scheduled sessions at times when the children were
most likely   to be watching   television  in order   to avoid  interfering with   their schedules   and  routines. We
simultaneously recorded the in-show video stream from the television and the in-room activity of children and

                                                     992  ·  © ISLS
                                              ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

others in the viewing space (Stevens et al., 2007). We employed a device that synchronized the two streams at
the time of recording in the field. In the early stages of the study, we set up the dual-recording equipment and
then stepped out of the room while the children were watching. As the study progressed, we were able to further
minimize our intrusion by leaving the equipment with the families for a week or more, during which periods the
parents turned on the equipment as often as possible when the children watched television. In order to record
children when   they watched   video  on a    computer,  we  also  used a  software program  (Screenium)     that
simultaneously recorded the computer screen and the video stream from the computer's internal camera.

Figure 1: Split-screen image illustrating Harrison "in room" showing his brother Max how to follow the "blast-
            off" sequence from Leo, and the "in show" Little Einsteins program on the television.

         We also interviewed or provided written questionnaires to the parents of the children about their child's
viewing habits, television learning experiences, and their own feelings about television, movies, and online
media usage in their homes. We asked parents to informally interview their children (these interviews were
recorded) and we asked specific follow-up questions in a separate questionnaire distributed to parents via email.
Finally, parents used journals to record instances of learning and discovery in their children's everyday lives
when researchers were not present. These journals were critical with regard to determining whether and how
children's viewing habits and interactions when watching visual media affected their everyday activities "in
world."

Data Analysis
All of the video-recorded data were logged and tagged to locate examples of children's responses to television
and interactions in the room. Next, we analyzed the actions taking place within each individual clip in greater
detail (Stevens et al., 2007), looking specifically  at highlighted  moments  of activity using interaction  and
conversational  analysis techniques (Erickson,   2004;  Schegloff,  1998). We  devised a  transcription method
(illustrated in the next section) to distinguish between activities in the show and in the room, and to display
activities simultaneously. We used these techniques to illustrate how each viewer action began, what happened
during the action, and how long each action lasted. Case studies were created that tied together our video
analyses with interviews and diary reports in order to tell the story of an individual child's television viewing
experience and relevant learning.

Case Studies
This section is organized around the case studies of Harrison (age 3 at the beginning of the study and age 4 at
the end) and Owen (age 5 at the beginning of the study and age 6 at the end), starting with the television shows
they viewed and then examining their in-room interactions and in-world connections to their media viewing
behavior. Both children live in the Pacific Northwest, each with a mother and father. Harrison has 1 younger
brother and 1 older sister, and attends pre-school every day for a half day. Owen has 1 younger sister and
attends kindergarten each day for a full day.

Harrison

Show Viewing Habits
Harrison mainly watched television shows on DVD. In a pre-study questionnaire (April 2008) his mother stated
that he usually watched about "four to six hours of television a week," including "Dora and Diego; Super Why?
... movies about animals, non-fiction; some Disney movies; basically anything he can get his hands on; no
Sesame Street ([he]doesn't like [it]), [and] age-appropriate videos." Many of the shows he watched were
animated shows designed to elicit viewer actions, like Dora the Explorer, Little Einsteins, and Go Diego Go.
         In addition to the shows mentioned above that are designed to elicit viewer actions, Harrison also
watched non-fiction nature programs such as Eyewitness Amphibians and Henry's Amazing Animals. These
shows employ a narrator and use video footage along with animation to explore animals, their habitats, and their

                                                 993  ·   © ISLS
                                                              ICLS 2010         ·  Volume 1

behaviors. In a post-study interview (February 2009), Harrison said he liked "nature shows the best" and would
watch them over anything else because they "were real."

In Room
Harrison was a very social television viewer in terms of the level of interaction he maintained with other people
while watching television shows. He watched shows in his living room, typically with one or more people, who
might include his older sister Leanne (aged 5 to 6 during the study), his mother, and his younger brother Max
(aged 9 to 21 months during the study). His mother closely monitored what he viewed on television because he
did not like to watch shows he had not already seen and because he would get scared easily: "[he] tends to
distrust any show if it has new characters" (May 2009). Harrison's mother also stated that Harrison usually
watched shows that allowed him to learn new facts he could share with her and his other family members.
"[Harrison] enjoys yelling out facts he learns [from shows that] engage him" (May 2009). When watching
television with his sister, his mother said that "they usually sit by each other and talk about the show. If they get
scared, they work together to turn the volume down, hide under a blanket, etc. If they are learning something,
they shout out to me. Once in a while they correct each other or bicker a little about a show" (May 2009).
            While viewing shows, Harrison tended to speak to and about the show, regardless of whether the show
elicited viewer responses. He responded to shows that prompted him to repeat words, answer questions, repeat
actions, and sing songs. Even while viewing shows that lacked prompts for response, Harrison responded to
them. Tables 1 and 2 illustrate a sequence of two transcripts, several seconds apart, that exemplify Harrison's
response to an episode of a nature show. The top part of the transcript records what is happening sequentially in
the show and the bottom of the transcript describes what is happening in the room. The picture in the middle is a
frame from the split-screen image from which the segment was taken. Actions on screen are represented in
parentheses, while actions in the room are represented in italics.

Table 1: Harrison imitating the movements of the frog's mouth as its froglets jump out (October 30, 2008).
Participant      11th sec.    12              13              14        15               16        17        18                       19        20th sec.
18.   Narrator: are ready to jump out
19.   Screen: (tiny frog jumps out of bigger frog's mouth)
20.                                                  (frog baby lands on the ground)                        (slow motion shot of
21.                                                                                    baby frog jumping out of larger frogs mouth)

22.
23.   InShow
24.   In Room
25.   Harrison: (laying on rocking chair leaning on arm rest gaze towards show)                 (opens mouth slightly like frog)

            Harrison responds           to the nature       show  both          verbally and physically by simulating                 the  movements,
actions, and sounds of a frog on the screen. In Table 1, Harrison, while seated on a chair, imitates the mouth
movements of a male frog shown on television (which stores its young in its mouth until they jump out fully
formed). In Table 2, several moments later, Harrison explains the frog gestation information he just learned to
his mother while continuing to watch the show.

                                                                  994  ·         © ISLS
                                                              ICLS 2010           ·  Volume 1

Table 2: Harrison explaining the frog's unique gestational practice to his mother (October, 30, 2008).
Participant       31th sec.    32        33                    34           35             36             37              38             39             40th sec.
37.   Narrator: After twelve weeks the frog leaves the pond   one small hop for the frog one giant leap for evolution
38.   Screen:   (frog leaves pond and hops onto land)        (frog jumps)
39.

40.
41.   InShow
42.   In Room
43.   Harrison:  they they grow in its mouth he opens it and then he closes and the frog when its ready jumps out
44.              (sits up and looks into camera) (looks back at show imitates the frog by opening and shutting his mouth)
45.                                                                         m( oves arm to show motion of froglets coming out of mouth)
46.                                                                                                               (sits back in chair)
47.   Mom:                                                                                                  wow

            These transcripts reflect Harrison's desire to perform actions along with the show and invite his mother
to share in his newfound knowledge about frog gestation. It follows that television shows provide children with
information they can learn and teach to others, and that young children who view a television show sometimes
imitate and simulate an experience presented in the show, such as how a frog stores its babies in its mouth until
they are mature enough to survive on their own. In Harrison's case, he uses his body and voice as he actively
responds to the content of the show.
            Furthermore, Harrison and his sister are quite familiar with the conventions of certain shows (such as
the "blast-off" sequence from shows like Little Einsteins), which is the result of "years of viewing" according to
their mother (March, 2009). Given this familiarity, they are able to coach their younger brother Max (17
months) to share in the experience of responding to prompts from a television show. They demonstrate this by
performing the "blast-off" sequence from Little Einsteins for Max and he learns to participate appropriately (see
Table 3 below). After a few viewings, Max was able to also perform the sequence on his own. Their mother
stated that Harrison and Leanne "encourage him to do actions or sing along" to shows that elicit viewer
responses and in other contexts. They also like to support Max "...and teach him new words. He's their little
prodigy. I think they are excited at the prospect of being able to share their knowledge with him"(May, 2009).

Table 3: Harrison teaches Max the "blast-off" sequence from Little Einsteins (November 25, 2008).
Participant       1st sec.     2         3                     4            5              6              7               8              9              10th sec.
1.    Leo:                   Prepare for blast off we're going to need a lot of power to blastoff pat, pat, pat, pat, pat  June is patting,
2.                                                       (begins patting his lap)              (continues to pat lap)
3.    Rocket:                                                                        (Rocket wiggles)
4.    June:                                                                                                           (blinks, smiles and pats lap)

5.
6.    InShow
7.    In Room
8.    Leanne:                                                  Max remember? pat, pat, pat , pat, pat, pat, pat           Max likes it
9.                                                             l(eans forward and stretches out arm and sits up on knees and begins patting her lap)
10.   Harrison:                                                                                             pat, pat, pat        hee hee hee
11.                                                                                           (camera pans to Harrison who is   patting and looking at Max)
12.   Max:                                                                                                             pa
13.                                                                                                     (camera pans to Max patting lap)

            In sum, Harrison was an active viewer who responded verbally and physically to television shows that
were designed to elicit responses, and to shows that were not designed to elicit any responses. According to his
mother's journal, as well as our interviews and observations with him and his family, as Harrison viewed
specific television programs designed to elicit viewer responses he developed techniques for how to act while
watching those programs. He passed along these techniques by encouraging his younger brother to also share in
the  experience     of responding    to a             show   that  elicited         viewer   responses.      He       also   liked     to   share     facts and

                                                                   995     ·      © ISLS
                                            ICLS 2010  ·   Volume 1

information he learned from watching nature shows with his family, and applied these skills in his interactions
with his family while watching television and in other contexts.

In World
During the study,    Harrison also began  applying  information   learned while  watching    one  show to   other
experiences, including other shows that did not elicit viewer responses. For example, his family went on a trip to
Arizona to visit his grandparents. While there, they all viewed Disney's Planet Earth as a family. Harrison's
mother said she was stunned when Harrison began to name the locations of certain waterfalls and demonstrate
knowledge about many of the caves, animals, and rock formations in the show. She stated that Harrison and
Leanne said they "learned" about them from Dora the Explorer, Go Diego Go, and Little Einsteins (March
2009). "This instance was unusual because it crossed the bridge between cartoons and non-fiction videos," She
thought it was interesting that Harrison was discussing information he saw and learned about in an animated
fictional show and was relating that information while watching a documentary about nature (May 2009).
        In addition, Harrison's mother stated that television viewing helped him make learning connections
away from the television set. In her viewing journal and interview, Harrison's mother stated that "about twice a
month [Harrison] will randomly say something that he `learned' from TV." For example, "if we go to the zoo,
he will say facts about the animals" (May 2009). Furthermore, in her parent journal she wrote that Harrison
asked to watch shows such as Reading Rainbow because "they helped him learn to read" (December 2008). She
also said in a post-study interview, "we did get some Diego phonics readers...because he asked for them" (May
2009). She believed that, when Harrison asked for a Diego book for Christmas, he thought it would help him
learn to read. So Harrison connected the shows he viewed to other aspects of his life.

Owen

Show Viewing Habits
Owen, who turned 6 years old during the study, did not watch any shows that elicited viewer responses in our
study observations, yet he frequently responded to the shows he watched. His mother indicated in her journal
and interviews that Owen previously watched shows such as SuperWhy and Little Einsteins that elicited viewer
responses when he was a bit younger (April 2008). In a pre-study questionnaire (April 2008) his mother stated
that Owen usually watched about "fifteen to sixteen" hours of media each week, including television shows on
PBS such as "Curious George; Dragon Tales; whatever is on when he comes home," as well as videos on
YouTube about "Bionicles movies; commercials; vintage tv ads for toys; reviews of toys (home movies), for
example Bionicles (showing how to put toys together)," and movies such as "...Pokemon, Digimon movies;
The Black Stallion; [and the] Marx Brothers." We observed Owen mainly watching shows on the afternoon
block of PBS Kids (Curious George, Arthur, Dragon Tails, Word Girl, and Fetch with Ruff Ruffman); we also
observed him watching    toy   reviews on YouTube      for Lego   Bionicles as well    as  Hot Wheels  cars and
Transformers. Furthermore, we observed Owen viewing the live-action nature documentary series Nature: The
Beauty of Ugly and the animated DVD series Avatar the Airbender.
        In a post-study interview (May 2009), Owen stated that his favorite shows were "Curious George
because he can do things we can't," "Fetch with Ruffman because it's funny," and "...Nature...because...my
favorite thing [is] the rat-tailed scorpion... they, they were ­ they're not...insects like scorpions, but they're not,
they're not like spiders but they're a different species... and they look weird." The nature shows were generally
more realistic than the other types of programming that Owen viewed in terms of their settings (real life vs.
cartoon fantasies).

In Room
On an average day, Owen watched media for up to 4 hours in his basement. He was usually unaccompanied
when he watched video, although he sometimes watched shows with a friend, with his mother and younger
sister Mia (who was 1 year old) in the afternoon, or with his father before bedtime.
        Owen often displayed sensitivity to what he saw on the screen. On several occasions Owen became
upset when he viewed show characters in embarrassing or suspenseful situations. His responses to these kinds of
situations included running away screaming, hiding his head under a pillow or in his hands, or shouting that he
hated it or that it made him scared. With regard to these observations, Owen's mother stated that "he seems to
be frightened when something `bad' is about to happen, whether that be someone getting angry or someone
getting hurt. It does confuse me. The best answer I can give right now would be that he takes things very
literally. He doesn't do a lot of `pretending to be a character'. He gets frustrated and confused when his friends
claim something that is just not true. Also, he has an explosive personality himself, and so maybe he is afraid
that the characters in the show would react the same way he would, and that scares him. [Owen] feels things
very deeply, so if there are scary things happening he will feel very scared!" (May 2009).

                                                996  ·  © ISLS
                                                             ICLS 2010      ·          Volume 1

            Owen developed coping mechanisms that he employed as he watched television, even as he watched
programs that were designed for children his age and that did not contain purposefully frightening content.
Table 4 illustrates how Owen coped with a segment from Curious George that scared him.

Table 4: Owen copes with an unsettling situation in Curious George (January 12, 2009).
Participants      11th sec.    12             13             14            15                16             17         18                    19        20th sec.
1.    Narrator:                                             George didn't want to get in trouble                                                      but he
2.    George:                 (looks up)                          (stands with hands clutched)
3.    MWYH:                   just tell the truth                                                                                       no one will be upset
4.    Dog:                                                               l(ooks displeased and frowns)

5.
6.    InShow
7.    In Room
8.    Owen:                                                 tiss huhh   I can just see it I can't do this                      ok   I'll look again
9.                                                          (covers eyes with hands)            (kicks up leg and lunges towards couch)
10.                                                                                                                   (sighs; uncovers eyes)

            While watching All New Hundley, an episode of Curious George, in which Hundley the dog messes up
the room and George is accused of making the mess, Owen was visibly upset by the fact that George was
accused of something he did not do. Owen got through the unsetting situation by telling himself (out loud) that
he could not look, but then decided to make himself start viewing again to see whether George would be
exonerated (line 8). This behavior matches his mother's observation that Owen disliked scary and misleading
situations.
            According to the PBS Parents Web site, the educational objective for this episode was to "demonstrate
inquiry about the world and solving problems," a process that "includes a variety of skills," and to "model
positive attitudes toward learning like persistence and curiosity" (All New Hundley). Owen's reaction suggests
that he missed the show's intended message because of the context in which that message was presented. Rather
than  reflecting    an  interest       in persistence      and  curiosity,             Owen    relied     on   his technique       for       coping  with     the
emotionally challenging content of the show, and engaged with the show again after George had been cleared of
wrongdoing. Therefore, the way in which Owen shared George's experience was, most likely, not what the
producers of the show intended.
            Other forms of media also have a powerful impact on Owen, such as the toy review videos that he
watched on YouTube. Owen viewed toy reviews because he found them interesting and wanted to learn about
specific toys and their differences to aid his decision-making process for purchasing new toys. As Table 5
illustrates, Owen used the computer in his living room to watch a YouTube toy review about a Transformer.
Table 5: Owen manipulates Transformer toy when watching YouTube toy review (July 23, 2008).
Participants      1st sec.     2              3              4            5                  6              7          8                9              10th sec.
1.    Biker T:  And that's him Rotate the other part of this plan it have right here?
2.                                                            Turn them around to expose the orange cuz I like the orange better than the purple
3.              (touches head of toy)                                    (adjusts plate on     transformer leg) (adjusts plate on other leg)
4.                                                                                                         (moves toy forward)

5.
6.    InShow
7.    In Room
8.    Owen:     (holding transformer and watching video)   (turns his transformer to the right)                        (moves transformer back to face video)

            As the video narrator discussed the toy he was reviewing, Owen (line 8) manipulated his own similar
but smaller toy along with the narrator's description. The narrator did not ask viewers to have a similar toy
handy during his review, yet Owen had his toy with him anyway. Owen said he always tried to have a toy or

                                                                 997     ·            © ISLS
                                            ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

object similar to the one being reviewed so he could more carefully inspect his own toys and see how they
compared to those being reviewed (May 2009). He told us he considered these reviews useful because "you
know what to expect" before buying something (May 2009), which could indicate that Owen was making a
judgment about whether a given toy was different enough from his current toys to warrant a purchase.
        The notable difference between Owen's behavior in these two examples is the level of emotional
arousal he exhibits while viewing Curious George and the toy review. The Curious George show elicited a
highly-charged emotional, empathetic reaction that seemed quite visceral and difficult for Owen to control. He
reacted in a way that, according to his mother, mirrored several other outbursts, many of which resulted in a
temporary cessation of viewing. By contrast, his viewing of the YouTube toy review was steady and controlled
from an emotional perspective, and Owen's activity was limited to his manipulation of a similar toy. Instead of
responding reactively, Owen ultimately responded proactively to the toy reviews he watched.

In World
As Owen viewed more toy reviews on YouTube, he engaged directly with this form of media by becoming a toy
reviewer. He came to the conclusion that other toy reviewers did not always provide helpful reviews, and he
began to examine more closely how people reviewed products and how good and bad toys were differentiated.
After a while, according to his mother, Owen wanted to let people know what he learned, so he recorded his
own review of Jazz, a Transformers toy that he enjoyed playing with, and posted his review on YouTube. He
stated that he wanted to create a review that would give viewers a more honest assessment of the product they
were researching compared to some of the other reviews (May 2009). After posting the video, a few people left
complimentary and encouraging comments for Owen on his YouTube page that stated how helpful his review
had been for them (see Figure 2).

                                   Figure 2: Owen's YouTube Toy Review

        In this context, Owen developed proactive viewing skills that were not reflected in his highly reactive
style of viewing television shows such as Curious George. Owen learned to watch toy reviews with a critical
eye and he chose to apply that learning in practice by becoming a producer of reviews for others to watch. As
stated earlier, television shows and YouTube videos provide children with information they can learn and,
subsequently, teach to others. In Owen's case, the YouTube toy reviews that he watched filled in gaps in his
desired knowledge about a toy that he owned, gaps that neither his parents nor his teachers could fill. His
viewing of these videos also triggered an interest in producing a video review of his own with distinctive
features, a video that generated enough interest to accumulate over 1,000 views and a 3-star rating.

Discussion and Implications
While current research (Christakis et al., 2004, 2009; Zimmerman et al., 2007) indicates that young children are
passive viewers who should not    watch television  because of potential language      development   and attention
problems, the present study provides a more nuanced perspective. This study is important in part because little is
known about how young children watch television in natural settings. Our observations demonstrate that young
children can be active viewers who are indeed learning from their experiences with media and who act to draw
others into their viewing experiences. Our study suggests that we might want to worry less about the mere fact
of whether children watch television but rather pay more attention to what they do with it and how that might be
cultivated in ways that support their development as people (cf. Penuel et al., 2009).
        A good assessment of learning is the ability to actively apply knowledge from one context to another.
Regardless of the media formats that Harrison and Owen viewed, both boys actively applied knowledge they
obtained from those media to other contexts. The similarities between these boys center around their sharing of
media viewing experiences with others, either by helping others understand television shows they viewed or
creating new content they considered superior to what they had watched.
        Harrison and Owen both developed specific, active viewing habits while watching and responding to
television shows. Furthermore, both boys seemed to engage emotionally through embodied responses when
viewing these shows. After repeated viewing of children's television shows that elicited responses from young

                                                998  ·  © ISLS
                                          ICLS 2010  ·  Volume 1

viewers, Harrison developed the skills needed to interact with television shows and he even taught his younger
brother the same skills. Moreover, when viewing a show Harrison imitated and acted out the movements and
actions of the animals on screen. Harrison also shared the facts he learned from shows with other members of
his family, a desire to teach that resembles Owen's proactive creation of YouTube toy reviews. Owen was also
an active and sensitive viewer who developed ways of exerting control in relation to visual media. He taught
himself coping techniques for viewing some television content that he found disturbing, and he recorded and
published on YouTube his own toy review.

References
All New Hundley (n.d.). Retrieved October 13, 2009 from
       http://www.pbs.org/parents/curiousgeorge/program/ep_desc_s2.html.
Buckingham, D. (1993). Children talking television: The making of television literacy. London: Falmer Press.
Christakis, D. A., Zimmerman, F. J., Di Giuseppe, M., & McCarty, C. A. (2004). Early television exposure and
       subsequent attention problems in children. Pediatrics, 113(4), 708-713.
Christakis, D. A., Gilkerson, J., Richards, J.A., Zimmerman, F. J., Garrison, M. M., Xu, D., Gray, S., &
       Yapanel, U. (2009). Audible television and decreased adult words, infant vocalizations, and
       conversational turns: A population-based study. Archive of Pediatric and Adolescent Medicine, 163,
       554-558.
Erickson, F. (2004). Talk and social theory: Ecologies of speaking and listening in everyday life.
       Malden, MA: Polity Press.
Fisch, S.M. (2004). Children's learning from educational television: Sesame Street and beyond. LEA's
       communication series. Mahwah, N.J.: L. Erlbaum Associates.
Fisch, S.M., & Truglio, R.T. (2001), "G" is for growing: thirty years of research on children and Sesame Street.
       Mahwah, N.J.: Erlbaum.
France bans broadcast of TV shows for babies (August 20, 2008). Retrieved October 13, 2009 from
       http://www.msnbc.msn.com/id/26312386/.
Kaiser Family Foundation. (2010). Generation M2: Media in the lives of 8- to 18-year olds. Retrieved February
       27, 2010, from http://www.kff.org/entmedia/upload/8010.pdf.
Kirkorian, H.L., Wartella, E.A., & Anderson, D.R. (2008). Media and young children's learning. Future of
       Children, 18(1), 39-61.
Maccoby, E.E. (1952). Television: its impact on school children. Indianapolis: Bobbs-Merrill.
Pecora, N.O., Murray, J.P., & Wartella, E. (2006). Children and television: 50 years of research. Mahwah, N.J.:
       Lawrence Erlbaum.
Penuel, W. R., Pasnik, S., Bates, L. Townsend, E., Gallagher, L. P., Llorente, C., & Hupert, N. (2009).
       Preschool teachers can use a media-rich curriculum to prepare low-income children for school
       success: Results of a randomized controlled trial. Newton, MA: Education Development Center and
       SRI International.
Schegloff, E. A. (1998). Reflections on studying prosody in talk in interaction. Language and Speech, 41, 235-
       263.
Stevens, R. & Hall, R. (1998). Disciplined perception: Learning to see in technoscience,Talking
       mathematics in school: Studies of teaching and learning, pp. 107-149. M. Lampert & M. L. Blunk,
       (Eds.), Cambridge University Press: Cambridge.
Stevens, R. (2000). Divisions of labor in school and in the workplace: Comparing computer and
       paper-supported activities across settings. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 9(4), 373-401.
Stevens, R., Satwicz, T., & McCarthy, L. (2007). In game, in room, in world: Reconnecting video game play to
       the rest of kids' lives. In Salen, K. (Ed.), Ecology of games: MacArthur Foundation series on digital
       media and learning. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Zimmerman, F.J., Christakis, D.A., & Meltzoff, A.N. (2007). Associations between media viewing and
       language development in children under age 2 years. Journal of Pediatrics, 151, 364-368.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by a National Science Foundation grant (NSF#0354453). Any opinions, findings, and
conclusions expressed in this paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Science Foundation. For more information on the LIFE Science of Learning Center see: http://life-
slc.org/. Furthermore, Stephanie Scopelitis, Sheldon Levias, and Lionel Enns contributed to data collection for
this study. Finally, the authors would also like to thank Professor Stevens' Learning, Media, and Interactivity
(LMI) Research Group for their helpful comments and ideas.

                                              999  ·  © ISLS
