CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                 Volume I: Long Papers

       Construction of Health Knowledge in an Alternative Medical
   Community of Practice: Hermeneutic Analysis of a Web Forum
   Joachim Kimmerle, Kristina Abels, Katharina Becher, Anna Beckers, Annette Haussmann, Ansgar Thiel,
                                University of Tuebingen, 72072 Tuebingen, Germany
      Email: j.kimmerle@iwm-kmrc.de, kristinaabels@gmx.de, katharina.becher@student.uni-tuebingen.de,
       anna.beckers@student.uni-tuebingen.de, annette.haussmann@web.de, ansgar.thiel@uni-tuebingen.de
      Ulrike Cress, Knowledge Media Research Center, 72072 Tuebingen, Germany, u.cress@iwm-kmrc.de

         Abstract: This paper presents a hermeneutic analysis of a web forum in which supporters of
         an   alternative  medical approach,     the so-called  Urkost  ("primordial    food")  movement, are
         gathered as a community of practice, and in which they exchange information and opinions in
         order to pass on and develop relevant knowledge. In our analysis of knowledge construction,
         we were able to identify four aspects. 1) Imparting a certain view of the world ­ knowledge
         creation provided an ideological guidance system. 2) Role structure within the community ­
         the entire communication was centered on one individual expert who played the role of a kind
         of guru. 3) Persuasion and reinforcement of followers ­ the impartment of knowledge and
         persuasion were primarily based on an emotional type of communication. 4) Separation from
         "dissidents" ­ the attitude towards people of a "different faith" and towards standard medicine
         was characterized by strong hostility and rejection.

Introduction
Medical   progress    in Western   civilizations has    brought various   achievements   in the past decades.   But the
specialization and    differentiation that accompanied      these achievements    is perceived  by  many  patients  and
people who are seeking help as unpleasant and inappropriate, because often they feel they are being reduced to
their symptoms, and have the impression of being left alone with their worries. Not surprisingly, many people
prefer alternative medical approaches, which appear to take a more holistic view of human beings, and present
solutions  to  health    problems  in simple   language.    This  trend   may  be  considered   in the  context of  the
development of cultic milieus in modern societies in general (Campbell, 1972) and medically oriented cultic
milieus in particular (Salmon, 1984). New media make it very easy to catch up on what is known about diseases
and treatments that represent alternative medical methods. For this purpose, a variety of different alternative
medical communities have come together on the Internet, where they exchange their respective information.
This paper explores how such communities create and develop their health knowledge. In the following section,
one (quite radical) alternative medical community, the so-called Urkost movement, will be introduced. This
community was selected for analysis because of three reasons: 1) This extreme movement represents a typical
example of a cultic milieu, bearing in mind that its basic assumptions are highly controversial from a scientific
point of view, but ­ nevertheless ­ it has a significant number of compliant followers. 2) The Urkost community
is interesting as it propagates, on the one hand, an "archaic" lifestyle, but uses, at the same time, the Internet,
which is really a typical post-modern form of communication. 3) This group has some characteristic features of
a community    of  practice   (see below),  and     the interesting question  here   is whether  their development   of
knowledge occurs in a similar way as in a scientific community. After the introduction of the Urkost community
we will describe the method that was applied here. In the main part, we will then present the four modalities of
knowledge creation in the Urkost community, as they emerged from the data in our analysis: imparting a certain
world view; role structure within the community; persuasion of newcomers and skeptics; and separation from
standard medicine and people of some "different faith". In the conclusion, our findings will be summarized and
discussed.

The Urkost Movement As an Alternative Medical Community of Practice
The term alternative medicine (Bratman, 1997) refers to all those procedures and methods of treatment in the
field of medicine which are not (or only to some limited extent) accepted by conventional medicine, because
their  claimed effects   cannot be substantiated     using scientific methods.  Alternative  medical   communities  are
characterized by a shared interest in a certain topic. The members of such communities look into the subject of
their  shared interest   and deal with it; and   in  this process they  develop corresponding    competencies.  In  this
context,  knowledge      development   is supposed    to  take  place  at both an    individual and  a collective level
(Kimmerle, Cress, & Held, 2010). The Urkost movement (the German term Urkost may best be translated as
"primordial food") was established by Franz Konz (*1926), who was at one time well known in Germany as an
author of handbooks on how to save tax. In the first instance, Urkost is a nutrition concept that says that all
diseases are a consequence of some lifestyle that is not in harmony with nature. Nutrition is considered as an
essential part of a natural lifestyle, and it is assumed that all diseases may be cured by Urkost diet and by a

© ISLS                                                                                                                 1
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                     Volume I: Long Papers

certain  type  of physical   activity (Ursport).  Urkost-style     nutrition consists  of   raw vegetables,  fruit, and  wild
herbs (such as dandelion). This raw food is neither washed nor cooked. Real followers of Urkost will not eat
meat or any other animal products, but they are supposed to eat the insects that reside on plants which they eat
(Konz, 1999). Urkost followers are also advised to eat humus from time to time.
         The    Internet  is a quick   and  comfortable      way  of  communicating     between   members     of alternative
medical   movements,      and  this   is also  true   of   the   Urkost  movement.      Its members     use  a   web  forum
(http://www.urkostforum.de), in which they may search for and exchange information. This forum is targeted at
people who practice Urkost or are interested in it. It is defined as a stage where Urkost is presented as a way of
achieving a healthy lifestyle. The introduction page of the web forum explains that insults will be deleted and
that a   "loving  and  respectful"    atmosphere   of   communication     is  desired.  Brigitte  Rondholz    ("BR"   in the
following) ­ who is presented as the deputy of Franz Konz ­ is introduced as the regular moderator of the
forum.   She  also   appears   to be   the only  administrator.     This web   forum    provided    the basic  data  for our
hermeneutic analysis, which was conducted between April and September 2010. The users that come together
on this web forum form a group that represents what Lave and Wenger (1991; Wenger, 1998) have described as
a "community of practice". The users of the Urkost forum share an identity that is defined by a common interest
in a certain subject. Even though most people would probably not consider the Urkost idea as a topic worth
knowing     anything  about,   Urkost    followers  obviously     learn  from  each   other  and  appreciate   their  shared
competence. The members of the forum are strongly committed to their domain and engage in discussions and
collective activities. They support each other and exchange information. The members of the Urkost community
are literally practitioners and, as will be described below, they share and develop a collection of resources, such
as stories, experiences, or routines for dealing with recurring problems.

Hermeneutic Sociology of Knowledge
The analysis presented here examined how knowledge is developed in the Urkost community, why its followers
believe in this health knowledge ­ despite all logical inconsistencies and missing evidence ­, and how this faith
is accomplished    collectively.  What   occurs  here   is  a  social construction   of reality (cf. Berger   &  Luckmann,
1966), as people interacting with each other will experience that they may impute their own construction of
reality and their corresponding emotions to others. Individuals will assume that what they think and feel would
be correct because others seem to think similarly and report constructions that may be connected to one's own
opinions. Such a collective affect-logic (cf. Ciompi, 1991) is not necessarily connected to individual processes
of reflection.  The   experience  that   another person    to whom    an  individual  feels  some   emotional  commitment
takes  a similar  stand   towards  a   certain topic  appears    to be  sufficient for  conveying    to that individual  the
impression that a statement or assumption is true.
         In order to conduct a qualitative analysis of the social construction of reality and the development of
knowledge    in  the  Urkost  forum,   we  followed   the   hermeneutic   sociology   of  knowledge.    This  approach   is a
complex theoretical and methodological concept that aims at reconstructing any type of interaction (Reichertz,
2004). An interpretation of data in the sense of this approach does not only consist of describing observations or
reconstructing    subjective   meaning,    but rather   aims   at  detecting  the  inter-subjective   meaning    of  actions.
According to hermeneutic sociology of knowledge, the epistemologically appropriate attitude is one of general
skepticism concerning social matters-of-course, and skepticism concerning prejudice in their interpretation. For
our present analysis of knowledge communication and knowledge creation in the Urkost forum, we adopted
such a hermeneutical attitude. The data that were used for our analysis are non-standardized data that occurred
in a natural setting. They were not created for research purposes, so the collection of these data was not biased
by  any  subjective   observation   schema.    Moreover,     our analysis was    not restricted  to  previously  determined
research topics, but explored ­ in a first step that took several weeks ­ all contributions in this web forum, with
respect  to content,  topics   addressed,  language,    etc.  This  openness  gave   us various   options of   access and   a
bandwidth of topics from which we could select, as a second step, the most interesting and relevant modalities
of knowledge construction in this community of practice. In this process of selection we made sure that the
quantity of data obtained was sufficient for re-checking the explored aspects. In a third step, an analysis of the
data was performed in such a way that contributions could be examined in more detail in their context. The
insights  that  resulted  from    this   procedure   were     challenged  once   again    by  amendatory     and    corrective
interpretation by several researchers. Finally, the findings were `compacted', transferred into written form, and
illustrated with pertinent quotations from the forum (that represent only few examples from an abundance of
data).

Analysis of Knowledge Construction
In the   following   four sub-sections,    an  analysis  of  the  modalities  of knowledge      construction  in the  Urkost
community will be presented. This analysis elicited four relevant aspects: impartment of a certain world view;
role structure within the community; persuasion and reinforcement of Urkost followers; and their separation
from standard medicine and people of a "different faith".

© ISLS                                                                                                                      2
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                     Volume I: Long Papers

"Let it be your green bible" ­ View of the World
In the  following,    we will   explore  how   Urkost  influences    its followers'   way  of   life, at least  according to
discussions in this web forum. Our exploration provides an analysis that will be more concrete in the subsequent
sub-sections on role structure, persuasion, and separation. When reading through the topics of the forum, one
can easily see that nutrition and health do indeed play a central role, but they are by no means the only content.
The `right' attitude toward life and nature, to animal protection, religion, society, politics, sexuality, and many
other topics are discussed as well. User "Waldelfe" wrote, for example (translated from German by the authors):
         "As a conversion to Urkost changes nearly everything (for the better), sexuality will change as well.
Nowadays, everything is about sex [...] Especially young people [...] attach great value to having a lot of sex,
and finish a relationship when they do not turn on each other any more after some time. Franz Konz writes in
his book that it is largely meat that leads to this excessive (?) craving and Schlechtkost1 in general".2
         Urkost appears to be a general attitude with a strong impact on all spheres of life, and carries a certain
view of the world. This attitude appears to come along with criticism of society and culture. The reference to
Konz' book as a guideline is another characteristic which can be found in many other contributions as well. The
supposedly deficient lifestyle of the general population is attributed to eating Schlechtkost, i.e. "bad food". The
discussion that followed this contribution centered on what characterizes good sex in terms of Urkost. There
were   many  judgments    concerning    good   or bad,   right or wrong.    Many     norms and   attitudes of   society were
questioned  fundamentally      and  rejected,  while  Urkost-style    attitudes   were  praised.  In  addition,  the Urkost
supporters propagated in their postings a life in primordial conditions in paradise. Urkost is supposed to lead to
living longer, becoming or staying healthy, being sporty, strong and attractive, being happy etc. The users do
not tire of listing all the advantages of Urkost. Those who live on an Urkost diet are supposed to reach an old
age happily and healthily, as may be seen from a contribution by the user "Taraxacum":
         "[...] here are my 20 reasons. 1 To become and to stay healthy. [...] 19. Urkost is the ideal way. 20. To
die of old age with at least 120 years." (Contribution date ­ format: dd.mm.yyyy: 07.02.2010, 03:32 pm).
         People who live on Urkost commit themselves to a universal ideology that provides a guidance system
and seems   to  bear   some    parareligious  markings.   The   web   forum    was   analyzed   for   religious aspects both
linguistically and with regard to content:
1.  The  book   by    Franz  Konz   that was    mentioned   before   is  entitled  Der  Große   Gesundheits-Konz     (GGK)
    ("Konz's Great Health Book"), but some Urkost followers also call it the Green Bible. This definitive book
    is cited repeatedly and serves as an orientation and source of arguments. For example, user "Karlina" wrote:
         "You may find that all in the GKK, let it be your green bible, there you can find all the advice you
    need." (11.03.2010, 10:27 am).
         The content of this "bible" seems to be taken for granted, and citing from it is considered good form.
2.  Recurring   to    biblical statements    and  Christian   traditions  may     be found  quite   frequently   (despite an
    ostensible  denial   of    religiousness  ­  as  religion  is related   to  society  and    culture  and their  negative
    connotations; instead, Urkost followers believe in "nature"). The following quotations by BR (a & b) and
    "Robert" (c), may illustrate this observation:
    a.   "May this forum [...] be blessed." (02.07.2008, 09:06 pm).
    b.   "I mean no harm to anybody, I even carry astonishingly much of this `love thy enemy' with me that was
         demanded by Jesus." (16.06.2010, 09:07 am).
    c.   "Paradise as described by the bible is not a utopian phantasy [...]" (03.08.2010, 12:55 am).
    In one posting BR presented nearly messianic promises in biblical terminology:
         "Once we are a majority with our lifestyle [...], then there will really be something for everybody [...]
    and we can enjoy the abundance. [...] Just like paradise." (20.05.2010, 10:23 am).
3.  User "Urtica" wrote:
         "In our allegedly well-informed world, two superstitions appear to be ineradicable, because people
    want  to believe     in them:  that  they   were  capable     of living  on   after death,  and   that there  was   some
    miraculous   cure    to take away    their  sins committed    against    life and   nature. [...] Believing  in  medical
    miracles is a global disease, one of mankind's many superstitions [...]" (04.06.2010, 08:08 pm).
         While placing medicine at the same level as civilization and faith, this user employs Christian terms
    such as sins or life after death. Everything that is not in line with Urkost is attributed to superstition.
         In addition to such religious aspects, it may be noted that the Urkost movement fulfils some criteria of
a sect. The community is clearly focused on a leading figure (see the following sub-section on `role structure'):
BR is a leading figure of the Urkost movement, as may be seen from her great activity in the forum. She is
successful in committing followers to herself and her doctrine of salvation (see sub-section on `persuasion and
reinforcement'). Salvation is equalized with healing from some illness, something reported quite frequently in
the forum (e.g. "Due to Urkost, we became healthy again"). The community members perceive themselves as
surrounded by enemies. The Urkost movement turns against Schlechtköstler ("bad food eaters") and considers
them   enemies. Criticism    is not possible,    neither from   inside   nor from    outside; those   who  question  certain
positions, express criticism, or even support methods used by standard medicine will be outcast or vilified (see

© ISLS                                                                                                                      3
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                  Volume I: Long Papers

sub-section on `separation from dissidents'). The Urkost movement is not a sect in the narrow sense: it does not
persecute  renegades   (at  least,  there is no  evidence  in   the forum)  or expose  dissidents,  but it features   some
criteria of a sect. What we may conclude from this analysis is that knowledge creation in the Urkost community
goes beyond questions of nutrition and health; it rather aims at providing an ideological guidance system.

"You are under special surveillance now" ­ Role Structure
How does the role structure in the Urkost community influence knowledge exchange between its members?
Participants  of  the  web    forum  differ   with   respect  to the  number   of their   postings. Apart    from   BR  as
administrator and a number of rather active members, there are also many registered users who are less active or
have only participated for a short time. In order to be allowed to make contributions to the forum, one has to
send an application to BR and needs to be approved by her as a contributor. At the formal level, we can only
distinguish between the administrator and ordinary members. BR stimulates debates by introducing new topics
into the forum. Even though BR is not always the first who raises a point for discussion, she gives her opinion
on virtually every topic, so, for example, in a discussion on sexuality:
          "You   simply  have   to  know  that  the mass   media    present sexuality in an absolutely    incorrect way."
(13.06.2010, 08:17 pm).
          Very often it seems as if the members wait until BR expresses her opinion, in order to simply express
confirming views. One gets the impression that BR usually has the final say and that she does not only play the
role of an expert (due to her experience and knowledge), but rather the role of a guru. She also rebukes other
users for stating "wrong" opinions. For example, in a discussion on whether it is `correct' to eat maggots in
fruits, user "Dawn" (who was a member for only two weeks at this time) had written:
          "[...] I support natural and organic as well, but I'd prefer chemistry to eating maggots." (21.07.2010,
08:03 am).
          BR replied:
          "Prefer chemistry to maggots?          Sorry, but you don't understand much of it yet, do you? [...] Have a
nice time in the Urkost forum, but you are under special surveillance now, honey.             But just reading what the
others write is nice, too, and instructional above all, right?      " (21.07.2010, 11:59 am).
       This reprehension seemed to result from a position of strength and showed that BR clearly takes on a role
in which she decides what is right or wrong. And the other users accept BR's superiority: for example, user
"orchidee"   had  written  that  in her   opinion   Urkost should   not be  practiced too strictly and  that eating   grain
should be okay. BR answered by commenting every single sentence. Referring to the grain issue she wrote:
       "[...] Humans are biologically not designed for grain. For every class of creatures on this planet nature
has provided appropriate food. Each deviation leads to all sorts of problems: tumors, psychoses, depressions,
allergies, etc." (26.03.2010, 11:49 am).
       Subsequently, user "orchidee" confirmed:
       "You were right, once again [...] so far you have been right in the end in all discussions." (26.03.2010,
01:41 pm).
       Finally, BR answered:
       "I am happy and I enjoy watching you learning" (27.03.2010, 12:41 pm).
       BR    plays the   part of a  guru,   and  it becomes   apparent  that  two goals   are associated   with  this role:
followers and potential new members are to be persuaded and kept (this will be addressed in the following sub-
section on `persuasion') and separation from dissidents (cf. sub-section on `separation').

"You are on the right path" ­ Persuasion and Reinforcement
In this sub-section, we analyze how followers are reinforced and persuaded to living on Urkost prescriptions.
On the one hand, we describe how the community communicates with new members and how knowledge is
passed on to them. On the other hand, we analyze how skepticism in their own ranks is dealt with (handling of
criticism from outside will be analyzed in the following sub-section). An Urkost follower is expected to take a
clear stand on all kinds of issues ­ breast feeding, vaccination, natural contraception, or on whether vegans are
allowed   to kill ticks. This  may   be   a  great  challenge to new    members,  and  they   tend to seek  support   from
established Urkost followers. This is why it is interesting to analyze how new members are attracted. At first
sight, the Urkost forum appears to be an open community. New members are welcomed to get to know the
Urkost lifestyle. In order to analyze contributions that refer to attracting members, we selectively searched for
responses to contributions by new users (newcomers were defined as users who joined less than three months
ago).  It was found    that newcomers       are received   very  cordially. New  user  "januschka"    got  three welcome
greetings within one day. The newcomers' questions are taken seriously and answered in a personal way. For
example, a new user was unhappy about eupepsia problems since he switched to raw food. He was praised for
switching to raw food and his problems were traced back to being not consequent enough, as user "apfel" noted:
          "You are on the right path, keep going [...], but there is a lack of wild plants [...] you eat too many
cultivated plants" (05.09.2010, 10:10 pm).

© ISLS                                                                                                                    4
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                     Volume I: Long Papers

         Urkost   followers   try to  give   others  a feeling   of security.    In this pursuit, a  tough-minded     attitude
towards Schlechtkost is given high priority. Usually, these users refer to some personal experience, but factual
arguments are rare. Negative presentations of Schlechtkost are contrasted with salutary Urkost. This contrast is
the basis for reinforcing and motivating followers. When users describe some conflict with non-Urkost people,
they   experience strong    support   in the  forum:     they are   incited not     to listen to  them,  and   supplied  with
encouraging stories and phrases that can be used as replies in debates. But as soon as a certain period of grace is
over, it turns out that the users monitor each other's compliance with the Urkost regulations, and evaluate each
other accordingly. Members who practice Urkost in a half-hearted way, will experience harsh criticism (see
above). Sometimes this results in the withdrawal of a member. As an example, we analyzed a dispute with user
"Petra". The  original   debate   cannot  be  depicted   completely,  as    this user   withdrew  from   the forum    and her
contributions were deleted. But we may reconstruct some of her statements as they have been quoted by other
users. "Petra" said goodbye with these words:
         "[...] Even though [...] I have met some lovely people, I found out very quickly, unfortunately, that
one's own opinions are only accepted if they are consistent with those of the person who runs this forum."
         She also complained about "insults below the belt" and concludes:
         "I can only advise against fully believing in ideologies, health literature, or scientific reports."
         BR reacted with disapproval. Other members joined in and attacked "Petra". User "amelia" wrote:
         "All I can    say  about  Petra:    She really   hasn't  understood     anything.  Moreover,    she lets herself   be
influenced by propaganda      against    the Urkost  forum    and against   you   [BR],   instead of   thinking  for herself."
(26.06.2010, 10:54 am).
         User "cherrycurry" added laconically:
         "Eating meat makes you daft, it seems" (26.06.2010, 11:52 am).
         BR also likes to impute "shabbiness of character" to dissenters (20.06.2010, 11:52 am).
         Reinforcement,     motivation,   and  mutual     support   occur   at an   emotional    level and   are based   on  a
separation from skeptics in the forum users' own ranks (such as "Petra") and dissidents (cf. next sub-section).
Many discussions are rather personal, and this may have a positive effect on members by inducing a feeling of
security. But this personal atmosphere of communication may also be provocative and offensive. At the surface
the healing effects   of Urkost   are praised,   but underneath     many  members       seem  to  be rather  vulnerable.  The
Urkost followers appear to be easily assailable and under constant pressure to justify. Critical dialogue is hardly
imaginable  from  such    a position  and    not really   taking  place.  Discussions     are  dominated    by  references   to
personal experience.    The goal   is not  to exchange    valid  arguments,    but  to   be there emotionally    for the like-
minded and to signal that one is on the right track.

"Let them die stupidly from diseases" ­ Separation from Dissidents
The followers consider Urkost as the only right path. Accordingly, people of some "different faith" are despised,
or pitied at best. When conflicts with Schlechtkost eaters are discussed, many statements express the superiority
of Urkost followers in terms of a principle of selection. For example, user "Irmisato" wrote:
         "Don't listen to those people who want to put you off Urkost. Just say: `We'll talk again in 50 years'.
And think: `... in case you are still alive then'." (10.06.2010, 01:35 pm).
         This principle    of selection   (in terms    of social-Darwinistic     ideology)    is even   more   apparent  in  a
comment by user "Robert":
         "Let them    die  stupidly  from    diseases, nature  is tough   sometimes,     but  always   wise..."  (10.06.2010,
05:11 pm).
         What finds expression here is the notion, also known from other pre-modern views of the world, that
one is struck by illness as a consequence of guilt or sin. This was a common attitude in the ancient world and the
Middle Ages (Riese, 1953). The members of this forum appear to take for granted that the Urkost lifestyle is
superior, and that this is expressed by their own health. They believe that this superiority will be evident in the
long run and find expression in a longer life of Urkost followers. An explanation for the supposed misbelief of
dissidents is provided be user "Nera":
         "The   majority   still believes  in the   lies of science  and    does    not  make  an effort  to question    them.
Authorities mean more to them than critical thinking and insight." (13.06.2010, 08:13 am).
         This statement     not  only contains   an    explanation  for  the   behavior   of  dissidents, it also    implies a
superiority of Urkost followers in thinking and reasoning: Urkost followers consider to distinguish themselves
from non-believers by greater intellectual ability as well. In order to be separated from dissidents more easily
and protected from criticism, it is sometimes discussed to switch to a closed web forum. But this proposal was
rejected by user "Ritchen":
         "By no means should the entire Urkost forum become private. As you [BR] had said before, this is
VERY IMPORTANT because of public relations in particular. We want to tell people that this road exists. And
many have already found it ­ through Brigitte, her forum, her blog, her seminars." (20.06.2010, 12:17 pm).

© ISLS                                                                                                                       5
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                   Volume I: Long Papers

          But it appears that an additional closed forum is also in existence, in which even more radical ideas
may be exchanged. There is a posting by BR in which she mentioned a "private Urkost forum" and explained:
          "By all means, one can be more explicit there than here, and I will permit access only restrictively to
hand-picked people." (01.07.2010, 04:58 pm).
          As far as standard medicine is concerned, the attitude expressed is critical, to put it mildly. There is
fundamental doubt that standard medicine is able to cure any disease at all. For example, user "Robert" wrote:
          "Who cures is right! And somebody has to prove to me that physicians have ever cured anything with
their standard medicine!" (10.06.2010, 05:11 pm).
          Another example is a contribution by user "apfel":
          "She  [BR]   is a  fighter for the   good on  all   levels (Not  only    when it is about  the lies of standard
medicine, woman-destroying contraceptive pills, vaccination, human suffering)." (31.07.2010, 05:17 pm).
          This, generally,   very critical attitude also   applies   to specific   procedures  of standard medicine,  for
example, vaccination, as can be seen from a contribution by user "Jana" in a discussion on the necessity of
inoculation and the normal number of infectious diseases:
          "We only have one infection per year. After two years, still breast fed and completely unvaccinated.
My personal assumption is that the main cause for this alarming state of the children's health is vaccination."
(31.07.2010, 03:49 pm).
          Other users took the same line, for example "Nera" and "apfel":
          "Nice, if you can lay the blame for secondary complications of vaccination on some phantom germs.
Saves jobs, doesn't it? *cough*" (31.07.2010, 03:56 pm).
          "Vaccinations are really very, necessary/important ... for the moneybag of the greedy pharmaceutical
industry. It is sad that innocent children are exposed to dangerous vaccinations." (31.07.2010, 01:41 pm).
          The   sarcastic tone  in   these comments     is  characteristic   of  contributions  that deal  with  standard
medicine. It seems as if this diction is supposed to express their authors' perceived own superiority, or, perhaps,
resignation in the face of the incorrigibility of the rest of the world. Critical discussion on the necessity and the
risks  of vaccination   are, of course,    not restricted  to groups    like the   Urkost  community,    even though  the
particular way in which this fraternity addresses the topic is rather exceptional. What is even more peculiar is
their attitude to HIV/AIDS, where the discrepancy between standard medicine and Urkost views is particularly
apparent. The Urkost followers not only criticize the methods of HIV/AIDS treatment, but their criticism goes
further: they doubt the existence of AIDS, as a viral disease, in general. User "Nera", for example, claimed:
          "[...] Aids is not a disease caused by a "virus", and it is curable at any time." (10.07.2010, 12:31 pm).
          This statement was broadly supported by other users. User "Robert" wrote on this topic:
          "Correct. Aids is the outbreak of various diseases due to a f***ed up immunity system. Earth fast3,
Urkost, sports and it can be cured." (20.07.2010, 11:29 am).
          AIDS is considered as a lie that is maintained due to financial interests. At someone's suggestion to
move this topic of AIDS healing to a private forum, BR answered:
          "The Aids critics are reputable and there is no reason to hide them. Rather those people should hide
who keep the money-printing machine running although they know better." (21.07.2010, 07:04 pm).
          So far, we have analyzed a rather theoretical attitude to standard medicine and its representatives. But
what will Urkost followers do when they meet physicians, who represent standard medicine, and how will they
react  to diagnoses    by conventional     medicine  in   their everyday     life? Some    forum  contributions  give the
impression that some Urkost followers indeed turn to doctors of medicine ­ especially with severe diseases,
such as tumors, or when children are concerned. The recommended treatments, however, are often rejected.
Instead, they try to cure themselves the Urkost way, as can be seen from the example of user "Jana" who reports
that she suffered from a tumor in the parotid gland:
          "[...] Surgery denied. Switched to raw food the next day, after 6 weeks tumor not palpable anymore. In
April 2010 finally another MRI, and last week finally its results. Tumor completely disappeared." (01.06.2010,
09:07 pm).
          What is interesting here is that methods of standard medicine such as an MRI are accepted and taken
for granted, and that the results of this procedure are awaited eagerly, as can be concluded from the double use
of the word "finally". Further contributions in this thread show that the other users do not only regard this as a
fight against the tumor, but also praise it as a victory against the physicians. User "Bartok" wrote in this context:
       "Hello Jana, that is great          You can be veeeery proud of you that you showed the ropes to the tumor
and to the doctors. What did the doctors say about it? Would be nice if you told us how they responded to the
refusal of surgery and the disappearence of the tumor." (02.06.2010, 07:57 am).
       "Jana" answered that the doctors would deny any relation between Urkost and the healing, and expressed
her disappointment:
       "I would have been glad if I could have made the doctor think. But this was not the case." (02.06.2010,
10:28 am).

© ISLS                                                                                                                   6
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                Volume I: Long Papers

         This disappointment reflects the ambivalent relationship to physicians, which was mentioned above.
On the one hand, as representatives of standard medicine, they are considered as enemies, in theory. But, on the
other  hand,  they are  consulted, their  diagnoses  are regarded  as  real, and their evidence   for diseases and   for
recovery are completely accepted. In the stage of treatment, however, what they say is irrelevant. It seems as if
doctors were important authorities, whose persuasion would be a great success. Physicians and their diagnoses
are by no means ignored, they rather represent a point of friction that is heavily discussed.
         An aspect on which the forum is not very explicit is the attitude of Urkost to other alternative medical
approaches and procedures. One example in which another alternative medical procedure was advised was the
case of a mother (user "Kleeblatt2007") who wrote that her little son had started to be cross-eyed. On the one
hand, she was surprised:
         "We are sad, because we had thought that this would not occur with Urkost" (13.07.2009, 08:31 pm).
         But she admitted that she had eaten meat from time to time during pregnancy, and assumed that this
might be a potential reason for her son's strabismus. She asked for suggestions, and various alternative medical
procedures were recommended to her which are not based on Urkost. But this seemed to be no problem here.
Users "alice", "Mangofan", and "uma" recommended various methods:
         "I finally came across Glenn Doman [...] I would never recommend glasses. Because these do not
stimulate the brain, quite the opposite." (14.07.2009, 12:15 am).
         "Strabismus is not a disease but a dysfunction that can be resolved in many cases, following Dr. Bates
in his book [...]" (17.07.2009, 10:35 am).
         "I started a cranio-sacral-therapy with her [her cross-eyed daughter] [...]". (30.09.2009, 11.08 am).
         A separation can be found in this discussion as well, but, again, mainly from standard medicine, which
can be seen in some side blows, for example in a contribution by user "Mangofan":
         "Ametropia is always caused by stress, because the external muscles of the eye disarrange the eyeball,
especially when a toddler is examined by an eye doctor." (17.07.2009, 10:35 am).
         Surprisingly,   the  professional   medical  background   of  authorities  is considered  as  positive  if  the
approaches    of these medical  authorities  are like-minded   with  the respective  user's view   of the world.  Two
examples were provided by the users "alice" and "Mangofan":
         "Glenn Doman [...] is a physiotherapist and has worked for more than 60 years with brain-injured
children." (14.07.2009, 12:15 am).
         "Fortunately, Dr. W. H. Bates has been doing research for nearly 40 years and found that eyesight
improved with anatomically correct use of the eyes with the brain. He was a physician, ophthalmologist, and
eye surgeon." (21.07.2009, 06:28 am).
         And even BR applies this strategy, for example in the following posting:
         "`Humans are not really granivores`, says Karl Pirlet, Professor of Internal Medicine. only for the last
15,000 years have humans eaten grain, too short for a real genetic adaptation." (26.03.2010, 11:49, am).
         This is an indication of what might be called the fundamentalist eclecticism in the Urkost community:
anecdotic  knowledge     is  indiscriminately   mingled  with    medical  and  scientific  findings.  Often, scientific
medicine  is  fundamentally    criticized in the same   breath as  a reference   to some  scientific  study is cited as
evidence for the trueness of one's own world-view.

Conclusion
In this paper, we provided a qualitative hermeneutic analysis of a web forum, in order to examine how a (rather
radical) alternative medical community of practice, the so-called Urkost movement, applies the Internet as a
platform for knowledge exchange and knowledge construction. The Urkost community is concerned, primarily
and at  first sight,  with   aspects of   nutrition and  health, but  what   happened   in  this forum  exceeded     the
construction of health knowledge and addressed an ideological view of the world in general. Even though a
holistic approach is typical of alternative medical communities, the way in which a construction of reality took
place in the Urkost movement was definitely exceptional. So our findings cannot be generalized to knowledge
construction in other alternative medical communities, but it was still revealing to elaborate on the structures of
knowledge exchange that emerge from our hermeneutic analysis of this particular alternative medical fraternity.
Even   though  the exchange     processes  that we  analyzed   did not really  represent  knowledge   development    in
scientific terms, what occurred from the Urkost point of view was indeed a form of knowledge advancement,
users learning from each other, forming a collective identity, and developing a common repertoire of resources.
Our hermeneutic procedure identified four aspects of knowledge creation within this community of practice.
         Firstly, we examined to what extent Urkost is more than just alternative medicine to its followers. It
appears that Urkost is rather a holistic ideology and attitude towards life adopted by members of the Urkost
forum. Their contributions showed that they do not only refer to curing diseases, but address a great variety of
topics of everyday    life. The influence  of Urkost  on  these  people's lives  bears some  parareligious   markings.
Concerning the second aspect of knowledge creation, the role structure in the forum, it was found that there is
one administrator who clearly took the position of a leader or guru. Such an outstanding position is actually

© ISLS                                                                                                                7
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                Volume I: Long Papers

untypical of a community of practice, but its existence is comprehensible ­ and this is in line with theory ­
because this person plays a significant role when it comes to ensuring compliance with group norms and the
formation of identity: she initiated new discussion threads, commented other contributions very frequently, and
was always on the spot when it came to defending the Urkost lifestyle in a quite dominant way. The third part
dealt with the question how communication was used to put newcomers on the right track and rebuke members
who expressed deviant opinions. It was found that the Urkost forum welcomed new members in a quite cordial
and   open  way.  Critical questions   or  comments,  however,    were not   accepted,  and  answered   brusquely      and
reprehensively. Both the motivation of the forum members and responses to critics were communicated in an
emotional and personal manner. The final part of the analysis of knowledge-creation structures examined the
attitude of the Urkost community to standard medicine. We found a critical, even hostile communication style
when the topic of doctors, their treatments, and standard medicine in general came up. The behavior of standard
medicine representatives was criticized and it was even insinuated that conventional medicine would do harm to
patients intentionally   and  out  of greed.  By   clear-cut communicative    separation from    standard  medicine,     a
feeling of supremacy and, perhaps, also a sense of uncertainty of the Urkost followers were expressed.
         It may be concluded that the community that was examined here is, in large parts, a prime example of a
community of practice: the identity of this group is defined by a shared interest, its members are engaged in
joint  discussions,  and they have    developed  a shared repertoire of   stories and cases  for  their practice. Many
things that were going on in this community may appear absurd or insane to outsiders, but it makes perfect
sense ­ from a systems theoretical, constructivist point of view: the social system (in terms of Luhmann, 1995)
described here uses its own operations in order to distinguish itself from its environment (e.g. from standard
medicine) and, in doing so, determines what is accepted as legitimate content of its own communication. As a
consequence, communication takes place in a way that allows connectivity for further pertinent communication.
Within   the   scope  of this self-organization  (in terms   of  autopoiesis) the  system    maintains  itself, reduces
complexity from the environment and constitutes meaning (cf. Kimmerle, Moskaliuk, Cress, & Thiel, 2011).

Endnotes
(1) The term "Schlechtkost" ­ like "Urkost", not really an existing word in German ­ is often used by the Urkost followers
     and may be translated as "bad food". This neologism is reminiscent of the terminology used in G. Orwell's "1984".
(2) No contribution date is provided for this quotation, because this user left the web forum early in September 2010 and all
     her contributions were deleted. We had taken down this quotation at an earlier session, but could not find it any more in
     the web forum when we wanted to note the contribution date.
(3) "Erdfasten" ­ literally "earth fast" ­ is the Urkost "starting diet" that people are supposed to go through before they start
     living on Urkost.

References
Berger,  P.  L., &    Luckmann,   T.  (1966). The  social    construction of reality: A  treatise in  the  sociology    of
         knowledge. Garden City, NY: Anchor Books.
Bratman, S. (1997). The alternative medicine sourcebook: A realistic evaluation of alternative healing methods.
         Los Angeles: Lowell House.
Campbell, C. (1972). The cult, the cultic milieu and secularization. In M. Hill (Ed.), A sociological yearbook of
         religion in Britain (Vol. 5, pp. 119-136). London: SCM Press.
Ciompi, L. (1991). Affects as central organising and integrating factors. A new psychosocial/biological model
         of the psyche. The British Journal of Psychiatry, 159, 97-105.
Kimmerle,    J., Cress,  U.,  & Held,  C.  (2010).  The interplay   between   individual and   collective   knowledge:
         Technologies for organisational learning and knowledge building. Knowledge Management Research
         and Practice, 8, 33-44.
Kimmerle, J., Moskaliuk, J., Cress, U., & Thiel, A. (2011). A systems theoretical approach to online knowledge
         building. AI & Society, 26, 49-60.
Konz, F. (1999). Der große Gesundheits-Konz. München: Universitas.
Lave, J., & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning: Legitimate peripheral participation. New York: Cambridge
         University Press.
Luhmann, N. (1995). Social systems. Stanford: Stanford University Press.
Reichertz,   J (2004).   Objective hermeneutics    and hermeneutic   sociology    of  knowledge.   In   U. Flick, E.    v.
         Kardorff, & I. Steinke. (Eds.), A companion to qualitative research (pp. 290-295). London: Sage.
Riese, W. (1953). The conception of disease: Its history, its versions and its nature. New York: Philosophical
         Library.
Salmon, J. W. (1984). Alternative medicine: Popular and policy perspectives. New York: Tavistock.
Wenger,    E.  (1998).   Communities    of practice:  Learning,   meaning,    and  identity. Cambridge:     Cambridge
         University Press.

© ISLS                                                                                                                   8
