CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                       Volume II: Short Papers & Posters

   New Forms of Collaborative Repository Development Involving
                Students, Teachers, and Japanese Lesson Study
            Eric Hamilton, Pepperdine University, Los Angeles, CA, eric.hamilton@pepperdine.edu

         Abstract:    This    poster  reviews  a   novel form   of  NSF-   and   IES- supported   professional
         development      research   that explores   teacher conceptual    and   pedagogical change     as  they
         develop a repository of videos of worked examples that shadow school curricula.                Several
         elements     are unique,  including   the creative  role  that teachers are expected to  assume,   the
         implementation       of Japanese   Lesson   Study   as the  collaboration   methodology    for teacher
         interaction, and the involvement of student teams in creating peers for video.

Introduction
The expression "teacher creativity at the intersection of content, cognition and digital media" (Hamilton, 2010)
captures much of the vision of this research this poster presents, research that challenges assumptions both about
professional  development      and about  digital  repositories of  learning objects, where  the  US    National Science
Foundation has made sizable investments, most notably in the National STEM Digital Library (NSDL) Program
(National   Science   Foundation,    2010).   Work   in  projects  supported by   NSF  (Hamilton,    2010)  and  the US
Department of Education (Hamilton & Harding, 2008) has been based on the conjecture that enabling teachers
to exercise collaborative creativity in the form of teams that producing digital media could yield surprising and
powerful    results in    the quest  to   accelerate and   deepen   student  learning  in   high  stakes   accountability
environments.   The project thus focuses directly on teacher creativity.     It also focuses on the process of drawing
peer tutor students into the teaching community by engaging them in the effort to build by a cadre of student
tutors working alongside their teachers.       Together, in collaboration with Pepperdine University's mathematics
department,   and   drawing    deeply on   the methodology      of Japanese  lesson  study,  Los  Angeles   mathematics
teachers and student tutors are creating a growing digital collection or repository of digital media reflecting the
curriculum and standards of the four year high school sequence of standards that students are expected to master
in high school.

Surface and Deeper Outcomes
This repository development is also fundamentally participatory and both teacher ­centric and student-centric.
Combined with the lesson study methodology, it relies on the collaborative, reflective and generative work of
teachers for the substance of professional development in ways that elude even current reform practices (e.g.,
Darling-Hammond & Richardson, 2009).           This approach to use lesson study to produce a living repository of
creative mathematics lessons has two immediate and significant "surface" outcomes: a) finding practical means
for teacher teams to build and exercise creativity through digital media is inherently rewarding and meaningful;
it elevates the sense   of professionalism     and identity of  teachers.  Additionally,  b) the  repository becomes   a
dynamic and powerful resource that students come to use frequently to form robust mathematical knowledge, in
contrast to many digital libraries.   Beyond these two immediate benefits, it is becoming clear that more subtle
and powerful teacher changes "beneath the hood" take place.             The level of teacher sophistication both about
cognitive pathways in mathematical development and about mathematics itself escalates significantly.

Video Creation
The notion of engaging teacher teams in digital object development originated in work by SRI, International and
the TRAILS project that NSF funded in 2002 (DiGiano et al., 2002).             TRAILS was designed in part to draw
teachers into the mathematics applet development process.           This effort contributed to the design of a project
entitled "Agent and Library Augmented Shared Knowledge Area (ALASKA)" that includes the TRAILS PI
(Chris DiGiano) and that NSF's Computer Science Directorate supported (Hamilton, DiGiano, Cole, & Martin,
2004).   Neither    TRAILS     nor  ALASKA     focused   primarily   on  teacher  development    of  media,  and  neither
successfully realized the active teacher production of mathematical content in digital media.        Researchers found
that teachers did not have the time, energy, or technical software skills necessary to help create applets that
would be useful in a classroom.       The ALASKA project was oriented around integrating digital libraries with
software agents and peer tutoring (Hamilton, 2005).        The US Department of Education's Institute for Education
Sciences  (IES) continued     support of   the ALASKA      research, though,  through  a  current Goal   II R&D   award
(Hamilton & Harding, 2008) that re-conceptualized the mathematical object development of the project, based
on work at the US Air Force Academy on sustaining learner engagement in mathematics classes (Hamilton &
Hurford, 2007).       That re-conceptualization    shifted from    producing mathematical    applets from   scratch to a)
using a combination of tablet computers and screen video software to create mathematical videos, and b) using
screen  video software    to  make   existing  applets  or  mathematical     visualizations available   in  the National

© ISLS                                                                                                               1006
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                         Volume II: Short Papers & Posters

Science   Foundation     digital  library  repositories   more  usable  in classroom     settings.  This re-work in the
current ALASKA research has now produced two rounds of important interview and survey data that the poster
will present.   These interviews and surveys confirm the viability of the teacher creativity model.        It came about
as teacher   teams    in the  pilot work   found  enormous   satisfaction  and   excitement   ­ not   in what  university
professors or professional development experts imparted in professional development seminars, but in their own
generative work.      Teacher teams authored materials that they tailored to the students they teach and to
the standards for which they are accountable.

Teachers Typically Excluded from Considerations of Creativity
We have observed that the prominent role of traditional textbook or reform curriculum producers, curriculum
standards and policies, and the very limited time that teachers have outside of the classroom, all act to crowd out
their  creative potential  to produce    content tailored to their own  student   population,   local standards, and   the
teaching styles they have found effective or appropriate for given settings.          As in the past, mathematics and
science  teachers  are   not expected   to  be content producers   but  rather   are content  conveyors,  following  pre-
defined curriculum in preparation for accountability tests. But at a time of unparalleled ascendency of user-
generated  content    in  society   more broadly   (as evidenced   by  phenomena      such as   YouTube),   teachers   are
strangely left out; mathematics teachers simply are not expected to be creative in producing content.            At least,
that is the message which comes through loudly when examining state and federal funding programs involving
research and innovation in teacher professional development and teacher preparation.            Creativity in education
more generally, of course, is the subject in a broad range of the literature as well as in specialized research
journals. There is robust research on ways to foster creativity in students (e.g., Kaufman & Sternberg, 2006).
There  is a   strand  of  literature in  school  system   administration   that  explores  creativity  and flexibility in
leadership (McCallum, 1999). And, of course, there is an extensive body of literature and research support
(especially from NSF) intended to impart to teachers creative and innovative instructional activities, materials,
and full curricula. NSF review panels for other professional development programs (such as DRK12 or REESE)
explicitly reward innovative and creative researchers, but ironically appear not to suggest directly that effort
should be taken to focus on helping teachers understand, exercise, or benefit from their own creativity. With the
exception  of   a very   small number    of researchers   looking  at only  loosely   related issues  such as  classroom
improvisation (e.g., Sawyer, 2004) there appears to be little or no explicit guidance toward helping teachers to
function  as  active  and  creative  agents   at the complex   intersection   of navigating   mathematical  content  and
student cognition. (Hamilton & Jago, 2010)

References
Darling-Hammond, L., & Richardson, N. (2009). Teacher Learning: What Matters? Educational Leadership,
          66(5), 46-53.
DiGiano, C., Chung, M., Griffin, M., Huang, J., Knudsen, J., Pacpaco, R., et al. (2002). Training and Resources
          for Assembling Interactive Learning Systems (TRAILS).        NSF Grant 02-0563. SRI, Inc.
Hamilton, E. (2005). Affective Composites:        Autonomy and Proxy in Pedagogical Agent Networks. In J. Tao, J.
          Tan & R. E. Picard (Eds.), Affective Computing and Intelligent Interaction (ACII2005) (Vol. 3784, pp.
          898-906). Berlin: Springer Lecture Notes in Computer Science.
Hamilton,  E.   (2010).   PREDICATE      Project:  Targeted  Research   on  Teacher   Creativity   at the Intersection of
          Content, Student Cognition, and Digital Media: Award DUE104478, National Science Foundation.
Hamilton, E., DiGiano, C., Cole, R., & Martin, D. (2004). Agent and Library Augmented Shared Knowledge
          Areas (ALASKA): National Science Award 0420310.
Hamilton,  E.,   & Harding,    N.   (2008). IES   Grant:  Agent and   Library    Augmented    Shared  Knowledge    Areas
          (ALASKA). Institute for Education Sciences Award 305A080667.
Hamilton, E., & Hurford, A. (2007). Combining Collaborative Workspaces with Tablet Computing: Research in
          Learner   Engagement      and  Conditions    of Flow.   Paper  presented    at the  Proceedings   of the  37th
          ASEE/IEEE Frontiers in Education Conference, Milwaukee, WI.
Hamilton, E., & Jago, M. (2010). Towards a Theory of Personalized Learning Communities. In e. (M. Jacobson
          & R. Reimann (Ed.), Designs for Learning Environments of the Future Springer Press.
Kaufman, J. C., & Sternberg, R. J. (2006). The International Handbook of Creativity: Cambridge University
          Press.
McCallum, B. (1999). Literacy in Four Effective Schools. School Leadership & Management, 19(1), 7-24.
National     Science      Foundation.     (2010).    National   STEM        Education     Digital     Library    Program
          (http://nsf.gov/pubs/2010/nsf10545/nsf10545.htm).
Sawyer,   R.  (2004).    Creative   teaching:  Collaborative  discussion   as disciplined  improvisation.   Educational
          Researcher, 33(2), 12.

© ISLS                                                                                                               1007
