CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                   Volume I: Long Papers

 Effects of Using Multiple Forms of Support to Enhance Students'
                          Collaboration during Concept Mapping
  Anushree Bopardikar*, Dana Gnesdilow*, Sadhana Puntambekar, University of Wisconsin ­ Madison, 1025
                                       West Johnson Street, Madison, WI 53706,
             Email: bopardikar@wisc.edu, gnesdilow@wisc.edu, puntambekar@education.wisc.edu

         Abstract:    Collaborative    learning provides   opportunities  to   facilitate  students'  knowledge
         construction.    However,   students  may   face  challenges   while  constructing   meaning    through
         dialogue. This study explored multiple forms of support to foster collaboration that would lead
         to a deeper understanding of science ideas and high-quality group concept maps. Ninety-five
         students   from   four 8th  grade science   classrooms  participated   in  this  study. Using   a 2 x  2
         experimental design, we examined the effect of teacher modeling of prompts and the effect of
         meaningful individual preparation prior to collaboration on the quality of students' concept
         maps.    Statistical analyses  revealed  that groups   that  prepared  individual   concept  maps   and
         received teacher modeling of prompts generated the highest quality concept maps. Further,
         teacher   modeling    of  prompts   was  only  found   to   be  effective  when    combined    with  the
         individual   preparation   of  concept maps   prior to collaboration.     Implications for classroom
         practice and future research are discussed.

Research from collaborative learning in classrooms and Computer Supported Collaborative Learning settings
(CSCL) has found that engaging students in collaboration provides opportunities to facilitate their knowledge
construction. Students involved in collaboration may learn through generating elaborate questions, explanations,
and arguments (e.g., Choi, Land, & Turgeon, 2005; Weinberger, Stegmann, & Fischer, 2006). However, other
research reveals that constructing meaning through dialogue often involves challenges. Students may not always
interact effectively and may have difficulty extending one another's ideas and sustaining discussions (So, 2007).
Our   own   prior research has  found   that students  do  not always    engage  in  elaborate   science conversations   in
groups (Gnesdilow, Bopardikar, Sullivan, & Puntambekar, 2010). Mercer (2000) has explained that people use
their  past social    and cultural  experiences   to  help them    to understand     the  ways   that particular   dialogic
interactions unfold. Students may not be able to draw from such resources during conversations with each other
if their prior school experiences have provided them with little time to talk with peers and has focused more on
didactic forms of instruction and discourse.
         This  paper   focuses    on collaborative   concept   mapping    as  a specific   context   for researching    and
enhancing students' collaboration. Concept maps are graphic organizers that represent knowledge by showing
relationships between     concepts.  A  concept  map   includes at least  two   concepts   connected  by   a linking word
which explains the relationships between the concepts (Novak & Cañas, 2008). A collaborative concept map is
created when   students   collectively  generate  a  concept map   that  may   reflect the  understanding    of the group.
Collaborative     concept  maps   may   promote   social   thinking   and  metacognition     among    students     (Roth &
Roychoudhury, 1992), and engage students in elaborate science discussions to co-construct scientific meanings
(van Boxtel, van der Linden, Roelofs, & Erkens, 2002; White & Gunstone, as cited in Edmondson, 2000).
         To   facilitate  collaborative concept   mapping    and address   the   challenges   involved   in  collaborative
knowledge    construction,    there  is a  need   for  supporting    students'  collaboration.    Classroom     studies  on
collaborative learning    have  provided   students  with  prompts   for generating    high-level science    questions  and
explanations (Coleman, 1998; King, 1999), and instruction and training to students in various group skills, prior
to collaboration (Mercer, 2000). In CSCL settings, studies have utilized software-based tools to help students
construct   elaborate  science    explanations   (Vattam,    Kramer,    Kim,   &   Kolodner,     2007),  provided   online
metacognitive     support to  promote   students' critical discussions   (Choi  et   al., 2005), and  scripts   to enhance
students' online discussions (Weinberger et al., 2006). Furthermore, in classroom and CSCL settings, studies
have stressed the important role of the teacher in moderating students' discussions and helping students develop
collaboration skills (Mercer, 2000; Schwarz, Asterhan, & Gil, 2009).
         In  this  study, we   utilized multiple  forms   of support  to  facilitate students'   knowledge    construction
during collaborative concept mapping. We examined how two supports, (i) meaningful individual preparation
and (ii) teacher modeling of prompts prior to collaboration, affect the quality of students' collaborative concept
maps. We will explain the forms of support in more detail in the methods section.

© ISLS                                                                                                                   104
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                     Volume I: Long Papers

Methods

Participants and Instructional Context
We conducted this study in four eighth grade science classes taught by the same teacher in a public school near
a mid-sized US Midwestern city. Twenty-five groups, with a total of 95 students, participated in this study.
These students had worked in collaborative groups in their science class for about three months prior to this
study.  Students   then engaged     in a  seven week   design-based     science curriculum,    called  CoMPASS,      to learn
about work and energy in simple machines through completing a set of five design challenges (Puntambekar,
Stylianou,   &  Goldstein,   2007).   Students  collaborated    in the same    small  groups  of  three  or four  during  the
CoMPASS       unit to generate    predictions  and  questions,  to explore  information    on  a hypertext   system,  and  to
perform    physical   and    computer-based      experiments.    Students   also   constructed    several    individual  and
collaborative concept maps during this unit, which were used for both instructional and assessment purposes.

Study Treatment and Comparison Groups
Our    study   focused  on   supporting    collaborative   knowledge    building   during    group  concept     mapping    by
investigating the effects of multiple forms of support for students' collaboration. Based on previous research, we
designed   two    forms of   support   to enable students    to engage   in collaborative    knowledge    building   through
concept  mapping.     The   first form  of support   was   teacher  modeling   of  prompts    to involve  students   in more
elaborate  science    discourse.   This   was grounded    in  sociocultural approaches     to  learning   which   emphasize
cultural tools and practices, such as discourse, during collaborative activities (Vygotsky, 1978). Consistent with
studies on    the  teacher's role  in  facilitating students'   collaboration,  we   included  teacher   modeling    of these
prompts    for a  constructive    student  dialogue  (Mercer,   2000;   Schwarz    et al., 2009).  This   support  aimed   to
facilitate students' discussion of science concepts when working in peer groups and to provide them with social
and cultural experiences prior to collaboration as models of how elaborate science conversations may unfold
through the teacher's expert enactment of the prompts (Mercer, 2000). As in prior research by Coleman (1998)
and King (1999), our prompts reminded students to question, elaborate, and justify their ideas during dialogue
with their peers. We provided students with written prompts and the teacher demonstrated constructive science
discussions    using  these  prompts.   Specifically,  the teacher   read each   prompt    to the  class  and explained    its
meaning    in  her own  words.    Then    she modeled   a  scenario  to elicit students'   thinking about    how  to use  the
prompts to help their peers elaborate and improve their science ideas to make deeper connections on the map.
The  prompts     were   designed   to  support  students   on   both individual    and collaborative    levels. One   of  the
individual level prompts was, "justify your thinking about why the concepts or relationships between concepts
you contribute are important," and one of the group level prompts was, "ask other group members to justify,
give evidence, or support their ideas."
         The second form of support explored an individual preparation activity related to the science content
prior to the collaborative concept mapping activity. This support was intended to help students generate and
reflect on the scientific concepts to productively contribute to their collaborative activity. This is similar to the
individual use of the Design Diaries to help students plan their ideas before meeting in their groups, so that they
could  engage     more  productively     during  their collaborations   (Puntambekar       &  Kolodner,   2005).  We    used
individual concept mapping as the meaningful preparation activity prior to collaboration. This choice was based
on the work of Novak and Cañas (2008) who explain that concept mapping provides a scaffold or template to
help   students   organize   and   structure  their  knowledge.     They  further    associate   concept  mapping    with  a
constructive process of learning or knowledge creation, which they describe as being different from more rote
forms of learning. This choice was also based on a study by van Boxtel, van der Linden, and Kanselaar (2000),
who asked students to individually prepare either a concept map or a poster for five minutes before engaging in
a collaborative activity. Their findings, though not statistically significant possibly due to the brief time period
allotted, showed greater conceptual understanding for students who had time for individual preparation. In our
study,  we   offered  students    greater  time for  individual    preparation  to examine    the  effect of  the nature   of
individual preparation on the quality of students' collaborative concept maps. We included an individual lists
condition to control for time on task between the different conditions. Students had approximately 12 minutes to
individually   prepare  for  their  collaboration   using  any  classroom   resource.   We     believe  that constructing  a
concept map is a meaningful activity because it requires students to consider different concepts and to represent
the relations between these concepts, helping them reflect on and thus be metacognitive about their prior ideas.
This metacognitive engagement may help students contribute their ideas towards an elaborate science discourse,
which   is consistent   with  research    highlighting  the  role   of  metacognitive   activities  in  science  classrooms
(Gunstone, 1994; Hennessey, 2003).
         The study involved a 2 x 2 experimental design to examine the effects of teacher modeling of prompts
and  meaningful    individual     preparation on the   quality  of group  concept    maps.   The  four  conditions   were: i)
individual map + teacher modeling of prompts; ii) individual map only; iii) individual list + teacher modeling of
prompts; and iv) individual list only (see Table 1). We randomly assigned the four classes to the four conditions.

© ISLS                                                                                                                    105
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                    Volume I: Long Papers

All students in all conditions received the same directions. The teacher emphasized deep connections between
concepts  and    offered suggestions    for   focal concepts    and linking  words.  Students   could use    resources  from
previous class activities for their collaborative concept map. Students worked face-to-face in their small groups
for 20 minutes to construct these paper and pencil group concept maps.

Table 1: 2 X 2 study design of teacher modeling of prompts and type of individual preparation activity.

         Factors                  Teacher Modeling of Prompts                     No Teacher Modeling of Prompts

   Individual Map           Individual Map + Teacher Modeling of                        Individual Map Only
                                      Prompts    (6 groups)                                  (5 groups)

          List               Individual List + Teacher Modeling of                      Individual List Only
                                       Prompts (6 groups)                                     (8 groups)

         To investigate the two forms of support across the four conditions discussed above, we formulated
three  research  questions:   1)  Do  groups   that receive  teacher  modeling    of prompts    generate  more   deep  level,
elaborate  connections,     on  their group   concept  maps     than groups    that do  not  receive teacher    modeling     of
prompts?   2)  Do    groups    that engage    in  individual    map  preparation    generate  more   deep    level, elaborate
connections on their group concept maps than groups that engage in individual list preparation? 3) Do groups
that engage in individual concept maps and receive teacher modeling of prompts generate more deep level,
elaborate connections on their group concept maps than groups in all other conditions?
         For our first question, we hypothesized that groups that received teacher modeling of prompts would
generate more deep level, elaborate connections on their group concept maps than groups that did not receive
teacher modeling of prompts. For question two, we hypothesized that groups that engaged in individual concept
map    preparation would    generate   more   deep   level, elaborate  connections    on  their group   concept   maps     than
groups   that engaged    in individual   list preparation.  Finally, for  our  third question,   we  hypothesized     that   the
individual concept    maps    +  teacher modeling    of  prompts    groups  would    generate more   deep    level, elaborate
connections on their group concept maps than groups in all other conditions.

Data Sources and Analysis
We analyzed 25 collaborative concept maps across the four conditions that students drew at the end of the work
and energy unit. We focused on the quality of the propositions, or connections, on the maps. A proposition is
two concepts connected by a linking word to form a semantic unit. Each proposition was scored based on a three
level coding scheme modified from prior work (Gnesdilow et al., 2010; Puntambekar et al., 2007) (see Table 2).
A Level 2 proposition score shows a more elaborate understanding of science concepts than proposition scores
assigned a Level 1. The first two authors independently coded 15% of all maps with about a 92% inter-rater
reliability. The remaining maps were then scored.

Table 2: Concept maps scoring rubric.

   Level      Description                                                         Example
       0      Incorrect, ambiguous, or no connection                              levers are inclined planes
       1      Simple fact, example, definitions, formula, overgeneralization,     third class lever is one of three kinds of
              unelaborated connections, (e.g. increases, decreases, reduces),     lever
              everyday language acceptable
       2      Scientific    language,   elaborate    explanations,   specifying   levers increase MA when the fulcrum
              conditions for increase or decrease                                 is closer to the load than applied force

Results
We  examined     the  effects  of the  four   conditions on   the   quality of  students' collaborative   concept     maps   as
follows. First, we performed a Kruskal Wallis test to identify if there were pre-existing differences among the
four classes in students' content knowledge. This preliminary analysis was important to establish equivalence
among the conditions. Next, we performed tests of equality of proportions to compare the quality of connections
on the concept maps in the four conditions by examining the proportion of Level 2 connections on the maps.

Kruskal Wallis Analysis
We  performed    a Kruskal     Wallis  test   to determine   if the  four classes   (conditions) differed    in their content
knowledge prior to the final collaborative concept mapping activity. All students individually took an online test
of physics knowledge contextualized in the pulley unit. This test consisted of 19 multiple choice and 11 open-

© ISLS                                                                                                                       106
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                  Volume I: Long Papers

ended items. The total score on this test ranged from zero to 45 points. We chose the Kruskal Wallis test for this
preliminary analysis because of the small sample size of less than 30 students in each condition and because the
assumption of normality was not met in each condition. The test, which was corrected for tied ranks, was not
significant, 2 (3, N = 95) = 1.65, p = .6481,  = .01 (see Table 3). This result indicated that there was no
statistically significant difference in students' pre-existing content knowledge among the four conditions.

Table 3: Kruskal Wallis Test case summary table.

                          Condition                                      n                         Mean Rank
    Individual Map & Teacher Modeling of Prompts                         27                           52.31
    Individual Map only                                                  15                           65.47
    Lists & Teacher Modeling of Prompts                                  25                           53.10
    List only                                                            28                           55.77

Tests of Equality of Proportions

Main Effects of Teacher Modeling of Prompts vs. No Teacher Modeling of Prompts and
Individual Preparation of Concept Maps vs. Lists
We collapsed the four different conditions into the two factors as per our 2 x 2 design to test the effect of each of
the two  factors.  We    performed   two,   two-tailed  planned pairwise   comparisons   for  the two  factors  to  test the
equality of   proportions  of   Level   2 connections   versus  Level 1  connections.    We   focused  on   comparing    the
different conditions according to the frequency of Level 2 connections because we had designed the two forms
of support to encourage deep and elaborated science connections on students' concept maps. For this study, we
did not examine the frequency of connections assigned a score of zero because a score of zero could indicate
multiple issues such as misconceptions, ambiguous or no connections, thereby making comparisons between
groups problematic to interpret.
         We     created  two,  two-way    contingency   tables to examine   the proportion    of Level 2   connections   by
condition (see Tables 4 & 5). The sample size for each of these comparisons was the total number of correct
science  connections     from   all concept   maps   in the  study  (N   =  491).  The   null hypothesis    for these    two
comparisons was that the groups in the two conditions within each factor would not differ in the proportions of
Level 1 and Level 2 connections on their concept maps. The alternate hypothesis was that the groups in the two
conditions within each factor would differ in their proportions of these connections.
         The first comparison examined the proportion of Level 1 versus Level 2 connections within the first
main   factor,   teacher  modeling     of prompts   vs. no  teacher modeling    of  prompts.     The second   comparison
examined     the proportion    of Level   1  versus Level  2   connections  within the   second   main factor,  individual
preparation activity of maps vs. lists. We used the Dunn method to control the Type I error rate at .01 across the
two comparisons (reject if Z  -2.81 or  2.81). Both comparisons were statistically significant and confirmed
our first two hypotheses. For the first factor, the groups that received teacher modeling of prompts generated a
higher proportion of Level 2 connections on their concept maps than the groups that did not (Z = 3.12, p < .01).
For the individual preparation factor, the groups that prepared individual concept maps prior to the collaborative
activity generated a higher proportion of Level 2 connections on concept maps than the groups that prepared
individual lists (Z = 5.70, p < .01).

    Table 4: Contingency table displaying frequency               Table 5: Contingency table displaying frequency
    and proportion of level 2 connections on maps                 and proportion of level 2 connections on maps
    within teacher modeling of prompts factor.                    within the individual preparation factor.

       Level of       Modeling      No           Total             Level of        Lists          Maps          Total
       Connection     Of            Modeling                       Connection
                      Prompts       of
                                    Prompts

       Level  1       160 (.81)     268 (.92)    428               Level 1         244 (.94)      184 (.79)     428

       Level 2        38 (.19)      25 (.09)     63                Level 2         15 (.06)       48 (.21)      63

       Total          198           293          491               Total           259            232           491

© ISLS                                                                                                                   107
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                    Volume I: Long Papers

Effects of the Combination of Teacher Modeling of Prompts and Individual Preparation
Activity
Because we found significant differences with our main factors, we decided to delve in further to uncover which
conditions may have supported students better in creating high-quality group maps. We set up six, two-tailed
pairwise comparisons to study each combination of the two factors and compare the proportions of Level 1
versus  Level  2 connections     among    the   four  conditions (see    Table  6).  The sample    size  for each   of these
comparisons   was     the total number    of  correct  science  connections    from  all concept    maps   in  the  pairwise
comparison groups. The first analysis compared the individual map + teacher modeling of prompts condition to
the individual list   only  condition  (N  =    291).  The second    analysis  compared   the  individual    map  +  teacher
modeling of prompts condition to individual list + teacher modeling of prompts condition (N = 198). The third
analysis  compared    the  individual  map    + teacher modeling     of  prompts  condition    to the  individual map   only
condition (N = 232). The fourth analysis compared the individual list only condition to the individual list +
teacher modeling of prompts condition (N = 259). The fifth analysis compared the individual list only to the
individual map only conditions (N = 293). The sixth analysis compared the individual list + teacher modeling of
prompts condition to the individual map only condition (N = 200).

Table 6: Summary contingency table displaying the frequency and proportion of level 1 and level 2 connections
on group maps by condition.

    Sophistication of      Individual Map     Individual Lists   Individual Lists      Individual             Total
    Connection             + Modeling of           Only           + Modeling of        Maps Only
                               Prompts                                Prompts

    Level 1               81 (.70)            165 (.94)          79 (.95)            103 (.88)          428 (.87)

    Level 2               34 (.30)            11 (.06)           4 (.05)             14 (.12)           63 (.13)

    Total                 115                 176                83                  117                491

          The null hypothesis for all six comparisons was that there would be no difference in the proportion of
Level 1 and Level 2 connections on the maps between the conditions. The alternate hypothesis was that groups
in the different conditions would differ in their proportions of these connections. We used the Dunn method to
control the Type I error rate at .01 across all six comparisons (reject if Z  -3.15 or  3.15). The first three
pairwise  comparisons     were  statistically significant. The   groups   in the  individual   map    preparation  + teacher
modeling of prompts condition generated a higher proportion of Level 2 connections as compared to the groups
in the  individual list   only  condition (Z    = 5.02, p  <   .01), individual list preparation   +   teacher modeling  of
prompts condition (Z = 5.1, p < .01), and the individual map only condition (Z = 3.38, p < .001). The remaining
three comparisons were not statistically significant (see Table 7). These results supported our third hypothesis
that the groups in the individual map preparation + teacher modeling of prompts condition would generate the
highest proportion of Level 2 connections.

Table  7: Results   for   six pairwise comparisons      testing proportion   of  level 2  connections    between    different
conditions.

    Comparison                                                                                    Z Score      p-value

    Individual Map + Modeling of Prompts vs. Individual Lists Only                                5.02         < .01

    Individual Map + Modeling of Prompts vs. Individual Lists + Modeling of Prompts               5.1          < .01

    Individual Map + Modeling of Prompts vs. Individual Maps Only                                 3.38         < .01

    Individual Lists Only vs. Individual Lists + Modeling of Prompts                              .504         > .01

    Individual Lists Only vs. Individual Maps Only                                                -1.62        > .01

© ISLS                                                                                                                   108
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                    Volume I: Long Papers

   Individual Lists + Modeling of Prompts vs. Individual Maps Only                               -1.89        > .01

                                                                         P = Proportion of Level 2 Response

Discussion
While   research  on    collaborative  learning  has shown    that student  collaboration   can  provide    opportunities     to
facilitate students' knowledge construction (e.g., Choi et al., 2005; Weinberger et al., 2006), some studies show
that students often struggle to construct meaning through discourse and may not always collaborate effectively
(Gnesdilow et al., 2010; So, 2007). In attempting to address this issue, we investigated two forms of support to
facilitate students'    knowledge   building    during collaborative   concept  mapping    in  a  science   classroom.      We
provided students with an individual preparation activity to help them reflect on the science content they could
contribute   to  their  collaborative  activity and  teacher modeling    of prompts    to help them    engage     in elaborate
science  discussions.   We    found that the    groups that  engaged in  the  meaningful   initial  preparation   of    making
individual concept maps generated more elaborated connections on their collaborative maps than groups that
prepared individual lists of concepts. We also found that the groups that received teacher modeling of prompts
generated higher quality concept maps than the groups that did not. While we found significant main effects for
these  two   factors,   a  closer  examination   of  the  pairwise  comparisons    revealed   that  prompts   with      teacher
modeling and individual preparation of concepts maps were significantly more effective only when they co-
occurred.   The   groups   that   both engaged    in individual   preparation   of concept    maps  and   received      teacher
modeling of prompts generated the greatest number of elaborated connections on their collaborative maps than
all other groups. Thus, our findings show that it was the combination of the two forms of support that was the
most   effective  in   helping students  generate    deep and  elaborated   connections   on  their collaborative       concept
maps.
           In the absence of an analysis of students' discourse, we can only offer tentative explanations about the
underlying reasons for why the combination of individual concept map preparation and teacher modeling of
prompts    was   most   effective.  Previous    research  in classroom   collaboration    and  CSCL      has identified      the
important   role  of   the teacher  in facilitating  students' discourse    (Mercer,  2000;   Schwarz    et  al., 2009).    We
designed the teacher modeling of prompts from a socio-cultural perspective to provide students with models of
effective science conversations as social and cultural tools and practices. Whereas one might expect that teacher
modeling of prompts would be beneficial under any condition, this was not the case in this study. When teacher
modeling of prompts was combined with lists as an individual preparation, we found no statistically significant
difference from the conditions where there was no modeling. Instead there seemed to be a synergistic effect
when the teacher modeling of prompts and individual preparation of concept maps were combined. We surmise
that having students engage in a meaningful individual preparation of content prior to their collaboration may
promote students' metacognitive processes, such as reflecting on, organizing, and making connections between
their  science   ideas,   and  may  help   them   consider   the ideas  they  could    contribute  to  their collaboration.
Additionally,    the individual    concept mapping     may   have  primed   the students   to take  full  advantage      of  the
prompts because the creation of the maps may have provided students with a scaffold or template to organize
and structure their content knowledge (Novak & Cañas, 2008). Consequently, the students who were given time
to individually prepare concept maps were in a better position to take advantage of the teacher modeling of
prompts, perhaps enabling them to better articulate these previously reflected upon ideas. To test our tentative
explanations, we plan to analyze students' dialogue during collaborative concept mapping.
           Our  investigation   of students' collaborative   concept   mapping   in a  classroom    follows  from    previous
research in collaborative learning. Studies have addressed challenges in students' collaboration by providing
students   with  prompts    to generate  explanations    and questions,  and  with   instruction   and training      in several
collaboration    skills (Coleman,   1998;  King,    1999;  Mercer,   2000)  and  software-based     tools to help       students
construct  elaborate    explanations,   online   metacognitive   support  through    tips and  examples,     and     scripts  to
facilitate students' collaboration (Choi et al., 2005; Vattam et al., 2007; Weinberger et al., 2006). Our study
shows   that multiple   forms   of support   for both  the  content  and models    for productive   collaboration       may   be
necessary to more effectively guide students' dialogue and to help them reflect on their own ideas prior to their
dialogue.
           Consistent with the theme of this conference, our findings can also be used to inform teachers' practice.
The emphasis on multiple forms of support may be pertinent for younger middle school students in complex
collaborative    settings, where   facilitating both the  content  and the  nature  of their  dialogue   may  be     critical to
enhance    their learning.  Furthermore,   the   multiple   supports we  have   designed   can   be integrated    in    various

© ISLS                                                                                                                       109
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                 Volume I: Long Papers

curricula, are amenable to the teacher's implementation in a relatively straightforward manner, and can also be
easily adapted for CSCL and online settings.

Conclusions and Future Research
We conducted this study with four classrooms of a single teacher and our findings represent a modest first step
in exploring ways to support students' collaborative learning and concept mapping. Whereas our quantitative
analyses helped us explore differences in the quality of concept maps among the four conditions, we plan to
conduct a detailed qualitative analysis of students' dialogue in the different conditions to understand how the
multiple   forms  of  support influenced   students'  collaborative  interactions, and   how  these    interactions were
related to  the quality  of the  concept  maps.   Future   research could  also investigate   the effects   of individual
preparation  of  concept  maps    before  different  types of  collaborative  activities and  explore    other  forms of
meaningful individual preparation prior to collaboration and conditions for which giving prompts with teacher
modeling may be most beneficial. While we investigated collaborative concept mapping, future research could
study these supportive measures for a variety of collaborative activities. Finally, our study showed the benefits
of  meaningful   individual  preparation  and   teacher   modeling  of prompts   for  a  single collaborative     learning
session. Future research could examine these supportive measures over sustained periods of time.

References
Choi,  I., Land,  S.  & Turgeon,   J. (2005).   Scaffolding   peer-questioning  strategies to facilitate  metacognition
           during online small group discussion. Instructional Science, 33, 483­511.
Coleman,    E. B. (1998).   Using  explanatory  knowledge     during collaborative  problem   solving    in science. The
           Journal of the Learning Sciences, 7(3/4), 387-427.
Edmondson,     K.   M. (2000).   Assessing  science  understanding   through    concept  maps.    In J.J. Mintzes,   J.H.
           Wandersee, & J.D. Novak (Eds.) Assessing science understanding: a human constructivist view               (pp.
           19-40). San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Gnesdilow, D., Bopardikar, A., Sullivan, S. A., & Puntambekar, S. (2010). Exploring convergence of science
           ideas through collaborative concept mapping. In K. Gomez, L. Lyons, & J. Radinsky (Eds.), Learning
           in the Disciplines: Proceedings of the 9th International Conference of the Learning Sciences (ICLS
           2010) - Volume 1, Full Papers, 698-705. International Society of the Learning Sciences: Chicago, IL.
Gunstone, R. F. (1994). The Importance of Specific Science Content in the Enhancement of Metacognition. In
           P. Fensham, R. Gunstone, & R. White (Eds.), The Content of Science:        A Constructivist Approach to its
           Teaching and Learning (pp. 131-146). Washington, D.C.: The Falmer Press.
Hennessey, M. G. (2003). Metacognitive aspects of students' reflective discourse: Implications for intentional
           conceptual  change    teaching and   learning.  In G. M.   Sinatra  &   P. R.   Pintrich  (Eds.),   Intentional
           Conceptual Change (pp. 103-132). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
King,   A. (1999).    Discourse  patterns for mediating    peer  learning. In A.   M.  O'Donnell     & A.   King   (Eds.),
           Cognitive perspectives on peer learning (pp. 87-115). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Mercer, N. (2000). Words & minds: How we use language to think together. London: Routledge.
Novak, J. D. & Cañas, A. J. (2008) The theory underlying concept maps and how to construct and use them,
           Technical Report IHMC CmapTools 2006-01 Rev 01-2008, Florida Institute for Human and Machine
           Cognition,       2008,         available       at:       http://cmap.ihmc.us/Publications/ResearchPapers/
           TheoryUnderlyingConceptMaps.pdf
Puntambekar,    S., &  Kolodner,   J. L.  (2005). Toward    implementing   distributed   scaffolding:  Helping    students
           learn science from design. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 42, 185­217.
Puntambekar,    S.,   Stylianou, A.,  &   Goldstein, J. (2007).  Comparing     classroom   enactments     of   an inquiry
           curriculum: Lessons learned from two teachers. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 16(1), 81-          130.
Roth, W. M., & Roychoudhury, A. (1992). The social construction of scientific concepts or the concept map as
           conscription device and tool for social thinking in high school science. Science Education, 76(5), p
           531-557.
Schwarz, B. B., Asterhan, C. S. C., & Gil, J. (2009). Human guidance of synchronous e-discussions: The effects
           of different moderation scripts on peer argumentation. In C. O'Malley, D. Suthers, P. Reimann, & A.
           Dimitracopoulou    (Eds.),    Computer-Supported      Collaborative     Learning     Practices:     CSCL2009
           Conference Proceedings (pp. 497­506).
So, H.  (2007).   Improving   young   learners' scientific understanding   in CSCL    environments.    In   C. Chinn, G.
           Erkens, & S. Puntambekar (Eds.), Mice, Minds, and Society. Proceedings of the        Eighth      International
           Computer   Supported   Collaborative   Learning    Conference   (CSCL   2007):  Vol    8  (2)  (pp. 645-647).
           International Society of the Learning Sciences, Inc.
van Boxtel, C., van der Linden, J., & Kanselaar, G. (2000). Collaborative learning tasks and the elaboration of
           conceptual knowledge. Learning and Instruction, 10, 311-330.

© ISLS                                                                                                                110
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                            Volume I: Long Papers

van Boxtel, C., van der Linden, J., Roelofs, E., & Erkens, G. (2002). Collaborative concept mapping: Provoking
         and supporting meaningful discourse. Theory into Practice, 41(1), 40-46
Vattam, S., Kramer, C., Kim, H., & Kolodner, J. L. (2007). Effects of technology-based support for explanation
         construction on learners' discourse during design-based learning in science. In C. Chinn, G. Erkens, &
         S. Puntambekar      (Eds.),  Mice,   Minds, and  Society: Proceedings   of   the Computer    Supported
         Collaborative Learning Conference 2007, Vol. 1, 740-749. Rutgers, NJ: International Society of the
         Learning Sciences.
Vygotsky,   L. S. (1978).   Mind in  society: The development of higher psychological  processes. (M.      Cole, V.
         John-Steiner,   S. Scribner, &  E. Souberman,  Eds. and   Trans.) Cambridge, MA:   Harvard University
         Press.
Weinberger, A., Stegmann, K., & Fischer, F. (2006). Scripting Online Discussions: Effects on Argumentative
         Discourse, Cognitive Processes, and Knowledge Acquisition. In      A. Weinberger, D. Clark, G. Erkens,
         V. Sampson, K. Stegmann, J. Janssen, J. Jaspers, G. Kanselaar, & F. Fischer (Eds.), Argumentative
         Knowledge     Construction   in CSCL:   Proceedings  of the Seventh  International  Conference      of  the
         Learning     Sciences (ICLS  2006),   1094-1100. Bloomington:  International Society  of the      Learning
         Sciences.

* The first two authors listed contributed equally to the writing of this paper and appear alphabetically.

Acknowledgements
CoMPASS research is supported by the National Science Foundation: IERI #0437660 & Institute of Educational
Sciences: CASL #R305A08050

© ISLS                                                                                                           111
