CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                 Volume I: Long Papers

 Weblines: Enabling the Social Transfer of Web Search Expertise
                      using User-Generated Short-form Timelines
         Neema Moraveji, Salman Ahmad, Chigusa Kita, Frank Chen, Sep Kamvar, Stanford University
        Email: neema@stanford.edu, saahmad@stanford.edu, ckita@stanford.edu, fxchen@stanford.edu,
                                               sdkamvar@stanford.edu

         Abstract: Web search encompasses more than fact retrieval; it is a primary entry point for
         learning.    Exploratory  search  tasks   are attempts     at such learning   and require   cognitive,
         strategic, and interpretive work from the user. The pathways of such searches are likewise
         complex and nuanced. The present study attempts to enable the human work that goes into
         conducting exploratory searches to be efficiently captured and transmitted to other learners.
         By  this  method,    web  search  expertise   can transfer    socially and  implicitly between   users
         instead of developing individually or through directed learning. The system we deployed uses
         an  existing  metaphor,   the  timeline,  to  structure insights  from  searches. We   refer to  these
         semantically meaningful representations as `weblines'. We deployed a live system to 81 users
         in three user populations. The resulting weblines were delineated into four types. Successful
         weblines     were those   that participants  used to iteratively   reflect upon the insights of  their
         searches.

Introduction and Motivation
Web search has emerged as a primary entry point to acquiring, confirming, and analyzing knowledge.                  The
study of search has grown to encompass more than looking up discrete facts (e.g. In what year was the San
Francisco fire?) and into the informal and formal learning of complex topics (e.g. Why did my local public
swimming pool close and what can be done about it?).
         Moving beyond the traversal of digital libraries and into general knowledge acquisition it is a skill that
crosses  the boundaries       between   formal and     informal   learning  environments     and  across  cultural  and
socioeconomic strata. While we tend to think of web search as `information retrieval' rather than learning, much
learning in information societies takes place during web search.
         Information-processing theory posits that the formal mental operations required to conduct purposeful
and effective searches (e.g. as required to define abstract keywords) emerge at the corresponding developmental
stage. We view the logical steps in web search as a partial and abstracted representation of the user's cognitive
process. By  representing     such processes we   allow  them    to be  transferred between  participants via cognitive
apprenticeship, a     process by   which  learners   can model   accurate   problem-solving   skills by  inspecting the
cognitive processes of instructors (Collins 1987).

Insights: The Products of Exploratory Web Search
Researchers are actively attempting to unpack search into different types that vary in complexity. An oft-cited
theory is the distinction between lookup, learning, and investigation tasks (Marchionini, 2006) (see Figure 1)
while another attempts to use navigation characteristics such as `search moves' to describe the complexity of the
search task (Aula, Russell, 2008).

 Figure 1. Web search is a broad area. The research community is growing to consider Exploratory search as
being of utmost importance as it relates to higher-order tasks and processes. The results from such searches are
                ostensibly of greater value to the searcher and others (from (Marchionini, 2006)).

         Improving system and user efficacy for exploratory search tasks has emerged as a paramount problem
of human-information interaction research (Marchionini, 2006). Currently, exploratory search success depends

© ISLS                                                                                                               112
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                Volume I: Long Papers

largely on the cognitive and interpretive work of the user rather than retrieval algorithms. This human work
increases the potential value of the results to the searcher and potentially to others. That work also contains
cognitive processes and interpretations that are likely to be instructive to other learners about the topic at hand
or the search process itself.
         The results of exploratory searches are also different from those of lookup tasks because the insights
gained often come from connections found across multiple webpages. This leads to a problem the present work
aims to solve: how can we support users to share a series of related URLs that led to the insight in question?
         For  lookup    tasks, the  problem   of  sharing   results has   been  largely   solved using   `link-sharing'
mechanisms common to social networking status updates and micro-blogging where a single URL is qualified
with an optional textual description or conclusion. However, the problem is not solved for more complex and
multi-step queries where multiple pages and queries are necessary to qualify and communicate the insight. As
Hamming was paraphrased in (Gersh, et al, 2006), "the purpose of exploratory search is insight, not data." (The
original quote was "The purpose of computing is insight, not numbers.")
         We refer to the results of a complex search as `insights'. Insights are the result of "a story implied by
relationships among     discovered   information  items"  (Gersh,   et al, 2006).   In  this  study we   present  work
conducted to capture and represent the insights from complex search for later individual use as well as the social
transmission of knowledge. We narrowed our focus to results from news-related searches as these encompass
common research methods as well as being of social interest.
         After first motivating the study of sharing insights, we present a summary of related research on the
topic. This is followed by a description of our iterative, user-centered design process that draws upon principles
from micro-blogging, print media, and social media. We present results using the deployed system with 81
unique users and 195 shared insights. We studied the nature of these insights and what differentiates them. Our
results have  implications     for the  study of   learning technologies     concerning   web    search expertise  and
knowledge-sharing systems within classrooms and organizations.

Related Work
A comprehensive and nuanced understanding of the development of search expertise (and "online reading") is
emerging in the literature (Leu, Zawilinksi, 2007). Formulating queries is complex task due to its reliance upon
abstraction, vocabulary, domain knowledge, and grammar. Despite this complexity, query formulation is often
the focus of explicit instruction because it is so central to Web search practice (Lazonder, 2003).
         Prior work studying the habits and behaviors of students of various ages using the Internet in directed
or self-directed tasks have associated novice searchers with issuing vague queries (Bilal, 2000), focusing on
surface site features (Coiro, 2003), and limited confidence about and awareness of Web resources (Druin, 2010).
         Numerous      search  curricula have  been   proposed  though     none   are  yet established   as  standards.
Instructional guidelines   have    been  proposed   for  teaching   search   skills and    creating relevant  learning
environments as reviewed in (Lazonder, 2003). These approaches have focused on direct learning, not social,
implicit learning.
         The concept of imitating a skilled practitioner is perhaps the oldest and most natural form of social
learning (Lave, Wenger, 1991). However, it is not clear if imitating an expert's queries or navigational choices
directly enhances a searcher's skill set. Rather, it is the process underlying a search that is useful to imitate. This
is because information    needs vary   from moment    to moment,    making   the  user's  conceptual model   of  search
paramount.    In postulating   that  these  processes   may  be  socially    transferred,  we  draw    upon  cognitive
apprenticeship (Collins, 1987), which posits that learners can imitate experts by deriving components of their
thought processes, not just their behavior.

Sharing the Web Search Process with Others
Another branch of research in this area has been on how search processes can be represented and shared. Indeed,
Vannevar   Bush  conceptualized    "trailblazers" whose  primary    function in society   would  be to  establish paths
through hypertext collections for the purpose of serving future searchers (Bush, 1945). High information-density
visualizations of web navigation processes have traditionally been used to study information-seeking behavior.
         The work of Lin, et al, on visualizing search processes (Lin, 1991) (see Figure 3) led to representations
like PadPrints (Hightower, et al, 1998) for search behavior analysis and navigation flow maps (Lin, Tsai, 2005)
for enabling search instructors to understand student search behavior.
         Academics     have   also  used graphical  representations    of  search   processes for   learning purposes.
Twidale, et al, attempted to apply such representations to support collaborative search explicitly for the purpose
of improving expertise (rather than improving instruction) in searching structured digital libraries with Ariadne
(Twidale, 2005). These and related systems are useful for instructors and curious searchers in formal learning
environments. However, they require learners be explicitly interested in improving their search expertise. We
propose drawing learners into the search process of another expert through a compelling narrative.

© ISLS                                                                                                              113
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                  Volume I: Long Papers

         A number of commercial applications are enable publishing and sharing of navigation histories or a
collection of  links  about   a topic. They   include  TrailFire.com    (now    defunct), PearlTrees.com,     and  Google
Bookmarks. As far as we have seen, they have not differed significantly from any prior academic projects.

Sharing the Results from Search and Analysis
Gersh, et al, supports the sharing of insights in the intelligence community (Gersh, 2006). Their tools aim to
share  "chains  of    data, evidence,  hypotheses,   and   other  constructs,   in which    a   collection of lower-level
information supports a statement (hypothetical or real) at some higher level of organization or abstraction".
         What   remains     understudied   is how    the  results from  exploratory    search   can   be   structured in a
lightweight and flexible manner that can be shared to aid social learning and lead to well-acknowledged search
expertise  exemplars     and    practices.  Such   a  representation    could     improve    knowledge-transfer      within
organizations, classrooms, or in public.

A User-centered Design Process for a Tool to Share Web-based Insights
We set out to design a system that allows users to create a single representation from a small collection of URLs
that result from a complex or exploratory search. We expected the representation to consist of four components:
(1) a  collection of  URLs,   (2) the  relevant   portion of   each URL,    (3) a  semantically  cohesive   title or  meta-
description, and (4) a visual representation that makes this collection easily and quickly understandable.
         Though the system is designed to support social learning of web search expertise, its ostensible goal
was to share insights from exploratory web search. This section describes how the final system, LineHive.com,
evolved through three rounds of user testing. The final design (see Figure 4b) uses an embeddable timeline
representation to   aid in  describing  a  narrative and  constrains  the   set to ensure   all items are  always    visible
simultaneously.

Connecting a Collection of Related URLs
Based on existing practices, the initial design approach was to allow a user to declare a collection of individual
URLs in a manner that closely resembles existing link-sharing practices on micro-blogging services and social
networks. Such practices support sharing results from lookup tasks, i.e., a single URL and an optional user-
generated caption. A title was added to allow the user to describe the collection, as shown in Figure 2.

  Figure 2. Our initial approach allowed a user to define a title for a collection of URLs. Each URL was then
                             added manually with a subtitle (labeled, "your thoughts...").
Figure 3. Our second iteration was a weblog view of a URL sequence. A rich description is included to support
                              writing of a narrative, an `embed code' field is included.

         We asked three university students to create a collection of links using a medium-fidelity prototype of
this system. The primary feedback we received was that commentary or a preface was necessary to describe the
sequence   of URLs.    This  initial prototype did   not  feel sufficiently easy   to create  and share.   We noted   how
disjointed the items were from one another. We reflected upon how, in contrast, user-generated blog posts can
contain multiple URLs yet still feel cohesive because a narrative connects them.

A Weblog View of a URL Collection
Figure 3 depicts the next iteration of the interface, which added a description under the title for narrative or
explanatory   text. The  items   were  laid   out as individual,  short weblog     entries, using  a  well-known     online
metaphor (i.e. blogs). We also added support for reader comments and related `trails' (as they were then called).

© ISLS                                                                                                                  114
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                               Volume I: Long Papers

To support the transfer of these trails as units, we added support for embedding them as an HTML widget (as is
popular with YouTube videos).
          Our team conducted informal feedback sessions with several adults and found a number of problems.
The description field would likely prompt users to type information, making creation prohibitively laborious.
The sequence or relationship between individual URLs in the collection had to be described textually by the
author, resulting in even more text. This extra information would make it time-consuming to read and result in a
reduced ability to be treated as a single structural unit and theme. Similarly, the vertical scrolling required to
view more than two links meant the reader would never see the sequence in its entirety.
          Our approach     to remedy   these issues was  to employ   a  metaphor     that  would constrain   the URL
collections but enable fast inference of the relationship between each URL. This would reduce the amount of
text required to be written.

Weblines: Using Timelines to Represent Insights from Web Navigation
Using  timelines   was  an attempt  to turn  the URL  collection  into a URL     sequence.  The  timeline   is a well-
understood metaphor that includes its own narrative: setting, apex, and resolution along a temporal dimension
with any units. Timelines also connote a story rather than simply a logical collection; timelines are used to
outline stories and they make regular of use of thumbnails, a useful visual element for digital media.
          We refer to these timelines as weblines because they are timelines about web traversals meant to guide
another's sense-making process on the web. That is, individual items must link to URLs, they cannot contain
arbitrary information or events. This constrains what weblines can be used to express but enable readers to
interrogate and re-interpret the source URLs.
          Following Western tradition, the timeline is presented horizontally. This was also done to ensure the
sequence felt like and could be embedded in other webpages more easily. The authoring experience required the
author to add a URL for the webpage and one for the thumbnail. User-defined subtitles of each URL appear on
mouseover as tooltips when the user's mouse hovers atop the thumbnail.
          There are two potential dates to use for each item in a webline: publish date and user access date. Our
initial implementation ignores the latter and attempts to parse the former from the source URL but makes it
user-configurable.
          The result was a highly visual sequence of images meant to tell the story using the imagery alone. In
feedback using a high-fidelity prototype with five users, we found it difficult to create a sequence whose images
alone would be communicative. Figure 4a shows what would be displayed if you viewed one webline alone.
The user's mouse is hovering on the third item from the left. Figure 4b shows a webline embedded in another
webpage (without reader comments and metadata).

Figure 4a. A webpage dedicated to displaying a single webline. Thumbnails depict the items in the collection of
       URLs and a textual description describes the narrative. The reader here is hovering their mouse atop a
                                           thumbnail to reveal the subtitle.
              Figure 4b. A webline embedded in another webpage hides the narrative description.

          Though   the  initial impression of the  page was  less loquacious     and  more  visual  than the previous
iteration, hiding the captions in tooltips meant the users co-opted the description fields to describe the narrative,
again creating an abundance of text. The distinction between webline title and item description prompted users
to type short titles  (3-7 words)  and very   long descriptions. The goal    for the  next revision was  to  make  the
narrative immediately    apparent   by complementing    the thumbnails   with    text and  reducing  reliance  on  the
description field.

© ISLS                                                                                                              115
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                Volume I: Long Papers

Figure 5a. The WYSIWYG authoring interface has essentially two elements: a textbox to paste URLs into and
    the resulting timeline below it. A single box enables the author to add items to the webline. As dates are
                       changed of individual items, their order animates to the new sequence.
 Figure 5b. After entering an item URL, the user can elect to refine the choice of a representative thumbnail. A
    list of thumbnails is presented from the URL in question and the user can paste any image URL as well.

WYSIWYG Authoring of Weblines
A system supporting webline authoring, reading, and embedding is available at LineHive.com. The weblines
authoring interface requires the user to paste desired URLs into a textbox and press [Enter], whereupon they are
added to the webline in WYSIWYG fashion. Hovering over individual items allows the user to refine the date or
change  the  thumbnail.  Crucially,    as dates on  individual items are  changed, their position   on the  timeline is
updated immediately, animating to the new position.
         We also made timeline creation simpler by automatically downloading a thumbnail from the item's
URL (an idea observed in Facebook). Because automatically selecting a representative image is error-prone, the
user can refine the choice or enter the URL of a desired thumbnail image (Figure 5b).
         Three types of time-scale representations were explored: relative (the distance between the items is
proportionate to the duration between them), fixed-interval (all items are displayed at a fixed distance apart ­ see
Figure  6a), and   fixed-interval clusters  (visual indicators are placed  on  the timeline    to represent  significant
durations ­ see Figure 6b). To reduce information complexity, we sacrificed temporal accuracy and used fixed-
interval clusters.
         The  description  was    eliminated  and  renamed to   `caption' to prompt a  descriptive   title. It was also
moved below the timeline, resembling a caption to an illustration, to ensure the author is sufficiently descriptive.

  Figure 6a and b. These two weblines illustrate the difference between fixed-interval and fixed-interval with
    clusters types of time-scale represntations. In (a), the items are placed at fixed intervals regardless of the
          duration between them. In (b), visual `time gap' indicators indicate relatively large durations.

Sharing Weblines by Embedding or Hyperlinking
The    sequence of    webpages    that a  webline   represents is meant   to be  treated as    a  unit of   information
complementing a greater point or standing alone. Each webline has a short URL that can be micro-blogged and
can be embedded as a widget to complement articles or blog posts.

Pilot Study: 60 Collocated Participants in a Classroom Setting
We took a high-fidelity prototype of the design to two 9th grade public high school journalism classrooms in an
affluent area where students were writing reviews of books by conducting Internet research. They were asked to
create timelines to complement their reviews.
         The function and form of the caption was effective at eliciting descriptive but not loquacious titles.
Though   we  expected   these timelines    to be created quickly,  the students voiced   their opinion  to  login, save
drafts, and revisit the timelines they created. In effect, the timelines became valuable narrative representation of

© ISLS                                                                                                               116
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                  Volume I: Long Papers

student thinking and research. They both took longer to create and were more valuable to authors and peers than
expected.
          Frequently, students would create long timelines with over 10 items that required significant horizontal
scrolling, an undesired consequence. They would simply paste links from any URLs they visited during their
research, without regard. These quickly became unwieldy and lost their narrative thread.

Constraining Volume and Length to Form Short-form Timelines
Our team inspected a number of print periodicals for examples of timeline narratives. We observed that short-
form timelines were used frequently to complement articles or even to stand on their own. These short-form
timelines  were constrained     in both volume  (number     of items) and  length   (characters   of   text). Readers   are
accustomed   to them    and   they drew upon   the same  principle  that has  led  to  the success     of micro-blogging:
constraint. We restricted the maximum number of items to 6 and amount of characters to 200 for each subtitle,
and the title to 100 characters (to make room for a URL that could then be micro-blogged).
          By restricting the volume and length of our timelines would both eliminate horizontal scrolling and,
ideally, ensure tighter narratives. By reducing the number of options, authors would have to be selective in their
choice of URLs. All items would be visible on one screen at one time, requiring no scrolling whatsoever. This
became a guiding principle in the system's design.

Evaluation
Our research  question    then  became,   "What characterizes   the nature of    different weblines    and  how  does   the
user's exploratory search process inform this nature?"

Participants, Dataset, and Methodology
We deployed LineHive.com publicly and worked closely with three groups of participants to collect data on
how it was used and the nature of the resulting timelines over the course of three months. The first group N1,
was a classroom of 30 9th grade journalism students. The second group, N2, consisted of 29 journalists for an
online magazine who work remotely from one another and conduct weekly teleconferences (and occasional in-
person meetings) that our team became part of. The third, N3, was a group of 22 students in a university course
on social technologies. The students had weekly reading assignments and, each week, were given the option of
writing an essay or creating a webline. In either case, they were shared publicly with the class and on Twitter. In
total, there were 81 unique users of the tool. In total, 353 weblines were analyzed (including the research teams'
own examples).   We collected and analyzed the weblines created by all these participants.
          We used     a grounded   theory (Glaser, 1992)   approach   to evaluate  how     users expressed    their search
insights. We pruned     a portion  of  weblines that  were  not suitable  for analysis.    The pruning    process   was as
follows. First, we first omitted duplicates and some improper contents such as racist account (which were likely
created by  arbitrary   web   users).  Second, we omitted `test' weblines.        Through   this  pruning     process, 252
timelines remained to be analyzed.
          We then     categorized  weblines based  on communicative      intent. With  these   initial categories,  we  re-
examined the 252 weblines and refined the categories again.          Two category types emerged: "sequence" and
"argument." We then pruned items that our team had contributed, resulting in 195 weblines. Weblines in the
sequence   category     pull together links in  order to  describe  an   event   (e.g. "Major    events    of the   Obama
campaign") or steps in a process while argument weblines are where the author is using links to make a logical
argument or statement (e.g. "How social media changed youth radio").

Results
Among the 195 weblines created, 26 lines deal strictly with chronological report of a current issue (13.3%) (e.g.
Figure 7a). In creating these narratives, authors had to choose the most relevant facts to form a sequence of
events on an issue.     However, chronology of an issue sometimes has longer time span as shown in Figure 7b.
Figure 7a was clearly stimulated by the Olympic Games but is focused on its historical aspect. There are 61
historical weblines of this kind (31.3%).
          A portion of the weblines go beyond just convey a chronology as Figure 7c illustrates. In this case, the
caption delivers creator's argument, and the links are selected as to support the argument, at the same time the
evidences  became     more   comprehensive  when   it is in chronological  order.   22 timelines are fallen into this
category (11.2%).

© ISLS                                                                                                                  117
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                            Volume I: Long Papers

Figure 7a-d, clockwise from top-left.    (a) This webline illustrates a chronological timeline that does not present
 an argument, per se. (b) This webline combines a chronology with an argument. (c) The result of a contextual
 interview we conducted, this webline both makes an argument and presents a chronology of a topic. (d) This
webline does not present a chronology of an event but rather a collection of weblines. The numbers on this latter
                        webline indicate the order in which they were added by the author.

         In a majority of the weblines that illustrate a well-constructed argument, the chronological order of the
URLs is not paramount, as shown in Figure 7d. We labeled this category, which contains 43 weblines (22.0%),
"argument by example."
         We then created a quadrant graph of the weblines with the two dimensions, plotted in Figure 8 (with
counts for each quadrant). One third of timelines made a clear argument but it is not clear whether this type of
argument is formed during the search process or beforehand.

Figure 8. Weblines made using the tool fell into four quadrants along two dimensions: Sequence and Argument.
          The numbers represent counts. Category descriptors on the circles represent sub-categories.

Contextual Interview with an Expert Webline Creator
We conducted a contextual interview with a participant who created multiple high-quality weblines to see how
such insights are developed and transferred into weblines.    We tasked her with making a webline related to her
expertise in youth's use of social media. We asked her to think-aloud (Lewis, 1982) through this process.
         The participant spent 48 minutes talking. We attribute this relatively long duration to the think-aloud
and interjecting we initiated. During this time, she changed URLs 58 times, 11 of which were searches. The
outcome is as Fig. 7d. The number on each link indicates the order in which that link was added to the webline.
This timeline can be plotted in the overlap area between "History" and "Argument by Chronology" in Fig. 8.
The webline  caption    was finalized at the end. Her initial intention evolved significantly over the course of
creation. She frequently mentioned the remaining number of link spots available and ran up to this constraint
repeatedly. Several times throughout the process, she looked at what she had so far and the forced temporal
sequence made her re-evaluate her goal and the most interesting insight to share with the webline.
         Arguments shown in weblines may not be directly attributed as an initial insight but the tool galvanizes
the exploratory search and insights from the search can be expressed as a selection of the items. In effect, a

© ISLS                                                                                                          118
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                 Volume I: Long Papers

number of non-obvious insights can support weblines that are ostensibly made to be arguments or chronologies.
Weblines effectively support not only the transfer of insights but also an insightful search process itself.

Discussion and Next Steps
We learned how the exploratory search process can be represented using a metaphor common to print design:
the short-form   timeline.  By  translating  search  skill development   into   a constructionist (Harel, Papert, 1991)
storytelling tool, authors can create weblines individually or collaboratively. Future studies will determine if
authors develop    exploratory  search   skills by  ensuring their   search process  develops   a narrative arc and,  for
readers, because exploratory search process is represented by an engaging narrative. It is core to the design that
each webline is automatically published in a user's `stream' so that public sharing is the default.
         One reason users iterate on their weblines is because they re-organize themselves based on each link's
publication  date. This    forces  users to  re-evaluate   their choices and  address   gaps. By   having   at least  one
organizing principle (i.e. time), the system enforces a level of coherency in the user's findings.
         Our    representation does   not illustrate the   author's entire  process, as prior work  did,  but  rather the
resulting insight. Thus, the trade-off is that authors are motivated to search enough to produce an insight but that
this process is more opaque to readers. Future work might reveal this process upon request.
         This   study  has  implications  for   how  exploratory    search  systems  are  conceived.  Currently,  search
interfaces  are designed   for solitary  use and   their results are of use  to the  user only; sharing  is a  secondary
consideration. It is interesting to investigate search engines as inherently social systems such that the act of
using it was to create knowledge for oneself and others. By creating knowledge one knows others will consume,
constructionist theory posits that one creates higher-quality artifacts and conducts more insightful searches.

References
Aula,  A.,  Russell,  D.   (2008). Complex      and  Exploratory   Web   Search.   NSF:   Information   Seeking Support
         Systems. UNC Chapel Hill.
Bush, Vannevar. (1945). "As We May Think." The Atlantic Monthly.
Bilal, D. (2000). Children's use of the Yahooligans! Web Search Engine: I. Cognitive, Physical, and Affective
         Behaviors on Fact-Based Search-Tasks. J American Society for Information Sciences, 51.7, 646-5.
Coiro, J. (2003). Rethinking comprehension strategies to better prepare students for critically evaluating content
         on the Internet. New Eng Reading Assoc J, 39, 29-34.
Collins, A., Brown, J.S., Newman, S.E. (1989) Cognitive apprenticeship: Teaching the craft of reading, writing
         and mathematics. Knowing Learning and Instruction, 8.1, 453-94.
Druin,  A., Foss,  E.,    Hutchinson, H., Golub,    E.,  Hatley,  L. (2010).  Children's  roles   using keyword   search
         interfaces at home. Proceedings of CHI 2010.
Gersh,  J., Lewis,    B., Montemayor,    J., Piatko, C.,   Turner,  R.  (2006).   Supporting  insight-based information
         exploration in intelligence analysis. Commun. ACM 49, 4, 63-68.
Glaser, B. (1992). Basics of grounded theory analysis. Mill Valley, CA: Sociology Press.
Gupta,  N.K.,   Rosé,  C.P.  (2010) Understanding     Instructional  Support  Needs   of  Emerging   Internet  Users  for
         Web-based Information Seeking. Journal of Educational Data Mining, 2 (1), 38-82.
Harel, I., Papert, S. (1991). Constructionism. Ablex Publishing.
Hightower, R. R., Ring, L. T., Helfman, J. I., Bederson, B. B., Hollan, J. D. (1998) Graphical multiscale Web
         histories: a study of padprints. Proceedings of Hypertext.
Kuiper, E., Volman, M., Terwel, J. (2005). The Web as an Information Resource in K-12 Education: Strategies
         for Supporting Students. Rev of Educ Res, 75.3, 285-328.
Lave, J. & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated Learning: Legitimate Peripheral Participation. Cambridge Univ Press.
Lazonder, A. (2003). Principles for designing web searching instruction. Educ. & Info Tech., 8.2, 179-93.
Leu, D.J., Zawilinski, L. (2007). The New Literacies of Online Reading Comprehension. JNERA, 43.1, 1-7.
Lewis, C. H. (1982). Using the "Thinking Aloud" Method In Cognitive Interface Design. IBM TR RC-9265.
Lin, X., Liebscher, P. Marchionni, G. (1991). Graphical representations of electronic search patterns, J Amer
         Soc for Info Sci, 42.7, 469-78.
Lin, C., Tsai, C. (2005). Navigation Flow Map Method of Representing Students' Searching Strategies on the
         Web. Proceedings of World Conf on Educational Multimedia, Hypermedia and Telecommunications.
Marchionini, G. (2006). Exploratory search: from finding to understanding. Commun. ACM 49, 4, 41-46.
Twidale, M. B. (2005). Over the Shoulder Learning: Supporting Brief Informal Learning. JCSCW, 14.6.

Acknowledgements
Chigusa Kita's research was supported by Kansai University's Overseas Research Program for the year of 2010.
We thank David Zhang and Amanda Li for interface design support and the reviewers for valuable feedback.
We thank Roy Pea for valuable guidance.

© ISLS                                                                                                                119
