CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                   Volume I: Long Papers

       Facilitating Web Design Skills through Online Design-Based
       Learning: The Case of Collaboration Scripts and Incomplete
                                                 Concept Maps
   Walid El-Refai, Ingo Kollar, Frank Fischer, Ludwig-Maximilians-University (LMU) Munich, Institute of
                             Educational Psychology, Leopoldstr. 13, D - 80802 Munich
               Email: walid.el-refai@psy.lmu.de, ingo.kollar@psy.lmu.de, frank.fischer@psy.lmu.de

         Abstract: Web design skills are an important component of media literacy. The aim of our
         study   was   to promote   university   students' web   design  skills through    online  design-based
         learning     (DBL). Combined      in  a  2x2-factorial  design,  two    types   of  scaffolding   were
         implemented in an online DBL environment to support the students through their effort to
         design, build, modify, and publish web sites on processes and outcomes measures, namely
         collaboration scripts and incomplete concept maps. The results showed that both treatments
         had    positive  effects on   domain-specific     knowledge    acquisition  and    on    content-related
         discourse quality and collaboration skills in a subsequent discussion. There was synergism
         between the two scaffolds in that the combination of the collaboration script and incomplete
         concept maps produced the most positive results. To be effective, online DBL thus needs to be
         enhanced     by  appropriate  scaffolds,  and both  collaboration   scripts and   incomplete    concept
         maps are effective examples.

Web Design Skills as a Component of Media Literacy
Media literacy has become an important competence in our society (Piette & Giroux, 2001). It concerns the
competence to both critically analyze media and to create messages in a wide variety of forms (e.g. print, audio,
video, and multimedia; Hobbs, 1998). Designing web content is one important component of media literacy,
which however receives little attention in college and university education as reflected by empirical evidence
showing   that  web   design skills  of university  students  are   not very  high   (e.g. Shannon,   2008;  Wallace    &
Clariana, 2005).   In  deed, web   design  is  a  challenging  and  complex   process   that requires    learners to  build
complex   web   sites  involving  hyperlinked    documents,   different navigation   systems,     and social information
spaces as well as to account for the possible needs, purposes, and abilities of different users (Spyridakis, Wei,
Barrick, Cuddihy & Maust, 2005). In this study, we investigate how the acquisition of university students' web
design skills can be supported in CSCL environments.

Facilitating Web Design Skills through Online Design-Based Learning
One promising approach to support students' acquisition of web design skills is Design-based Learning (DBL).
DBL has been described as a combination of problem-based learning and inquiry learning and has gained wide-
spread attention in the Learning Sciences (e.g. Fortus, Dershimer, Krajcik, Marx & Mamlok-Naaman, 2004;
Kolodner, 2002). In DBL, students engage in design tasks such as building and creating computer programs,
models, projects, etc. Engaging in such design processes is supposed to support learning of content knowledge
as well   as   the acquisition    of  social   and communicative,       inquiry-related    skills (e.g., communication,
collaboration and problem-solving skills; see Kolodner, 2002). The design task is defined as an ill-structured
problem   that  encourages   students  to  engage  in  design-based   discussions,   which   involves    asking questions,
searching and giving answers, evaluating answers and engaging in discussions about the content. Educational
research  has  developed    quite a  number    of  different DBL-approaches     such   as  Learning   by  Design   (LBD;
Kolodner,  2002),   Design-Based     Science   (DBS;  Fortus  et al., 2004), and   Engineering     Competitions   (Sadler,
Coyle & Schwartz, 2000). In LBD, students go through two cycles of activities. One cycle concerns the design
of the artifact (e.g., designing and building a miniature car that goes from one end of the classroom to the other),
while the other focuses on the investigation of the designed artifacts by means of controlled experiments. In
both   cycles, activities on different  social levels  (individual, small groups,    and   plenary) are  realized  to help
students acquire science knowledge and skills and to benefit from each others' comments and suggestions. We
investigated if DBL can successfully be transferred to online learning and be used to facilitate the acquisition of
web design skills. However, given the complexity of DBL, we were interested in whether students can benefit
from further instructional support measures such as incomplete concept maps and collaboration scripts.

Supporting Online Design-Based Learning through Collaboration Scripts and
Incomplete Concept Maps
As described,   DBL    requires   students to  engage  in  complex    design processes   and  challenging    investigation
processes. In addition, when students work in small groups, they need to engage in high-level collaboration

© ISLS                                                                                                                 120
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                 Volume I: Long Papers

processes that seldom happen spontaneously (Cohen, 1994). Therefore, additional support during online DBL
seems to be promising. There are at least two categories of scaffolding that have a certain potential to improve
online DBL: (a) social scaffolding, that refers to the guidance and structuring of social interactions (Kollar,
Fischer & Hesse, 2006), and (b) content scaffolding, that refers to conceptual support concerning the content of
the task (Cox & Brna, 1995). Our study focuses on (a) computer-supported collaboration scripts as a realization
of social scaffolding and (b) incomplete concept maps as a realization of content-related scaffolding.

Computer-supported Collaboration Scripts
DBL    typically requires  students  to engage   in collaborative  learning  activities through  their investigation. In
LBD, students collaborate in small groups to reach an understanding of the design task at hand, control and
conduct   the  design   process  and   related empirical  investigations,   and effectively  communicate    with  other
learning partners (Kolodner, 2002). Many studies have demonstrated that students often do not collaborate well
and experience difficulties when supposed to engage in high-level collaboration processes (e.g., Cohen, 1994).
If realized online, these problems may even be amplified. As a solution, collaboration scripts are considered
powerful   instructional   interventions.   They    facilitate   high-level  collaboration   processes  by  specifying,
sequencing and distributing learning activities and roles among learners in a small group (Kollar et al., 2006).
For example,   Kollar,   Fischer   and Slotta  (2007)   demonstrated  that  collaboration  scripts are able to improve
collaboration processes and individual learning outcomes through structuring the interactive processes between
learning partners. Moreover, collaboration scripts may facilitate communicative-coordinative processes between
students  and  guide   them through    complex   learning  processes  (Haake    &  Schümmer,    2003;  Hoppe,  Gaßner,
Mühlenbrock & Tewissen, 2000). With respect to knowledge acquisition, there is evidence that collaboration
scripts can   positively affect  especially  the acquisition   of more  domain-general     knowledge,   but if properly
designed also may facilitate the acquisition of domain-specific knowledge (Weinberger, Stegmann & Fischer,
2010).  Based  on  this, we  expected   that   implementing    a collaboration  script in an online  DBL    environment
would lead to more domain-specific knowledge concerning learning content and domain-general knowledge on
collaboration than unstructured collaboration.

Incomplete Concept Maps
In online DBL, students have to acquire science concepts and realize their mutual relations, after that connect
them with ideas about research and design, and finally organize their ideas for addressing the challenge (Vattam
&  Kolodner,   2006).   To help    achieve this, shared  external  representations that   provide  students with visual
representations of the to-be-learned content have been demonstrated useful (e.g., Suthers, 2003). In online DBL,
one  type   of   shared  external  representations   that  may    be useful   are  concept   maps,   which   are visual
representations that graphically depict relations between concepts (Baker, 2003; Cox & Brna, 1995). Studies on
the use of concept maps and graphical organizers indicate positive effects on comprehension of content (e.g.
Romance    &   Vitale, 2002), intensive    discourse about  content  (Fischer,  Bruhn,  Gräsel,  &  Mandl,  2002), and
content quality of discussions (Jacobson & Levin, 1995; Suthers, 2003). One strength of using concept maps lies
in the graphic representation to visualize and manage domain-specific knowledge necessary for the design task
(Tergan & Keller, 2005), which enables students to understand and remember complex information and abstract
concept relationships (Armstrong, 2003) as well as to organize and communicate their ideas and thoughts (Cox
& Brna, 1995; Jonassen, Beissner, & Yacci, 1993). Even more, concept maps that involve missing concepts and
relationships  can increase  students'  activities  for seeking  missing  information,    which in turn may   positively
affect learning outcomes (Baker, 2003). Thus, in this study we used incomplete concept maps and implemented
them   in an  online  DBL   environment.    We   expected  that  incomplete  concept    maps would   increase  students'
discussions about content and thus lead to higher levels of domain specific knowledge and collaboration skills
than unsupported DBL.

Research Questions and Hypotheses
In this study we examined to what extent a collaboration script and incomplete concept maps as well as their
combination affect (1) the acquisition of domain-specific knowledge and domain-specific skills related to the
design and building of web sites and (2) the content-related discourse quality and collaboration skills shown in
a subsequent   collaborative  transfer  task.  We   expected   positive effects of both   treatments on  both  kinds  of
outcomes and hypothesized the combination of collaboration script and incomplete concept maps to lead to the
highest results in the post tests.

Method

Participants

© ISLS                                                                                                                121
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                              Volume I: Long Papers

100 students from the Educational Technology Department of Tanta University (Egypt) participated in the study
in winter term of 2009. 15 participants were male, and 85 participants were female (MAge = 20.00, SD = .71).
Their task was to design, build and publish tourist web sites about Egypt by aid of the software "FrontPage".

Design
An experimental    2x2-factorial  design   was   established with the collaboration   script (without  vs. with)   and
incomplete concept maps (without vs. with) as independent variables (see table 1). The students were randomly
assigned to dyads which were then randomly assigned to one of the four conditions.

Table 1: Design of the empirical study.

                                                                  Collaboration Script
                                                      Without                                With
       Incomplete         Without                 N= 20 (10 dyads)                    N= 24 (12 dyads)
       Concept Map          With                  N= 24 (12 dyads)                    N= 32 (16 dyads)

Setting and Learning Environment
The students participated in an Arabic online DBL environment, the design of which was inspired by the LBD
approach (Kolodner, 2002). In each condition, the online DBL environment was divided into three sections (see
figure 1). The left part of the screen (1) included tutorial videos about how to use the learning environment. The
middle section (2) involved the course instructions, a news forum, and links to the learning phases, which in
accordance with the course schedule appeared in a sequential order. The right section (3) included a range of
communication tools (chat rooms, Wiki pages, and emails) to be used by the students and the teacher.

                                          Figure 1. Screenshot of the Online DBL.
         Each dyad had a private chat room, in which eitiher a collaboration script, an incomplete concept map,
both or none of the two were integrated (see below). Moreover, each dyad had a private Wiki page to receive
comments,    questions,  and answers     from other  groups  during designated  sessions  in  which  each  dyad    was
supposed  to  evaluate  the web   sites  created by  one other group. The  role of the  teacher  was   to provide  the
students with all details about the task and instructions for each learning phase as well as technical support for
the students during the learning phases.
         The learning scenario included five phases. (1) The first phase started with the teacher providing the
design  task  to the   students, namely   to  create tourist websites on   Egypt. Then,  the    students  started their
investigation by  looking   at   both good   and poor  tourist web  site examples,  based    on specific  constructive
standards for  designing    web   sites, which   were extracted  from  the literature and    presented in  the online
environment (e.g., Harbeck & Sherman, 1999; Powell, 2001). (2) The second phase was devoted to learn about
"FrontPage" software and the constructive standards for designing web sites by providing nine online tutorial
lessons. At the end of each lesson, there was a small group discussion during which the different treatments
were implemented. (3) Through the third phase, each dyad developed and discussed a plan for their web site and
sent it to other groups before the group session. (4) During the fourth phase, each dyad built and published their
web sites individually, then discussed, compared, and decided which of the two to represent their group. (5) In

© ISLS                                                                                                              122
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                              Volume I: Long Papers

the fifth phase, each dyad had the opportunity to modify, rebuild, and republish their web site. In each of these
phases, the students worked individually, in small groups (dyads), and in plenary sessions. The treatment was
provided during the small groups discussions.

Procedure
First, pre-tests served to determine prior domain-specific knowledge and domain-specific skills related to the
design  and  building   of   web  sites. Subsequently,  the   student  dyads  were introduced   to the online   DBL
environment. Afterwards, they participated in the learning phases for an overall of 41 days. In each learning
phase, the students started their work individually, then conducted small group (dyadic) discussions (depending
on the experimental condition with or without collaboration scripts and incomplete concept maps), and at the
end of each phase, plenary sessions were conducted. In the final phase the students took two post-tests: post-test
1 was realized as an unstructured chat session to measure content-related discourse quality and collaboration
skills employed in a subsequent online discussion, and post-test 2 was a test on domain-specific knowledge and
domain-specific skills related to the design and building of web sites.

Experimental Conditions
The experimental design of this study consisted of the following four conditions:
         (1) In the control condition, groups did not receive scaffolds during their small group discussions and
thus led unstructured discussions using regular chat facilities.
         (2) Groups in the condition with collaboration script only received a collection of interaction-related
prompts to structure their collaborative discussions. The collaboration script involved different activities and
roles for each student during the small group' discussions (see figure 2): (a) first, student 1 was instructed to ask
a design-related question, (b) which student 2 then was supposed to answer. Then (c) student 1 was asked to
either accept the answer with or without comment(s) or to refuse the answer with or without justification(s).
After that (d) student 2 could either accept his/her partner's answer with or without comment(s) or refuse his/her
partner's answer with or without justification(s). Finally (e) the discussion between dyads about the questions
repeated until both students agreed on the same answer. After that the students' roles were switched to start a
new cycle of the collaboration script (student 2 asks a new question and student 1 gives answer, etc.).

 Figure 2. Visual Representation Shows Sequence of              Figure 3. Chat Room Supported with the Computer-
    the Computer-supported Collaboration Script.                           supported Collaboration Script.

         In this condition, each chat room was equipped with the script (see figure 3). The right side of the chat
room   (discussion    area) was where    students could send   and receive  messages from   their  partner, while the
collaboration script was located in the left side of the screen. The collaboration script section was divided into
two parts: the upper part presented a visual representation of the script, while the bottom part involved specific
prompts (based on the work by King, 1989) to assure a high level of discussion. There were prompts concerning
questions (e.g. "Explain how...?" "What is the best...?" "Why...?"), answers (e.g. "I think the answer is...",
"From my perspective..."), and reactions to answers (e.g. "I support this answer", "I agree but...", "I disagree
because..."). The     prompts   were changed  automatically    according to the student's role after sending  his/her
message to his/her partner. In addition, the student was not allowed to write his/her message in the discussion
area before selecting a prompt that was associated with his/her role.
         (3) In the   condition  with  incomplete   concept   maps only, groups were provided   with  12 incomplete
concept  maps,  one    for  each  chat   session. Each  concept  map   involved the  key  concepts,  principles,  and
propositions  related  to   the contents  of the   particular learning phase, which  were   listed and ranked    in a
hierarchical order. Each level of the concept maps had the same color, shape (e.g. circles, oval, or rectangle),
and size. Lines and arrows were used to indicate relationships between the concepts. We also put verbs on each
arrow to clarify the kind of relationship between the two concepts. Each concept map therefore represented a

© ISLS                                                                                                             123
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                        Volume I: Long Papers

group of related concepts. In each group, some boxes and arrows were not named to evoke students' discussions
about this missing information (see figure 4) and to force them to discuss all sections of the map. Students
explicitly had the task to fill in blank spots in the concept map. The missing concepts were varied between
specific concepts     that related more     to the topic (e.g.  bookmarks,     hotspot   area,  DHTML      effects) as  well as
intermediate    (e.g. hyperlinks,  Marque,     jump    menus),    and  general  concepts    (e.g. toolbars,    multimedia, and
interface)   that  focus on   specific  content.   The  missing   verbs  were   limited    to relationships    between specific
concepts (e.g. verb "create" to express the relationship from "image maps" concept to "hotspot area" concept) or
between    specific   concepts   with     intermediate   and/or   general   concepts    (e.g.  verb    "write" to  express   the
relationship from "Marque" as intermediate concept to "Marque text" as specific concept).

   Figure 4. Screenshot of Incomplete Concept Map (Representations in Bubbles and Square Boxes Serve as
                                 Caption and were Not Presented in the Concept Map).

          (4)   In the   combined      condition,  the  students   were   supported     with  both   the  computer-supported
collaboration script and incomplete concept maps during their small group discussions.

Dependent Variables and Instruments
Two    tests were  used    to assess   different  learning outcomes:    Post    test 1  measured    content-related  discourse
quality  and  collaboration     skills in a  subsequent  collaborative    transfer   task; post test   2 assessed  individuals'
factual knowledge and skills on web design.
           With    respect  to  content-related    discourse   quality and  collaboration      skills, we  analyzed  the   final
discussion   in each   small    group, which   was    realized without  treatment.    Trained   coders   first segmented   each
discourse into meaningful sentences and rated the segments (total agreement = 86 %). To assess content-related
discourse    quality, a  coding   scheme    was   developed    to capture   what  web-design    concepts     were  used during
discussions   (Cohen's        =  .71). The   number   of used   concepts  during     the final chat    discussion  was used  as
indicator  for  content-related    discourse   quality.  With   respect  to collaboration      skills, a coding    scheme  was
developed    to   identify the   different  kinds  of questions   (Cohen's      =    .97), answers     (Cohen's    = .76), and
reactions to answers (Cohen's  = .83) that were suggested by the collaboration script. After that, a principal
component analysis (PCA) with all 16 variables was performed resulting in two factors which were used to
describe  two   different  dimensions     of collaboration   skills. The  first factor   included   the  categories "accepting
answers   with    comment(s)"    and    "refusing  answers    with   justification(s)",  which  we     labeled as  "elaborative
dimension    of   collaboration   skills".  The   second  factor  included   only    one   variable,   which   was  "evaluation
questions". Thus, this factor was labeled "metacognitive dimension of collaboration skills".
          Post test 2 measured both domain-specific factual knowledge and domain-specific skills of web design.
The factual   knowledge     test consisted   of  66 multiple   choice  questions     directed  towards   the functionalities of
FrontPage. The application-oriented knowledge test assessed students' Web-design skills when using FrontPage
software. To that end, they were asked to perform the different functions of FrontPage and could reach between
0 (the  action  could   not   be performed)    and  2  points  (the  action was   performed     correctly) for  each function.
Reliabilities were sufficient ( = .72 for factual knowledge test,  = .96 for application-oriented knowledge test).

Results

Collaboration Skills and Domain-Specific Discourse Quality
Table 2 presents the mean scores and standard deviations concerning collaboration skills and domain-specific
discourse quality in the subsequent collaborative transfer task for the four experimental conditions.

© ISLS                                                                                                                       124
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                   Volume I: Long Papers

An ANCOVA        with   the   collaboration  script  and  the  incomplete   concept   maps   as  fixed   factors and   the
elaborative  dimension    of  collaboration   skills exhibited  in the  final  unstructured chat  session   as dependent
variable as well as the total number of discourse segments as a covariate revealed significant and positive main
effects for both treatments (F(1.46) =17.30, p < .001, Eta² = .28 for collaboration script, and F(1,46)=7.43, p <
.001, Eta² = .14 for incomplete concept maps), and their interaction (F(1,46)=20.69, p < .001, Eta² = .32). An
analogous   ANCOVA        with   the metacognitive      dimension    of collaboration   skills  exhibited   in   the  final
unstructured  chat    session as dependent    variable  revealed   significant and positive  main   effects only  for  the
collaboration script   (F(1.46)  =4.60,   p  < .001,    Eta² = .09). The  interaction  effect   did not  reach   statistical
significance (F(1,46) =.14, n.s.). An ANCOVA with the collaboration script and the incomplete concept maps
as fixed factors and the domain-specific discourse quality as dependent variable as well as the total number of
discourse segments as a covariate revealed significant and positive main effects for both treatments (F(1,46)
=13.30, p < .001, Eta² = .23 for collaboration script, and F(1,46)=45.11, p < .001, Eta² = .50 for incomplete
concept maps). The interaction effect did not reach statistical significance (F(1,46) =.24, n.s.). Due to significant
effects on the Levene's test on homogeneity of variances, the effects were re-tested with non-parametrical tests
(Kruskal-Wallis test and Mann-Whitney U-test), confirming the results of the ANCOVAs.

Table  2: Mean    scores  (standard   deviations     in brackets)  concerning    collaboration   skills (elaborative  and
metacognitive dimension) and domain-specific discourse quality in the subsequent collaborative transfer task
for the four experimental conditions.

                                  controlgroup  collaboration scriptonly  incomplete conceptmaps onlycollaboration scriptand incompleteconcept maps
                                 M (SD)                 M (SD)                   M (SD)                     M (SD)
   Collaboration skills(elaborative dimension)- .75 (.22)-.56 (.42)             -.47 (.21)                1.24 (.79)
   Collaboration skills(metacognitive dimension)- .75 (.10)- .03 (.88)          - .45 (.29)               .83 (1.16)
Domain-specific discoursequality 6.40 (2.22)         16.75 (9.44)               9.08 (.79)               20.38 (6.77)

Acquisition of Domain-Specific Knowledge and Skills
For domain-specific factual knowledge about FrontPage software and standards for designing web sites (mean
scores  see Fig. 5),  the results showed     significant and   positive effects  for both   the collaboration  script and
incomplete concept maps. An ANCOVA with the collaboration script and the incomplete concept maps as fixed
factors, group membership as further independent factor nested within the experimental conditions (to account
for interdependencies in the data of the two learners in a group), the post test scores in the factual knowledge
test as dependent variable and the pre test scores as a covariate showed stronger effects for incomplete concept
maps (F(1,95) = 28.13, p < .001, Eta² = .37) than for the collaboration script (F(1,95) = 11.94, p < .001, Eta² =
.20). The interaction effect did not reach statistical significance (F(1,95) = 2.30; n.s.). Thus, the combination of
collaboration script and incomplete concept maps led to the highest levels of knowledge acquisition.

 Figure 5. Mean Scores (Standard Deviations in                     Figure 6. Mean Scores (Standard Deviations in
    Brackets) in the Test on Domain-Specific                       Brackets) in the Test on Domain-Specific Web
        Factual Knowledge across the Four                           Design Skills across the Four Experimental.
                      Experimental.

© ISLS                                                                                                                 125
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                       Volume I: Long Papers

         A similar pattern was found with respect to the acquisition of web design skills (mean scores see Fig.
6). An   ANCOVA          with the  collaboration   script and    the incomplete     concept    map  as fixed   factors, group
membership as further independent factor nested within the experimental conditions, the post test scores in the
Web-design     skills test  as  dependent    variable and  the   pre test scores    as a  covariate  showed   significant   and
positive main effects for both treatments (F(1,95) = 21.90, p < .001, Eta² = .31 for incomplete concept maps,
and  F(1,95)   =   27.61, p   < .001,   Eta² = .36 for   the collaboration   script),  but no   significant interaction   effect
(F(1,95) < 1; n.s.). Thus again, additive effects for both treatments with respect to web design skills were found.

Discussion
Overall,   our results   support   quite  clearly  our   expectation  that  online   DBL    can  be  improved    by  adequate
scaffolding. When considering the results in the unstructured control condition and comparing them to the other
three  conditions,    it is   confirmed  that  additional    scaffolding    can improve     learners'  knowledge     and   skill
acquisition in online DBL. As our study indicates, implementing social and content scaffolds in an online DBL
environment    are  powerful    means    to  improve   collaboration  skills  and   content-related   discourse  quality   in a
subsequent collaborative transfer task as well as the acquisition of factual knowledge and skills on web design.
Obviously, and in line with prior research (Kollar et al, 2007; Weinberger, Ertl, Fischer & Mandl, 2005), the
collaboration script we used seemingly helped learners lead more sophisticated discussions, which in turn may
have   led  to the  acquisition    of   domain-specific   factual  knowledge     and   web-design     skills. This  is  a  very
encouraging    finding   since  many    laboratory   studies  on collaboration   scripts   in CSCL    contexts  failed  to  find
positive effects   on more     domain-specific    outcomes.   Perhaps,   compared      to early studies, the  more   extensive
learning   phase   employed     in this study  employed   may    have  promoted     such   positive effects.  Yet, to  test the
underlying process assumptions, in-depth process analyses are necessary, which are currently under way.
         In line with results of studies on the collaborative use of concept mapping techniques (e.g. Fischer et
al., 2002), the incomplete concept map provided the students with effective conceptual support concerning the
domain-specific content of the task. This may have facilitated the content-related, but in parts also the social-
interactive level of the discussions between students (Jacobson & Levin, 1995) during their work in the online
DBL environment (Tergan & Keller, 2005). Also, these higher levels of discussion and collaboration obviously
may have been responsible for enabling students to acquire both factual knowledge on Web-design concepts and
web-design skills. Yet again, process analyses are needed to confirm these process assumptions.
         With respect to the question how collaboration scripts and incomplete concept maps work together in
online DBL, we found a results pattern that can be described as a nice materialization of what Tabak (2004)
called "synergistic scaffolding". On almost all dependent variables we found the combination of collaboration
script and incomplete concept maps to evoke the most favorable results, going beyond what could be achieved
by  each   of  the two   scaffolds  alone.   Thus,   our results make     a strong  case   for  augmenting    online  DBL   by
scaffolding measures directed at both the interactional and the content-related level. A limitation of our study,
however, may lie in the measurement of web-design knowledge and skills, since our operationalizations merely
relied on   rather context-free,    one-dimensional    measures.     For  example,    measuring   the  acquisition  of  design
knowledge according to different categories such as stages, values, roles, principles, patterns, techniques, and
design psychology, as suggested by Hoadley and Cox (2009), might be a valuable alternative to our approach.

References
Armstrong,     S.  (2003).  Snapshots:    Educational    insights from    the   Thornburg     Center.  Lake   Barrington,   IL:
         Thornburg Center.
Baker, M. (2003). Computer-mediated argumentative interactions for the co-elaboration of scientific notations.
         In   J.  Andriessen,   M.    Baker   &   D.  Suthers  (Eds.),   Arguing    to Learn:   Confronting    Cognitions     in
         Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning Environments (pp. 47-78): Dordrecht, The Netherlands:
         Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Brem, S. K., & Rips, L. J. (2000). Explanation and evidence in informal argument. Cognitive Science, 24(4),
         573-604.
Brown,   J. (1991).   Television    critical viewing   skills education:    Major   media   literacy  projects in  the  United
         States and selected countries: Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Cohen,   E.   G.   (1994).    Restructuring   the  classroom:    Conditions     for productive   small   groups.   Review     of
         Educational Research, 64(1), 1-35.
Cox, R., & Brna, P. (1995). Supporting the use of external representations in problem solving: the need for
         flexible learning environments. Journal for Artificial Intelligence in Education, 6, 239-302.
Crismond, D., Camp, P. J., Ryan, M., & Kolodner, J. L. (2001). Design Rules of Thumb - Connecting Science
         and Design. Paper presented at the AERA, Seattle, WA, April 2001.
Fischer, F., Bruhn, J., Grasel, C., & Mandl, H. (2002). Fostering collaborative knowledge construction with
         visualization tools. Learning and Instruction, 12(2), 213-232.

© ISLS                                                                                                                      126
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                Volume I: Long Papers

Fortus, D., Dershimer, R., Krajcik, J., & Mamlok-Naaman, R. (2004, November). Design-based science and
         student learning. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 41(10), 1081 ­ 1110.
Haake, J. M., & Schümmer, T. (2003). Supporting collaborative exercises for distance learning. In B. Wasson,
         S. Ludvigsen & U. Hoppe (Eds.), Designing for Change in Networked Learning Environments (pp.
         125-134). Dordrecht: Kluwer.
Harbeck, J., & Sherman, T. (1999). Seven Principles for Designing, Developmentally, Appropriate Web sites
         for Young Children. Educational Technology, 39(4), 39-44.
Hoadley,   C., &   Cox, C.  D.  (2009).   What  is  design knowledge   and   how do   we teach  it? In C. DiGiano, S.
         Goldman      & M.    Chorost   (Eds.), Educating  learning   technology   designers:  Guiding  and  inspiring
         creators of innovative educational tools (pp. 19­35). New York: Routledge.
Hobbs, R. (1998). Building citizenship skills through media literacy education. In M. Salvador & P. Sias (Eds.),
         The Public Voice in a Democracy at Risk (pp. 57-76): Westport, CT: Praeger Press.
Hoppe, H. U., Gaßner, K., Mühlenbrock, M., & Tewissen, F. (2000). Distributed visual language environments
         for cooperation and learning. Journal Group Decision and Negotiation, 9(3), 205-220.
Jacobson, M. J., & Levin, J. A. (1995). Conceptual frameworks for network learning environments: constructing
         personal   and    shared knowledge     spaces. International Journal  of  Educational    Telecommunications,
         1(4), 367-388.
Jonassen,   D.  H.,   Beissner, K.,   &  Yacci, M.    (1993). Structural  Knowledge:   Techniques   for Representing,
         Conveying, and Acquiring Structural Knowledge: Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
King,  A.   (1989).   Effects of  Self-Questioning    Training  on College   Students'  Comprehension     of Lectures.
         Contemporary Educational Psychology, 14, 366-381.
Kollar, I., Fischer, F. & Slotta, J. D. (2007). Internal and external scripts in computer-supported collaborative
         inquiry learning. Learning & Instruction, 17(6), 708-721.
Kollar, I., Fischer,   F., &  Hesse,   F. W.    (2006). Collaboration scripts  - a conceptual   analysis. Educational
         Psychology Review, 18(2), 159-185.
Kolodner, J. L. (2002). Facilitating the Learning of Design Practices: Lessons Learned from an Inquiry into
         Science Education. Journal of Industrial Teacher Education, 39(3), 1-31.
Piette, J., & Giroux, L. (2001). The theoretical foundations of media education programs. In R. W. Kubey (Ed.),
         Media   Literacy   in  the   Information  Age:  Current  Perspectives   (pp. 89-134):  New    Brunswick, NJ:
         Transaction Publishers.
Powell, G. C. (2001). The ABCs of Online Course Design. Educational Technology, 41(4), 43-47.
Romance, N. R., & Vitale, M. R. (2002). Concept mapping as a tool for learning. College Teaching, 47(2), 74-
         79.
Sadler, P. M., Coyle, H. P., & Schwartz, M. (2000). Engineering Competitions in the Middle School Classroom:
         Key   Elements    in Developing   Effective    Design  Challenges.  The Journal  of  the Learning   Ssciences,
         9(3), 299­327.
Scott,  S.  (1995).   The   technological   challenge    for  curriculum   and   instruction. Journalism   and   Mass
         Communication Educator, 2, 30-37.
Shannon, L. (2008). Information and communication technology literacy issues in higher education. Information
         Systems Education Journal, 6(23), 1-13.
Spyridakis, J. H., Wei, C., Barrick, J., Cuddihy, E., & Maust, B. (2005). Internet-based Research: Providing a
         Foundation for Web Design Guidelines. IEEE Transactions on Professional Communication, 48(3),
         242 - 260.
Suthers, D. D. (2003). Representational Guidance for Collaborative Learning. In H. U. Hoppe, F. Verdejo & J.
         Kay (Eds.), Artificial Intelligence in Education (pp. 3-10). Amsterdam: IOS Press.
Tabak,  I.  (2004).   Synergy:  A   complement     to emerging   patterns of distributed scaffolding.  Journal of the
         Learning Sciences, 13(3), 305­335.
Tergan, S.-O., & Keller, T. (Eds.) (2005). Knowledge and information visualization ­ Searching for synergies.
         Heidelberg: Springer.
Vattam,  S.  S., &    Kolodner,   J.  L. (2006).   Design-based   science learning:   Important   challenges and  how
         technology can make a difference. Paper presented at the Paper presented at International Conference
         of the Learning Sciences.
Wallace, P., & Clariana, R. (2005). Perception versus reality: Determining business students' computer literacy
         skills  and   need   for instruction   in information   concepts  and   technology.  Journal  of Information
         Technology, 4, 141-150.
Weinberger,    A.,  Stegmann,     K., &   Fischer, F.   (2010). Learning  to argue  online:   Scripted groups  surpass
         individuals (unscripted groups do not). Computers in Human Behavior, 26, 506-515.
Weinberger, A., Ertl, B., Fischer, F., & Mandl, H. (2005). Epistemic and social scripts in computer-supported
         collaborative learning. Instructional Science, 33(1), 1-30.

© ISLS                                                                                                              127
