CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                              Volume I: Long Papers

        The Interactional Organisation of Location-based Gaming
  Jo Dugstad Wake, Frode Guribye, Barbara Wasson, Department of Information Science and Media Studies,
                               University of Bergen. Fosswinckelsgate 6, 5007 Bergen.
Email: jo.wake@infomedia.uib.no, frode.guribye@infomedia.uib.no, barbara.wasson@infomedia.uib.no

          Abstract:   This  paper   describes a  study   aimed  at  gaining insight  into the interactional
          accomplishment    of  collaborative game  play.   Mobile,  location-based  games   are commonly
          believed to hold great potential for creating novel and immersive learning experiences, but
          little have been done to unravel the practical details of how such games are actually played.
          To address this issue, a mobile, location-based game for teaching and learning history have
          been designed, deployed and the participants' activities were video taped. The focus of the
          study is how the participants make use of the resources available in the game space and how
          these resources,    including the   historical narrative, feature in   the participants' practical
          accomplishment of the game.

Introduction
This paper describes a study aimed at gaining further insight into the interactional organisation and practical
accomplishment of collaborative game play. A location-based game for learning history has been designed and
deployed and we have video taped students playing the game. The analysis focuses on how the participants used
the resources available to them in the game space: the game itself on the GPS-enabled mobile phone, and the
urban environment and physical surroundings. Playing the game involves moving around in a city landscape
and focus is also set on how the participants make these resources available for each other and how they engage
with the material presented in the game instructions. This includes how the participants relate to the historical
narrative presented in the game, in and through their interaction, and how this is seen in relation to the historical
aspects of actual  locations   and  surroundings. Much     of the game  play  is constituted of  mundane,  everyday
activities such as way finding and orientation in the urban environment, and attention is also set on how these
activities are interactionally accomplished and how the resources and their knowledge of the local geography
feature in the activity.
          The text has the following structure. The first section is dedicated to a short review of relevant studies,
such as studies entailing the use of mobile technology and games within the field of CSCL, and video-based
research. Then we describe SILO, our technological architecture for creating mobile games, and the mobile
game, Premierløitnant Bielke (PB). Next we present our study, including the research focus and methodological
approach, and the analysis. Finally we present and discuss our findings.

Mobile, Location-based Computer Games and Learning
The use of mobile technology to support collaborative learning has been discussed within the field of CSCL for
almost  a decade  (see   e.g., Roschelle &  Pea  2002;   Roschelle,  Rosas  &  Nussbaum,   2005).  Tools  have been
developed and studied, both to support collaboration in the classroom (Chang, Wang, Chen & Liang, 2009;
White, 2006), and to provide support when moving into the field (Lyons, 2009; Yatani, Sugimoto & Kusunoki,
2004; Tan, Liu & Chang, 2007).
          Computer games have also become increasingly used and studied for their educational potential (e.g.,
McFarlane, Sparrowhawk & Heald, 2002; Kirriemuir & McFarlane, 2004; Shute, Rieber, & Van Eck, in press),
also within the field of CSCL (e.g., Ke, 2007; Rosenbaum, Klopfer, Broughner & Rosencheck, 2007; Satwitcz
& Stevens,  2007;     Klopfer, Perry, Squire, Jan &  Steinkuehler,   2005). Bennerstedt   and Linderoth   (2009),   for
example, have studied gamers' practices within multiplayer online role-playing games to discover how they are
dependent on generic social skills such as use of language. They approach the game of World of Worldcraft as a
knowledge domain, and through the use of interaction analysis they show how the participants in the game
"make visible what they see as relevant knowledge objects" (Bennerstedt & Linderoth, 2009, p. 410).
          The terms ubiquitous and pervasive computing shares a high degree of similarity (Dourish, 2004), and
have been used to refer to technology and computer use that is not limited to taking place in front of a screen
connected to a stationary computer. Technologically, pervasive computing usually relies on devices for sensing
and positioning   the   user,  such as  GPS   or Mobile    network  base stations,   and devices   for facilitating an
information exchange dependent on the user's location, such as RFID tags, 2D barcodes or Bluetooth.
          Mobile, location-based games, refers to a subcategory of ubiquitous and pervasive computing. In such
games the physical and cultural surroundings, for example an urban area, are made an integral part of the game
space and the location of the gamers is a key aspect of the game-playing activity. The games add a digital layer
to these environments, creating a game space where players can explore familiar urban spaces in a new context.
Thus, location-based, mobile games represent a new kind of game compared to both traditional console-games

© ISLS                                                                                                              136
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                       Volume I: Long Papers

and  physical    games;  one   that has   potential  for  providing   novel   learning   environments,       for example   by
facilitating the embedding     of  (abstract)  concepts   in the contexts    of their actual use     (Kurti,  Spikol,  Milrad,
Svensson & Petterson, 2007; Kurti, Milrad & Spikol, 2007).
         Little have been done, however, to unravel the practical details of how such games are actually played,
and subjected gaming activity in mobile, location-based games to detailed empirical analysis at the level of
interaction. Such analyses have the potential to reveal the interactional organization of the game-play and how
different aspects of a given game are made relevant in situ. As mentioned above, the analysis presented in this
paper aims at offering this kind of insight into the practical accomplishment and interactional organisation of
gaming. There is a body of research inspired by ethnomethodology and conversation analysis relevant for this
study, especially studies where the use of technological resources features as a central component in the analysis
(e.g., Heath & Luff, 2000; Suchman, 2007). A key issue in these studies is the use of video recordings in the
analysis (Heath,   Hindmarsh    &   Luff,   2010). Recently,   the use   of  video-based   research     has  gained  a certain
momentum in CSCL and the learning sciences (for a recent overview see Derry, et al., 2010). As Koschmann,
Stahl  and   Zemel  (2006),  point  out, a  key analytical   commitment      in such  studies     is "to discover  within  the
recorded materials what the members are actually accomplishing (...) and are making relevant (...) through their
interaction" (Koschmann, Stahl & Zemel, 2006, p. 7).
         Goodwin (1994), in doing a detailed study of the field work of archaeologists, shows how they make
certain aspects of their physical surroundings relevant and visible to each other in interaction, and in this way
highlight objects as relevant in the given context. While Goodwin's study is focused on activities that take place
in a  relatively limited area,  his   insights are  still relevant for   understanding   how      participants,  through  their
interaction as they move through an urban area, give relevance to different aspects of their surroundings and
thereby  how   they   perceive  these surroundings.  Recently,     Brown    and colleagues   (Brown      &   Chalmers,   2003;
Brown & Laurier, 2005; Brown, et al., 2005) carried out a series of ethnomethodological studies of mobile
technologies that ranged from simple paper maps to hand held tablet computers. These studies highlight how the
participants  organised  their  way-finding    and  navigation,  how   they  oriented   themselves      in their geographical
surroundings and how they made use of the different available resources. This was all studied at a detailed level
of interaction   and  shows  how    such activities  are  practically accomplished      and how      the use  of navigational
resources such as a map features in the organisation of these activities. All the above-mentioned studies have
informed the analysis presented below. First a description of the game design is presented.

SILO and Premierløitnant Bielke
Premierløitnant Bielke (PB) is a mobile, location-based game for teaching and learning history. It builds on
several technological resources, and was created using the SILO system. This section briefly describes SILO
and PB (see Wake & Baggetun (2009) for a more detailed account of both).
         SILO is a web-based system for creating mobile, location-based games. It permits a game creator to
construct a storyline as a set of missions, and attach the different missions to different locations, by clicking on a
map, displayed on the screen. Aside from the storyline, the game creator can add icons and set limitations on
time, and configure user data, in addition to a maximum of three hints on how to find each location. When all
the parameters of a game are specified, they are put in a zip-file that can be transfered to the phone. The mobile
application then unwraps the game parameter file, and creates a game. SILO is designed to be easy to use,
making it possible for non-technically oriented persons to create games, for example teachers who have an idea
for a location-based game for their students.
         When    the  game   is being   played  the  application   displays  a  mission    (i.e., a  description  of  the next
location from the storyline), a marker indicating the participant's current location and the number of meters to
the next location, a scrollable map (see Figure 1a), and a track displaying the history of their movement, a set of
icons indicating progress in the game, and their current score. While the game is being played the application is
constantly   calculating the   distance  to the next location.   This    is displayed   in red    until  the players  near the
location ­ when it turns green and they can pick-up the location (see Figure 1b). They are then congratulated
and offered a text that describes the next location (see Figure 1c). The game then pauses, to allow the group to
think about what to do next, and an icon signalling that they have picked up the previous location is displayed
(see  Figure  1d). The   game   is  over  when   the last    mission  is solved  (i.e., the last     location is found).   The
application continually saves game data so that the game can be restarted and continued from where a game was
left (e.g., if a participant accidentally switches off the phone, the participants can restart the game, and continue
from where they left off).

© ISLS                                                                                                                     137
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                            Volume I: Long Papers

           (a)                            (b)                          (c)                        (d)
                            Figure 1. The Mobile Interface of a Game Created by SILO.

The PB Storyline: Bergen during the Napoleonic Wars
The main idea behind the game PB is to use both the concrete geographical surroundings relevant to a historical
setting, and a storyline about the same setting in a game, creating an ad hoc museum for the purpose of teaching
and learning (Wake & Baggetun, 2009). Thus, a novel and immersive experience of history is provided, in a
way not possible in the classroom. Furthermore, it is envisaged that the presence of actual buildings and sites,
relevant to the history in question, will facilitate reflection over the same history. The game PB is about Bergen,
Norway during the Napoleonic Wars. This was a period of distress in Bergen, as the war with Great Britain led
the British to block trade routes via the sea. Due to the resulting scarcity of food and supplies, the citizens of
Bergen needed to amend the situation, and decided to build small, rowed gunboats to defend merchant ships
against the larger British frigates. The game is about the building of these gunboats, and the players are to
virtually collect their different parts and accessories, by visiting the actual sites where boat parts and accessories
were being produced in Bergen, in the early 1800's. In this way, we highlight the different trades and vocations
that were important to the marine trade hub that Bergen was during this period.
         PB is designed to be played by groups competing to first complete the set of missions. The groups
navigate the area of Sandviken, Bergen in search of locations described in the set of missions. Once they have
received a mission, they orient themselves and wander to the location with the aid of the available map, location
indicator, distance to next location, up to three hints, and the physical surroundings. When they have found the
location, they pick it up and receive the next mission. The group can then reorient and make decisions about
where they need to go to find the next location. The game ends when they pick up the last location. The group
with the lowest score, consisting of a sum of time and number of hints used, wins.

Research Design and Methods
The gathering of video data and their analysis reported in this text is a continuation of a series of empirical
studies of the game    of  PB. The previous   experiences with  deploying  scenarios of the game, has   also been
reported on elsewhere with focus on usability (Wake & Baggetun, 2009) and on integration with a web-based
publishing tool for integration of the gaming activity with classroom learning activities (Baggetun & Wake, in
preparation). The overall research design is based on creating learning scenarios inspired by designed based
research (Barab & Squire, 2004), where the deployment of the game is studied and this informs the redesign of
the game and the scenario.
         In order to study the practical accomplishment and interactional organisation of the game playing, we
organised a field trial where the main body of participants were master students in a course in CSCW at our
department. Twelve participants were divided into five groups of two or three, and filmed while playing PB.
         Nine participants were master students at our department. Two of the participants were acquaintances
and the last was a PhD candidate from our department. For the master students, the gaming activity followed a
lecture on technologies    for mobile   support of work, and   ubiquitous and pervasive computing   in general, in
addition to a short introduction to the game. The technological structure the game builds on, and the historical
background for the game was presented. (For the remaining participants a quick introduction was given on site
as part of the briefing.)
         The  empirical   material consists of  seven hours    and 15 minutes  of video recordings. The  average
duration of the recordings is 1h 26mins, the shortest 1h 17mins and the longest 1h 46mins. The corpus of video
data has been logged and transcribed. This material formed the basis of our analysis.
         The first two groups were filmed simultaneously with two different video camera setups, one with and
one without an extra wireless microphone attached to one of the participants. The remainder of the groups were
filmed  with the additional    wireless microphone   attached. Filming location-based game  players in  an   urban
milieu represents a set of practical challenges compared to filming classroom activity, largely in the sense that
the potential influence of environmental factors on the quality of the video is higher. One is factor is the quality

© ISLS                                                                                                          138
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                Volume I: Long Papers

of sound, as noise from, for example traffic, construction work, treading on snow and bystanders' chatter made
reconstruction of speech difficult when an extra microphone was not attached to the participants. The recordings
with   the wireless microphone,   however,   are of good   quality and were   relatively easy   to transcribe. Another
factor is that the choice of camera angle is challenging. When the groups were moving around, it was difficult to
capture footage from another angle than behind the group, as the groups' movement was volatile and discrete.
This for example made it more difficult to capture what they were looking on at the screen, and their facial
expressions. Still, when they stopped to find the locations, we were able to get good footage of most of these
situations. We were able to reconstruct what they were looking at on the screen when they were talking about it
(from the audio track), however, and also to some degree from the groups' current location and activity.

Analysis of Game Playing
The  analysis  of the  empirical  material revealed   an  emerging  structure in  the groups'   game  activity. In this
section we present the structure of the gaming activity. The overall activity structure consists of four phases: 1)
Briefing, 2) Search and orientation, 3) Arriving at a location, 4) Receiving instructions. There is iteration over
the last three phases, until the final location is reached. Each of these is described below.
           Briefing. At the beginning of the game, the participants in each group are given a briefing on the aims
of the game and how it works by the game facilitator. This includes showing the directions to the first location.
           Search and orientation. During the search and orientation phase, the group moves towards a location.
Having received and read the instructions, the group carries out an initial orientation and starts walking. When
they needed to adjust their direction, they do so in several ways. One way is that the person carrying the phone
reads out loud the distance to the next location. A second way is when a group member verbally suggests that
the group is moving in the wrong direction. A third way is markedly changing direction, sometimes together
with a comment of some sort.
           Arriving at a location. In this phase, the groups establish among themselves whether they have arrived
at the intended location. Arriving at the location could mean that the GPS numbers turned green indicating that
they are within the zone of the location allowing them to "pick up the spot" to proceed in the game. In addition,
they have to consider whether they can identify the actual physical location (the building, object or area). The
completion of this phase, in terms of picking up the spot, varied. Either they identify the physical location at a
distance and then zone in on the location and pick up the spot, or they enter GPS zone, and pick up the point
without    identifying the actual physical location.  This  varied  with the  groups  and   the different locations in
question. Picking up the spot concluded the phase of zoning in on the location.
           Receiving instructions. Instructions on how to find a new location are received on the phone, as the
starting point for the search for the next location. The instructions are shared in one of two ways. Either the
person carrying the phone reads the instructions out loud to the rest of the group, or they position themselves in
a way where each of them can each read the instructions on the display simultaneously.
           The groups   iterated through  the last three  phases,  searching  for and  orienting   towards a   location,
zoning in on it and receiving new instructions, until they arrive at the final location where they receive a final
message containing historical information that concludes the game.

Interaction in the Game
An  episode    from   one of the  groups' game   play  (a group  of three) has been   selected  to  illustrate how  the
participants organised their gaming activity in the different phases and how they make decisions concerning
their involvement in the game, how to play it, and how this is organised in and through interaction. (Excerpt 1,
translated to English from Norwegian, and anonymised.) The episode is one minute and nine seconds long, and
starts where the group is in the search and orientation phase after having picked up five of the total nine spots in
the game. They are trying to find the sixth spot and are walking down a road (see also Figure 2, images used
with permission of the participants).

Excerpt 1:
1      Anders:    No,     it is   fort-   forty    se::ven    (0.2)   and  now    it  is        Walks
                  forty      three  and   the   next   is  forty   one   (2.1)    I'm
                  sure     it's   the   building    that   burned   down,    don't    you
                  think?     Hehe
2      Bård:      (2.3)      Recently?
3      Anders:    (3.0)      Let's  see   (0.3)    no  wait   a second    (0.6)    Now   we     Stops,   turns
                  were     actually    within    I  think,   and   then  (2.8)     (Let's       Walks  back
                  see)     (3.0)   We  were   actually     supposed    to  be  a   bit          Stops
                  further     down   I  think,     but eh   (0.7)   we   are  at   least
                  allowed     to   pick   up  the   next   point   here
4      Chris:     Hehe     (0.8)   Yess   (0.6)    Where's   the   river   then?
5      Bård:      The     most   important    thing    is  to win,    not  that    we  are
                  supposed       to learn    so  much?
6      Anders:    (Th)     true.    Eh. (0.8)    It  [depends,     it  depends     if  it

© ISLS                                                                                                               139
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                            Volume I: Long Papers

7      Bård:                                       [Maybe   it  is  down  there?          Points  towards
                                                                                          location
8      Anders:    >Maybe<     (1.0)   >You  have   picked   up,   eh, the    point        Reads  from
                  Bøkkerne,     Message    from  Hesselberg:     good  work               phone
                  Premierløitnant       Bielke,   the    barrels  will   be   handy
                  at    sea<  (0.5)  Now   you  have  most    (0.4)  of  what   you
                  need    to  build  the   boats  (0.4),    .hh,  as  they    are
                  supposed     to,  drawings,    money,    ropes,   hh,  barrels,
                  gunpowder,      you only    need  to   pick  up cannons     and
                  cannonballs      before   you  can  go   to  the  shipyard    and
                  get    the  construction     started    (0.8)  Before   you   do
                  that,    it  would  be   nice  to  quench    your  thirst,    have
                  a   beer,   [he he,
9      Bård:                  [Heh
10     Anders:    .hh,    and  something    to  eat  at   Lars  Evje's   inn   which      Reads  from
                  is    located   (0.9)   eh,  along  the   sea  in  the  direction       phone
                  of    Åsane,  yeah,  I   know  where    Åsane  is.                      Turns,  walks

         In turn 1 Anders is reading the GPS numbers from the phone as they walk. As we have noted, these
numbers  indicate their  distance to  the next location. By reading these numbers   Anders  makes the numbers
available to the other participants and in this way makes them a potential resource in their joint orientation.
Then he makes a joke by suggesting that the next location is a building in the vicinity that recently burned down
-- his last utterance in the form of laughter at the end of the turn further supports that this is meant as a joke. In
turn 2, Bård asks when the incident took place, and by this indicates that he isn't aware of this -- and thus
accounts for his lacking response to the joke. The question remains unanswered.
         In turn 3 Anders makes a change of topic and returns to the orientation. He says "Let's see, no, hang
on". The first part of this utterance can be understood as an indication that he has some new information based
on his reading of the display that contradicts their current movement in the given direction, (this is also made
explicit by saying "no" in the middle of the sentence). In addition, this is a common way of saying that you are
thinking or preparing the next statement. This is reinforced by the second part of the utterance "hang on", which
also is a common way to make a bid for the next turn. While he is making this utterance he turns around and
then begins to walk in the opposite direction right after he has finished talking. This point in turn 3 can also be
seen as the start of the phase arriving at the location. Then Anders says, while walking, that he thinks they just
were within the zone where they could pick up the next spot. This clarifies his abrupt change of direction. The
other two participants turn around and follow Anders.
         Now Anders has moved close to a fence and stops. He then says that they actually were supposed to be
in another place. He does this by using the word "actually", and the chosen verb form "should have been"
further indicates that it is someone's intention that they should have been at another location which is further
down below the fence. Then the "but, eh" suggests that they will not do that. He then says that they can pick up
the spot from where they are. Chris, in turn 4, asks where the river is. This refers to the text describing the next
location they received at the previous location, where a river is mentioned. In this way the utterance is also in
reference to the location they were supposed to be in, mentioned by Anders in turn 3. Simultaneously, Bård
makes an ironic comment on their situation (turn 5). He says that the most important thing is to win, not to
learn. This can be seen as a kind of evaluation of their predicament. They know they are supposed to be in
another place, further down, below the fence, but they are allowed to pick up the spot in the game (since they
are within the perimeter   of the location, according  to the GPS  signals). This will save them time and thus
increase the chances of winning the game. Anders answers "true" to the comment suggesting that he agrees and
starts a statement that modifies this first agreement by saying "it depends". Bård simultaneously says that it
might be down there, pointing down below the fence. Picking up the spot from where they are would save them
the time and effort it would take to walk down to the physical location to which Bård is pointing. This would,
due to the geography of the location, imply walking around several blocks. Anders repeats "it depends" but
stops, and makes a short reply to Bårds statement, by saying "maybe". While they were discussing their location
and where they were supposed to be, Anders has, obviously, picked up the spot on the mobile, and have now
received the text. He then starts reading from the phone. This ends their discussion and removes any doubt as to
whether they should actually go and find the physical location. In the last turn (10), he is reading from the phone
that the next spot is in the direction of a suburb of Bergen, Åsane. He then turns around and starts walking,
while saying that he knows where Åsane is.

© ISLS                                                                                                          140
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                              Volume I: Long Papers

                                        Figure 2. Participants at Location.

          As it is evident in this analysis, there are many things going on in this episode. We see how their joint
orientation and movement involves both making the readings from the GPS available within the group, the use
of bodily orientation and movement, and explicitly taking up and discussing where they are heading. Further we
see an example of how they make some of the aspects of the game explicit and a topic of discussion (such as
deciding on whether to find the physical location). We also see how the sequential structure of the talk and
interaction is an important resource in the interactional organisation of the game play. It is also shown how this
is a collaborative effort and that the game play relies on a number of contingent circumstances depending on
how    they navigate  through the city streets and make  use  of the resources  available to      them, such as their
knowledge of the city's geography and how they align this with the navigational resources offered through the
phone's GPS and map, and the hints provided by the textual descriptions in the game.

Discussion
One key issue that is visible in the interaction and sheds further light on observations made in earlier phases of
analysis in the project (see also Wake and Baggetun, 2009), is that there seems to be a contradiction between
immersion in the game in the sense that winning the game is set up to use as little time and hints as possible, and
time to dwell and reflect upon the historical aspects of the setting and the actual buildings and sites of historical
significance. In the episode analysed above, the participants choose to move along without clearly identifying
the physical location. Other groups, in other episodes in our material, spend more time and effort on finding the
actual location, and are less oriented to move along quickly. This variation is, to a certain extent, dependent on
the design of the game and the physical layout of the location in question, but ultimately something that is
decided through the groups' interactional organisation of their game play. As is apparent in the analysis, Bård
topicalizes this aspect in turn 5 in the excerpt. This statement is, as such, recognition of the dual purpose of the
scenario.   On the one  hand, through  this statement, the educational aim   of the game  is recognised;     they are
supposed to learn something about history. On the other they can approach this as a game where the important
thing is to win. A similar finding is analysed by Hemming, Randall, Marr and Francis (2000), when they discuss
how the "educational' character is 'there to be seen', and seen in the detail of activities" (Hemming, Randall,
Marr & Francis, 2000, p. 224) of schoolchildren's visits to a museum. They look at how, even though there are
clear educational goals and pedagogical inscriptions found in the arrangements and artefacts, the lessons to be
learned "are contingent, in situ achievements of the parties to the interaction" (ibid., p. 234).
          Another issue related to learning from the game is visible in turns 8-10 in the excerpt, where Anders
reads out the text describing the mission to find the next location in the game. This text can be understood as
instructions to the group, if understood and followed accordingly, will ensure the group's progress in the game.
Suchman (2007), building on Lynch, Livingston and Garfinkel (1983), describes how the problem of following
instructions "is to bring canonical descriptions of objects and actions to bear on the actual objects and embodied
actions that the instructions describe" (Suchman, 2007, p. 111). In other words, turning the received, necessarily
partial, instructions into something that can be recognised and practically accomplished ­ something that can be
carried out. In the excerpt we see how Anders reads quickly through the narrative description and in and through
this speedy reading checks that there is nothing they need to do with the information presented. Then in turn 10

© ISLS                                                                                                             141
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                              Volume I: Long Papers

when he recognises the referred place, Åsane, he immediately construes this, by stating that he knows where it
is, as something that can be acted upon, and then turns around and walks, followed by the two other group
members. In this way, the instructions are acted upon on and carried out through their embodied actions in the
local environment.
         Brown and Chalmers (2003) have discussed how way finding with various resources is a central part of
tourism, and an activity through which tourists learn about the place they are visiting. This is relevant for the
game play in this analysis. As much of the game play consists of activities, similar to those of the regular tourist,
such as way finding and navigating in an urban landscape, an important aspect of the game is getting to know
the city in a new manner ­ connecting the historical narrative to actual buildings and sites. This involves both
engaging  with  the   resources   available  through   the game,  but  also  bringing their knowledge   of  the local
environment and geography to bear on the instructions and information presented in the game. Furthermore, the
different characteristics of the urban, physical environment are used as game clues and information in order to
complete  the  game.     This  was  supported  by  the design  of the game,   by bringing   hints about the physical
environment into the game missions. In the analysed episode, however, the physical environment acted as a
constraint in finding the location they were looking for, as it was visibly a long walk from where they were.
Other episodes illustrate how participants used street-names, signs containing historical information set up by
the local government of Bergen, and identifying characteristics of the environment referenced in the mission
text as means of orientation in the game. This shows how the resources available in the game vary depending on
the participants' navigation in the urban environment and how they in the practical accomplishment of the game
play must deal with such a variation of contingent circumstances.

Concluding Remarks
This paper has presented a study of the interactional organisation and practical accomplishment of collaborative
game play in a location-based game. Through analysis of the video-based material, the study has addressed how
the participants in the gaming activity use the resources available to them in the game space, and make these
resources available to each other as part of the practical accomplishment of game play. One of the practical
aspects of accomplishing the game is related to navigation and way finding in the urban environment. A key
issue that have been discussed is the apparent contradiction between the competitive features of the game and
time to dwell on and reflect upon the historical aspects of the local environment as highlighted in the game, and
how this was resolved at a practical level in and through the participants' interaction.

References
Baggetun, R., & Wake, J.D. (in preparation). Integrating location-based gaming with classroom activities.
Barab, S. & Squire, K. (2004). Design-based research: Putting a stake in the ground. Journal of the Learning
         Sciences, 13, 1-14.
Bennerstedt U., & Linderoth, J. (2009). The Spellbound Ones: Illuminating Everyday Collaborative Gaming
         Practices    in a MMORPG.       In: C. O'Malley,   D.  Suthers,  P. Reimann,   A.  Dimitracopoulou   (Eds.),
         Computer supported collaborative learning practices: CSCL2009 Conference proceedings (pp. 404-
         413). Rhodes, Greece, July 2009.
Brown, B., & Chalmers, M. (2003). Tourism and mobile technology. In: K. Kuutti, E. H. Karsten, et al. (Eds.),
         ECSCW 2003: Proceedings of the eighth European conference on computer supported cooperative
         work, Helsinki, Finland. Pp. 335-355, Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Press.
Brown B., Chalmers, M., Bell, M., MacColl, I., Hall, M., MacColl, I., Rudman, P. (2005). Sharing the square:
         collaborative    leisure in the city streets. Proceedings  of ECSCW     2005,  Paris, France.  Pp. 427-429.
         Springer Verlag.
Brown, B., & Laurier, E., (2005). Maps & journeying: an ethnomethodological approach. Cartographica, 4(3),
         17-33.
Chang, B., Wang, H.-Y., Chen, C.-S., & Liang, J.-K. (2009). Distributed Weather Net: Wireless sensor network
         supported by inquiry-based learning. In: C. O'Malley, D. Suthers, P. Reimann, A. Dimitracopoulou
         (Eds.), Computer supported collaborative learning practices: CSCL2009 Conference proceedings (pp.
         365-369), Rhodes, Greece. July 2009.
Derry, S.J., Pea, R.D., Barron, B., Engle, R.A., Erickson, F., Goldman, R., Hall, R., Koschmann, T., Lemke,
         J.L., Sherin,   M.G.,    &  Sherin, B.L. (2010).  Conducting  Video   Research  in  the  Learning  Sciences:
         Guidance on Selection, Analysis, Technology and Ethics, Journal of the Learning Sciences, 19(1), 3-
         53.
Dourish, P. (2004). Where the action is. The foundations of embodied interaction. Massachusetts: MIT Press.
Goodwin, C. (1994). Professional vision. American Anthropologist, 96(3), 181-209.
Heath, C. & Luff, P. (2000). Technology in action. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Heath,  C., Hindmarsh,     J., &  Luff, P. (2010). Video   in qualitative research. Analysing  Social  Interaction in
         Everyday Life. SAGE Publications Ltd.

© ISLS                                                                                                             142
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                Volume I: Long Papers

Hemmings, T., Randall, D., Marr, L., Francis, D. (2000). `Task, talk and closure: situated learning and the use
         of an `interactive' museum artefact'. In S. Hester, D. Francis, (Eds.), Local Educational Order, (pp.
         223­244). Amsterdam: Benjamins.
Ke, F. (2007).   Using Computer-based Math Games as an Anchor for Cooperative Learning. Proceedings of the
        8th iternational conference on Computer supported collaborative learning, pp. 354-356.
Koschmann, T., Stahl, G., & Zemel, A. (2007). The video analyst's manifesto (or the implications of Garfinkel's
         policies for the development of a program of video analytic research within the learning sciences). In
         R. Goldman, R. Pea, B. Barron & S. Derry (Eds.), Video research in the learning sciences. Retrieved
         from   28th Oct 2010.
Kirriemuir, J.,    &  McFarlane,   A.  (2004). Literature  Review    in Games    and Learning.  Future   Lab  Literature
         Review,      Report    8.    Available    at:   http://www.futurelab.org.uk/resources/publications-reports-
         articles/literature-reviews/Literature-Review378
Klopfer, E., Perry, J., Squire, K., Jan, M.-F., & Steinkuehler, C. (2005). Mystery at the museum: a collaborative
         game     for  museum     education.  Proceedings    of  the 2005     conference  on  Computer      support  for
         collaborative learning, pp. 316-320.
Kurti,  A., Milrad,   M.,  &   Spikol, D.   (2007).  Designing   Innovative   Learning   Activities  Using   Ubiquitous
         Computing.      Proceedings    of   Seventh   IEEE     International  Conference   on    Advanced      Learning
         Technologies (ICALT 2007), (pp. 386-390).
Kurti, A., Spikol, D., Milrad, M., Svensson, M., & Petterson, O. (2007). Exploring how Pervasive Computing
         Can Support Situated Learning. In: Proceedings of Pervasive Learning 2007, (pp. 19-26).
Lynch,  M.,   Livingston,  E., &   Garfinkel,  H. (1983). Temporal    order   in laboratory work.   In K.  Knorr  &  M.
        Mulkay (Eds.), Science observed (pp. 205-238). London: Sage.
Lyons, L. (2009). Designing Opportunistic User Interfaces to Support a Collaborative Museum Exhibit, In: C.
         O'Malley,    D. Suthers,   P. Reimann,   A.   Dimitracopoulou     (Eds.), Computer  supported     collaborative
         learning practices: CSCL2009 Conference proceedings (pp. 375-384). Rhodes, Greece, July 2009.
McFarlane, A., Sparrowhawk, A., & Heald, Y. (2002). Report on the Educational Use of Games: an Exploration
         by TEEM of the Contribution Which Games Can Make to the Education Process, Teem: Cambridge.
Roschelle, J., & Pea, R. (2002). A walk on the WILD side: How wireless handhelds may change computer-
         supported collaborative learning. International Journal of Cognition and Technology, 1(1), 145-168.
Roschelle, J., Rosas R., & Nussbaum M. (2005). Towards a design framework for mobile computer-supported
         collaborative   learning,  Proceedings   of the 2005   conference    on Computer   support    for collaborative
         learning, Taiwan, July 2005, (pp. 520­524).
Rosenbaum,      E., Klopfer,   E., Broughner,   B.,   &  Rosencheck,     L. (2007).   Engaging  Students     in Science
         Controversy Through an Augmented Reality Role-Playing Game. Proceedings of the 8th iternational
         conference on Computer supported collaborative learning, pp. 608-612.
Satwitcz,   T., &   Stevens, R.    (2007). Tools  of   Play: Coordinating   Games,    Characters, and    Actions  While
        Learning to Play Video Games. Proceedings of the 8th iternational conference on Computer supported
         collaborative learning, pp. 629-638.
Shute, V.J., Rieber, L., & Van Eck, R. (in press). . To appear in R. Reiser & J. Dempsey (Eds.), Trends and
         issues in instructional design and technology, 3rd Edition. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson Education
         Inc.
Suchman,    L.  (2007).  Human-Machine       Reconfigurations.   Plans   and  Situated Actions,   (2 ed.).  New   York:
         Cambridge University Press.
Tan,   T.-H., Liu,  T.-Y., & Chang,    C.-C.  (2007).  Development   and    Evaluation of an RFID-based      Ubiquitous
         Learning Environment for Outdoor Learning. Interactive Learning Environments, 15(3), 253-269.
Wake,   J.D.,   & Baggetun,    R.  (2009). "Premierløitnant   Bielke":  A   Location-based   Game    for   Teaching and
         Learning History. International Journal of Mobile and Blended Learning, 1(4), 12-28.
White,  T.  (2006).   Code  talk:  Student  discourse  and   participation  with networked   handhelds.    International
         Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 1(3), 359-382.
Yatani, K.,   Onuma,   M.,  Sugimoto,   M.,  &  Kusunoki,    F. (2004). Musex:     A system for supporting    children's
         collaborative learning in a museum with PDAs. Systems and Computers in Japan, 35(14), 54-63.

Acknowledgments
SILO and the adhering mobile application builds on earlier development work done by Rune Baggetun on the
MOTEL framework in the TRANSFORM project, and we would like to thank him for allowing us to build on
this work. We thank Bjørge Næss for programming the SILO system and the mobile application. We would also
like to thank Lars Wake for taking the pictures for Figure 1, and finally the participants that allowed us to film
them while game playing.

© ISLS                                                                                                               143
