CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                       Volume I: Long Papers

    Analysis of Small Group Interactions in a Seamless Language
            Learning Environment: An Artifact-Oriented Approach
    Lung-Hsiang Wong, Wenli Chen, Ying Zhan, Learning Sciences Lab., National Institute of Education, 1,
                                            Nanyang Walk, Singapore 637616,
              Email: lunghsiang.wong@nie.edu.sg, wenli.chen@nie.edu.sg, ying.zhan@nie.edu.sg
       Chee-Kuen Chin, Singapore Centre for Chinese Language, 287, Ghim Moh Road, Singapore 279623,
                                                   cheekuen.chin@sccl.sg

          Abstract:   We    present  a  study   in "Move,     Idioms!",   a mobile  Chinese    Language     learning
          approach    that emphasizes    learner   created content    and  contextualized  meaning     making   with
          their daily encounters. Students used smart-phones on a 1:1, 24x7 basis to capture photos of
          the real-life contexts     pertaining to  Chinese    idioms   or  conjunctions,     made   sentences  with
          idioms/conjunctions, and posted them onto a wiki space for peer review. This paper focuses
          on  students'    on-campus    face-to-face    collaborative   learning   process.   We     derive a  novel
          visualization approach for descriptive analysis of the small group activities inspired by the
          notions of mediation by artifacts and distributed cognition to provide a synoptic view of the
          process  of  student  artifact co-creation    in such   collaborative   activities. The  artifact-oriented
          analysis and visualization approach is our preliminary attempt in making sense of how the
          seamless    learning  process   may    look   like  in  the perspective   of learners'     individual and
          collaborative learning experiences.

Introduction
From e-learning to m-learning, the most publicly known phrase to describe these new advancements is perhaps
"learning anytime, anywhere." The mobile technology enhances student learning whenever and wherever they
are motivated   to   learn  (Chan,   et al., 2006).   Whereas     the rise  of  e-learning  a  decade    ago  had  resulted in
educators' concern of aggravating the digital natives' indulgence in the cyberspace, we argue that through proper
m-learning    design  that emphasizes     learners' interactions    and   meaning   making    with   the peers  (f2f) and   the
material reality (e.g., Rogers & Price, 2008; Wong, Boticki, Sun, & Looi, in press; Wong & Looi, 2010; Zhang,
et al., 2010), the technology would instead bring them "back" to the physical world (Wong, 2010b).
          Chan et al. (2006) define seamless learning as an approach where a student can learn whenever they are
curious in a variety of scenarios and in which they can easily switch from one scenario or context to another
(formal  and  informal     learning, personal   and social    learning, physical   world  and   cyberspace,   etc.)  using  the
personal device as a mediator. Nevertheless, after several years of relevant studies, the potential of mobile-
assisted seamless learning has yet to be fully explored. One major challenge is that seamless learning has been
blended into learners' day-to-day lives where every-"thing" within and beyond the four walls of the classroom
has the potential of supporting or distracting/constraining their learning. This salient characteristic of seamless
learning makes it difficult for any existing analytic tool to capture the full picture of seamless learning journey.
Furthermore, the rich learning resources and contexts that could be distilled from learners' non-academic daily
lives to complement formal learning are often neglected by both learners and teachers (e.g., Coffield, 2000).
          How  can    learners' habit   of   mind  and  skills   in making   meaning     with  their  daily  encounters,   and
associating   those   with  their formal     learning   gains  be   nurtured   through   their participations   in  (teacher-)
facilitated seamless learning (FSL) (Wong, 2010a) experiences? This is one of the major research issues of our
recent study in exploring a FSL design for Mobile-assisted Language learning (MALL), "Move, Idioms!". In the
study, we facilitated a Primary 5 (11-year-old) class in Singapore to study 48 Chinese idioms (with 8 additional
conjunctions  in  the  later part of    the  study to experiment    on  the  versatility of   the learning   design)  over  10
months.   Apart   from     in-campus    idiom/conjunction     lessons   with    contextualized    and  small-group    learning
activities (collaborative), the students were each assigned a smart-phone which they were allowed to access
24x7.   With   their  smart-phones,     they  took    photos   in   daily   lives (personal),     made   sentences   with   the
idioms/conjunctions, and then posted them onto a wiki space for peer review (collaborative). In analyzing the
students' learning    process  in "Move,     Idioms!",  we    are keen  to  uncover   how     the interplay  of personal   and
collaborative meaning making (in both formal and informal settings, through non-ICT and ICT means), and the
different forms   of  student   artifacts   constructed    in different   contexts, could     create a "chaining"    effect in
mediating the students' learning journey (i.e., one piece of student work becomes a mediating artifact of the next
stage of learning activity).
          We have published (Wong, Chin, Tan, & Liu, 2010) our in-depth analysis on one particular form of
student artifacts  ­  the  photo/sentence    sets  that they   shared   on  the wiki, in the   aspect  of   personal  meaning
making. In this paper, we shift our focus to the students' on-campus face-to-face (f2f) collaborative learning
processes, not only with the aim of revealing how the social meaning making took place during their discussions

© ISLS                                                                                                                      144
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                    Volume I: Long Papers

with the mediation of various forms of student artifacts, but also establishing a construct for our future attempt
to link the outcomes of such social learning experiences to their out-of-class, personal artifact creation and peer
reviews.
          Our rationale behind the design of the small-group f2f activities is to motivate and prepare the students
for their  out-of-school   personal   learning  experiences.  The   small-group    activities can be   viewed      as a group
"exercise" of what and how the students can individually do in performing their out-of-class learning activities ­
closely observing and reflecting upon their living environments, associating environmental contexts (or creating
contexts  with  the   aid  of physical  objects or  people)  with   their learned   idioms/conjunctions,       and generating
artifacts for sharing. With this, we derive a novel visualization approach for descriptive analysis of the small-
group  activities of  "Move,    Idioms!'  that  is inspired  by the notions    of mediation   by  artifacts    and distributed
cognition. It is not (yet) our intention in this paper to formalize this approach for more general use, but more to
provide a helicopter view of the process of student artifact co-creations in such collaborative FSL activities.

Mediation by Artifacts
Research   findings   show    that classroom learning   mediators   include tasks,   teacher  and peer  resources,     subject
content, and semiotic artifacts (e.g., languages, textbooks, PowerPoint and worksheets) (Liang, 2009). Artifacts
(broadly defined to include instruments, signs, languages, and machines) mediate activity and are created by
people to control their own behavior (Nardi, 1996). As (Stahl, 2002) posits, if we adopt a Vygotskian view of
mediation by artifacts, then the knowledge construction process can be conceptualized as the construction of
knowledge artifacts, involving physical and symbolic artifacts as starting point, as medium and as product.
          The notion of mediation by artifacts, as formulated by Leont'ev (1981), accounts for material activity
and its outcome in the form of transformed material objects. More recently, spoken and written discourse began
to figure in the lists of mediating artifacts (Wells, 2002).    Leont'ev (1974) argues, "A tool mediates activity that
connects a person not only with the world of objects, but also with other people.." Distributed cognition offers a
similar   notion; e.g., Hutchins    (1987)  discusses "collaborative  manipulation,"     the   process by      which  we take
advantage of artifacts designed by others (and ourselves), sharing ideas across time and space.
          Combining both social and cognitive aspects,       a distributed cognition perspective (Hollan, Hutchins, &
Kirsh, 2002) suggests that cognitive activities such as knowledge construction are distributed across individuals
and information artifacts through and with which they interact. The perspective implies the unit of analysis at
the cognitive system as a whole, and emphasizes understanding of the coordination among the individuals and
the artifacts in a system. Under the perspective, we would look for transformations of representations across
individuals where those transformations can be interpreted as an intersubjective cognitive process. Examples
include merging, revising, and connecting representations of ideas (Suthers, 2006).
          We found the commonality between the small-group learning activities of "Move, Idioms!" and both
notions of mediation by artifacts and distributed cognition. Our work is also related to an interpretative study
(Alcock,   2005)  on  young    children's  co-construction   of playful   narrative events,   motivated     and mediated   by
artifacts ­  where  Alcock    put  forward  the concept   of "distributed  imagination"    and  claimed     it an  analogy of
distributed  cognition.   One  notable   aspect in  Alcock's  thesis is   that she  treats people    (e.g., the teacher  who
orchestrated the learning activity; a child who used her own body as an artifact to imitate a television character
for her peers) as a potential form of artifacts. That echoes Cole's (1996) wider overarching concept of artifacts
that people may be used as mediating objects. In addition, the meaning and use of artifacts are structured and
transformed through activities. Hence, the term "mediating artifacts" is not necessarily in the traditional sense of
(persistent) man-made      objects,  but could  refer to  any   element   (object or human)    involved     in  the cognitive
system of a learning activity, which can be appropriated into a mediating artifact that serves students' learning
needs.  Such  a   view  is congruent    with (Latour, 1996)   argument    that  "to act is  to mediate      another's  action"
(p.237) ­ both humans and objects mediate, and one can only proceed to action by mediating another's action.

"Move, Idioms!" ­Theoretical Framework and Learning Experience Design
As a fundamental component of language learning, vocabulary learning is often delivered in conventional ways,
such as providing abstract definitions and sentences taken out of the context of normal use (Miller & Gildea,
1987). Such pedagogical strategies may pose a greater problem for learning of context-dependent vocabularies,
such   as conjunctions,    idioms   and  proverbs.  The complex   nature   of  such  vocabularies    may    result  in  highly
context-dependent     appropriateness    of  their usage.   There are   many    possible   real-life contexts    where   such
vocabularies could suitably (or unsuitably but often mistakenly) be used, which are almost impossible to be
prescribed in a simple definition.
          Recognizing     both the  importance  and   the limitation of   formal,  in-class  language  learning,      language
learning theorists have been advocating the integrations of formal and informal (Titone, 1969), and personal and
social (Noel, 2001) language learning, which mesh well with the notion of seamless learning. Informed by the
theories, we developed a cyclic, customizable learning experience design of "Move, Idioms!" (see Figure 1).
          The processes of the four activities are described below:

© ISLS                                                                                                                     145
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                     Volume I: Long Papers

           Activity 1 ­ In-class/campus contextual idiom learning: The activities are conducted to motivate and
prepare    students to  engage    in  subsequent    out-of-school    activities. During     each lesson,   new    idioms   are
introduced to the students in the means of multimedia presentations. The teacher then conducts contextualized
learning activities such as facilitating the students to take photos in the campus to illustrate the idioms.

         Language output activities      Language input activities

           Formal learning                     Contextual,
           setting                          Collaborative                  Consolidation
           (In-class/campus)                Idiom Learning
                                                                                                     Collaborative
                                                                                                     learning space

        Informal learning
                                               Contextual,settingIndividual(Out-of-class/campus)SentenceOnlineIndividualCollaborativelearning spaceLearning
                                                  Making

                                                    Main ICT tool:            Main ICT tool:
                                                    mobile device            Wiki (Web 2.0)
                            Figure 1. The "Move, Idioms!" Learning Experience Design.

           Activity 2   ­ Out-of-class,   contextual,    independent     sentence    making:    Students   carry  the mobile
phones  assigned    to  them  24x7   in order  to  identify    or create contexts    in their  daily lives which    could  be
associated with the idioms. They then take photos, make sentences by using the idioms to describe the photos,
and post   them  onto   a class  wiki   space. We   create   one  wiki page  for    each  idiom  for students   to  post their
artifacts. This offers    convenience   for comparing      student-identified/created    contexts   pertaining  to  the  same
idioms.
           Activity   3 ­  Online     collaborative     learning:   Students  perform     peer   reviews   on   the wiki   by
commenting    on   (with  the built-in  comment    tool  of  wiki), correcting   or improving    their peers' sentences   (by
modifying the sentences posted on the wiki pages).
           Activity 4 ­ In-class consolidation: Each student group is assigned a few existing student artifacts
(photo/sentence sets) on the same wiki page with a mixture of correct, ambiguous and erroneous usages of an
idiom.  The  groups     compare   the   artifacts and   revise  the sentences    if necessary.   Subsequently,    teacher-led
classroom discussion makes contradictory views among the groups surfaced, facilitating class-wide debates.

The Enactment of "Move, Idioms!"
Our design research study of "Move, Idioms!" took place in January-October 2010. A class of 34 Primary 5
students, with mixed abilities in Chinese Language (as L2), participated in the study. Each of them was assigned
a Samsung Omnia II smart-phone running MS Windows Mobile 6.5, with built-in camera, Wi-Fi access, Internet
browser and English/Chinese text input. We (the researchers and a group of Chinese teachers) co-designed 8
"Activity 1" and 2 "Activity 4" lessons (see Table 1) which were then enacted by the Chinese teacher with 2-4
week intervals. With a graphic designer background, the teacher had had eight years of teaching experience and
had been one of the ICT-mediated Chinese curriculum leaders in her school. Meanwhile, we featured off-the-
shelf  mobile-optimized    comic   animations     that  depict the  meanings of     the taught idioms    during each  lesson,
which could also be accessed by the students anytime, anywhere.

An Artifact-oriented Approach to Analyze the Small-Group Artifact Co-creation
Activities of "Move, Idioms!"
In our  attempt  to   unpack  the learning  processes     of the  small-group    activities  during  the in-class  lessons of
"Move, Idioms!", one particular aspect that comes to our attention is the role of artifact mediation throughout
their rich, situated learning experience, which can be characterised as an experience situated in `continually
moving and re-constructed contexts' (Looi, Wong, & Song, in-press). In turn, we carried out descriptive analysis
on  the verbatim    transcriptions   of audio  and     video recordings  as  well    as  the field  notes  of student   group
interactions during all the in-class lessons. The 8 student groups were comprised of 4-5 members each, which
were   randomly    assigned   by  the  teacher    prior to the  study  and  were    heterogeneous    in  Chinese    Language

© ISLS                                                                                                                     146
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                     Volume I: Long Papers

competencies.   We    adopt  the  above-stated    perspective   of mediating   artifacts   as the   analytical means.   The
intention of the analysis is to identify various forms of learning support tools and intermediate products, both
physical and non-physical, map them into the artifact-oriented perspective, and unveil their relationships as well
as various paths that different student groups had taken to accomplish their learning tasks in different lessons.
We engaged student groups to member-check our analysis ­ though we did not use the academic term "artifacts"
and instead  asked     them  to   confirm and     further elaborate  "things   that contributed     to or   distracted  their
photo/sentence co-creation activities" that we discovered. Due to the space constraint, we will not go into the
detailed analysis but to present the synoptic view of our findings.

Table 1: Summary of 10 "Move, Idioms!" in-class lessons (all were "Activity 1" lessons unless otherwise
stated).
Lesson    Worked  in  groups of   4, students brainstormed  and made   sentences  that utilized the  idioms (one  idiom per
ID: #1    sentence) learned in this lesson and sketched the scenario on paper worksheet. Students were not assigned the
          smart-phones yet.
#2        Students were assigned the smart-phones after receiving technical training. Worked in groups, they repeated the
          activity of Lesson #1 except that they were asked to enact the scenarios and took photos within the classroom.
          They then signed out the phones for 24x7 access.
#3        Each student group was assigned a particular area within the campus (e.g., canteen, basketball court, ecological
          garden). They went to the designated area, brainstormed to associate their encounters with their learned idioms,
          took photos and made sentences. They were encouraged to make one sentence that utilized two idioms.
#4        Each group brainstormed a paragraph that utilized multiple (both newly learned and previous) idioms. In-class
          Photo taking was not allowed but they were asked to plan for four pictures to depict the group-generated scenario.
#5        Each group brainstormed a paragraph that utilized multiple idioms, and took photos within the campus.
#6        An "Activity 4" lesson.

#7, #8,   Same as #5. For Lesson #8 and #9, they were taught and brainstormed sentences that utilized learned conjunctions
#9        instead ­ although most sentences had incorporated some idioms as well.
#10       An "Activity 4" lesson.

         The unit of analysis is the group photo/text co-creation session. By artifact we refer not only to the
student products (photo/text sets) but also the mediating artifacts and emergent, intermediate products involved
in their learning processes.    We    classified  the artifacts identified  in the  analysis    into four   categories. The
classification is based on the major role of each artifact in the learning process. To simplify the analysis, we
exclude task regulating artifacts such as timers and teacher's monitoring but focus on identifying artifacts that
are directly contributing to the contents of the students' outcome artifacts. The four types of artifacts are:
         ·   Physical artifacts: Physical or environmental tools that mediate the learning activities, such as the
             ICT  tools,    the classroom     and the campus    (and the physical   objects     available there), and   even
             people (teachers, students, researchers, guests) who posed for photo shooting;
         ·   Subject matter artifacts: Artifacts that represent the target knowledge to learn ­ the idioms and
             conjunctions    themselves    (which     are linguistic/cultural  artifacts), and   the   example    sentences,
             paragraphs, or photo/text sets given by the teachers (digital artifacts ­ in PowerPoint form), as well
             as comic animations and YouTube videos, to demonstrate the usage of the vocabularies;
         ·   Socio-cognitive artifacts: Non-physical artifacts generated through socio-cognitive means, such as
             teacher's    verbal  scaffolds   and  peer   discourses (both    are semiotic    artifacts), students' in-situ
             improvising or emergent strategies to carry out the learning activities, ideas and stories for photo
             taking    and  sentence/paragraph    compositions,    and their  shared   (evolving)    understandings  in  the
             associated meanings and linguistic functionalities of the idioms and conjunctions;
         ·   Outcome      artifacts:  The target   artifacts that  the students   are   explicitly   required  to generate,
             including photos and text, peer review comments and peer revised text.
         Hatch and Gardner (1993) propose a concentric model of the forces affecting a distributed cognition
system. The three forces in the model are personal, local and cultural. Our level of analysis with the four types
of artifacts being identified fits to the local level. We generated diagrams which depict all the artifact-mediated
processes leading to outcome artifact creations as we have observed in the small group f2f discussions. Due to
the space constraint, we present only the diagram pertaining to the combination of Lesson #5, #7, #8, #9 (with a
photo set and a coherent plot in a paragraph as the outcome artifact) in this paper (see Figure 2). Although it is
possible to generate one diagram per group per lesson, we decided to feature one consolidated diagram per
lesson   design for   the  same   reason  (space).    The  arrows   in  the   diagrams   represent     mediatioon-outcome
relationships. Each numbered node in the diagrams denotes a mini-state, which we refer to as joint mediation, of
multiple artifacts (linked by incoming arrows) to the student group that results in certain output artifacts (linked
by outgoing arrows). We refer to such nodes as joint mediation nodes (JM-nodes). Note that for any JM-node
with multiple "input" artifacts, it is not necessarily that all (but can be any combination of) the "input" artifacts

© ISLS                                                                                                                   147
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                             Volume I: Long Papers

will be utilized in every instance of the joint mediation. The same goes for a JM-node with multiple output
artifacts (not necessarily all but can be any combination of output artifacts). The numbers in the JM-nodes show
the rough   sequence       of different    joint  mediations     (not  definitive,   as some      groups could   have      occasionally
backtracked to previous states to revise their earlier artifacts) in the co-creation processes. The JM-nodes labeled
with the same number plus an alphabet (e.g., 1a) represent supplementary joint mediations that occurred in the
same mini-state and were likely to be interweaving (or never happened in some cases). In addition, we identified
certain mediating     artifacts   that occasionally       did  not   play their  usual  constructive     roles and    instead   became
distracting or   constraining      factors     to students'    co-creation    processes.  We      refer  to them      as   constraining
mediation.

         Shape legends:            Physical artifact           Subject matterartifactSocio-CognitiveartifactOutcome artifact

           Edge legends:           Existing artifacts            Teacher generated           Student generated
                                   (persistent structure)

           Arrow                                  Observed (constructive) mediation
                                                  Observed (constructive) mediation with occasional dysfunctional mediation

                                  Vocabularies                       Vocabulary usage
                                      (VO)                             examples (EX)
          Physical
        environment                                                                                Group
            (PE)                                                                             discourse (GD)1

                                  1a                                                     1b

                                                      Story (ST)
                                  2a                                                                      Verbal
                                                                                                        scaffold (VS)
            Emergent
           strategies (ES)                                 2
                              Improvising (IM)                                                              Role differentiation(RD)
                                                          Photos (PH)                        3a
                 Smart-phone
                     (SP)                                                                             4      Wiki tool (WK)
                                                          3

                                                                                                      Shared photo/
                                                      Paragraph (PR)                                 paragraph set (SH)

  Figure 2. The Artifact-oriented Diagram of Collaborative Learning Activities in Lesson #5, #7, #8, and #9.

Analysis of Small-Group Artifact Co-creation Processes in Lesson #5, #7, #8 and #9
The small-group activities in Lesson #5, #7, #8 and #9 can be divided into four mini-states ­ story co-generation
(the result of the joint mediation of 1), photo set co-generation (the result of 2), paragraph co-generation (the
result of 3), and wiki page appending (the result of 4).
         JM-node      1    &  1a: Fresh    from   learning    new    idioms/conjunctions,    student    groups   brainstormed     their
stories in  the  class,    with   the  set of     vocabularies   to   use (VO),    the  vocabulary    usage    examples      (EX), the
potentially accessible physical environment (PE; see the next paragraph for elaboration), and the (emergent)
group discourse (GD) and teacher's verbal scaffolds (VS) as mediating artifacts. In particular, the vocabulary
usage   examples    (EX)      were  presented     by   the   teacher  prior   to the  small  group    activities,     in the forms  of
idiomatic/conjunction       animations,    PowerPoint       presentations   of  photo   and  sentence/paragraph       sets,  or videos.
Such digital artifacts had inspired or influenced some groups' subsequent storytelling (ST). In many cases, we
consider the EX a constraining mediation as the artifacts constrained the students' creativity ­ some student
groups copied the essential story idea and only made minor changes in the characters or the props. That is, they
were   not  able   to apply     the   learned     idioms    in different   contexts,    thus limiting    their  deep     learning  and
internalization of the idioms. However, there were also positive cases where student groups managed to work
out stories inspired by the EX but with more enriching contents and utilizations of different sets of idioms.

© ISLS                                                                                                                              148
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                   Volume I: Long Papers

         Even   with    the "comfort"  of   brainstorming  (GD)     stories (ST)  in  the   classroom  rather  than in-situ,
students usually took into consideration the accessibility of the physical environment (PE) for their subsequent
photo shooting. This might instead become a constraining mediation as they had to revise the story and even
drop some of the idioms (VO) in mind to satisfy the PE constraints. For example, a student proposed using the
idiom , literally means "birds twitter and fragrance of flowers" but figuratively characterizes "a fine,
beautiful day", in their story. The group spent minutes to debate about how tedious it would be to take a photo
with both twittering bird(s) and flowers in it within the campus. Even though a member aptly pointed out the
metaphorical nature of the idiom and could be used to describe fine weather and pleasant sceneries, with or
without  actual birds   and  flowers  in the  context, his group-mates      did not   concur and   eventually  gave up   the
idiom.
         Conversely,    for  another   group, the  PE  constraints   triggered   them    to figure out strategies   (ES) to
overcome  those.  For     example, another   group which     was similarly   stuck    in how  to portray            (a fine,
beautiful day) had the teacher granted permission to take photos after school. They then worked out a plan of
taking four photos and assigned each group member the task to take one of them, with a student who claimed
that she could take a photo with birds and flowers from her home balcony assuming the obvious responsibility.
         The common misconception on the usage of (a fine, beautiful day) was later clarified by the
teacher to the class at another lesson. However, we argue that through such socio-cognitive learning activities,
students were able to more effectively internalize the correct functionality of the idiom after the clarification.
Therefore, such a mediating artifact which is seemingly constraining the students' outcome artifact creation in
short term may turn out to be conducive in their learning in a long run if the teacher             is able to scaffold for
"making errors work for the students and not against them" (Rubin & Thompson, 1982).
         JM-node 1b: During the small group activities, the teacher was usually "touring" among the groups to
check  their progress    and  provide  verbal  scaffolds  (VS)   to improve     their contextualized   stories (ST)  where
necessary. Therefore, the VS is usually a product of the joint mediation of VO, PE and/or GD. However, there
were occasional cases where the teacher advised against certain student groups' story ideas for no pedagogical
reason.  One  possibility    was  that the   teacher's designer     background   had     made  her  subconsciously     more
`interventionist' in students' creative processes and products. We consider that another form of constraining
mediation that might have distracted the students' creativity.
         JM-node      2 &   2a: The   joint mediation  of  ST,   PE, GD     and  the  smart-phone   (SP)  resulted   in  the
production of the first part of an outcome artifact ­ the photo set (PH). Improvising (IM) prompted by PE,
including the sets (e.g., the library) and props (e.g., putting math and science books, sketch paper, a ruler and a
calculator on the desk of an inventor character in the story ­ these props were contributed by different students)
available, took place in some photo shooting occasions that resulted in the adaptation of their original ST. All
the group-generated ST required some group members to become actors and enacted the scenario. Therefore,
most of the groups were getting self-organized (i.e., role differentiation or RD) with dedicated "directors" and
"photographers"  being      appointed  (or  self-appointed), and they  sometimes      switched   roles between   directors,
photographers and actors. There were also cases where co-directing and co-photographing took place and due to
the simplicity of the storyline, they still managed to carry out the learning task smoothly.
         The smart-phone (SP) did not only serve as a productive tool. Occasionally, students checked a photo
on the phone display immediately after shooting, and decided whether a retake was needed to make sure their
idea was correctly executed and the idiom association was appropriate. In turn, SP became a cognitive tool
(albeit still a physical artifact) to mediate their deeper thinking.
         JM-node 3: The joint mediation of PH, VO, GP and SP resulted in the production of the second part of
an outcome   artifact   ­ the paragraph    (PR). Unlike  during  JM-node     1  where    student groups  only  worked   out
rough story ideas (ST) that "guaranteed" usage of some of the given idioms or conjunctions, this would be the
time that they synthesized their ST and photos taken (PH) and threaded the idioms they had in mind together to
become a coherent paragraph (PR). In developing their paragraphs, some groups re-looked at the photos taken
by different students (although most groups would have appointed an "official" photographer during JM-node 2,
some students had taken extra photos when they were not engaged in acting) and replaced or inserted photos to
the original photo sets. Additional idioms might incidentally be added to the paragraph. One instance took place
in Lesson  #5   where   a   group came   back  to the  classroom    from photo   shooting    on  a story about  basketball
playing. A student recalled that her group-mate who played the role of basketball player (and became a PE
artifact) was sweating minutes after the shooting started, which was captured by the photos (PH). She asked if
 ("all of a sweat") is an idiom (VO) and a group-mate confirmed that. They decided to incorporate the
idiom into the paragraph (PR). We checked with the group afterward and found out that the idiom was not
taught in the present year but two of the group members recalled that their Chinese teacher in the previous year
taught it in the class. The other two members who came from another class with a different teacher had not
come across the idiom before; but they now learned it from their group-mates.
         JM-node 3a: During JM-node 3, some groups found it difficult to organize their photos, or organize the
idioms and their stories into paragraphs. The teacher was again "touring" among the groups and provided the

© ISLS                                                                                                                   149
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                       Volume I: Long Papers

much needed scaffolding (VS). Typically, she looked at the unfinished paragraphs (PR) and offered ways to
organize the relevant artifacts, sometimes with additional or alternative idioms (VO) being proposed.
          JM-node 4: These were merely synthesizing-and-posting tasks (synthesizing photo and sentence into a
complete instance of outcome artifact, and posting it onto the web) although they did append new contents to the
relevant wiki pages, i.e., a new version of a wiki page, which was a collective outcome artifact, was generated.

Discussion
Seamless learning is probably one of the most complex forms of learning as it involves multi-facets of learners'
daily lives and has the potential of integrating most of the ICT-enhanced learning models ­ digital classroom
learning, e-learning, m-learning, context-aware ubiquitous learning, etc. A holistic seamless learning experience
design  requires that   learners  not     only interact  with    other people    and  instructor-provided   artifacts   within a
relatively closed  learning   environment        (e.g.,  traditional classroom    or  e-learning  portal), but  also    with the
authentic physical environment and perhaps the Internet at large, where learners may draw any element that they
incidentally  encounter   and    appropriate     it into a  useful   mediating   artifact for  learning.  We   need  additional
analytic methods to unpack the individual and collaborative learning experiences of seamless learners. The most
common existing CSCL analytical tools may offer a microscopic view of the dynamics of student collaborations
within the situated learning context, most likely in a socio-cognitive constructivist perspective, but not so much
on how individuals or groups interact with the environments. The artifact-oriented analysis and visualization
approach reported in this paper is our preliminary attempt in making better sense of how the seamless learning
process may look like, in the perspective of seamless learners' individual and collaborative learning experiences.
          We  are     not the    first who     adopted      such an    artifact-oriented  approach     in  analyzing    learning
environments,  i.e.,  to  map    relevant  elements      in such   environments   into    mediating  artifacts for   subsequent
analysis. Apart from the above-stated analysis on young learners' narrative co-construction activities (Alcock,
2005) which bears the greatest resemblance with our work, there had been other studies (e.g., Conole, 2008; Lei,
2008; Wang & Ching, 2003) which adopted similar approaches of artifact-oriented analysis.
          The uniqueness    of   our   work   is twofold.   First, we  developed     a   visualization approach   to reveal  the
interdependence   among     the   mediating    and    outcome    artifacts within    relatively complex    learning   processes
perhaps with multiple branching ­ as the flexibility of multiple learning pathways (see: Looi, et al., 2009) is a
significant feature for seamless or authentic learning environments. In our diagrams, we observed what Stahl
(2002) conceptualizes as "... the construction of knowledge artifacts, involving physical and symbolic artifacts
as starting point, as medium and as product." (p.67) Artifacts changed their roles through learners' appropriation
for carrying out different learning tasks. Seamless learners ought to assume greater agency in deciding what and
how to learn, either personally or collaboratively and across different learning spaces, rather than always being
"dictated" by the externally-supplied mediating artifacts with prescribed roles. In turn, their habit of mind and
skills of identifying and appropriating artifacts (including their previously learned knowledge and previously
created artifacts) to mediate both their planned and incidental learning would become crucial for them.
          Second, the above-stated literature almost only portrayed ideal situations where all mediating artifacts
worked well in supporting student learning. As artifacts, in nature, both enable and constrain human activities
(Paavola   &  Hakkarainen,    2004),      we  identified    some  weak  links    (constraining  mediations)    of the   learning
processes  through    our analysis     on the  empirical    data ­   artifacts which   may  instead constrain  or  distract  the
learning tasks under certain circumstances. We believe that such findings (together with the identified positive
emergent strategies and teacher's scaffolds) could be used to inform future pedagogical and even technological
(re)design to eliminate or reduce such constrains and strengthen the use of emergent positive artifacts.

Conclusion and Future Work
This paper reports on our effort in analyzing the small-group f2f artifact co-creation processes in the "Move,
Idioms!" learning environment. We derived an artifact-oriented visualization approach, inspired by the notions
of "mediation  by     artifacts" and   distributed   cognition,  to  meet  this  end.  Due  to  the strong  nature   of situated
learning in our design, analyzing the discourses among the group members leading to their outcome artifact co-
creations without taking into consideration their interactions with the environment is inadequate. We believe
such   an approach    can also   be applied    to   analyze  the students'     personal, out-of-school  learning  experiences,
especially that the small-group artifact co-creation activities were designed in the way as a preparation of their
personal artifact creation activities in informal settings. Subsequently, the interplay between collaborative and
personal learning can be investigated. Still, more work need to be done to formalize the approach, such as a
more rigorous categorization of artifacts, the similarities and differences in applying the approach to analyze
collaborative and personal learning experiences, and how can it be applied to inform future learning design.

References
Alcock, S. J. (2005). A socio-cultural interpretation of young children's playful and humorous communication. PhD
          Dissertation, Massey University, Palmerston North, New Zealand.

© ISLS                                                                                                                       150
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                 Volume I: Long Papers

Chan, T.-W., Roschelle, J., Hsi, S., Kinshuk, Sharples, M., Brown, T., et al. (2006). One-to-one technology-enhanced
         learning: An opportunity for global research collaboration. Research and Practice in Technology-Enhanced
         Learning, 1(1), 3-29.
Coffield, F. (2000). The structure below the surface: reassessing the significance of informal learning. In F. Coffield
         (Ed.), The Necessity of Informal Learning (pp. 1-11). Bristol: Policy Press.
Cole, M. (1996). Cultural Psychology: A Once and Future Discipline. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Conole, G. (2008). Capturing practice: The role of mediating artefacts in learning design. In L. Lockyer, S. Bennett, S.
         Agostinho & B. Harper (Eds.), Handbook of Research on Learning Design and Learning Objects: Issues,
         Applications and Technologies (pp. 187-207). Hershey, PA: IGI Global.
Hatch, T., & Gardner, H. (1993). Finding cognition in the classroom: an expanded view of human intelligenc. In G.
         Salomon (Ed.), Distributed Cognitions (pp. 164-187). New York: Cambridge University Press.
Hollan, J., Hutchins, E., & Kirsh, D. (2002). Distributed cognition: Toward a new foundation for Human-Computer
         Interaction research. In J. M. Carroll (Ed.), Human-Computer Interaction in the New Millennium (pp. 75-94).
         New York: ACM Press Addison.
Hutchins, E. (1987). Metaphors for interface design ICS Report 8703. La Jolla: University of California, San Diego.
Latour, B. (1996). On interobjectivity. Mind, Culture and Activity, 3(4), 228-245.
Lei, X. (2008). Exploring a sociocultural approach to writing strategy research: Mediated actions in writing activities.
         Second Language Writing, 17, 217-236.
Leont'ev, A. N. (1974). The problem of activity in psychology. Soviet Psychology, 13(2), 4-33.
Leont'ev, A. N. (1981). The problem of activity in psychology. In J. V. Wertsch (Ed.), The Concept of Activity in
         Soviet Psychology (pp. 37-71). Armonk, NY: Sharpe.
Liang, X. (2009). Investigating mediations in student activities in an English immersion context in mainland China.
         English Language Teaching, 2(4), 38-50.
Looi, C.-K., Wong, L.-H., So, H.-J., Seow, P., Toh, Y., Chen, W., et al. (2009). Anatomy of a mobilized lesson:
         Learning my way. Computers & Education, 53(4), 1120-1132.
Looi, C.-K., Wong, L.-H., & Song, Y. (in-press). Discovering Mobile Computer Supported Collaborative Learning. In
         C. Hmelo-Silver, A. O'Donnell, C. Chan & C. Chinn (Eds.), The International Handbook of Collaborative
         Learning. New York: Routledge.
Miller, G. A., & Gildea, P. M. (1987). How children learn words. Scientific American, 257, 94-99.
Nardi,  B. A. (1996).   Studying  context: A   comparison of activity  theory, situated action  models,  and distributed
         cognition.   In B. A.   Nardi  (Ed.), Context  and  Consciousness:    Activity Theory   and Human-Computer
         Interaction (pp. 35-52). Cambridge: MIT Press.
Noel, K. A. (2001). New orientations in language learning motivation: Towards a model of intrinsic, extrinsic, and
         integrative  orientations and   motivation. In Z.  Dörnyei   &  R.  Schmidt    (Eds.), Motivation and   Second
         Language     Acquisition  (pp. 43-68). Honolulu:   University  of  Hawaii,   Second    Language Teaching   and
         Curriculum Center.
Paavola, S., & Hakkarainen, K. (2004). "Trialogical" processes of mediation through conceptual artifacts. Paper
         presented at the Scandinavian Summer Cruise at the Baltic Sea 2004, Stockholm, Sweden.
Rogers, Y., & Price, S. (2008). The role of mobile devices in facilitating collaborative inquiry in situ. Resarch and
         Practice in Technology Enhanced Learning, 3(3), 209-229.
Rubin, J., & Thompson, I. (1982). How to be a More Successful Language Learners. Boston: Heinle and Heinle.
Stahl, G. (2002). Contributions to a theoretical framework for CSCL. Proceedings of the Conference on Computer
         Support for Collaborative Learning (pp. 62-71), Boulder, USA.
Suthers, D.  (2006).  Technology   affordances  for  intersubjective meaning   making:  A  research  agenda  for CSCL.
         Computer Supported Collaborative Learning, 1(3), 315-337.
Titone, R. (1969). Guidelines for teaching second language in its own environment. The Modern Language, 53(5),
         306-309.
Wang, X. C., & Ching, C. C. (2003). Social construction of computer experience in a first-grade classroom: Social
         processes and mediating artifacts. Early Education and Development, 14(3), 335-361.
Wells, G. (2002). Dialogue in activity theory. Mind, Culture and Activity, 9(1), 43-66.
Wong, L.-H. (2010a). From facilitated seamless learning to self-directed seamless learning. Proceedings of the Global
         Chinese Conference on Computers in Education 2010 (pp. 33-40), Singapore.
Wong, L.-H. (2010b). Theme-based Invited Speech (CUMTEL). Paper presented at the International Conference on
         Computers in Education 2010, Putrajaya, Malaysia.
Wong, L.-H., Boticki, I., Sun, J., & Looi, C.-K. (in press). Improving the scaffolds of a mobile-assisted Chinese
         character forming game via a design-based research cycle. Computers in Human Behavior.
Wong, L.-H., Chin, C.-K., Tan, C.-L., & Liu, M. (2010). Students' personal and social meaning making in a Chinese
         idiom mobile learning environment. Educational Technology & Society, 13(4), 15-26.
Wong, L.-H., & Looi, C.-K. (2010). Vocabulary learning by mobile-assisted authentic content creation and social
         meaning-making: Two case studies. Computer Assisted Learning, 26(5), 421-433.
Zhang, B., Looi, C.-K., Seow, P., Chia, G., Wong, L.-H., Chen, W., et al. (2010). Deconstructing and reconstructing:
         Transforming primary science learning via a mobilized curriculum. Computers & Education, 55(4), 1504-
         1523.

© ISLS                                                                                                               151
