CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                   Volume I: Long Papers

  Weather Gods and Fruit Kids ­ Embodying Abstract Concepts
              Using Tactile Feedback and Whole Body Interaction
       Carolina Johansson, Zeynep Ahmet, Jakob Tholander, Franc Aleo, Mobile Life Centre, Forum 100,
                                                 164 40 Kista, Sweden,
         Email: lina@mobilelifecentre.org, zeynepa@mobilelifecentre.org, jakob@mobilelifecentre.org,
                                                franc@mobilelifecentre.org
                  Martin Jonsson, Saiful Sumon, Södertörn University, 141 89 Huddinge, Sweden,
                                Email: martin.jonsson@sh.se, saiful.islam.sumon@sh.se

          Abstract:   In   this paper we   present findings  based on   the design   and   study of a game   like
          activity that allows for physical and bodily interaction around abstract concepts like energy
          and energy consumption in a collaborative learning setting. The game, called Weather Gods
          and   Fruit Kids,  uses   motion   sensing  technologies   in  combination    with  tactile and   audio
          feedback to create an embodied interactive setting without computer screens. We analyze and
          discuss the properties of the interactive setting as well as the interactions with and around the
          system using characteristics such as multiple modalities of response, large space interaction
          and aspects of focus and attention. The work suggests that alternative pedagogical activities
          can be created providing new entries to theoretical concepts using an embodied interaction
          approach. In particular it may support kinesthetic learners in their preference to learn by being
          physically engaged.

Introduction
The use of physical and tangible objects has been a longstanding approach in design of technology for learning.
A common argument both in learning technology design and human-computer interaction has been that physical
interaction supports making abstract notions more concrete and easy to grasp (Ullmer & Ishii, 2000). A more
recent trend is to design for interaction and experiences that involve bodily action and movement in a more
significant way than by only introducing tangible interaction elements. This trend is sometime referred to as
whole   body  interaction.  Letting   people engage   in  interactions  using their  whole   bodies   provides way  to  let
people have new forms of experiences with technology that could not be achieved in a traditional hand-eye
interaction styles.
          In this paper we explore a game like activity called the Weather Gods and Fruit Kids designed for
bodily interaction and kinesthetic learning in a school setting. The technology is designed to support children to
interactively   experience   consumption,    preservation  and  creation   of energy,   by   sensing  and   responding  to
different aspects    of the  children's   movements.   Here   we  will   present  the design   of the   game,  the design
explorations leading up to it and some key outcomes from a study of children using the game.
          Bodily   interaction   and  the involvement  of    body and    movement    to interact  with  technology   is an
important part in the shift towards so-called post-WIMP interfaces. It concerns how by moving away from the
traditional mouse and keyboard interaction we can allow for a richer, more multifaceted way of interacting with
technology. By opening up the interaction space to include our full body we make use of a bigger range of our
perceptual resources to make sense and understand the world (Klemmer et al., 2006). A range of recent work in
HCI has addressed how bodily interactions and experiences should be understood and designed for, examples
include focus on the felt aspects of experiences (Larssen et al., 2007) and approach of designing for the aesthetic
dimension    of   physical  experiences   (Schiphorst, 2009).   To   understand   such   processes  of  experience  some
researchers   have    taken  inspiration   from  physical    activities with  non-digital   devices   such  as  golf   and
skateboarding,    or  even  horseback    riding in  order to  outline   key dimensions     of physical  experiences    (see
Tholander & Johansson, 2010; Höök, 2010).
          The   focus   of the  findings  presented here  is on the  different   ways children   use  their bodies in   the
interaction, the  kind  of  experiences    they have, and  the  role the  technology    plays in  these processes. In   the
analysis presented we use the three themes from the analysis by Jonsson et al. on interactive spaces for physical
interaction;  (i) the role  of  the  embodied   performance   for  others;  (ii) the  role of the physical   space in   the
interaction, and (iii) the role of device specific qualities in the unfolding of the interaction (Jonsson et al., 2009).

Background
There are the numerous explorations of technology that illustrate new ways of increasing bodily involvement in
interaction, such as the Lega device for leaving physical traces of experiences at an art hall (Laaksolahti et al.,
2010) , the eMoto system for bodily emotional expression (Sundström et al. 2007), BodyBeats for dance-based
music  creation   (Zigelbaum     et al., 2006), BodyBug   the  interactive  movement     partner  (Moen,    2005)  and  the
emotion and movement controlled game Emroll (Zangouei et al., 2010). Bodily ways of interacting have also

© ISLS                                                                                                                  160
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                Volume I: Long Papers

grown commercially and become particularly popular in computer games. This includes an array of dancing and
sports games. For instance in Dance Dance Revolution where the player follow a sequence of instructions by
dancing on a sensor mat, in WiiSports sports where the player performs movements mimicking those required in
real games of bowling, boxing, tennis, or in music games like Guitar Hero and Rock Band where the player acts
out pieces   of  music   by playing   on replicas of real  instruments. These   technical developments     have drawn
attention   to the   need   to further understand    people's   interaction and experiences    with   bodily  engaging
technology, as well as to the interplay between physical, social and digital aspects of our experiences.
          Issues of   physicality, materiality, and  social space  are central in  research on  embodied   interaction,
pervasive computing and tangible interfaces, in which the particular physical manifestation of a computational
artifact and its consequences for people's interaction and learning with and through the artifact is commonly
brought   to   discussion   (Hornecker &   Buur   2006; Klemmer    et  al., 2006).  These   issues are also  becoming
increasingly relevant for design of collaborative technology for learning (Price, Sheridan et al., 2010) through
the emphasis on how cognitive processes are deeply intertwined with and dependent upon our physical bodies
and our relations to the material and physical properties of our social world. We experience and make sense of
the world by moving in it, by exploring new situations through bodily interaction and with the material, physical
and social surroundings (Lakoff & Johnson, 1999; Säljö, 2000). Thus, new interactive technologies that support
mobile, bodily, and social activities beyond the desktop setting enable a shift both in the development of new
forms of user interactions and experiences, as well as new tools to be used in learning activities. This aligns with
much CSCL research as not being only the study of how people interact and learn with designed artifacts, but
also the study and design of the situations in which efficient learning is taking place (Price & Rogers, 2004).
          This paper presents findings from our close collaboration with an elementary school in Stockholm,
where we made use of bodily interaction in a kinesthetic learning context. This ongoing collaboration started in
large parts due to their pedagogical planning, their continuous use of technology in the classrooms and their
extensive work with different learning styles (Dunn & Dunn, 1992). The work presented here falls within the
area of so called kinesthetic learning, which is about how we understand and learn through bodily interactions
and through moving in the world. The learning styles perspective starts out from the idea that different persons
have   different preferences   with respect to   how   they engage  in  pedagogical  activities. Out   of the  different
learning  styles adopted    by  the school, the   teachers  were most   challenged  to find  ways   of supporting   the
kinesthetic learners. A person characterized as primarily "kinesthetic" learn best by incorporating their entire
body and movement in the learning process and these persons often have problems sitting still in one place and
might prefer dramatizing and learning by doing or acting out. This acknowledgement of the importance of the
tactile and kinesthetic dimensions fits well with recent research on tangible user interfaces and the emerging
bodily   interaction  field as described  above.  In a  previous study  with   the school we  explored    how  learning
situations can be created in mixed digital and physical settings, and how the properties of the respective media
can be utilized to support exploration and learning (Ahmet et al., 2011). With the Weather Gods and Fruit Kids
game,    we  continue  this work   by  exploring  how  abstract notions of  energy  and energy   consumption    can be
turned into something that can be experienced and interacted with in a physical manner using your body and
movement.

The Weather Gods and Fruit Kids Game
The game Weather Gods and Fruit Kids is a result of a design process involving three previous workshops, one
involving school teachers, and two where the children were introduced to the concept of energy in various ways.
          The purpose of the first workshop was to find a concept for the children to explore through kinesthetic
learning. Three teachers together with two members in the project group had a brainstorming session around
some preliminary ideas. The teachers would reflect on suggestions for each of the ideas, and how they could be
incorporated into their own respective teaching subjects where they themselves had difficulties incorporating
kinesthetic dimensions.     After numerous suggestions, the concept of consumption, charging and preservation of
energy through using bodily movement was chosen.
          The second workshop was designed as a bodystorming session with 20 children, to explore alternative
pedagogical    activities involving motion  sensors   and  energy  consumption.    The children  wore  plastic stickers
attached on arms and legs (see Figure 1), simulating sensors that would detect their energy consumption. The
estimated energy consumption was then visualized on a computer screen and was reflected on during and/or
after each exercise. The exercises involved throwing a large and small ball where the children would observe
and compare the visualization of their respective energy consumption levels, moving to mimic a set of pictures
(like  a kite, snake  or  basket ball) and  moving   according  to specific  movement   types,   such as  slow motion,
robotic movement and big and round movements. The aim of the workshop was to simulate, rather ambiguously
but in a simple manner, what it means to consume energy. Through different types of movements involving
different body parts with varied intensity and strength, the children would at times comment on each other's
movements and how it could be that certain movement types required more energy and why energy levels could
at times differ from their own expectations.

© ISLS                                                                                                              161
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                 Volume I: Long Papers

          In the third workshop the children were equipped with real sensors that would actually estimate their
energy consumption. Ten children in groups of two were equipped with Nintendo Wii Remotes, nicknamed Wii
Motes, on one arm and one leg. While performing a number of exercises they were encouraged to hypothesize
and think  about   the outcomes  from   the  exercises  they   were undertaking:   i) running   vs. walking    where  the
children would firstly eat a slice of apple and then either run or walk while observing on a computer screen the
type of activity that "consumed" the eaten apple the fastest, ii) the children would operate a lamp and a fan,
while observing which appliance would run the longest on the approximate energy amount found in the slice of
apple they had previously eaten, iii) moving to charge a `smart battery' while listening to audio and vibration as
feedback, the children would try to find the movement patterns that triggered a rhythmic sound from the Wii
Motes. In this workshop, as well as the previous one, the use of sensors, simple visualizations and exercises
were not meant to provide the perfect setting nor the correct procedures for analyzing e.g. energy consumption
in real life but were designed to spur discussions with the children about the subject energy.

 Figure 1. Workshop 2 (left) with Fake Sensor and Wizard of Oz Prototype. Workshop 3 (right) Attaching Wii
                      Motes to Arms and Legs to Detect Movement and Energy Consumption.

          In the   two  workshops     with the  children,   we   found  that although   the  children   were   exploring
consumption and preservation of energy, they did it in a very controlled and structured manner. The activities
did not contain much free exploration and experimentation around the concepts. The most striking result from
these  workshops   was   however    how    much   the presence   of a  computer    screen affected   and   restricted the
movements in the room as well as the interaction between the children. Based on these findings we decided to
continue with the relation between body and energy, but in a more self-contained activity were the technology
would restrict the activity in the room as little as possible. From these requirements we ended up with an idea of
a game activity without computer screens taking place in a large space like a gym hall.

The Game
The Weather Gods and Fruit Kids game engage four players to compete against each other in pairs by physically
moving    about in a  large space,  a gym   hall, and simulating  the  generation,  consumption     and preservation   of
energy (see Figure 2). All players wear Wii Motes attached to one arm and one leg. The objective of the two
fruit kids is to collect fruit cards that are spread out around an obstacle course, while not touching the ground.
The motion sensors on the arms and legs of the players are used to estimate the amount of energy consumed
when moving around the track. If not moving carefully, the players will run out of energy and thus lose the
game. By collecting fruit and bringing it to their `nest' they will refill their energy levels.
          The opposite   team,  the weather   gods,   tries to obstruct the  fruit kids by   stealing their energy.   By
engaging in various magic dances, they charge energy that can when accumulated be released in the form of
thunder and lightning (by pressing a button on the arm-mounted Wii Mote), which will reduce the energy level
of the fruit kids. Moving around on a stage placed next to the obstacle course, the gods have a good view of
where the fruit kids are and their actions. Rather than performing specific gestures or steps the weather gods
interaction is designed for free flowing movement of a specific type: Big & Fast, Slow-motion and Robotic. In
Big & Fast mode the movement is free but needs to be large and quick, in Slow-motion the movements need to
be slow, smooth and continuous while in Robotic the motion should be very sharp, edgy and staccato. If the fruit
kids manage to collect all the fruit without running out of energy they will replace the weather gods, and can be
challenged by a new team of fruit kids.
          The design was inspired by three of the interactional qualities introduced by Tholander & Johansson
for whole body interaction: connecting to the physical space, harmonizing modalities and open-ended response
(Tholander & Johansson, 2010). To allow for a head-up interaction (Soute et al., 2009), giving the player the
possibility to freely explore movements in the physical space and be part of and aware of the larger activity in
the hall, the interaction   was designed   specifically to   not occupy  the  player's  full attention, e.  g. by visual
feedback on a screen. Instead, to allow for a continuous attention to the activity and each other, harmonizing
modalities was chosen in the form of vibration and audio feedback to support their understanding of their status

© ISLS                                                                                                                162
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                   Volume I: Long Papers

in the game. The Nintendo Wii technology was used for motion sensing as well as for tactile vibration feedback
both for weather gods and the fruit kids. The current energy level of a fruit kid is represented as individual
feedback through the use of vibration pulses with varying frequency; high energy - high frequency vibration and
vice versa.  For  the  weather   gods   the  response was    designed  to be  semi open-ended     to allow  for individual
interpretation by the player, and no specific instructions were given on how to know when enough energy had
been accumulated. The vibration would indicate whether the user's current body motion was the expected one,
by vibrating at a regular time interval. Consequently, a lack of vibration could alert the user that the right dance
style is not being danced.
           Different forms of audio feedback was also used in the game, e.g. to inform when the fruit kids were
out of energy, when lightning was thrown or when fruit cards were collected and new energy had been charged.
All these sounds were provided through shared speakers that all players would hear. Individual sound feedback
was  also  provided   to the weather    gods  through    the Wii   Motes   on the arms   to indicate  whether   they were
performing the indicated movement type. These sounds were very faint and were mostly only perceived by the
bearer of the Wii Mote. The only visual feedback provided by the system was through a light flash that would
light up the room whenever lightning was thrown by the weather gods. The researchers played no active role in
the game other than indicating a change of dance style to the weather gods by holding up large signs from the
tech booth situated inside a smaller room adjacent to the game area.

  Figure 2. The game field with fruit kids' obstacle course and the weather gods' stage created in a gym hall.

Study and Method
Eleven children between the ages of 9 to 11 participated in the study. The study began with a sum up of the two
previous workshops, an introduction to the game and a warm up session with playfully moving about according
to the three weather god dances. Four children at a time would play the game while the others were observing on
the  side. A total of   six game    sessions  were   played  followed    by semi-structured    interviews  with questions
formulated   to  gather  qualitative    data on  how     the activity  was    perceived, the   purpose   and also   of the
understanding of the underlying discussions around the concept of energy. The interviews and the game sessions
were video recorded, with one camera filming an overview of the hall and the second filming the stage.

Findings
The  particular  focus  of  the  findings  presented  here   is on the different ways  children   use their  bodies in the
interaction, the kind of experiences they have, and the role the technology plays in these processes. The analysis
is framed around the three themes presented by Jonsson et al. on design of spaces for embodied performance.
The themes were adapted to the analysis of the interaction and learning in and around the Weather Gods and
Fruit Kids game. The themes were interpreted and viewed upon in the following way; Embodied performance
refers to  how the    activities take place  in an open   space    without  computer screens     as dominating  source  of
interaction with the participants. We also focused on the communicative function of different actions in the
game, of how the actions performed by the actors in the game were not only directed towards the system and/or
the game, but also played a performative role, directed more towards the other players and the spectators. The
role of the  physical   space    refers to  how the   configuration   of  the physical   setting affects and restricts the
interaction in numerous ways. The role of the physical space becomes especially interesting in this case since
the  interactive system  is  situated   in a gym   hall, which   not  only  provided a   large space  for interaction  and
performance but also a space where the children are accustomed to moving and bodily ways of playing. Device
specific qualities refer to how the properties of interaction devices and objects shape how the overall system and
the game as a whole is perceived and interacted with. A particularly prominent aspect was how the setting and
the devices encouraged the children to put significant efforts into interacting with the partner, the surrounding
and the co-players rather than the technology. The findings are presented below, divided into each theme.

© ISLS                                                                                                                 163
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                  Volume I: Long Papers

Embodied Performance and Experience
When    performing    the  different weather  god  dances,   the children   were   observed   moving   their bodies  and
different body parts equally much, with no specific emphasis on the arm or leg with the Wii Motes attached.
Although instructed that the Wii Motes would sense and pick up their movement, they did not move that arm or
leg more than the other; instead their whole bodies were involved and engaged. In a sense they were doing more
than needed of movement, with the focus on the dance rather than the Wii Mote. In most cases with the weather
gods the Wii Motes were just there, not dictating their movement or focus but was rather an extension of the
body, creating an embodied experience and augmenting the child's ability to interact in the game. The children
had done the same movement types in the previous third workshop, but had then moved in a more controlled
and smaller manner. In the game however, when performing the very same movement types, they did so in a
much more elaborate and free way. The game setting and its context, with the Wii Motes and the beforehand
decided  dances,  seemed     to give  the children a  frame  within which     it was allowed  to play  out  and   move in
strange ways.   While   waiting   for their game   to start, one   pair of  weather  gods  would   try out  the   different
movement types and mimic shooting out a `flash' by aiming with their arms out towards the fruit kids tracks.
One pair pretended to be hit by each other's flashes by shaking their bodies and laughing. In this warm-up some
couples would also rehearse movements to do later on in the game, like one pair doing a skier-movement. The
freedom of how to move brought out the element of choreography in how many weather gods came up with
their own movements.
         While   on   stage,  some   weather  gods  were seen    making     weird, tricky and complicated    movements
involving the whole body from snaking with the head, twirling their fingers around and letting the experience be
seen also in their facial expressions (see Figure 3). One pair doing the robotic dance made `sch-sch' sounds to
go with their movement, when trying to get into a rhythm. The freedom space in the game context seemed to
allow  for  the children   to tailor their  own  individual  experience    of really getting  into the movement.    This
embodied experience was also shown in how many gestures and actions were exaggerated, for example the
sending off of a `flash'. The action was described as pushing a button on the Wii Mote, but on stage during the
game the weather gods were seen to be in a more embodied state with not only pressing the button, but instead
using their whole body to aim with the arm fully stretched out forward from the shoulder. Some were even
squinting with their eyes as if looking through a riflescope to aim the flash (see Figure 3).

Figure 3. (Left and middle) Weather gods getting into the grove of moving, acting out with the whole body, and
                                 (right) aiming with the whole body to shoot a flash.

The Role of the Physical Space
In the whole body interaction in large space as a gym hall, the interaction space could be seen as divided into
personal, near and far space. Firstly the weather gods would interact with their Wii Motes within their own
personal space, their bodily sphere. One weather god moving in Robotic style was constantly changing the gaze
of his eyes with sharp movement with the head to different directions showing how the interaction allowed for
zooming out from what was happening in the surroundings and opened up for zooming in on the own personal
experience and expression of the movement.
         The second interaction space, the near space, included the fellow weather god on the stage. Despite the
relative large open space, the weather gods tended to move around close to each other. When interacting in
body-to-body style, i.e. doing fake hitting movements at each other in slow-motion, the closeness was natural
but was also observed when moving freely but following each other around. When moving this close to each
other  they would     also at times  affect the movement     space of   the other  person and hence    also  this persons
movements (see Figure 4). E.g. one pair moving close by each other in slow motion was seen to adjust their
bodies around each other with one moving her torso to make room for the other persons arm to slice through
that personal space.
         Lastly the stage was part of the larger gym hall space, and situated very close to the fruit kids. The
children on stage would mostly have their focus on each other or on their own movement. Sometimes however,

© ISLS                                                                                                                 164
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                            Volume I: Long Papers

events  would   make   them  become aware   of the far-space. For example  at  one point  the weather   gods were
looking only at each other but when hearing the loud `eat'-sound, meaning a fruit kid had collected a fruit card
and had raised his/her energy level, they looked up at the fruit kids. Then one of the weather god girls tapped the
other one of the shoulder, said something in a low voice where after they both started moving more intensely to
generate more energy. Many weather god pairs also talked about waiting for the fruit kids to get new energy
from fruit cards before they sent off a flash, showing how the interaction allowed them to stay aware of the
surrounding environment, what was happening out on the fruit kids track, despite their at times deep dive into
the movement and their personal sphere.

 Figure 4. Two weather gods influencing each other's movement space when doing a fake hitting action in the
                                               slow-motion dance.

          Similar behavior was also seen with the fruit kids where in most situations they had their eyes on their
own search for fruit cards. However, a sudden flash thrown by the weather gods made one fruit kid pair look up,
where after they both started moving at a quicker pace (see Figure 5). They would jump down and almost run
into their nest instead of calmly moving about as when they started the game. Despite the fact that they knew
that moving in a faster manner will make them loose more energy, it was over ridden by the time pressure of
getting their fruit cards to raise their energy level. In another session both fruit kids started to hurry up their pace
after throwing glances at the stage where the weather gods were getting ready to fire off a flash.
          Another example of becoming aware of far space happened when one weather god pair changed dance
style into Big & Fast and started their beforehand rehearsed skier-movement, suddenly making a lot of thuds
and noise on stage. One fruit kid on a path very close to the stage then started to move in a more hurried way.
Prior  to this, she had  moved in a controlled   and slow  manner, to conserve  her  energy,  but  the loudness  of
movement    from   the stage made her   look  up and  then move   faster (see Figure  5). For   the fruit kids, the
importance of their role was to find a balance between movement and pace, in order to balance consumption and
preservation of energy. While they were focused on finding and retrieving fruit cards to their nest, they would
consider the implications of moving too fast (naturally leading to them consuming energy) and moving too slow
(and becoming the targets of the weather gods' lightning).
          Generally throughout the sessions both weather gods and fruit kids focus was observed to be mainly on
the personal and near space but how the children spoke of their opponents in the game also shows how they did
have a connection to the environment, that the interaction with the technology did not hijack their focus from
being  aware    of their surroundings. Sound   announcements   from the  speakers  as well   as noise  from  large
movements on stage, did also alert the players to look up and observe the other team.

Figure 5. (Left and middle) Fruit kids keeping an eye on the weather gods before and while a flash, and (right)
       fruit kid becoming aware of the game situation by the loudness of movement from the weather gods.

Device Specific Qualities of Interaction
The   vibration  from  the Wii Motes   to the  weather god's  movement    was  an open-ended    response,  and  no
instructions were given as to when and how it would feel when enough energy was loaded to send off a flash.
When asked how they knew that they had enough energy to send off a flash, one weather god said: "When it
had a very high pulse", showing with one hand over the wrist where the Wii Mote was attached. Another God
said that when "it was shaking much" they would alert each other through a code-word to coordinate to send off
a flash. Sometimes the technology was not working properly, with the Wii Motes not being active, but those
weather gods would find interesting ways to work around the tech gap, with one child saying "I didn't feel

© ISLS                                                                                                          165
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                               Volume I: Long Papers

anything from mine, but I heard that Otto's was going on like this" as to how he would hear the vibrations of his
partner's Wii Mote as a cue for sending off a flash. Even though this was a discrete sound it apparently caught
the attention  despite  the surrounding    noise. This  personal  feedback became  a  joint feedback  in between    the
weather gods and helped them coordinate their actions.
          For fruit kids it was rather the absence of vibration that caught their attention. When asked what was a
bit challenging in gameplay, they said "One felt when there was little left, and if one wasn't back in the nest
then   I thought   `I have to  hurry' and  started    moving  faster but then I thought  `no, I have  to take   it slow
otherwise...", showing how also the absence or the very weak vibration feedback made them notice and become
aware of their status in the game. The low volume sound emitted from the The Wii Motes of the weather gods
was an open-ended response. One child said "And then there were these tiny clicking sounds, when one was
doing the right movement" about how he interpreted it as doing the right movement type. This was a rather faint
sound (as the Wii Mote speakers did not allow a strong sound) and thus became more of a personal feedback.
          When   basing    our interaction on the  familiar   Wii  technology we  were   half expecting  to  see   some
children just shaking the Wii Motes to generate energy instead of moving according to dance styles. Contrary to
this though, the children were in most cases moving as if the Wii Motes were not there, e. g. when acting as a
robot and mimicking it with their whole bodies. Those times when it did come into focus were situations when
the technology did not work or the Wii Motes fell out of the attachments to the body. Also the participants
seemed to be aware of the Wii Motes more in the very beginning of their game. One fruit kid began to hold the
arm where the Wii Mote was attached rather stiff through the track, but as the game progressed the movements
became more smooth and he would move freely also with the Wii Mote arm. Even the weather gods would
check that they were securely fastened but when the game progressed they would move more as one entity with
the Wii Mote, rather than focus on it. From the weather gods there was a natural focus on our tech booth as they
would receive cues for changing dance style by us holding up a sign. Yet they would aim to shoot a flash at the
fruit kids and not towards our tech booth where the loudspeaker and the flashing lamp was situated.
          In the interviews, the experience of the vibration feedback on the skin did mostly arise as a topic when
describing different peak situations, such as almost being out of energy or being ready to fire off a flash. Fruit
kid players did not speak specifically of the healthy high pulse that meant they were doing fine and had energy
to take them through the tracks, but talked about being aware of it when the pulse grew weak and the energy
started to run out. The loud audio feedback from the speakers would make the children look up and make them
aware of changes in the game. When waiting in line to play, the children would observe the games and as the
session progressed they learned tactics of how to move to win. But when asked what they understood when they
were observing, one boy said "one didn't know how it felt" and his friend "and how fast one could move before
it ran out", in support of how the vibration feedback actually did help them understand their status in the game.

Discussion and Conclusions
The gym hall setting for the activity and our choice of using several different modalities had the effect that there
were no obvious points of focus for shared information about the status of the game. Even though based on and
dependent on technology, the activity became to a certain extent de-coupled from the computer system. Instead
of focusing on the technology, the different groups had their focus on their immediate activity and movement
and would from time to time update themselves by looking around or be made aware of the overall status in the
game by audio cues and events happening out in the hall. The system provided feedback and information in
multiple modalities: personal feedback in terms of on the skin vibration, joint sound feedback in the near space,
and public feedback through audio and light. The effect of designing open-ended vibration and sound feedback
yielded personal interpretation and enabled an individual experience. The vibration feedback proved to be a
strong   indicator and  was most  noticeable   when    situations reached some   kind of emergency   limit,  e.g.  when
energy ran low and the pulse grew weak, suggesting that the healthy pulse remains in the periphery until its
absence is discovered. It is felt via the body, just as we are unaware of the states of our body until a change
occurs that make us consciously focus on the body part that signals the change. This suggests how feedback felt
by  the  body  could   be  powerful  to use for   interaction in  environments  where  the  user's attention is   highly
distributed. Specifically,  it highlights  how    the absence  of a  feedback to the  body  can be  used  as a    strong
response to catch a user's attention.
          The game allowed for an element of performance in how the children would do more than needed by
the technology sensing their movement. In contrast to an earlier study of bodily interaction with a digital artefact
where the players spoke of trying to please the technology they were interacting with (Tholander & Johansson,
2010),   the children  playing  this game  did  not   move just   because the Wii Mote   needed  it but  because   their
experiences was built from movement and embodied interaction. It would have worked equally well to interact
with the system by only moving the Wii Mote arm and leg, but instead all children, moved their whole bodies in
rich ways. How the weather gods children would move in free, creative and engaged ways adding facial gestures
and sound effects, showed how the context of the game allowed for personal exploration a space of freedom to
tailor the activity to their own preference. These weird, exaggerated movements performed for the pleasure of

© ISLS                                                                                                               166
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                  Volume I: Long Papers

moving, shows how the activity opened up for an embodied experience with open-endedness in interaction and
response. It is also noticeable that for bodily movement interaction, the `safe zone' or frame for moving created
by the game, opened up the creativity space      for the children to dare to explore using movement.
         The    large space   gym  hall  setting for the activity   gave    different dimensions  for experience, from
embodied   interaction   in  the  personal space  to being    part of the   larger whole  in  the hall. To  successfully
interchange between near and far space, the interaction should make use of both system response (like audio)
but also alerts from     the real world  setting (of thuds,   noises, or other  naturally occurring   sound from  other
movers in the surrounding). We argue that by adapting the interchange needed between the different spaces, it is
possible to build activities and learning environments that allow for both a rich experience of small details in the
personal space to a joint understanding of concepts in the larger whole, through both system and real world
feedback and interaction.
         The    aim   of the  project was  to explore  the    possibilities to spur   discussions in  a subject through
designing for learning by using bodily movement in a large space setting. Based on the outcomes of our design
process and the game, we argue that this shows a promising approach for designing for alternative pedagogical
practices that supports in particular kinesthetic learners in their need to learn by being physically engaged.

References
Ahmet, Z., Jonsson, M., Sumon, S. I. and Holmquist, L. E. (2011) Supporting embodied exploration of physical
         concepts in mixed digital and physical interactive settings. TEI `11. ACM
Dunn, R. and Dunn, K. Teaching elementary students through their individual learning styles. Allyn & Bacon Inc,
         Boston, 1992.
Hornecker, E. and J. Buur (2006). Getting a Grip on Tangible Interaction: A Framework on Physical Space and Social
         Interaction. CHI 2006, Montreal, Canada, ACM Press.
Höök, K. (2010). Transferring Qualities from Horseback Riding to Design. In Proceedings of NordiCHI, Reykjavik,
         Iceland, October 18 - 20, ACM Press
Jonsson, M., Tholander, J., Fernaeus, Y. (2009). Setting the stage ­ Embodied and spatial dimensions in emerging
         programming practices. Interacting with Computers 21(1-2): 117-124.
Klemmer, S. R., Hartmann, B., Takayama, L. (2006). How bodies matter: five themes for interaction design. DIS '06,
         ACM Press.
Laaksolahti, J., Tholander, J., Lundén, M., Solsona, J., Karlsson, A. (2011), The Lega: A Device for Leaving and
         Finding Tactile Traces, Proceedings of TEI' 11
Lakoff, G., Johnson, M. (1999). Philosophy in the Flesh: The Embodied Mind and Its Challenge to Western Thought.
         New York, Basic Books.
Larssen, A.T., Robertson, T., & Edwards, J. The feel dimension of technology interaction: exploring tangibles through
         movement and touch. TEI'07, (2007), 271-278.
Moen, J. (2005). Towards People Based Movement Interaction and KinAesthetic Interaction Experiences. In proc. of
         CC '05 decennial conference on Critical computing, August 21-25, Aarhus, Denmark.
Price, S., Sheridan J. G.et al. (2010). Action and representation in tangible systems: implications for design of learning
         interactions.   Proceedings  of the fourth  international conference   on  Tangible,   embedded, and embodied
         interaction. Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA, ACM: 145-152.
Schiphorst, T. soft(n): toward a somaesthetics of touch. Ext. Abs. CHI'09, (2009), 2427-2438.
Soute, I., Markopoulos, P., Magielse, R. (2009). Head Up Games: combining the best of both worlds by merging
         traditional and digital play. Personal Ubiquit. Computing, SpringerLink
Sundström, P., Ståhl, A. and Höök, K. (2007). In situ informants exploring an emotional mobile messaging system in
         their everyday practice. Int. J. Hum.-Comput.Stud., 65 (4). 388-403.
Säljö, R. (2000). Lärande i praktiken - ett sociokulturellt perspektiv. Bokförlaget Prisma.
Tholander, J., Johnssson, C. (2010). Bodies, boards, clubs and bugs: A study of bodily engaging artifacts. CHI10'
         Extended Abstract on Human factors, April 10-15, Atlanta, GA, USA
Tholander,  J., Johansson,    C.  (2010).  Design   qualities for  Whole    Body    Interaction ­  Learning from  Golf,
         Skateboarding and BodyBugging. NordiCHI'10, ACM Press
Ullmer, B. & Ishii, H.(2000). Emerging frameworks for tangible user interfaces. IBM Systems Journal, 39(3-4), 915-
         931.
Zangouei, F., Babazadeh Gashti, M. A., Höök, K., Tijs, T., de Vries, G-J., Westerink, J. (2010). How to Stay in the
         Emotional Rollercoaster: Lessons Learnt from Designing EmRoll. NordiCHI '10. ACM Press
Ziegelbaum, J., Millner, A., Desai, B., Ishii, H. (2006). BodyBeats: Whole-Body, Musical Interfaces for Children.
         CHI 06' April 22-27, Montréal, Québec, Canada, ACM press

Acknowledgments
We would like to thank the children and teachers at the elementary school for their ideas, inspiration and hours of fun
and creative participation. Also thanks to our colleagues for their input and comments.

© ISLS                                                                                                                167
