CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                    Volume I: Long Papers

     Improving the mCSCL Approach of a Mobile Chinese Character
              Forming Game via a Design-based Research Cycle
  Lung-Hsiang Wong, Learning Sciences Lab., National Institute of Education, 1, Nanyang Walk, Singapore
                                         637616, lunghsiang.wong@nie.edu.sg
     Ivica Boticki, Faculty of Electrical Engineering and Computing, University of Zagreb, Unska 3, Zagreb,
                                             Croatia, ivica.boticki@fer.hr
           Jizhen Sun, Chinese Culture University, 231 Section 2, Jian-Guo S. Road, Taipei, Taiwan,
                                                ccsun@sce.pccu.edu.tw
Chee-Kit Looi, Learning Sciences Lab., National Institute of Education, 1, Nanyang Walk, Singapore 637616,
                                                cheekit.looi@nie.edu.sg

         Abstract:     We  describe   one cycle   of  design-based   research    (DBR)   in  which    we  explore
         mCSCL through an iterative process of (re)designing and testing the learning approach with
         students. The mCSCL application assigns each student a component of a Chinese character
         and requires them to spontaneously form groups that can assemble a Chinese character. We
         observe the enactment of the learning design in two modes (with and without the ICT), and
         found the students favor the card mode over the phone mode due to their emergent trial-and-
         error strategy. That triggered us to examine the scaffolding strategies by exploring domain-
         oriented  theories   to inform   us in  deciding  how    we   should  accommodate      their use   of  the
         strategy. This cycle of DBR has reshaped our learning design. This paper brings to the fore the
         value of the interplay of theories, implementations and reflections as advocated by DBR.

Introduction
The proliferation of networked computers supplemented with software applications has provided us with a new
network-based     medium   to design  educational    services.  A variety  of  studies  in the field  of mCSCL      (mobile
Computer   Supported    Collaborative    Learning)  has  explored   opportunities   for designing   learning    applications
through  mobile    technologies   (Looi,  Wong,     &    Song,  in-press;  Zurita  &    Nussbaum,     2004).    While    such
innovations coupled with learning design look promising, we need to deal with the challenge of adoptability in
real classrooms.   We    adopted  a   design-based    research  (DBR)    perspective    to provide    a cyclic   process   of
designing, testing and redesigning the learning design and applications, and to integrate design principles with
technological affordances     to render  plausible  solutions.  Our goal   is to conduct   reflective   inquiry  to test  and
refine innovative learning environments as well as to refine new learning design principles.
         Building on prior studies, we propose the design of a model for a mobile synchronous collaborative
learning game     with the unique    characteristic of spontaneous     small  group formations.    In   the game,   students
follow or adapt the collaboration rules or scaffolds imposed both by the teacher and by the computer system. To
complete  the learning   tasks,  they must   draw   upon  their  social relationships   with other  students    to  negotiate
acceptable  solutions.  Previously,   we  developed    a fraction addition   game  system    and did    trials with primary
school  students. This   work    yielded positive   findings in students'  emergent    collaborative    strategies  (Boticki,
Looi, & Wong, 2010; Boticki, Wong, & Looi, 2010). We then reused the generic software architecture and
game model to implement "Chinese-PP", a game-based learning approach on collaborative Chinese character
formation. PP refers to  or "Pin yi Pin" in Chinese, which roughly means "trial assembling". Our DBR
methodology allowed us to collect and analyze data to many factors simultaneously and to use the rich data to
iteratively improve a design more rapidly than might be accomplished through systematic experimentation on
each   individual factor (Design-Based    Research    Collective, 2003).    Echoing  Roschelle   et   al.'s (2010)  call  for
transforming handheld collaborative tools to classroom modules, our ultimate goal is to elevate our game model
to a pedagogically-oriented learning environment that can facilitate the students' learning growth over the time,
rather than drilling   them through   repetitive  game   playing.  We   envisage  a series   of learning    activities to  be
conducted on a regular basis with varied scaffolds and rules undergirded with a theoretical framework.
         Now  that    we  have   the  mCSCL     tool, our  discovery    of the students'   collaborative    patterns   in the
fractions game and a theoretical framework for pedagogical design, we would like to adapt the model and the
tool to a different domain ­ the forming of a Chinese character from components. The students involved in
Chinese-PP  game      may  demonstrate    different   collaborative  patterns  and  encounter    different     challenges  in
achieving their game tasks as compared with the previous fractions game. Therefore, it was necessary for us to
conduct  experiments    with  students   using  Chinese-PP    as  part  of the DBR     process  of building     the learning
environment.
         This paper focuses on such a pilot trial of Chinese-PP, which was conducted in two modes, namely,
one using digital technology - the "phone mode" and the other without the digital technology - the "card mode".
The trial enabled us to examine the domain-independent and ­dependent collaborative patterns and attitudes of

© ISLS                                                                                                                    168
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                               Volume I: Long Papers

the students in each mode. With that, we gained a better understanding in the affordances of mobile technologies
in facilitating such a game. The findings will inform us in the subsequent revision of both the game model and
the mobile application, as well as assist us in fine-tuning of our pedagogical framework.

Background Literature

Chinese Character Learning
The Chinese script has always been the biggest challenge for learners of Chinese (Wong, Chai, & Gao, 2010; Y.
Zhu    & Hong,   2005).  Fan,  Tong    and  Song  (1987)  claim  that the logographic  nature   of the Chinese  script
constitutes the primary hurdle. Shen (2002) attributes the challenge to the retention of the combination of sound,
shape and meaning of a character in learners' long-term memory. This makes it even more difficult for a learner
whose first language is based on an alphabetic writing system to master Chinese (Ho, Ng, & Ng, 2003).
         The Chinese scripts are a principled and rule-based system ­ each Chinese character comprises of one
or more components, spatially arranged with certain principles (Liang, 2004). Most of the components have
fixed roles to play, as either a semantic component or a phonetic component; only a few of them play both roles.
Furthermore,  the  number   of    commonly    used  characters for learners   (1,000-3,000) is  much   larger than the
number of component types (< 100). The number of characters' spatial configuration is also limited and rule-
based. Zhao and Jiang (2006) propose that there are 10 basic spatial configurations for characters (see Figure 1).

1 ()          2()          3()          4()         5()          6()        7()        8 ()        9()        10()
          Figure 1. 10 Basic Spatial Configurations for Chinese Characters (with One Character Example Each).

         Studies (e.g., Wang, Perfetti, & Liu, 2003; Z. Zhu, 2004) have indicated that those who have acquired
Chinese characters recognize them mainly based on their structural elements such as graphic forms and spatial
configuration, treating each character as a salient perceptual unit. Tan and Peng (1991) also argue that analyzing
the 3-dimensional characteristics (spatial configuration, semantic element and graphic form) is the necessary
route leading to the effective recognition and reading of characters. Informed by language acquisition theories
(e.g., Comprehensible    Input    (Krashen, 1985),  Information  Processing   (Bialystok,  1978),  and Connectionism
(Gasser, 1990)) and Bloom's Taxonomy, we argue that there are six steps in acquiring Chinese characters, in
hierarchical order: comprehension, combination, memorizing, application, analyzing, and creation. The fact that
a limited number of semantic components and phonetic components can form a large number of characters leads
us to argue that learning characters through rearranging and combining their components in different positions is
cognitively effective,  as  it allows   learners to comprehend,    remember   and  apply   the principles of  character
formation.  This  process   also  has  the  potential to nurture the  ability of using educated    guesses when  they
encounter unfamiliar characters in reading (e.g., a character with the component is likely to carry a meaning
relevant to liquid, e.g.,  = river,  = wet).

Mobile-assisted Language Learning and mCSCL
In recent years, we have witnessed the paradigmatic development of the Mobile Assisted Language Learning
(MALL) framework in enhancing language learning (Wong, Chin, Tan, & Liu, 2010; Wong & Looi, 2010). The
focus of MALL research is shifting from content-based (delivery of relatively static learning content through
mobile devices) to design-oriented (design of authentic or social mobile learning activities) studies (Kukulska-
Hulme & Shield, 2007). In particular, Zurita and Nussbaum (2004) tapped on Syllable-mCSCL, a 1:1 (one-
device-per-student) mobile learning game to facilitate Spanish vocabulary learning for young children. In their
game design, the students were given language tasks that they had to solve by working in groups of three. A
syllable is assigned by the system to each group member's mobile device (e.g., "si", "la" and "bi") and the three
students need to determine sequences of the syllables to form correct Spanish words (e.g., "silabi").
         Latest developments in the field of mCSCL extend the idea of mobile learning with the collaborative
scaffolding   in order  to  include    both social  and  epistemic collaboration   scripts encouraging    small group
participation (Nussbaum,       et al., 2009). The   design  of  collaborative  scaffolding  should   encourage  social
interactions, facilitate joint problem solving, lead to richer knowledge construction and at the same time take
into account different and emerging roles, joint group goals and actions and facilitate verbal explanations. These
developments     mesh  well with   our  goal  of designing a component-based     Chinese   character learning  activity
through socio-cognitivist and socio-constructivist means.

© ISLS                                                                                                              169
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                   Volume I: Long Papers

Towards a One-to-One mCSCL Solution for Chinese Character Learning
Building on the work of other researchers (Zurita & Nussbaum, 2004), we developed the Form-A-One (FAO)
System, a mobile collaborative learning game with flexible, small group sizes. In Nussbaum's work, students
are assigned to fixed small groups before the beginning of the activities. We adapted Nussbaum's design so that
students would have to find and negotiate with other students to form their own groups spontaneously with no
fixed size. The activity is conducted in multiple rounds. In each round, a set of fractions are assigned by the
system server via 3G connections to individual students for them to form groups with the sum of the members'
fractions of each group equals one (e.g., a group of three with 3/6, 1/4, 2/8). When the game advances to the
next round, the existing groups are disbanded and a new set of fractions is assigned to the students. The activity
consists of  three    main    scaffolding sources:    technological, social  and the    teacher.    Technology    provides
scaffolding in both generic and context-specific rules and logic (in the form of software affordances), while the
teacher acts as facilitator and helps the students in dealing with impasses. Social scaffolding is encouraged in
order to increase student interaction and collaboration (Boticki, Looi & Wong, 2010).
         We conducted a pilot study in late 2009 that involved 16 Primary 3 students (Boticki, Looi, et al.,
2010) in Nan Chiau Primary School, Singapore. One important finding was the students' modification of their
initially chosen ad-hoc strategies (e.g., gender or personal preferences, looking for the same fractions, randomly
sending out invitations, etc., which inevitably ended with impasses) coming as a consequence of them realizing
the importance of achieving the global goals besides their local group goal, therefore learning how to collaborate
(e.g., breaking out groups for improved solutions). We then analyzed the process by examining the evidence and
what it took, in the form of teacher, technology or social scaffolding, to achieve the four elements/principles of
cooperative learning (Johnson & Johnson, 1994): positive interdependence, maximum peer interaction, equal
opportunity to participate, and individual accountability.
         Similar to the fractions game, the Chinese-PP activity is conducted in multiple rounds. In each round, a
set of Chinese components are assigned by the FAO system server to individual students' smart-phones (with
the Chinese-PP client application installed ­ see the screenshots in Figure 2a). Students are required to form
groups by choosing appropriate characters out of the assigned components, thereby forming a valid Chinese
character. Members of each group then discuss and choose one of the general Chinese character configurations
(see Figure 1) to organise their components properly via templates (character configurations) supplied by the
Chinese-PP   application   (arrows  <  and  >     in Figure 2a). For example,   with the  components  ,           and    ,
students could decide to choose template no. 9 (Figure 1) and place the components in the correct order to form
the character.

Figure 2a. A student's smart-  Figure 2b. A student's         Figure 2c. A teacher's view of the Chinese language
phone application showing      smart-phone application        learning activity (the "Group Status Window"). The screen
an assembled character out     showing a list of student      shows the characters from four groups of students. Each
of individual components.      with components                group has an assembled character framed into a template
                               participating in the Chinese   chosen by the students on the device.
                               learning activity.

         In preparing each round of the game, the teacher needs to select a set of components according to the
number   of participating  students and   input   them   to the system. The  choice  of components     should   allow    the
construction   of as   many   eligible characters     as possible, and  with at  least  one global     solution   (i.e., no
component/student will be left out) available. For example, for an eight-player game, a possible component set
is [       ], where students could form three groups and construct the characters [  ] or
[  ] without any player being left out. However, there exist other combinations such as [  ], with
andbeing left out (no character with the combination of these components), and a lot more. Although students
should be encouraged to socially figure out a combination where all the components are used to form characters,

© ISLS                                                                                                                   170
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                            Volume I: Long Papers

it is a tall order for our target students to achieve that, given their limited language proficiency (Chinese L2
standard) and cognitive ability (Primary school level). However, we had been keen to introduce game rules to
motivate them to form characters with as many components as possible and try to minimize the number of left-
out peers. In turn, students who have formed groups should continue to explore other possibilities, perhaps by
inviting another peer to join the group and form a new character (e.g., a group with the character may invite
their peer with the componentto form), or even disband an existing group, combine and reshuffle with other
components to form two or more new groups!

Micro-cycle of Design, Evaluation and Re-design with Chinese-PP
We ran the first implementation of Chinese-PP in Nan Chiau Primary School, involving 37 Primary 4 (10-year-
old) students. These were mixed ability students in Chinese Language and had had one year's experience in
using HTC TyTN II smart-phones on a 24x7 basis (and were therefore adept in using the device) for learning
science, English and math. Among them, 16 students were also involved in the trial of the FAO fractions game
in the previous year. As such a game may also be carried out, for example, using cards with individual character
components being printed, we experimented on both the "phone mode" and "card mode" (with four rounds of
each game) on two different days. The students were split into two subgroups. Subgroup A with 19 students
played one hour of card game followed by one hour of phone game. Subgroup B with 18 students went through
both games in reverse order. Table 1 shows the schedule of both subgroups' Chinese-PP experiences.

Table 1: The experimental process of Chinese-PP.
                                      Day 1                                            Day 2
Subgroup A       Card game A-1             Focus group FA-1        Phone game A-2             Focus group FA-2
Subgroup B       Phone game B-1            Focus group FB-1        Card game B-2              Focus group FB-2

         The games were played in a special classroom with more open space than usual so that the students
could freely move around to negotiate with different peers in group forming. For the phone games, the students
could invite potential group members and accept/reject invitations through the phone application. The teacher
facilitated all the   games by controlling the   game pace,  hinting the students on-the-fly  concerning  possible
groupings, verifying students' groupings, and determining when to terminate a round.
         We   video    and audio recorded  all the games  to document    and code   students' game   behaviors and
collaborative patterns. The software logs of the students' interactions during the phone games were also used for
triangulation. In addition, we conducted focus group interviews as noted in Table 1 (each session involved six
students, three of whom had also played the previous fractions game) in order to find out their perceptions in the
games and the reasons behind the collaborative behaviors that we observed. Due to the space constraints, we
will not show detailed coding and analysis of students' spatial movements and discourses, but will present high-
level findings and how they have informed us in our subsequent adaptation of the learning environment.
         The reason that we designed the experimental process in this way (Table 1), as opposed to the usual
experimental-control group design, is that we wanted to let both subgroups of students to experience the game
played in both modes. This approach permitted us to investigate the changes of their perceptions and to see if
that might be influenced by the order of experiencing the two modes. Nevertheless, our initial analysis on the
focus groups shows that both subgroups of students have expressed fairly consistent perceptions in both modes,
and therefore the factor of "which mode was played first" did not have any substantial impact in our analysis.

Findings

Domain-independent Collaborative Patterns
In all the card and phone game sessions, the students exhibited similar discussion patterns as in the previous
fractions games. Note that in both types of games, we encouraged the students to form legitimate groups with
more   peers, and   to minimize  left-out peers. Typically, in the beginning  of  a game round,   students  started
exchanging ideas verbally about arranging the components. Most students started with identifying a classmate
each to discuss, and then expand from pairs to clusters of 3-4 to discuss alternative possibilities. An initial set of
groups was created in the process, with a few left-out students still looking for groupings. However, personal
and gender preferences often influenced the formation of these initial groups. If the small amount of left-out
students could not form new groups among themselves, they would seek peers' or the teacher's assistance in
identifying other solutions. Meanwhile, some students who had already formed groups had considered helping
their left-out peers by thinking of the possibilities of adding a group member or even splitting their own group.
There came minor changes in the groupings with the effect of personal and gender preferences gradually fading
out. Nevertheless,    such positive tendencies were  not good  enough  to make   the students  achieve  any global
solution (i.e., no peer was left out) in all the Chinese-PP sessions, which we will explicate below.

© ISLS                                                                                                           171
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                Volume I: Long Papers

          The gender-shy issue is relatively minor but still shows intriguing influences in the game dynamics ­ as
it might result in sub-optimal solutions at the early stage of each game round which potentially jeopardizes the
chance of eventually reaching a global solution. In the card games, as face-to-face (f2f) discussion was the only
mode   of collaboration,  we   observed  that  students   almost always  started with  physical  clusters  of the  same
gender to carry out initial explorations. Students who were left out at this stage then proceeded to move around
the classroom to seek groupings with members of opposite gender. Conversely, the phone games allow two
modes of communication ­ f2f and phone invitation. We examined both the videos and the software logs and
discovered that the same groups of students were less reluctant to invite members of the opposite genders to
form groups even in the initial stage. In addition, we compared the final groupings of all the game rounds and
found that 65.3% of the groups formed during the card games were comprised of members of the same gender,
which was a high contrast with the phone games with only 40.2% of the groups were such. Among the 12
students interviewed during FA-2 and FB-2, 8 of them admitted that they were more gender-shy during the card
games but not so during the phone games, while the rest claimed that they were not gender-shy in either mode.
          Indeed, with two communication modes being offered by the phone mode, individual students may opt
for their most comfortable method in interacting with their peers, which was one of the advantages of the mode.
Nevertheless, due to the nature of the domain (Chinese characters) and the software UI design, most of them had
surprisingly indicated their preference in the card mode after the study, which we will explicate below.

Domain-specific Collaborative Patterns
During   the card games,   we  observed   the  students   who clustered together   often physically manipulated    their
cards by trial placing them in different spatial configurations. We identify it as a form of social scaffold. Figure
3 illustrates a scenario we observed in one of the card game rounds. Two students who carried the components
 and  respectively tried all four possible configurations to bring them together (i, ii, iii, iv), but none of them
formed  a legitimate  character. Third  student who  carried     joined them, and  tried to match  the component   with
the first two students' components individually (v, vi), and legitimate characters were formed in both cases (,
). They then faced a dilemma of "which friend to `sacrifice'", thus deciding to try forming a three-component
character instead. They formed  (vii) but thought that it was not a character (this is a legitimate but rarely
used one that they had not learned before). They eventually figured out vertical placing of the three components
and formed the character       (viii).

                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                                    

  (i)                   (ii)           (iii)         (iv)          (v)           (vi)            (vii)             (viii)
               Figure 3. A Scenario of Three Students Manipulating Their Cards in a Card Game.

          This is a strategy that we loosely call "trial and error" in this paper. We did not teach them this strategy
but they figured it out by themselves. We observed that all students applied this strategy almost all of the time in
the card games. The card mode offers the convenience of doing so while the phone mode does not. During the
phone games, the students had to study the "peers' components" screen, and mentally construct and picture
characters before deciding whom to invite. When playing the phone games, some students still approached each
other  physically  to   discuss, albeit  not  being  able   to   physically "trial construct"   characters  from   their
components. In one instance during A-2, two students carried their phones close enough and manipulated their
placements to imitate card manipulations (although they found it cumbersome).
          At the end of A-2 and B-2, we asked for a quick show of hands to reflect the students' preference
between playing card and phone game. More than 80% of them chose the former. The focus group interviews
showed a similar tendency, which could be summarized in two points, (1) After A-1 and A-2, most of students
had a good expectation in the phone game regardless of whether they had tried it, perhaps due to their technical-
inclined  mindset after  using   their phones  for a year;  (2)  Having tried both  modes    after B-1  and   B-2, most
students got used to the trial-and-error strategy and found that only the card mode was conducive to that.
          Obviously, the UI design and the invitation mechanism of the smart-phone application, both of which
were inherited from the fractions game, had been too complicated as well as imposing an additional cognitive
burden to them. We asked the students who had played the fractions game before to compare their experiences
to the Chinese-PP game. Most of them did not mind playing the fractions game in phone mode as they were
capable   of the  required   mental calculations,  while   spatial configurations   were    not applicable  to fraction
additions. This suggests that the application UI was not an issue for this group of students who had been using
the phones 24/7 for a year. Instead, it was the domain-specific factor that posed the challenge to them.

© ISLS                                                                                                               172
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                   Volume I: Long Papers

Towards the Pursuance of Global Solutions in Game Playing
Regardless of the game modes, the unique game design of Chinese-PP (as well as the fractions game), apart
from spontaneous group formation with flexible sizes, is the reinforcement of global solutions (i.e., no student to
be left out). In order to work toward this goal, students ought to set aside personal preferences and the pursuance
of local (individual) goals to help their peers. While some groups might have formed their characters, the others
might  have   reached  a   dead-end   situation.  Students  are  then required  to  put their global goal   in  front of the
individual or group goals and start thinking about other possible solutions or group configurations ­ that is, they
need to draw and integrate their thinking and collaborative skills and their linguistic knowledge to achieve this.
          In order to encourage the students to work toward the goal, we projected the grouping status window
which was originally designed for and only accessible by the teacher, to the students during the phone game.
The  display  offers  the  up-to-date     student groupings  where    students  could  study  and  consider  if  they could
reshuffle or break existing groups to form better solutions. This is a potentially powerful affordance that the card
mode cannot offer. However, according to our analysis of the two phone game sessions, the students often took
a glance at the display, merely out of curiosity. When we explained to the students during the Focus Group FA-
2 and FB-2 on how they could take advantage of the display, they all agreed (including those who did not favor
the phone game) that they could benefit from it if they were given another chance to try the phone game.
          In addition, after A-1 and B-1, we developed a scoring scheme and applied it in A-2 and B-2. Students
accumulated scores by forming legitimate groups ­ 10 points for a 2-component character (same score to be
awarded to each group member), 30 points for a 3-component character, 50 points for a 4-component character,
and so on. This was to encourage the students to form bigger groups to fulfil "local" goals. However, in order to
motivate them to assist their left-out peers (part of the "global" goal ­ to reduce the number of left-out students),
each student who has formed group and earned points was penalized by 5 points times number of peers left out
by the end of a game round. Due to a certain resource and time constraint, we did not automate this functionality
in the phone game system. Thus, for both A-2 and B-2, we recorded the scores manually and wrote them on the
whiteboard, which was logistically cumbersome and time consuming. However, some students reported to us
that the new scoring system did stimulate them to pay more attention in balancing the "local" and "global"
goals.

Subsequent Reflections and Further Work

ICT or non-ICT?
The trial seemed to leave us with more uncertainties. Shall we give up the phone mode and settle with the card
mode   for  Chinese-PP     due   to the   nature  of the  domain?   Conversely,    what  are  the  potential technological
affordances of the phone mode that may justify the mCSCL solution? If the answer is the latter, how can we deal
with the perceived "incompatibility" between the phone game and the students' favorite trial-and-error strategy?
          We further analyzed the designed and enacted game processes, and concluded that the critical success
factor of this game is the intertwining of the local and global goals for the student players that would stimulate
their active Chinese character retrievals, thinking of alternatives, applications of component rules, and making
educated    guesses   when     encountering      unfamiliar  characters.  It   may   also  further   reinforce   individual
accountability, equal opportunity to participate, positive interdependence, and maximize peer interactions. We
believe that the transparency of the global game view (the grouping status window) and the scoring scheme are
two  potentially  powerful    scaffold    forms  which  should   be retained.  Both  scaffolds, however,    are  logistically
cumbersome if executed manually. In addition, a minor advantage of the phone mode is that the gender-shy
issue could be eliminated at the beginning of each game round, instead of gradually fading out towards the end
of a card game. In this regard, we believe that the retention of the technological form of Chinese-PP is justified.

Is "Trial and Error" a Suitable Learning Strategy or a "Bad Learning Habit"?
With that, we decided to provide a theoretical treatment on the emergent trial-and-error method to see if this is a
justifiable strategy  for  Chinese    character   learning  that we   should  support,  or a  "bad learning    habit" to be
rectified ­   and if  that is the   case, how    can we   design  scaffolds  to help  students  shake   off  the habit?  We
conducted another round of literature review on the relevant issues, which is summarized below.
          The  acquisition    of any  subsystems     of a  language   involves  how   learners  establish the   connections
between forms and their meanings. Most learners attend meaning before form in an attempt to communicate
with   others (Krashen,    1982).   Ellis (1994)  argues   that the processes   for the acquisition  of semantic   and   the
formal components of words are distinct. The form-meaning connection is initially made when learners register
a form,   a meaning   and   the  fact that the   form encodes    that meaning   in  some  way,  or the  meaning   could  be
encoded by that form (VanPatten, 2004). Such a process is applicable to Chinese character acquisition as well.
          Given the complexity of a form or a meaning that learners should acquire in order to establish the
proper relationship between them, it is likely that learners would go through more than one attempt to make the
form-meaning connections. Such a view is consistent with Piaget's theory of cognitive developmental stages

© ISLS                                                                                                                   173
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                    Volume I: Long Papers

that include the sensory-motor period, preoperational period, concrete operational period and formal operational
period. Piaget suggests that children first learn by actively doing in a random way and, as a result of experience
and  reconstruction,   gradually    move to   think logically and  more    objectively during    the concrete  operational
period that spans from 7 to 11 years old (Inhelder & Piaget, 1958). In our experiment, the students' learning
strategies reflect the characteristics of the concrete operational period in which they assimilate in a collaborative
learning mode using both trial-and-error and logical thinking as the main strategies to reach the next stage.
          One of  the    strengths  of mCSCL     is its capability for  multiple branching   and     for allowing   learners
making   multiple   attempts    at problem  solving,  or in  this case, at  form-meaning    connections.     Therefore,  we
conclude that we should exploit suitable technological affordances to support such a strategy that students find it
natural and even fun to apply.

Redesigning the Technological Support
Informed by our reflections, we revamped the technological support for Chinese-PP. A major redesign of the
smart-phone application UI will take place. The two key improvements that we envisage are (1) to make the UI
more intuitive and convenient for the students to perform their personal and social learning tasks; and (2) to
allow  multiple learning     pathways   catering to  individual   students' preferences    (Looi, et   al., 2009).  We   are
designing a brand new UI where students will be given a working space on the screen, with their own and other
peers' components all displayed at the edges in the form of "virtual cards". The students could easily drag and
drop their chosen virtual cards onto and around the working space. The students will not have to construct the
characters mentally but can perform a quick personal, virtual "trial and error" before inviting and negotiating
with their peers. Furthermore, the invite-accept-reject mechanism will be simplified; an inviter's trial-composed
characters will be automatically sent to all their invitees to support the latter's decision making.
          Apart from     the smart-phone   application,  the  game  status  window    will also  be  enhanced    to support
students' global goal pursuance. Other than the formed characters of the committed groups, the window will
also display left-out components. Putting all such information in the same display will further stimulate the
students  to consider    alternative   groupings that   may  improve    the overall   solutions. Score    tracking  will be
automated; and the students' scores and rankings will be updated dynamically in the same window. We hope
that the combined use of the personal UI on the phone and the shared display will further reinforce the balancing
between the students' pursuance of local and global goals. However, additional teacher scaffolds need to be in
place to ensure students making good use of the resources. We will investigate such scaffolds, experiment with
them in the subsequent studies, and incorporate them as either technological or social scaffolds.

Transforming Chinese-PP into an Effective Classroom Module
As  stated before,  we   envisage   elevating Chinese-PP     beyond  a  one-off  or repetitive   mCSCL      game design  to
become an ongoing pedagogical practice that facilitates students' language learning growth. We will co-design 8
one-hour learning session with teachers, with varied teacher/social/technological scaffolds and game rules (e.g.,
a new game rule "allow cloning of components in the same character" such as composing  with two instances
of ,   or  alerting   them   on the  relevant linguistic  rules through  the  teacher  or  technological    means)   across
different sessions. We will vary these elements not just for injecting new excitement to sustain the students'
interest. We will strive for mapping a theory-informed (language acquisition theories and Bloom's Taxonomy)
Chinese character learning process into the variations of the game elements. We intend to conduct a full-fledged
study by implementing the new pedagogical model, with the revamped mCSCL infrastructure in place.

Conclusion
We have narrated our journey of conceptualization, prototyping, trial implementation, reflection, and refining of
Chinese-PP   which    is our  mCSCL     solution for  Chinese   character   learning. We   adopted   a   DBR  approach   to
embark on an iterative process of (re)designing and testing the learning approach by examining the effects of the
technological and social scaffolding. In each iteration, we anticipated how the proposed learning design might
be realized in a classroom, and how the students might collaborate, interact and learn as they participate in the
activities. From the enactment of the learning design in two modes, we analyzed the actual process of student
collaboration and learning in each of these two modes. On the basis of this analysis, we drew conclusions and
made recommendations for the next learning design which will combine the best of the two modes.
          Thus we found versatility and flexibility via the DBR methodology guiding our quest towards a refined
solution to address the challenges that we encountered when students used the current design. In prior mCSCL
(or learning  technology     in general)  studies,  the  grounding  of  domain-specific    learning  theories  tend  to  be
accorded a lower priority. In the early stage of our study, we observed how domain-specific factors undermined
the learning model. That is, the students performed well in, and positively perceived the previous phone-based
fractions games. However, in the Chinese-PP games, they preferred the card mode due to their emergent trial-
and-error strategy. That caused us to further examine the scaffolding strategies by conducting another round of
literature review. We let the domain-specific theories guide us in deciding whether we should accommodate or

© ISLS                                                                                                                   174
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                               Volume I: Long Papers

rectify the students' use of their emergent strategy. Our early exploratory study of the project has effectively
reshaped   our  overall learning model   design,   bringing to the fore the  value of the  interplay and  iterations of
theories, implementations and reflections, as advocated by DBR.

References:
Bialystok, E. (1978). A theoretical model of second language learning. Language Learning, 28, 81-103.
Boticki, I., Looi, C.-K., & Wong, L.-H. (2010). Doing collaboration and learning fractions with mobile devices.
          Proceedings of the Global Chinese Conference on Computers in Education 2010 (pp. 9-15), Singapore.
Boticki,  I., Wong,   L.-H., &  Looi,  C.-K.  (2010). Can   one-to-one computing   help children  learn cooperatively?
          Proceedings of the International Conference on Computers in Education 2010 (pp. 407-411), Putrajaya,
          Malaysia.
Design-Based Research Collective. (2003). Design-based research: an emerging paradigm for educational inquiry.
          Educational Researcher, 32(1), 5-8.
Ellis, N. (1994). Implicit and explicit language learning - an overview. In N. Ellis (Ed.), Implicit and Explicit Learning
          of Languages. London: Academic Press.
Fan, L., Tong, L., & Song, J. (1987). The characteristics of Chinese language and children's learning to read and write.
          In D. A. Wagner (Ed.), The Future of Literacy in a Changing World (pp. 87-94). New York: Pergamon.
Gasser, M. (1990). Connectionism and the universals of second language acquisition. Studies in Second Language
          Acquisition, 12, 179-199.
Ho, C. S. H., Ng, T. T., & Ng, W. K. (2003). A `radical' approach to reading development in Chinese: the role of
          semantic radicals and phonetic radicals. Literacy Research, 35(3), 849-878.
Inhelder, B., & Piaget, J. (1958). The Growth of Logical Thinking from Childhood to Adolescence. New York: Basic
          Books.
Johnson, R., & Johnson, D. (1994). An overview of cooperative learning. In R. V. A. N. J. Thousand (Ed.), Creativity
          and   Collaborative  Learning:   A  Practical Guide  to  Empowering     Students and Teachers   (pp. 31-43).
          Baltimore, MD: Paul H. Brookes.
Krashen, S. D. (1982). Principles and Practices in Second Language Acquisition. Oxford, England: Pergamon Press.
Krashen, S. D. (1985). The Input Hypothesis: Issues and Implications. London/New York: Longman.
Kukulska-Hulme, A., & Shield, L. (2007). An overview of mobile assisted language learning: can mobile devices
          support collaborative practice in speaking and listening? Paper presented at the EuroCALL 2007, Coleraine,
          UK.
Liang, Y. (2004). The characteristics of Chinese character components and Chinese as a Foreign Language teaching.
          Language Education and Research, 6, 76-80.
Looi, C.-K., Wong, L.-H., So, H.-J., Seow, P., Toh, Y., Chen, W., et al. (2009). Anatomy of a mobilized lesson:
          Learning my way. Computers & Education, 53(4), 1120-1132.
Looi, C.-K., Wong, L.-H., & Song, Y. (in-press). Discovering Mobile Computer Supported Collaborative Learning. In
          C. Hmelo-Silver, A. O'Donnell, C. Chan & C. Chinn (Eds.), The International Handbook of Collaborative
          Learning. New York: Routledge.
Nussbaum, M., Alvarez, C., McFarlane, A., Gomez, F., Claro, S., & Radovic, D. (2009). Technology as small group
          face-to-face Collaborative Scaffolding. Computers & Education, 52(1), 147-153.
Shen, H. H. (2002). Level of cognitive processing: Effects on character learning among non-native learners of Chinese
          as a foreign language. Language and Education, 18, 167-182.
Tan, L., & Peng, D. (1991). The visual recognition process of the Chinese characters. Psychology, 23(3), 272-278.
VanPatten, B. (2004). Input and output in establishing form-meaning connections. In B. VanPatten, J. Williams, S.
          Rott  &  M.   Overstreet (Eds.),   Form-meaning   connection  in second  language   acquisition (pp. 29-47).
          Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Wang, P., Perfetti, C. A., & Liu, Y. (2003). Alphabetical readers quickly acquire orthographic structure in learning to
          read Chinese. Scientific Studies of Reading, 7(2), 183-208.
Wong, L.-H., Chai, C.-S., & Gao, P. (2010). Singapore primary school students' perceptions and challenges faced in
          using  Chinese  computer     input systems  for compositions.    Global Chinese   Journal  on Computers    in
          Education, 6(1-2), 46-61.
Wong, L.-H., Chin, C.-K., Tan, C.-L., & Liu, M. (2010). Students' personal and social meaning making in a Chinese
          idiom mobile learning environment. Educational Technology & Society, 13(4), 15-26.
Wong, L.-H., & Looi, C.-K. (2010). Vocabulary learning by mobile-assisted authentic content creation and social
          meaning-making: Two case studies. Computer Assisted Learning, 26(5), 421-433.
Zhu, Y., & Hong, W. (2005). Effects of digital voiced pronunciation and stroke sequence animation on character
          memorization of EFL learners. Chinese Language Teachers Association, 40(3), 49-70.
Zhu,   Z. (2004). Chinese    character structures and Chinese  as  foreign language teaching  and learning. Language
          Teaching and Research, 4, 35-41.
Zurita, G.,   & Nussbaum,    M. (2004).  Computer   supported  collaborative learning using  wirelessly interconnected
          handheld computers. Computers & Education, 42(3), 289-314.

© ISLS                                                                                                               175
