CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                         Volume I: Long Papers

          Beyond Small Groups: New Opportunities for Research in
                         Computer-Supported Collective Learning
 Yasmin B. Kafai, University of Pennsylvania, 3700 Walnut Street, Philadelphia PA 10194, kafai@upenn.edu
    Kylie A. Peppler, Indiana University, 201 Rose Avenue, Bloomington, IN 47405, kpeppler@indiana.edu

          Abstract: CSCL research has focused on understanding and designing collaborative learning
          in  diverse  settings   and  configurations     with   support   of  computers.     Within    this  research,
          however,    most   efforts have  concentrated     on   studying  small   group  configurations      and thus
          examined    what   we   would  like  to   call `collaborative'   learning   (i.e., the abilities   needed  to
          participate and support collaborations of typically two to five people). Much less emphasis has
          been placed on studying massive communities and participation in large groups prominent in
          today's  social  networking    sites   and   online gaming    cultures   that  would    shift  the  focus  to
          `collective'   learning (i.e., the  abilities  needed    to participate   and  support    collaborations   in
          massive    groups). In  this paper,  we    identify  key    dimensions   of  collective   learning,  present
          observations of online and local participation in one open-source Web 2.0 community with
          over  630,000   members,     called Scratch    (scratch.mit.edu),    and  outline  a research    agenda    for
          computer-supported collective learning.

Introduction
Research in CSCL, by its very name, has focused on understanding various dimensions of group work such as
productivity  of different   group   arrangements    (Engelmann       & Hesse,   2010),   design    of  scaffolds (van   der  Pol,
Admiraal,    &  Simons,    2006),    argumentation     practices   (Scheuer,   Loll,   Pinkwart,    &   McLaren,     2010)    and
interactions between online and offline collaborations (Birchfield & Megowan-Romanowicz, 2009). With some
exceptions (e.g., Fields & Kafai, 2009; Guzdial & Rick, 2006), there is one assumption about collaboration
underpinning many of these efforts, which is the idea that collaboration happens in small groups, often of dyads
and triads,  as  they  engage   in   computer-supported       collaborative   tasks.  For the  most     part, the focus   of  this
research  has   been  to  understand     and  develop    what    we   will refer   to as  collaborative    learning   because   it
emphasizes the abilities to participate in small groups whether online or offline or in combinations thereof.
          Recent   developments,     however,     suggest   new     forms   of collaborations       are developing    in  online
communities    (e.g., Boyd,   2008;   Shirky,  2008).     One  striking    feature of  these  communities     is  their  size and
collaboration   that  can take  place    among   hundreds,    if not  thousands,   of  members.     Consider     the millions  of
contributions to entries in the Wikipedia or to programs in Linux (Benkler, 2006), the interactions of members
of fan fiction sites where thousands of writers create new stories and participants provide constructive feedback
(Black, 2006), or the participation in guilds in multiplayer online role-playing game communities with millions
of players   (Gee,   2003).  We    have  chosen     to call   this type of   collaboration    collective   learning   because   it
emphasizes the abilities to participate and perform in collectives and thus might be different from participation
in small groups. Our concept of collective learning is inspired by recent research in different communities: the
work   of social scientist   Pierre  Levy on   collective   intelligence   (1997)   examining    the   potential  of intellectual
contributions   from   large  groups;    the work    of   gaming    researcher   Jane  McGonigal        (2008)   observing    self-
organized    coordination  among     players  in collective   gaming;   and   the  work   of  media     scholar, Henry   Jenkins
(2006) studying participatory culture in networked communities. Taken together, this body of work converges,
helping   us to  recognize   that large-scale    communities     can  promote      new  forms    of opportunities,   as  well  as
challenges, for learning together.
          As  increasing  numbers     of learning   communities     in  K-12   and    higher education   move     online, so  too
grows   our  need  for   understanding   how     to engage    large   groups  of   learners  effectively   in  these  networked
communities. The starting point for our investigation on collective learning is a simple question: Does the size
of the group matter? We realize that there will be no simple answer because massive communities such as social
networking sites, virtual worlds, and multiplayer online role-playing games are each organized around different
purposes and practices and thus participants have different incentives for joining and collaborating with each
other (see also Hung, Lim, Chen, & Koh, 2008). We begin with a review of what research has identified as key
features of collaborative learning in small and large groups. We then draw upon research and our knowledge of
one such     large-scale networked    community,       called Scratch   (scratch.mit.edu),    to  describe    and articulate  the
different dimensions      of  collective  learning.    In our    discussion,   we   outline   the   emerging     challenges   and
opportunities for research in computer supported collective learning.

Background
The work in CSCL draws upon hundreds, if not thousands, of research studies that have investigated various
aspects   of collaboration,  including   the  nature   of various   group   arrangements      such  as  reciprocal   teaching  or

© ISLS                                                                                                                          17
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                       Volume I: Long Papers

jigsaw techniques, interactions with members of different gender, race, ability, and experience, and causes for
success and failures of group work (O'Donnell, 2006; Webb & Palincsar, 1996). The research on computer
supported     collaborative   learning,    as    documented      in the   International   Journal   of   Computer-Supported
Collaborative    Learning     (ijCSCL),    has   built on  this  substantial    body of  research  and   provides    compelling
evidence that collaboration can be arranged and even fostered in instrumental ways via computer support, albeit
with a focus on what we would like to call collaborative learning ­ the ability to interact in and contribute to
small groups. By contrast, the research on collective learning ­ the ability to interact in and contribute to large
groups ­ is only now beginning to build such a body of work. We call this collective learning because groups
are described by being in a particular space such as a virtual world or gaming community and often focused on
tasks such as contributing to a collaborative repository.
           To date, only a few studies in ijCSCL have tackled aspects of collective learning by designing wiki
activities for university classes (Guzdial & Rick, 2006) or studying an afterschool gaming club participating in a
tween  virtual  world   with   over  1.5   million   players (Fields    &  Kafai, 2009).    Some   researchers  have   begun  to
conceptually map out issues of understanding collaboration and learning in Web 2.0 communities (Dohn, 2009)
as well as to identify issues of trust building (Gerdes, 2010), while others have argued against adopting these
models for school communities (Hung, Lim, Chen, & Koh, 2008). The size in number of participating members
in these online communities is indeed impressive, especially considering that the possibility to interact with
hundreds of thousands, if not millions, of others across geographical boundaries is unprecedented in history.
This is particularly true for youth who might have connected at most with hundreds or thousands of others in
their local communities and schools. Research is now showing that participation in these online communities
can provide rich opportunities for learning to solve complex problems and for learning to collaborate with others
in large groups (boyd, 2008; Gee, 2003; Ito et al., 2008). Yet it is unclear what it means to participate effectively
in large-scale groups, to develop and foster a sense of community and belonging, and to design for collective
learning interactions.
           Closest to issues associated with collective learning is the work on Computer Supported Intentional
Learning Environments (CSILE) (Scardamalia & Bereiter, 1991) and other studies following the knowledge
forum    tradition, since    they examine   how    students'   knowledge-sharing,      knowledge-construction,      knowledge-
creation, and knowledge-assessment (e.g., Ares, 2008; Eddy, Chan & van Aalst, 2006; von Aalst, 2009) come
into play. Most CSILE implementations have operated within a classroom environment, sometimes connecting
students from other classes or previous years, and thus are far away from the size of social media communities
today. Despite this, Scardamalia (2002; see also Zhang, Scardamalia, Reeve, & Messina, 2009) articulated early
on the need for collective cognitive responsibility describing it as the "conditions in which responsibility for the
success  for  a group     is distributed   across all  the members       rather than   being concentrated  on    the leader"  in
addition for taking on responsibility "for knowing, what needs to be known, and for insuring that others know
what needs to be known" (p. 2). Concepts such as collective cognitive responsibility indicate that interactions in
these  online  communities      could   have   different  constraints    and affordances    due to  their massive    number  of
participants,  unstructured     and  structured   groups   with     concurrent  asynchronous     and  synchronous    nature  of
interactions, ongoing persistence of online life in absence of individual presence in addition to the nature of
collaborative tasks and contributions. To better understand what collaborative vs. collective learning in a large-
scale  networked    community      looks   like, we  will  first use  an  illustrative case  study of  Scratch   community    to
examine    some   of  its features   in context   before   highlighting    similarities and  differences  between    these  two
paradigms of social interaction.

Computer-Supported Collective Learning in Networked Community of Scratch
We have    chosen    as   a  case study  one   open-source   Web     2.0  application,  called  Scratch   (scratch.mit.edu),  to
illustrate different    dimensions      of both    collaborative     and   collective   learning.  Scratch  is   a   media-rich
programming     language     that allows   youth   to  design,   share,  and remix   software   programs   in   form of   games,
stories, and   animations.    Scratch   uses  a  familiar  building   block     command   structure  (Resnick,   et  al., 2009),
eliminating thorny debugging processes and the risk of syntax errors (see Figure 1a). Furthermore, programmed
objects  can  be  any   imported     two-dimensional    graphic     image,  hand-drawn   or  downloaded    from    the Web,   to
further personalize each project. This makes it particularly amenable to an array of novice programmers wanting
to build their own software and engage in the participatory culture. Since its public launch in May of 2007, the
Scratch  website    (http://scratch.mit.edu)     has been  the   primary    means  for  users to   share  their work   with one
another (see Figure 1b). With over 1.2 million registered contributors and over 630,000 projects shared to date,
the Scratch website is a vibrant online community with over 1,000 new projects being uploaded every day. It is
possible   to use   Scratch  as   an individual   programming       tool or  in traditional  small groups  formats   (e.g., pair
programming) but the website facilitates remixing and open-source like sharing of programs with others across
time and space. In the following section, we review prior work on the emerging Scratch community and reframe
this work with respect to our paper's central thesis: collaborative versus collective learning.

© ISLS                                                                                                                         18
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                    Volume I: Long Papers

                      Figure 1. (a) Screenshot Scratch Interface and (b) Screenshot of Scratch Website.

          We  first present   the  typical activities  that  are organized   collaboratively  and   collectively within   the
Scratch   community.     Each   of these   activity structures   occur   simultaneously  within  the   community     serving
separate ends and potential contribute to separate types of learning experiences. In order to better articulate the
differences between collaborative and collective learning, we have compiled a table (see Table 1) that highlights
the key differences and similarities between collaborative and collective learning. It's important to note that our
example, the Scratch community, affords both types of learning simultaneously, and while layered, each has its
own distinctions.
          Collaborative activities include mostly goal-oriented activities. Typically in the classroom, these would
include small group work, team projects, discussion groups and so on. Outside the classroom, collaborative
activities include playing board games, most platform style videogames with members of your family, sitting on
committees,   or  playing   in  a  rock band.   In  the  Scratch   online community,    collaborative   activities  typically
revolve around the production of particular types of Scratch projects by a small group of individuals that have
commonly      met one    another   in  the online   environment.     One   study  focused    on observations     of a  small
collaborative group within the Scratch community called "Green Bear Group" that had formed spontaneously on
the Scratch website by three children ages 8, 13, and 15 (Aragon et al., 2009). Over time, this group expanded
and was later joined by over a dozen other members. They posted their projects on a gallery and members vote
on  which  projects   to further   develop since   each  member      brought different skills such  as  music,   graphics  or
editing to the group. Based on an analysis of comments on the gallery as well as a survey, researchers observed
found 19% of comments related directly to the job that needed to get done, 49% on socio-emotional aspects
such as socializing and personal discussions, and 32% on contextual aspects such as arranging how to organize
work,  system  administration     and  hardware    issues. This   suggests that   collaborative groups  do more     than  just
getting the job done, they can also provide social and emotional support. Moreover, while bearing similarities to
collaborative groups found in many assigned classrooms, what distinguishes these types of online collaboratives
from regular groups are that they're self-organized and with flexible roles.
          Collective activities, by contrast, include larger groups of individual with participation that is less goal-
oriented and revolves more about sustained, enjoyed participation within the community over time. These types
of activities although sparse in classroom settings, are common particularly in online affinity groups and in the
arts. In the performing arts in particular, collective activities are common including African dance circles or
orchestra  performances.     Wikipedia,    Facebook,     and Massively-Multiplayer     Online    Games    are   examples   of
collective activities where there may be some goal-oriented activities that drive participation but the community
is driven by many individuals making modest contributions or participating peripherally and by a few intense
participants. Within    the Scratch   community,    this  move    toward  membership    in  a large-scale  community      like
Scratch   can be  a   complex   interplay  between     how   young   software  designers develop    personal    agency   with
programming    and    gain  status  as  experts amongst      their peers.  For instance, we     followed  two   12-year   old
participants, Lucetta    and    Matthew,   as they    learned    the programming     software   Scratch   and   then  joined
scratch.mit.edu   both   in an  after-school  club  and  in  a class  as part  of a four-month   long   ethnographic   study
(Kafai, Burke    &  Fields,  2010).   We   found    that the web     community    furthered both  Lucetta  and   Matthew's
membership    in  a   programming     community     in  different  ways.  Lucetta   friended  other users, commented      on
projects, and  uploaded     her own   projects, taking   advantage   of  the social community    on   the site. This  fit her
cooperative social style, mixing with others while sharing an interest in Scratch. In contrast, Matthew embraced
the potential of remixing, though there were other aspects of participation that he did not take up such as sharing
his own   project   for  validation and    feedback   from   the  community.   However,     Lucetta's  initial resistance  to
migrating online and Matthew's own reluctance to upload his club project to the Scratch website, also suggest
that establishing membership in a larger programming community is not as easily achieved as we had hoped.
This suggests that navigating the collective community can accommodate an array of participation strategies and
that there is a range of ways to participate in the collective and that it's probably necessary to learn about how to
participate in collective activities in ways that might be initially uncomfortable. For example, what's lost or
gained in Matthew and Lucetta's participation? What are the learning benefits of each of their participation

© ISLS                                                                                                                     19
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                                      Volume I: Long Papers

strategies? How might we teach them to participate in collectives in new ways, identifying with new practices?
Moreover, what's the potential role that schools can play in this landscape?

Table 1: Collaborative vs. collective learning.

                            Collaborative Learning                                               Collective Learning
 Group size    Small groups with less than 5 individuals, and more       Large groups of more than 5 individuals; can involve whole class
 is...         typically 2-5 individuals                                 instruction, frequently groups of 30-40 or possibly even hundreds
                                                                         or thousands of individuals that embrace a common set of
                                                                         practices and ways of participation
 Typical       Also includes mostly goal-oriented activities (i.e., a    Affinity groups; Wikipedia; Dance Circles; Massively Multiplayer
 Activities    group assignment in a course). Small group work;          Online Games; Sports teams; Orchestras
 include...    Team projects; Discussion groups; Board games;
               Platform Video games; Committees; Rock bands
 Time is...    Often relatively short, task-based time periods that      Often needs to happen over long periods of time with cyclical
               can be either synchronous or asynchronous and is          patterns or trends of involvement that can be further analyzed.
               usually organized by the group leader.                    Most often this is asynchronous but there may be spurts of
                                                                         synchronous large-scale activity. Less organization to the way in
                                                                         which time is organized in the collective. The web-master has the
                                                                         most immediate impact on the organization of time (e.g., calling
                                                                         for work on a certain theme) but the community can arrange
                                                                         happenings as well (e.g., flash mobs).
 Leadership    In classroom  communities,   it     is often centralized  In online communities, leadership is emergent, decentralized, and
 is...         (e.g., a teacher directs activity).                       distributed  among    a  large   group  of   individuals;   Collective
                                                                         leadership  is also an  inherent to the    role that designers play in
                                                                         shaping  the   online community     but also    co-constructed  in  the
                                                                         community.
 Division of   Usually prescribed; roles of either group leader and      Members take on one role to fill a legitimate community need
 Labor is...   participants. Participants usually take on the same       within the larger group. Absenteeism affects the collective less
               role in the group with one leader emerging from the       until it becomes widespread. Roles are un-prescribed and fluid ­
               group. Absenteeism affects the group. There is a          individuals can inhabit a range of roles but don't take on all roles.
               need for every member to take on a strong role in         Newcomers can be peripheral participants in the activity without
               the group ­ if one or more members are reticent           affecting the collective goals.
               members, the group's goals can be compromised.
 Knowledge     Distributed among a small group of individuals that       Collective knowledge, by contrast, by de facto is stored on the
 is...         commonly have some face-to-face interaction. Less         main site or with links to other off-site information (perhaps a
               institutional history (i.e., course assignments are       how-to webpage) and is readily accessible to the community to
               repeated year after year in the course with little        have large-scale impact. Collective knowledge is also distributed
               communication among students)                             among individuals, commonly separated in time and space.
                                                                         Knowledge usually has some institutional memory as old-timers
                                                                         remain in the group, and CSCL Communities typically create
                                                                         shared artifacts to share tips with other.

          The entire Scratch community, however, is not made from simply small collaboratives and individuals
participating in the collective activities fostered by the website. There are also collective groups (i.e., large
affinity groups) that work to produce work of a similar interest over an unspecified period of time. For example,
and    within the online   community,      similar        themes   emerge      and   spread    quickly    among     members      with   similar
interests, including projects around the Japanese manga character, Naruto, projects inspired by Logo Art, and
other popular videogames. We have also observed the emergence of large-scale collectives in local contexts
around the use of Scratch. For example, a sub-community of 30-40 Scratch programmers in South LA began
making   Scratch    projects based   on    Low        Riders--highly       personalized      cars often   characterized       by  having     low
suspensions and original paint and hubcap designs (Peppler & Kafai, 2007). This local affinity group worked to
produce   a   number    of Low  Rider     Scratch       projects   over    the course    of  a  year.    While   working      almost    entirely
offline, this community looks similar to affinity groups that have emerged within the online community as well.
          Moreover,     new   practices    emerge           at the  collective     level  that    are    simply     not   possible   in   small
collaborative groups. For example, a particular form of participation within the Scratch is called "remixing",
taking  existing  Scratch   projects     and   changing        them   before   uploading     them    back    to  the  website.    It has    been
argued that remixing is a key practice in today's networked culture in support of our knowledge production.
Crediting ownership consists of referencing the intellectual origins of "text" used in media productions. For
instance,   remixing    Scratch projects       (i.e.,   taking    an    existing project     and  modifying         code  or   graphics)     is  a
common practice in the larger Scratch community; in fact, over 40% of all projects posted on the web site are
remixes of existing Scratch projects (Senivirate & Monroy-Hernández, 2010) and this number has been steadily
increasing    since its launch. The      culture       of   remixing    in Scratch   itself  is  not  without    fraught      as positive    and
negative comments are prevalent. In an after-school club, Scratch programmers ages 10-12 years were adamant
that their fellow programmers credited the origins of programs that they had remixed and posted online. While
Scratch programmers initially were concerned about others taking their programs, they also came to understand

© ISLS                                                                                                                                          20
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                   Volume I: Long Papers

the  remixes   as a form  of    recognition that represented   attention  they  received  from   others (Kafai,   Burke, &
Fields, 2010).
          In addition to the differences in group sizes and types of activities that collaborative and collective
groups tend to engage in, there are several additional distinguishing features about collaborative learning versus
collective learning, which we summarize here in the ways that collectives organize time, community leadership,
the division of labor, and knowledge, which are further described below and draw upon the examples mentioned
above. In collaborative groups, time is often organized in relatively short intervals in a typically synchronous
but  sometimes    asynchronous    fashion.  Additionally,   time   is usually organized   by   the group's   leader, which
makes goal-oriented deadlines. For example, a project leader might organize a time for the group to meet or a
deadline   for materials  to  be  received   as in  the case  of  the Green   Bear Group.    By    contrast, time within  a
collective is more open and with cyclical patterns or windows/ opportunities for involvement at an upcoming
event  or  happening.    Most   often though    time in  collectives  is asynchronous    and   not deadline   oriented. For
example, online communities typically have round the clock involvement of its members, so that no matter what
time   you login  there  are  always  large  groups  of  individuals  in  the environment.   Time   in  the  collective also
demonstrates patterns of activity, which allow for trends to emerge over time with little intentional coordination
from its members. While in the Scratch community there is no unified effort to post projects on a certain day or
time   around  a  specified  theme, there   is nevertheless   certain trends  or memes    that spread  quickly   within  the
community similar to the Low Rider creators mentioned above. For example, there was a sudden posting and
remixing of Mother's day projects in May 2010.
          Leadership    within   collaborative  groups   usually   falls upon  a  single  individual   or small   group  of
individuals. While some aspects of this type of top-down leadership can still be seen in collectives, leadership is
also distributed  among     its members,    emergent,   and   decentralized.  For example,   the   online community     was
tweaked by its designers to highlight "Top Remixed Projects" to promote more remixing within the community.
After doing so, the number of projects claiming to have remixed another project went up substantially as well as
the number of projects that were created as tools for others to build on and remix went up substantially (as is the
case with projects like side-scrolling game engines). Individuals also began to make new types of projects that
could be remixed and to advertise and compete for these slots on the homepage in ways that were unexpected by
the webmasters. Similarly, prior studies in MMOs have demonstrated this type of emergent leadership and use
of tools in unexpected ways that the designers hadn't intended.
          Accordingly,    the   division of  labor  is  quite different  within  these two   types  of  groups.   Within  a
collaborative group, members all take on particular identities within the group as the programmer, the designer,
musician,   and   editor  with  a distinct  contribution  to  the  group's  production    goals. These  roles  are   usually
prescribed by the teacher or group leader and somewhat stagnant over the course of the project. Absenteeism
also highly affects the group. There is a need for every member to take on a strong role in the group because if
one  or more   members    are   reticent members,    the group's   goals  can  be compromised.     Within    the collective,
members take on a role to fill a perceived need within the community. Absenteeism also affects the collective
less until it becomes widespread as there are multiple individuals with similar expertise available to fill in and
knowledge is dispersed amongst its members. Roles are also un-prescribed and fluid. Individuals can inhabit a
range of roles but don't necessarily take on all roles and newcomers can be peripheral participants in the activity
without affecting the collective goals.
          Lastly, knowledge is public and well distributed among members of the Scratch community. This is
most visible when you look at the community as a whole and seeing it growing and changing in many ways over
time. One might wonder whether expertise grows over time in these informal communities, and, indeed it does.
Based on data from the South LA field site of Scratch users, pre- and post-test analyses revealed that youth
learned about the big ideas of computer programming as well as visual/multimodal media arts production over
the  course of   two  years  in absence  of  direct  instruction  (Maloney,   Peppler, Kafai,    Resnick, &   Rusk,  2008).
These analyses were consistent for individual learning as well as community learning (i.e., new members were
being apprenticed into the community to produce more sophisticated work over the course of the study). This
body of research demonstrates that the collective can generate competence in a domain in the absence of direct
instructions and what is traditionally thought to be subject area expertise. In fact, the corpus of projects growing
on the Scratch website at exponential rates reflects a similar growing understanding made more accessible by
the fact that any project can be downloaded, analyzed and easily remixed to enable new generations of members
to achieve tasks like creating side-scrolling gaming engines more quickly and easily than the ones prior.

Discussion
In this paper we examined different dimensions of participation in massive networked communities. We return
to our initial question: does the size of group matter? As expected, there is no simple answer to this question.
Collective  learning   is really  about  the   development    of a new   community     of practice  over  time   (Lave  and
Wenger, 1991). This is particularly true for a community like the Scratch online community, which has only
emerged in the past few years. As a result, specific notions of what it means to share work and start new projects

© ISLS                                                                                                                    21
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                     Volume I: Long Papers

evolve in this community. But we also do know that practices around sharing information and collaborating
have evolved differently than in other programming communities such as StarLogo or Alice where remixing pop
culture  texts like  Naruto   or Manga     is not  core  to participation   in  the community.    While   some  aspects,   for
instance the voluntary forms of peer production and contribution for the common good, suggest that new forms
of collaborations are emerging, others such as the formation of small groups and issues of intellectual ownership
suggest very much a continuation of previous collaborative practices. We have organized our discussion around
the following four main themes: groups, designs, ethics, and research in collective learning environments. This
list is by no means comprehensive but it serves as a promising starting point for thinking about new research
opportunities in computer-supported collective learning.
         Our   first  theme  focuses   on  the  group   as  the main  unit  of  analysis. This   has  been  a focal  point  in
collaboration research, and to some extent, continues to be a focal point for research in massive communities as
we observed in the formation of smaller groups in Scratch online and offline communities. It is clear that we
need more research to understand how such groups are being formed, who decides to join, and how these groups
continue working together, and also when and why they fail in their efforts. We also need to better understand
differences in group formation and how this relates to the nature of artifacts produced. For instance, in many
gaming   communities     players    organize    in guilds   to  engage   in quests.  These    guilds  are highly   structured
organizations   where   players   assume   different  roles  and   contribute   to the success  of the  mission    (e.g., Gee,
2003). Contrast this with the free formation of the "Green Bear Group" in Scratch that set out to design games.
Here   members   contributed    based  on  their   expertise   but roles could  change    based  on  needs.   The  traditional
collaboration research (Cohen, 1994) as well as CSCL research provides us with little information about the
dynamics of unstructured group collaborations as prevalent in many massive communities. We can say that one
aspect of collective learning is to assume multiple roles; these roles are not prescribed though members are
valued and recognized in the community for their particular abilities. Such changes in participation are also part
of communities of practice and often assumed for successful collaboration in small groups. Perhaps it is the
prescriptive nature of assigned roles in small group collaboration that make it difficult for members to adopt the
fluidity needed to function and perform and larger collectives.
         Technical     designs   are  equally   important   in  studying  collective   learning  since massive     networked
communities    are   artifacts, meaning    that structures  and  features   are designed  by   programmers    and   modified
through  community      use.    There  are multiple   feedback     mechanisms      and  documentation     notes that can    be
integrated and made accessible to participants. For instance, we do not understand which features lead members
to contribute productively to large efforts and which ones might hinder such contributions. While some of these,
such as recognizing heritage in remixed projects are social issues, they also involve technical solutions. For
instance, in Scratch, the system automatically keeps track and makes visible such lineage. On the other hand, we
have participants who are playing a growing role in content production, in the case of many virtual worlds such
as Second Life, even are the main content producers for the community. How much of this control is ceded to
participants is something that needs to be considered in the setup of these community as well as the technical
prerequisites of lay designers themselves, in particular when we talk about younger participants.
         We    also  need to    consider issues    about ethics  that invariably    come  up  in the  context   of collective
production, sharing and commenting and are particularly relevant in the context of schooling that still favors
individual recognition. What does it mean when members contribute to a larger project, how is this recognized?
What about remixes that take up existing projects and modify them ­ a practice very common in networked
communities?    In   a recent   ijCSCL   article,  researcher  Gerdes  (2008)   raised  the issue  of developing   trust   that
surely plays a growing role in massive communities where participants do not know each other and perhaps
never meet face to face.
         Finally we need to expand our repertoire of research methods in describing and analyzing collective
learning. Studies of gaming and social network communities (Boelstorff, Taylor, Nardi & Pearce, in press; Hine,
2000; Williams, Yee, & Caplan, 2008) reveal an unhealthy split in either quantitative or qualitative research
approaches. For instance, survey methods and statistical data mining seem to drive many efforts in coming to
grips what engages members in these communities. On the other end, we have ethnographies of single massive
community (see Boelstorff, 2008; Taylor, 2006) that inform us with a fine-grained detail of cultural practices
and activities. Of     course,  others have   complained     about  this dichotomy      and argued    for a mixed    methods
approach (Williams, 2005). In our view it is not just about juxtaposing data sources and analytical methods but
also about developing ways that integrate both in a productive manner. As a case in point, we have suggested
and employed connected ethnographies that make use of the data mining and reduction in large data sets to
identify particular    participants  based on   their contribution   profiles  and  to  cross reference   and develop     these
through in-depth ethnographies (Kafai & Fields, in press; see also Reimann (2009). Such analyses leverage the
explanatory potential of each method and allow us to contextualize cases within larger community trends.
         All of these features come into prominence when we think about the design of massive intentional
learning or knowledge building communities (Scardamalia & Bereiter, 1991) that design for collective learning.
In the  case of Scratch,  we     have  started  collaborative   design   challenges  in the online   community     that   invite

© ISLS                                                                                                                       22
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                Volume I: Long Papers

members     to work   together  on  programming   projects.  Our   efforts focus  on  understanding  how   groups  and
collectives form and interact across global and local Scratch communities and how to better design and support
computer-supported collaborative and collective learning. Our observations suggest that it might be worthwhile
to think about the second C in CSCL not just as collaborative but also as collective learning. It's not just a
simple matter of involving larger numbers of participants but also of considering the nature of activities, the
roles that participants will assume, and the performances or artifacts that present the culmination of efforts to
effectively design and study collective learning environments. We suggest that CSCL researchers step outside
the boundaries of small groups and begin to consider alternative arrangements. Both collaborative and collective
learning technologies, activities, and environments that we design are greatly influenced by how we think about
learning as a socially situated activity. Size does matter ­ we just need to know how and when to engage in
collective vs. collaborative learning.

References
Aragon,   C.,  Poon,   S., Monroy-Hernandez,     A., &     Aragon, D.  (2009).  A  tale of  two  online communities:
          Fostering   Collaboration  and  Creativity    in Scientists and   Children.   In Proceedings  of   the ACM
          Creativity and Cognition Conference, Berkeley, CA.
Ares,  N. (2008)   Cultural  practices in networked     classroom  learning  environments.   International Journal  of
          Computer Supported Collaborative Learning, 3(3), 301-326.
Benkler, Y. (2006). The Wealth of Networks: How Social Production Transforms Markets and Freedom. New
          Haven and London: Yale University Press
Birchfield, D. & Megowan-Romanowicz, C. (2009) Earth science learning in SMALLab: A design experiment
          for mixed reality. International Journal of Computer Supported Collaborative Learning, 4 (4), 403-
          421.
Black, R.W. (2008). Adolescents and Online Fan Fiction. New York: Peter Lang.
Boellstorff, T. (2008). Coming of age in second life: An anthropologist explores the virtually human. Princeton,
          NJ: Princeton University Press.
Boellstorff, T., Nardi, B., Pearce, C. & Taylor, TL (in press) (Eds.). A Handbook of Ethnographic Methods for
          Virtual Worlds. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
boyd, d. (2008). Why Youth (Heart) Social Network Sites: The role of Networked Publics in Teenage Social
          Life. In D. Buckingham (Ed.), Youth, Identity and Digital Media (pp. 119-142). Cambridge, MA: MIT
          Press.
Brown,   A.,   &  Campione,    J. (1994). Guided   discovery   in  a  community    of learners. In K. McGilly    (Ed.),
          Classroom    lessons:   Integrating cognitive theory   and  classroom  practice  (pp. 229-290).  Cambridge,
          MA: MIT Press.
Cohen,   E.  G.   (1994).   Restructuring  the  classroom:    Conditions   for productive   small  groups. Review   of
          Educational Research, 64, 1-35.
Dohn, N. (2009). Web 2.0: Inherent tensions and evident challenges for education. International Journal of
          Computer Supported Collaborative Learning, 4(3), 343-363.
Eddy, Y.C.L., Chan, C., & van Aalst, J. (2006). Students assessing their own collaborative knowledge building.
          International Journal of Computer Supported Collaborative Learning, 1(1), 57-87.
Engelmann,     T. &   Hesse, F.W.   (2010)    How digital  concept   maps   about  the collaborators' knowledge    and
          information influence computer-supported collaborative problem solving. ijcscl 5 (3), pp. 299-320.
Fields, D. A. & Kafai, Y. B. (2009). "U wanna go to the moon?" A connective ethnography of peer knowledge
          sharing  and    diffusion in a  tween   virtual   world.   International Journal   of  Computer-Supported
          Collaborative Learning, 4(1), 47­68.
Gerdes,   A.   (2010)  Revealing    preconditions for   trustful collaboration  in CSCL.    International  Journal  of
          Computer Supported Collaborative Learning, 5 (3), 345-353.
Hill, M. B., Monroy-Hernández, A., & Olson, K. (2010). Responses to Remixing on a social media sharing
          website. Fourth International AAAI Conference on Weblogs and Social Media.
Hine, C. (2000). Virtual ethnography. London: Sage Publications.
Hung,   D., Lim,   D., Chen,   V.  & Koh,  T.  S. (2008)   Leveraging  Online   Communities     in Fostering Adaptive
          Schools. International Journal of Computer Supported Collaborative Learning,3(4), 373-386.
Jenkins, H., Clinton, K., Purushotma, R., Robison, A., & Weigel, M. (2006).             Confronting the challenges of
          participation culture: Media education for the 21st century.  White paper.    Chicago, IL: The John D. and
          Catherine T. MacArthur Foundation.
Kafai, Y. B. & Fields, D. A. (forthcoming). Understanding Player Participation and Practices in Virtual Worlds:
          A Proposal for Qualitative Analyses of Log File Data. In D. Thomas (Ed.), Research methods in virtual
          worlds. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Knobel, M. & Lankshear, C. (2009) Wikis, digital literacies, and professional growth Journal of Adolescent &
          Adult Literacy, 52(7), 631-634.

© ISLS                                                                                                               23
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                            Volume I: Long Papers

Leadbeater, C. & Miller, P. (2004).   The Pro-Am Revolution: How enthusiasts are changing are economy and
         society.  London: Demos.
Levy, P. (1997). Collective intelligence. Cambridge, MA: Helix Books.
McGonigal, J. (2008). `Why I love bees: A case study in collective intelligence gaming' in K. Salen (Ed.), The
         ecology of games: Connecting youth, games, and learning (pp. 199-228). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press,
Maloney, J., Peppler, K., Kafai,Y., Resnick, M., & Rusk, N. (2008, March). Programming by choice: Urban
         youth learning programming with Scratch. Paper presented at the SIGCSE 2008 Conference, Portland,
         OR.
Monroy-Hernandez, A. & Resnick, M. (2008).         Empowering   kids  to create and share  programmable   media.
         Interactions, 15(2), 50-53.
O'Donnell, A. M. (2006). The role of peers and group learning. In P. Alexander & P. Winne (Eds.), Handbook
         of educational psychology, 2nd Edition. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Osterman,   K.  F. (2000).  Students' Need  for Belonging   in the  School  Community.   Review  of Educational
         Research, 70(3), 323-367.
Peppler, K. A. & Kafai, Y. B. (2007). From SuperGoo to Scratch: Exploring creative digital media production in
         informal learning. Learning, Media, and Technology, 32(2), 149­166.
Reimann, P. (2009) Time is precious: Variable- and event-centered approaches to process analysis in CSCL
         research. International Journal of Computer Supported Collaborative Learning, 4(3), pp. 239-257.
Resnick, M., Maloney, J., Author 2 Rusk, N., Eastmond, E., Brennan, K., Millner, A., Rosenbaum, E., Silver, J.,
         Silverman, B., & Author.     (2009). Scratch: Programming for all. Communication of the ACM, 52(11),
         60-67.
Scardamalia, M. (2002). Collective cognitive responsibility for the advancement of knowledge. In B. Smith
         (Eds.), Liberal education in a knowledge society (pp. 67­98). Chicago: Open Court.
Scheuer, O., Loll, F., Pinkwart, N., & McLaren, B. M. (2010) Computer-supported argumentation: A review of
         the state of the art. International Journal of Computer Supported Collaborative Learning, 5 (1), pp. 43-
         102.
Senivirate, O.  &  Monroy-Hernández,     A. (2010). Remix   culture on the  web: A  survey   of content reuse on
         different user-generated content web sites. Web Science Conference. Raleigh, NC.
Shirky, C. (2008). Here Comes Everybody: The Power of Organizing Without Organizations. New York, NY:
         Penguin Press.
van Aalst,  J.  (2009)   Distinguishing  knowledge-sharing,    knowledge-construction,   and knowledge-creation
         discourses. International Journal of Computer Supported Collaborative Learning, 4(3), pp. 259-287
Webb,   N.  &   Palincsar, A. (1996). Collaborative learning.  In  D. Berliner  (Ed.), Handbook  of Educational
         Psychology (pp. 345-413), New York: Macmillan.
Williams, D. (2005). Bridging the methodological divide in game research. Simulation & Gaming, 36(4), 1-17.
Williams,   D., Yee,  N. &  Caplan,  S. (2008). Who  plays, how   much,  and why?   Debunking   the stereotypical
         gamer profile. Journal of Computer Mediated Communication, 13(4), 993-1028.
Zhang, J., Scardamalia, M., Reeve, R., & Messina, R. (2009). Designs for Collective Cognitive Responsibility in
         Knowledge-Building Communities. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 18(1), 7-44.

Acknowledgments
The writing of this paper was supported by a grant from the National Science Foundation (NSF-CDI-1027736)
to the first author and a grant from the John D. and Catherine T. MacArthur Foundation's Digital Media and
Learning Initiative to the second author. The views expressed are those of the authors and do not necessarily
represent the views of the Foundations, University of Pennsylvania or Indiana University.

© ISLS                                                                                                           24
