CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                  Volume I: Long Papers

NumberNet: Using Multi-Touch Technology to Support Within and
                         Between-Group Mathematics Learning

   Andrew Hatch, Steve Higgins, Andrew Joyce-Gibbons, Emma Mercier, Durham University Technology
                          Enhanced Learning Lab, Leazes Road, Durham, DH1 1TA, UK.
              Email: andrew.hatch; s.e.higgins; andrew.joyce-gibbons; emma.mercier@durham.ac.uk

          Abstract: In this paper we present a new tool, NumberNet, designed to promote within and
          between group collaboration in a mathematics classroom. The activity builds on a standard
          individual mathematics activity (Explode-A-Number; Atkinson, 1992), to create a three-stage
          collaborative activity that promotes flexibility with numbers, operators and calculations. This
          tool uses   a network  of multi-touch   tabletop  computers   in   a classroom  environment,    taking
          students through a small group production activity, rotation of the activity between groups,
          and finally a sorting and structuring activity. Pilot results from 32 students indicate significant
          gains in the number of calculations that students produce from pre to post test. Further work
          and implications are described.

Introduction
Learning to use numbers in a flexible manner, and recognizing the breadth of operators that can be used and the
different ways calculations can be constructed, is a key feature in mathematics education at the upper primary
level  in the  United   Kingdom.    These  skills establish   a  basis  that prepares  students for   the more   complex
mathematical    constructs   and  concepts  that  they   will encounter     during  high  school, such    as algebra     and
geometry. However, while it is relatively easy to assess flexibility, designing curricula and activities to teach
and foster numerical flexibility and adaptive expertise (Baroody & Dowker, 2003) is more challenging. In this
paper, we describe a tool, NumberNet, that uses computer-supported collaborative learning activities to foster
mathematical flexibility and reasoning through an interlinked series of small group and whole class activities.
This tool builds on the standard classroom activity `Explode-A-Number' (Atkinson, 1992), in which students
are given a number and told to create as many calculations as possible that form that number (See figure 2 for an
example of students work on a pre-test version of this task).
          Although    adult  models  of  arithmetic  calculation    are relatively  well  known,   the development       of
children's calculation skills is less well understood (for a recent overview see Kaufmann & Nuerk, 2005), and
although   the  importance    of  developing   flexibility through     derived  facts and    mathematical    reasoning    is
acknowledged, the relationships between mathematical concepts and processes is complex (Gray, 1994). It is
generally  agreed   that derived  fact  and reasoning    strategies are  indicative   of more  successful    mathematical
learners (Baroody & Dowker, 2003) and, although teaching activities to develop these in computer-supported
environments have not always been successful (Higgins, 2003; Sarama and Clemens, 2009) and the importance
of experiences of teacher-supported mathematical activity in lessons is clearly essential (Ruthven, 1998)
          Collaborative learning and problem solving activities have long been studied and recommended for
teaching  mathematics     at many   levels  (see  Esmonde,    2009;    O'Donnell,   2006   for reviews).     Research    on
collaborative learning indicates that the task-type and structure (e.g. Johnson & Johnson, 1991; Slavin, 1986),
the quality of interaction, help seeking and problem-space creation can influence learning outcomes (Barron,
2003;  Webb    &  Farivar,   1994;  Roschelle,    1992).   Bringing    this  research together,   indicates  the value   of
developing tools to support collaborative mathematics activities in the classroom, while paying close attention to
how those activities are implemented and supported within the classroom. Adapting multi-touch technology for
classroom use allows for the increased use of collaborative learning in the classroom.
          Multi-touch technology provides a surface that can detect multiple touches, from one or more people,
which creates opportunities for interaction between learners with multiple points of control. This is in contrast to
single point of control computer technology that is more commonly used, and requires negotiation over control
of the device (e.g. desktop or laptop computers that use a mouse or keyboard). In this study, we use a multi-
touch  enabled  classroom    (see  Figure  1), which   consists  of    four  networked   multi-touch  student    tables, an
orchestration desk and a multi-touch interactive whiteboard.        The student tables are designed to be sit-to-use,
with space for between three and six students per table. The tables use a vision system that identifies up to thirty
simultaneous touches, allowing all students to interact with the content through touch directly. The tables are
networked,  allowing    for  the teacher or student to   `slide' or send    content from  the  orchestration  desk to    the
student tables, or between the student tables.    Finally, the orchestration desk can be used to move content from
the student tables to the multi-touch interactive white-board.      This means that teachers can project the content
from a table to the whole class, using it to prompt a whole-class discussion about the methods or organization
being  used by  an    individual group.  The teacher   or  students can  interact   directly with the projected   content,
explaining reasoning or pointing out difficulties to the whole class.

© ISLS                                                                                                                   176
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                             Volume I: Long Papers

          Previous work on collaboration with multi-touch tables suggests that when multi-touch is compared to
single-touch,  the use  of   multi-touch results in more   task focused  conversation  (Harris et al.,  2009),  more
equitable participation of collaborators (Marshall et al., 2009) and more speedy conflict resolution (Hornecker,
Marshall, Dalton, & Rogers, 2008). When compared to paper-based tasks, the use of multi-touch tables also
appears   to promote   joint attention and  the creation  of a joint problem space (Higgins   et  al, under review).
Levering this technology for whole-classroom learning provides the opportunity for increasing support of small-
group learning, and better ways for the teacher to orchestrate the tasks and moves between individual, small
group and whole class discussion (Dillenbourg & Jermann, 2010).
          NumberNet was designed to use the affordances of multi-touch to help students become more flexible
in their use of mathematics.    The tool builds on the multi-touch features, to allow small groups of students to
work towards a joint goal of creating calculations for a single target number, while retaining control of their own
input  devices, similar  to  numeric   keypads. The tool  also  takes advantage of the   networking   aspects of this
technology, allowing the teacher to move the target numbers between tables. In this way, students can learn
from their immediate group, from the calculations passed to them from other groups, and through whole class
discussion towards the end of the activity.
          In this paper, we present the tool and data from a pilot study, to explore the value of this tool for
increased flexibility generating arithmetic calculations in primary school children.

  Multi-touch                                                                                      Orchestration
  Interactive                                                                                      desk
  whiteboard

     Networked
     multi-touch
     tables

                                  Figure 1. The Multi-touch Enabled Classroom.

Method
As this was a pilot study of the use of the new NumberNet tool, the study was designed to collect both pre and
post data of math skills, and as a participant observation study to explore how students used the tool and any
issues that arose in relation to the collaboration, math or technology.
          Participants were 32, year six pupils (10-11 year olds; mean age 10.5 years; SD = 0.35), who attended
two local public primary schools during the 2010-11 academic year. Eight male and eight female students were
recruited from each school; in both schools, the students recruited were all part of one class group, and so were
familiar with each other and used to working together.
          Students were recruited during a visit to the school by members of the research team about a week
before they visited the lab. The purpose of this visit was to explain the study and the multi-touch technology and
lead  the students through    a number   of activities to prepare them  for the visit to the lab; the  students  also
completed the pre-test (described below) during this visit to the school.   All students in the class (approximately
25) participated in the introductory visit. Parental consent forms were distributed and the teacher selected 16
students to visit the lab from those who returned consent forms.
          Students were brought to the lab in a group of 16, spending about 5 hours working on a variety of
learning activities and games on the tables.     These activities included a number of non-educational game-type
activities to familiarize the students with the technology, two history activities and four mathematics mysteries.
All of the math tasks were word-based problems; one was a logic problem, another required sorting number
facts to find an answer, and two required calculations. These tasks were based of classroom based tasks, and
were unlikely to influence the students' performance on the post-tests. The NumberNet activity was introduced

© ISLS                                                                                                            177
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                               Volume I: Long Papers

after lunch, at which stage the students had been working on the tables for a number of hours, and were familiar
with interaction and operation of the tables. After using NumberNet, the students piloted other new tasks for the
non-educational aspects of this project, including a sorting task where they had to pass photographs between the
tables, and a three-dimensional version of Tetris; after approximately an hour, the post-test was distributed.
          The data described in this paper consists of comparison of the pre and post-test data, and an exploration
of the process of one group. As this was a pilot study, each of the authors of this paper were present during this
activity, acting as participant observers to evaluate the task; the groups at each table were each recorded by two
cameras and a recording of the computer display was made. Participant observers were focused on helping the
children complete the task while paying attention to any difficulty that they had with the task and the strategies
that the group members used. During a de-briefing session after each day of data collection, the participant
observers recounted what they had noticed, paying particular attention to processing of knowledge exchange,
helping   behaviour   or on-task conversations  within   their group.    The  focus group  was   selected through  the
comments of the participant observers, where the sharing of a strategy had been noticed; the video of this group
was reviewed in preparing the analysis for this paper.    Further data from a larger study will be presented during
the conference.

Pre and Post Test
Students were given a pre-test during the initial classroom visit, and a post-test about an hour after they used the
NumberNet tool in the lab.    The test consisted of a single sheet of paper, with space for the student's name, and
the statement: My target number is x, with x being replaced with one of up to ten possible numbers (six at pre-
test and four at post-test). Different target numbers were used for the pre and post-tests, and no two children at
the same table received the same target numbers.
          The tests and pencils were distributed to each student, and they were asked to put their names on the
top of the page.  There were then given brief instructions (all students were familiar with the task from prior use
in their mathematics class), and told they had two minutes to write as many calculations as possible. After two
minutes, the students were asked to put down their pencils and their tests were collected by members of the
research team.

               Figure 2. Examples of the Pre and Post-test (Standard Explode-A-Number Activity).

NumberNet
The NumberNet activity is based on a standard classroom activity known as `Explode a Number' (e.g. Atkinson,
1992).  This  task is  commonly     used in upper   primary  school   (9-11 year olds) in  the  mental/oral arithmetic
section   of the mathematics    lesson.  Students   are given  a  number    and  told to  create as many    alternative
calculations  as possible,   which  give that total, usually   within a  certain time limit. The  task can  be  varied
depending on the students' ability, areas in which they need practice and the learning objectives for the activity
by specifying    which   operations can  be used  to achieve   the  answer.   Over the course of time, students are
expected to identify a variety of strategies for this task, including using simple addition and subtraction patterns
(e.g.  499+1=500;     498+2=500;   497+3=500   etc), simple    multiplication or division  patterns (e.g. 50*10=500;
5*100=500;    0.5*1000=500;    5000/10=500    etc),  multiplication  or division by   one (e.g. 500/1 =   500; 500*1=
500), commutative statements (e.g. 200+300=500; 300+200=500; 250*2 =500; 2*250=500). The overall goal is
for students to be able to identify the different uses of operations and develop a flexible understanding of how
numbers and operators interact.
          While  this  task provides an  easy way    of assessing  a  child's current understanding   of  numbers and
operators, and can be used over time as a practice activity, it is explicitly an individual activity. While some
teachers attempt various whole-class extension activities after students have written their calculations, it remains
difficult to adapt this  from a  practice or  assessment  activity  into one  that provides  opportunities  to learn to
develop a wider range of strategies.
          The NumberNet tool takes the principle of the task, but by making it a collaborative task, and allowing
for an extension sorting activity, provides a way for students to learn from each other during production of

© ISLS                                                                                                              178
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                   Volume I: Long Papers

calculations, and for the teacher to structure and scaffold their learning in the conversations that follow. The
three phases of NumberNet take the students through small group, between group and whole class interactions,
allowing them to learn from their group members as well as other teams and from the classroom discourse.

Phase 1
In the first phase of NumberNet a target number is assigned to each table (a different number for each table) and
each student at the table has access to a multi-touch numeric keypad on the surface of the table (see Figure 2)
that is designated for their use.   The teacher can choose when to make the target numbers appear, and how long
the students are allowed to spend creating calculations for that number.          Each student can work alone, or can
discuss with their peers at the table how to address this task or particular calculations within the task.
          The numeric keypads allow the students to use the digits 0-9, the four primary operators (addition,
subtraction, multiplication and division) and brackets (parentheses). While the teacher controls allow for the
removal of any digit or operator on the numeric keypads (to make the task more difficult or encourage certain
students  to  focus   on a particular operator,  factors  etc), these features were   not used   during    the experiment
described here: all students were able to use all digits and operators.   When the student has created a calculation,
they use the send button to move the calculation from the number pad and onto the open space on the table.
          The keypads are set to identify duplicate calculations (e.g. calculations that are already on the table,
regardless of who created them), turning them red and not allowing the student to slide it into the middle of the
table.  Incorrect calculations and invalid expressions are permitted at this stage, although are flagged in the
teacher's control panel.
          Once a calculation is added to the table, any student at that table can pull it onto their number pad and
edit it, allowing for corrections or discussion within the group.        The teacher's control records which number
pads   create each    calculation, and whether   the calculations   are  new   or edits to   existing   calculations.  This
provides a way for the teacher to monitor the task from a distance during the task, or, what is more likely,
examine the activity afterwards, or over time. This information can be used to identify students who appear to
be stuck on a particular method, students who alter calculations during the tasks, and students who do not get the
calculations  correct.     Over time,  this can  provide   the   teacher with  a  method     of assessing   the  students'
performance, learning and areas of difficulty and indicate where prompting exploration of additional strategies
would be useful.
          Throughout the task, the total number of correct calculations on each table is displayed in the corner of
the screen. This feature can be turned on or off at any time during the activity, depending on whether the teacher
is interested in encouraging    between-group    competition.   For the  pilot study  described     here, this feature was
enabled, allowing the students to see which table was creating the most calculations.

                         Figure 3. Phase One of NumberNet, during Creation of Calculations.

Phase 2
After  a length  of   time determined   by  the  teacher  (either  before or   during the    task), the   second phase  of
NumberNet begins.      The number pads disappear, the correct calculations cluster near the top of the table, while
the incorrect calculations remain in the center of the table; the teacher can allow the group to examine their
incorrect calculations   before    moving onto  the  next part  of the  task. The  correct   calculations  and   the  target
number   are  then  rotated  to the  next table, so  that each   group   receives the   last group's    number   and   their
calculations. They are given a few minutes to explore the calculations that have been sent to their table, and then

© ISLS                                                                                                                  179
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                      Volume I: Long Papers

the number pads appear so they can add more calculations.             The length of time before the number pads appear
can  be altered,   and  increases   for   each  rotation,  as the  students   have  increasing  numbers    of calculations  to
explore. As before, the tool identifies duplications, so the new group cannot replicate calculations created by the
previous group.

Phase 3
Once the target numbers have been rotated around all the tables (four tables in our case), the teacher can activate
the  final phase   of the  activity.   In this  phase, the groups    get their original  target numbers    back,  with all the
calculations that have been created by their class.        The number pads disappear and the group's task is to link the
calculations   together    in a way    that makes   sense  to them   (see Figure   3). This  can   then be projected   by  the
teacher, so that the whole class can discuss the reasons for linking and what the similarities or differences are
between    calculations.   There  are   many    possible   ways   to create   structures for the   calculations  (e.g. similar
patterns,  the  same   operators,   etc),   the important  feature   is  that  the students  can   explain why    they   linked
particular calculations, and, over time, understand the range of possibilities.
           Calculations are linked together by placing a finger on each one and bringing them together; when the
two calculations touch, a link is formed. Links can be broken by pulling the calculations apart.                  Groups can
enable or disable a dynamic automatic layout of the resulting graphs of expressions. The layout algorithm used
is a simple force-directed graph layout that attempts to minimize edge crossings.
           Due to technical issues, not every group in our sample was able to use Phase Three, and the teacher
noted that additional work will be necessary to develop pedagogical supports for the classroom discussion of
this activity; however changes to the technology have resulted in increased stability for this phase, and the data
presented at the conference will include use of Phase Three.

Technical Details
Each   student  table  ran    an instance    of the NumberNet      student    software   which  was  built on   our  software
framework which was written to support distributed applications for the classroom. This framework uses Java
with OpenGL bindings through the jME2 scene graph library. Our framework specifically provides components
for  touch    interaction, content    management    and    teacher   control  over the   network.  Inter-table  messaging   is
achieved with opens standards messaging systems (XMPP). The teacher's software for NumberNet was built
using Multiplicity with a Swing GUI.

                              Figure 3. Phase Three of NumberNet: Sorting the Calculations.

Results

Outcome Measures
The data from the pre and post-test were collected and analyzed to explore whether there were differences in
number     of calculations    created, range   of operators   used   and maximum     number     of operators  use in a   single
calculation.   Paired sample t-tests were used to determine whether these scores differed significantly from pre to
post test.
           Results indicated     that  the  difference in  number    of  calculations  created  from   pre to  post  test  was
statistically significant, t(31) = -3.63, p <.001.     The differences in range of operators was not significant, t(31) =
.55, p=.59.   The  difference    in maximum       number   of operators   used  was  not  significant,  t(31)=-1.53,   p =.14.
Descriptive statistics are displayed in table 1.

© ISLS                                                                                                                     180
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                             Volume I: Long Papers

Table 1: Descriptive statistics for number of calculations, range of operators and maximum number of operators.

                                                      Pre-test                            Post-test
                                             Mean                SD                 Mean               SD
  Number of Calculations                      5.91               3.49               8.59              4.63
  Range of Operators                          2.5                1.14               2.41               .84
  Max number of operators                     1.38               .94                1.56              1.13

Within-group Learning
While  our  data indicated   an increased  number  of calculations created, but not  an  increase  in the maximum
number of operators used, or an increase in the range of operators used, through exploration of one group's
process,  we can  see   some  changes  to  their calculations during the task, shedding  light  on the mechanisms
through which NumberNet might support the developmental of mathematical understanding.
          The focus group is made up of two boys, Jack and Thomas, and two girls, Olivia and Amy.         This group
represent a wide range of mathematical skills, ranging from Jack, who produced two correct (and one incorrect)
calculation at pre-test to Thomas who produced seven correct calculations at pre-test.    The group also included
Olivia, who only produced three calculations at pre-test, although one of these was a 4-operator calculation, one
of the longest calculations seen in the entire data-set and the only multi-operator produced at pre-test by the
members of this group. At pre-test, Amy produced five correct and one incorrect calculation. The calculations
created at pre and post tests (as well as the target numbers) are shown in table 2.
          There were two primary changes to the group's post-test data that can be tracked back to the group's
process. The first is the introduction of multi-operator expressions. During the course of the activity, Olivia
created a number of multi-operator calculations; members of her group were then seen to also create multi-
operator expression, possibly as a reaction to seeing her use this form of calculation (usually just two operators,
without accurate use of brackets/parentheses). At the post-test, we see Amy produce a multi-operator calculation
(6*8*10), suggesting the possibility that she had picked this up from observing Olivia's behavior during the
activity.
          The second change that we saw was in Jack's calculations from pre to post test.          At pre-test, Jack
created two correct and one incorrect calculation. His pre-test calculations contained one correct subtraction and
one correct  addition,   at post-test this increased to three  correct additions,   two correct subtractions and   a
multiplication calculation (all single operator expressions). Three of these are also small manipulations around
his target number (e.g. 499+1=500; 500-0=500). As this type of pattern was created by other members of his
group, it suggests that he may have noticed that he could create these simple calculations, and used this strategy
as a way to create more calculations at post-test.

Table 2: Calculations created by each of the focus group students at pre and post (not all are correct).

           Jack                       Thomas                         Olivia                         Amy
    Pre          Post           Pre          Post          Pre              Post             Pre           Post
  (320)          (500)        (320)          (160)        (240)             (235)           (180)          (480)
  311+9         1+499        3200/10       1600-100      200+40           200+35            60*3         470+10
 10-330         503-3        200+120         80*2       100+140          200+30+5         1800/10         479+1
                                                        50+50+50
 20+300       10+490         20+300         16*10        +50+40        100+100+35          179+1          6*8*10
                                                                       50+50+50+50
              300+200        310+10        100+60                           +30+5         380-200        400+80
                                                                       100+100+20+
                100*5         1+319        17*10-10                      10+4+11           174+6          500-20
                                                                       200+19+11+3
                500-0         320+0        40+120                            +2                           438-3
                              2+318         1+159
                                           20+140
                                           10+150

Discussion
The results of our pilot study exploring the value of NumberNet for increasing mathematical flexibility and
developing adaptive expertise in upper primary students indicated that there was a significant increase in the
number of calculations created by students from pre to post test. This result suggests that from a single use of

© ISLS                                                                                                            181
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                Volume I: Long Papers

NumberNet, improvements in flexibility with mathematical concepts were evident.             Exploration of the process
also indicated that these improvements may have been due to the collaborative nature of the activity.
         While the results from the pilot study presented in this paper indicate the possibilities of NumberNet,
other  explanations    include  the  chances  that these   occurred   due  to the opportunity   of practicing  creating
calculations, rather than any direct effect of the tool. Further studies comparing students who used NumberNet
with students who practiced the paper-based version of the activity are necessary to determine whether this was
in fact the case. Further studies will also explore the role of the third phase of NumberNet in more detail to
understand how the process of sorting or creating structure of calculations may foster numerical flexibility.
         Additionally,   the data   presented  in this  study  came   from two  pilot tests of the tool;  each test was
orchestrated by   a   different teacher. While    both  teachers have   extensive in-classroom   experience  using   the
Explode-A-Number activity in a standard classroom and experience using the multi-touch enabled classroom;
the NumberNet activity was new to them. They both expressed the need to develop the pedagogical features of
this activity in more detail, helping the teacher to understand how best to manage and orchestrate the activity
and scaffold students' conversations in the final stages of the task to take the most advantage of the tool.    Future
development will include the pedagogical supporting documents and further testing with a range of teachers.
Finally, due to   technical  issues, the third  phase   of the activity could not be  completed    by every  group;  we
anticipate that this phase will lead to more complex conversation around the activity, and that greater changes in
flexibility and the range of calculations would be seen in groups who had the opportunity to fully engage with
this part of the tool.
         NumberNet was designed to take advantage of the affordances of a multi-touch classroom. in this way,
the tool is an example of CSCL embedded in the classroom, which supports small group, intra-group and whole
class learning and facilitates the movement between these phases for the teacher.        It also provides evidence for
the way in which integrating technology into the classroom can be used to introduce new types of interactions
between students, and engagement with content and ideas. By leveraging the affordances of the technology to
promote sharing of strategies in tasks similar to Explode-A-Number, students have the opportunity to learn from
each other and recognize different ways of approaching a similar task.
         Learning to be flexible users of knowledge has been described as adaptive expertise (e.g. Hatano &
Inagaki, 1986), and recognized as an important skill to develop for future learning and transfer. To develop
adaptive expertise, Schwartz, Bransford & Sears (2005), suggest that patterns of learning should balance the
development of efficiency using strategies, with experiences of innovation, keeping learning with the `Optimal
Adaptability Corridor'. Evidence from prior research indicates that when students learn mathematics in ways
focus on the development of efficiency, deep understanding of the constructs can be limited, while students who
learn using a more innovative approach took longer to master the fundamental ideas but understood the concepts
and were  better  prepared   to   transfer their  knowledge    into a new  situation  (Martin  & Schwartz,   2005).  In
NumberNet, students can move between using their pre-existing efficient strategies for creating calculations and
innovating new strategies through observation or collaboration with their peers during the initial stages of the
task. The third phase requires all students to innovate to structure the calculations that were created. The teacher
can guide this activity in a number of ways, and provide support for the whole class through projection of each
group's  calculation   maps.   In future work,   the use   of NumberNet    over time  will  be  explored, to determine
whether it promotes the development of flexibility and adaptive expertise in primary mathematics.

References
Atkinson, S. (1992) Mathematics with Reason: The Emergent Approach to Primary Maths London: Heinemann.
Baroody, A.J. & Dowker, A. (2003) The development of arithmetic concepts and skills: constructing adaptive
         expertise London: Routledge
Barron, B. (2000). Achieving Coordination in Collaborative Problem-Solving Groups. Journal of the Learning
         Sciences, 9(4), 403-436. doi: 10.1207/S15327809JLS0904_2.
Barron,  B.  (2003).    When    Smart  Groups     Fail. Journal  of   the  Learning   Sciences, 12(3),   307-359.   doi:
         10.1207/S15327809JLS1203_1.
Dillenbourg, P., & Jermann, P. (2010). Technology for classroom orchestration. In M. S. Khine & I. M. Saleh
         (Eds.), New Science of Learning (pp. 525-552). New York, NY: Springer New York.
Esmonde, I. (2009). Ideas and Identities: Supporting Equity in Cooperative Mathematics Learning. Review of
         Educational Research, 79(2), 1008-1043. doi: 10.3102/0034654309332562.
Hatano, G., & Inagaki, K. (1986). Two courses of expertise. In H. Stevenson, H. Azuma, & K. Hakuta (Eds.),
         Child development and education in Japan (pp.262­272). New York: Freeman.
Harris, A., Rick, J., Bonnett, V., Yuill, N., Fleck, R., Marshall, P., et al. (2009). Around the table: are multiple-
         touch surfaces better than single-touch for children's collaborative interactions?. Proceedings of the 9th
         international   conference   on   Computer    Supported    Collaborative Learning-Volume     1  (p. 335­344).
         International    Society     of    the   Learning     Sciences.    Retrieved    from    http://portal.acm.org/
         citation.cfm?id=1600053.1600104.\

© ISLS                                                                                                               182
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                               Volume I: Long Papers

Higgins, S., Burd, E., Mercier, E. & Joyce-Gibbons, A. (under review) Multi-touch tables, pedagogic design and
         knowledge transformation. Journal of Computer Assisted Learning.
Higgins,  S. (2003)   Does   ICT make    mathematics   teaching more   effective? in  I. Thompson   (Ed)  Enhancing
         Primary Mathematics Teaching Buckingham: Open University Press
Hornecker, E., Marshall, P., Dalton, N., & Rogers, Y., (2008). Collaboration and Interference: Awareness with
         Mice or Touch Input. Proceedings of CSCL, 167-176.
Johnson,  D.  W.      & Johnson,    R. T. (1991)   Learning   together and   alone:  Cooperative,  competitive  and
         individualistic learning. Englewood Cliffs, NJ. Prentice Hall
Martin, T., & Schwartz, D. L. (2005). Physically Distributed Learning: Adapting and Reinterpreting Physical
         Environments     in the Development      of Fraction  Concepts. Cognitive   Science,   29(4), 587-625. doi:
         10.1207/s15516709cog0000_15.
Marshall, P., Fleck,    R., Harris, A., Rick, J., Hornecker,   E., Rogers, Y., et al. (2009).   Fighting for control:
         Children's embodied interactions when using physical and digital representations. Proceedings of the
         27th international   conference  on  Human    factors in  computing systems     (p. 2149­2152). ACM    New
         York, NY, USA.
O'Donnell, A. (2006). The role of peers and group learning. In P. Alexander & P. Winne (Eds.), The Role of
         Peers and Group Learning (2nd ed., pp. 781-802). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Earlbaum.
Roschelle, J. (1992). Learning by collaborating: convergent conceptual change. The Journal of the Learning
         Sciences, 2(3), 235-276.
Ruthven, K. (1998) The Use of Mental, Written and Calculator Strategies of Numerical Computation by Upper
         Primary Pupils within a 'Calculator-aware' Number Curriculum British Educational Research Journal,
         24.1: 21-42.
Sarama, J. and Clements, D.H. (2009) Early childhood mathematics education research: learning trajectories for
         young children London: Taylor & Francis
Schwartz, D. L., Bransford, J. D., & Sears, D. (2005). Efficiency and innovation in transfer. Transfer of learning
         from a modern multidisciplinary perspective (p. 1­51).
Slavin, R.E. (1986) Using student team learning. (3rd ed.) Baltimore, MD: John Hopkins University.
Webb, N. M., & Farivar, S. (1994). Promoting helping behavior in cooperative small groups in middle school
         mathematics. American Educational Research Journal, 31(2), 369.

© ISLS                                                                                                             183
