CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                        Volume I: Long Papers

   Collaborative Gaze Footprints: Correlates of Interaction Quality
    Patrick Jermann, CRAFT, Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), Patrick.Jermann@epfl.ch
              Dejana Mullins, University of Freiburg, D-79085 Freiburg, dejana.mullins@gmail.com
    Marc-Antoine Nüssli, Pierre Dillenbourg, CRAFT, Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL),
                         Email: Marc-Antoine.Nuessli@epfl.ch, Pierre.Dillenbourg@epfl.ch

          Abstract:    Dual   eye  tracking    offers   new  possibilities    for the  analysis     and diagnosis    of
          collaborative interaction. Cross-recurrence analyses and visualizations offer insight into how
          closely two    collaborators'  gaze    follow   each  other. We    contrast  two    cases to  illustrate how
          gaze  cross-recurrence   can   be   used   as a   correlate  of high   and  low  quality  interaction.   The
          intriguing  graphical   patterns    that result from  the    time  coupled   traces  of the   collaborators'
          fixations are footprints of the quality of the interaction. Good quality interaction features a
          higher recurrence rate than low quality interaction. The graphical structure of the recurrence
          plots  indicates  whether   collaborators      divide  labor    and   whether    they are    sharing visual
          attention.

Introduction
The long-term goal we pursue is to use behavioral indicators that can be measured and evaluated automatically
to represent the quality of interaction along psychologically meaningful dimensions. These dimensions could
then be used as a basis to diagnose the quality of interaction (Soller, Martinez, Jermann & Mühlenbrock, 2005).
          We contribute to this endeavor by pointing out gaze-based correlates of rating dimensions that are used
in CSCL     to  characterize   the quality    of   collaborative   interaction   (Meier,   Spada,   &   Rummel,     2007).   The
assumption behind this approach is that the type of coupling between collaborator's gaze reflects the quality of
their interaction. We focus in this contribution on cross-recurrence, a measure of whether two collaborators look
at the  same   target more    or less at the   same    time  (typically   within  a  4 seconds    time  span).  We   see   cross-
recurrence visualizations (Figure 1) as footprints of the quality of interaction that allow to visually grasp the gist
of the interaction dynamics. More generally, our approach aims at describing and modeling collaboration across
several levels of control (Lord & Levy, 1994), from low-level individual signals up to social interaction via an
analysis of synchronization and alignment between individual behaviors.

Dual Eye Tracking and Gaze Recurrence
Synchronous     dual   eye  tracking  is    a novel    methodology,      which    consists  of  recording   the    gaze of   two
collaborators simultaneously (see for instance Cherubini, Nüssli & Dillenbourg, 2008 and Nüssli, Jermann, &
Dillenbourg,   2009).  Existing   research    about    gaze and communication       studied   situations  that are  often  about
"delayed" communication (subjects describe a scene for some listener who is not present) and about simple
visual  referents (the   scene looked    at by   the   subjects is  simple   and  static). Richardson    and   Dale  (2005)   for
example used eye movements to investigate how a speaker and a listener deployed their attention within a visual
"common ground". Their research focused on cases where two partners are looking at a visual scene that is the
topic  of conversation.    A   cross-recurrence    analysis   showed     that speaker   and   listener  eye movements       were
coupled   throughout    the  discourse.  The     more   closely   a   listener's  eye  movements     were   coupled     with  the
speaker's, the better the listener did on comprehension questions. In this study, speaker and listener were not
interacting  synchronously.      The  result     was   however     replicated    in  a study    with    synchronous     dialogue
(Richardson,    Dale,  & Kirkham,     2007).   Cross    recurrence  quantification     analysis was    proposed    recently  as a
generalized method to unveil the interlocking of two interacting people (Dale, Warlaumont & Richardson, in
press). The    authors   used  the method     to   analyze   gaze  as  well   as  the  use  of  language   alignment    through
grammatical sequences (Dale & Spivey, 2006). In previous studies conducted in our lab, we found that gaze
proximity   was,  at   the  micro-level,    negatively    related   to   the  misunderstandings     of  referential  utterances
(Cherubini  et   al., 2008)   and,  that cross-recurrence       was   at  the macro-level,     positively correlated    to  team
performance (Cherubini, Nüssli & Dillenbourg, 2010). Some initial observations by Pietinen and colleagues
(2008)  in  the   domain    of pair   programming       also  suggest    that gaze    closeness   might   reflect   tightness   of
collaboration. The driver and navigator roles that are typical for pair programming seem also to be reflected in
the way programmers look at the code.
          We extend the work by these authors on pair programming, a task that is more complex than controlled
referential communication and more realistic than faked interaction. The notion of footprint that we use in this
contribution is related to the notion of "signature" that is used by Dale et al. (submitted) to refer to the high level
visual  patterns  (lines and   structures)  in   cross-recurrence   plots.   In  physics,  where    the cross-recurrence    plots
initially stem from, Eckman Kamphorst, and Ruelle (1987) also describe two levels of reading recurrence plots:
"large  scale   typology"   which   refers    to   the overall  aspect    of  the plots    as containing  structure   or   being

© ISLS                                                                                                                        184
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                      Volume I: Long Papers

homogeneous; and "small scale texture" which refers to smaller details and reflects intrinsic properties of the
dynamical systems represented.

Collaboration Quality
CSCL encompasses diverse approaches for analyzing interaction that differ in the purpose of the analysis, the
units of interaction that are analyzed, and the underlying theoretical assumptions. In a recent workshop series
(e.g. Suthers, Law, Lund, Rose, & Teplovs, 2009), this diversity and the importance of achieving a common
ground in the analysis of interaction was specifically addressed.
         Traditionally,     researchers    applied  a   "coding  and   counting"   approach     in   order  to   evaluate  the
effectiveness    of collaboration    processes  (e.g.   De Wever,    Schellens,  Valcke,    &   Van  Keer,    2006;   Strijbos,
Marten,  Prins,   &    Jochems,   2006),   that is, they   transcribed  the interaction   and   counted    the occurence    of
particular types    of   utterances. This  approach   is not   only very  time  consuming,      but the results   of a  coding
analysis also do not necessarily inform about the success of the collaboration. For instance, a high amount of
utterances   concerning     the technical     coordination   can also   indicate  that   the  collaboration    partners   have
difficulties  in coordinating    the  use  of  the  technical  environment.     Meier  et al.   (2007)  therefore    suggested
employing a rating analysis. They developed a rating scheme to analyze the quality of collaborative interaction.
The   rating  scheme     contained   nine  dimensions    that  evaluated  aspects of   communication,      joint  information
processing,   coordination,     interpersonal   relationship,  and  motivation.   The  evaluation    of   the  rating   scheme
testified a high inter-rater reliability, consistency, and validity. Originally, the rating scheme was developed for
the context of interdisciplinary collaboration. However, Rummel, Deiglmayr, Spada, Kahrimanis, and Avouris
(2011)  showed      that it can also  be  adapted   for  other contexts,  for instance   for the   analysis of  collaborative
interaction between computer scientists, or for the analysis of students' collaborative learning in mathematics
(see also Diziol et al., 2008).

Research Question
The goal of this contribution is to point out gaze-based correlates of the dimensions of collaborative interaction
identified by Meier et al. (2007). To this end, we present a case study that aims at identifying the characteristics
of gaze traces that are related with interaction quality. In order to identify relevant gaze features, we contrasted
two cases: One dyad that showed high collaboration quality and one dyad that showed low collaboration quality
based on the interaction analysis with a rating scheme. By choosing diverse examples, we exploit the natural
variability between the cases to identify relevant gaze patterns (Firestone, 1993). Our main question is what are
the differences in the gaze patterns of the good and the bad dyad, and how do these differences relate to the
interaction quality?

Method
We report data that was collected during the piloting phase of a larger study of program understanding that
involved 42 pairs and 55 individuals, all students in computer science and communication science, and which is
under  analysis  at  the  time  of   writing.  We  focus specifically  in this  contribution    on  three master  students  in
computer science in their 4th and 5th year and one bachelor 3rd year student in communication science. They all
report to program at least between 1 to 3 hours per week in Java. We refer to the participants as "Blue" and
"Red". In Dyad 1, Blue indicated that he has "poor" knowledge of Java, whereas Red indicated that he has
"good" knowledge. In Dyad 2, Blue indicated "good" knowledge and Red indicated "very good" knowledge.
Despite this self-reported disparity of expertise, the dyad partners had comparable prior knowledge as assessed
in a pre-test: In both dyads, one student reached a prior knowledge score of 5 out of 13 points (Blue in both
dyads), and the other student reached a prior knowledge score of 7 points (Red in both dyads).
         Dyads      worked   on a    task that consisted  of  describing  the  rules  of  a game    implemented      as a Java
program    of three   hundred   lines. Understanding     and   explaining   the rules  of   the game    required  subjects  to
translate programmatic Java code into a domain model that is expressed in everyday language. In the game, two
players alternated in choosing numbers out of a list of nine numbers from 1 to 9. The goal of the game was to
have three numbers that add up to 15. The instructions for the dyads were: "You have been hired in a game
company and you have received this code. This is a two player turn-based arithmetic game. Please explain the
rules to potential non-programmer players including: What is the initial game situation, what does a player have
to do at each turn. Give an example of a valid and an invalid action. What are the general rules of validity of an
action? What does a player have to do or get in order to win the game? Under which condition can the game end
without a winner?"
         The experiment consisted of two phases. First, students completed an individual pre-test to assess their
prior  knowledge      in  programming      and  more    specifically their  java  skills  (individual     phase). Then    they
collaboratively solved ten programming tasks (collaborative phase). During the collaboration, the dyad partners
were seated in separate rooms, but were able to communicate with each other through an audio channel.                     Each
question was     timed,  and  the  dyads   received a   warning  20  to  45 seconds   before    time ran  out. Although    we

© ISLS                                                                                                                      185
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                 Volume I: Long Papers

recorded the entire interaction, the dyads were asked to indicate when they were ready to answer to the tasks by
clicking a button labeled "Start recording". The entire experiment lasted for approximately 90 minutes.
          The  problem-solving    environment       consisted of  a collaborative  programming    editor   based  on the
Eclipse IDE (http://www.eclipse.org). The workspace consisted of an instruction view (Instructions area) at the
top of  the screen    that contained  the question    the subjects  had  to  answer, and  a  central  view  (Code   area)
displaying the code of the program. The lower part of the editor displayed the remaining time and contained a
button for recording the answer (Time/Management area). The workspace was shared via a server that relayed
interface events to connected clients, i.e. if one partner used the scroll bar, the view of his partner changed as
well to ensure that they were viewing the same section of the code. Furthermore, the dyad partners were able to
highlight parts of the code in order to draw the partner's attention to specific aspects or sections. Two Tobii
1750   eye-trackers   were  used  to  record  gaze   at 50   Hz.  A dedicated   server  synchronized  the  eye-trackers'
recordings,  and   the data  was  logged  using     callback  functions from  low-level  API  of the  eye-trackers.  The
subjects' heads were held still with a chinrest placed at 65 centimeters of the screen. An adaptive algorithm was
used   to identify fixations  and   a post-calibration  was   done  to  best align fixations with the   stimulus. While
subjects used Skype to converse, audio was recorded using dedicated phantom powered boundary microphones
amplified through a preamplifier.

Analysis of Collaboration Quality
To  evaluate  the  collaboration  quality of  dyadic    pair programming,    we replayed  the  interaction of the dyads
using an interactive tool, which displays the shared screen, the selections done by the subjects, and plays back
their conversation and eye gaze. The analysis was two-folded: First, we rated the collaboration quality with a
rating  scheme that    is based  on the work     of Meier et  al. (2007; see  also Rummel    et al., 2011). Second,  we
compared the dyads' eye gaze during various moments of the interaction to identify whether gaze indicators are
sensitive to contrasts in the rating dimensions.

Rating Analysis
As the main goal of the current study was to identify simple gaze-based correlates of collaboration quality, we
concentrated the analysis on two aspects of collaboration quality: communication and coordination (cf. Rummel
et al., 2011). Two     other  aspects,  joint information     processing, as  well  as  interpersonal  relationship  and
motivation were not taken into account as these may have less clear indicators in dyadic gaze. We evaluated five
dimensions that we briefly describe hereafter. Two dimensions assess the quality of the dyadic communication,
and three dimensions assess the dyad's coordination of joint work.
          Collaboration    flow  evaluates    if the  collaboration    partners engage   in  a  coherent   exchange   of
information and keep mutual awareness on what the partner is currently working on. High collaboration flow is
marked by a seamless "flow" of dialogue while collaboratively solving the joint task, in other words, the dyad
partners address each other and react to each other's proposals or questions. The dimension sustaining mutual
understanding evaluates if the dyad partners successfully work towards a shared basis of understanding, in other
words, a common ground (cf. Clark & Brennan, 1991). Dyads that show successful grounding give and ask for
feedback. Mutual understanding can also be facilitated if the dyad partners clarify about which aspect they will
talk next, for instance by verbal references to the specific part of the code, or by selecting the specific part of the
code in the shared workspace (deictic reference). The dimension technical coordination assesses if the dyad
partners  effectively  use   the technical   environment     during  problem    solving and  capitalize on  the   system
resources (cf. Diziol et al., 2008). In the current study, the dyad partners work on a joint work space: if one
partner scrolls, the window of the other dyad partner changes as well; if one partner highlights code, his or her
partner can see it. In contrast to Meier et al. (2007), the current study evaluates the coordination of the joint
problem-solving with two separate dimensions. Similar to Meier et al. (2007), we evaluate the amount of task
division, in other words: Do the dyad partners solve all aspects of the task together, or do they alternate between
individual and collaborative work phases? In addition, the dimension participation symmetry assesses if both
dyad partners are equally engaged in problem solving.
          As in Meier et al. (2007), we assessed the dimensions on a 5-point rating scale from - 2 (low quality) to
+ 2 (high quality). The dimension task division was an exception. While phases of individual work are crucial
for a successful outcome in interdisciplinary interaction (Rummel & Spada, 2005), it is not yet clear if a certain
amount of task division is also beneficial in the current pair-programming setting, or if it is better if the dyad
partners constantly interact with each other. We therefore evaluated the amount of task division with a rating
scale from 0 (no task division) to 4 (high amount of task division). The two first authors of this paper separately
rated the quality of the collaboration and reached a high agreement; disagreements in the ratings were solved by
mutual discussion. Because of the small number of dyads, we cannot report kappa statistics about inter-rater
agreement.

Cross-recurrence Plots

© ISLS                                                                                                               186
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                       Volume I: Long Papers

Cross-recurrence    plots  represent   the time-dependence      of two     processes in a  dynamical    system. Because    the
graphical   interpretation of  cross-recurrence     is not  straightforward,    we   hereafter describe   a schematic    cross-
recurrence plot along a real plot for illustration purpose (see Figure 1).
         The horizontal axis represents time for the first collaborator and the vertical axis represents time for the
second collaborator. Each pixel of the plot (Figure 1, right) corresponds to 200 milliseconds time slice (the
duration of short gaze fixations are around 100 ms). For a pixel to be colored, the distance between the fixations
of the two collaborators has to be lower than a given threshold (70 pixels in our case). Moments of recurrence
appear colored in the plot (neither light gray nor white). Cross-recurrence plots show exclusively recurrent gaze.
If two   collaborators continuously     looked   at two    different spots   on  the screen for  the  whole  interaction,  the
resulting cross-recurrence plot would be completely blank (light gray in Figure 1, right). On the contrary, if the
two collaborators looked at the same spot on the screen totally synchronously, the plot would show only a dark
line on  the  diagonal.   Pixels  exactly  on  the  diagonal  of   the  plot  correspond   to  synchronous   recurrence,  e.g.
collaborators look at the "same" target at exactly the same time. Pixels below the diagonal show a lag for the
first collaborator (the second collaborator looked at the target before) whereas the pixels above the diagonal
show   a lag  for the second   collaborator.   Asymmetries      above    and  below  the  diagonal   line could therefore    be
indicative of leading and following behaviors.
         In some cases, the colored areas on the real plot form rectangular shapes, which are represented by
rectangles  in the  schematic     plot (Figure   1, left). Labels    refer to areas  of interest  on  the screen   (e.g.  for a
computer program a would typically refer to the method signature, b to the body of the method, and c to the
return statement). On the horizontal axis, the labels of the arrows represent the areas of the stimulus that were
looked   at by the  first collaborator.    The corresponding     sequence     of  areas of  interest that were  looked    at  is
"a->b->a->c->a".      The vertical axis    represents  the sequence     of  areas focused   on by   the  second collaborator:
"a->c->b->a->c". Following the diagonal, we move through the interaction, and we see that the dyad has looked
together synchronously at the areas "a->b->a->c". Off-diagonal regions indicate asynchronous cross-recurrence,
which happens when collaborators peek at or review places they have been or will be looking at together. For
example, in the schematic plot (Figure 1, left), the area labeled c' indicates that the second collaborator has
looked   at c  long   before  the dyad    focuses   on  c  together.    The  areas   marked   a' are indicative  of   the first
collaborator  looking   back   at area  a  after having    looked    at it together  with  the second    collaborator on  two
occasions.
         Hence,    in  the domain      of  program     understanding,      cross-recurrence   plots  not  only  represent  the
"togetherness" of collaborative code exploration, but also show whether the exploration of the program is rather
linear (there is almost no off-diagonal activity because regions of code are looked at only once) or iterative
(there are marked off diagonal regions that result from the collaborators repeatedly looking at the same regions
of the code).

                          Figure 1. Schematic (left) and Real (right) Cross-recurrence Plots.

Results
Two    dyads  were  chosen    among    available  data  at  the time    of  writing  because   they  best illustrated what    is
commonly understood in CSCL as a "good" and "bad" interaction quality. For each dimension of interaction
quality (as defined by the rating scheme) we report a characterization of the interaction through gaze cross-
recurrence plots and associated measures.

Gaze Correlates of the Dimensions of Interaction Quality
Overall, the collaboration quality of Dyad 1 is very bad. Their interaction is rather lopsided: Red explains to
Blue how he understands the code, while Blue is hardly contributing to the discussion and back-channels only
infrequently.  For  Red,   it apparently   was   quite easy  to understand    the   general functionality   of the code,  and

© ISLS                                                                                                                     187
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                            Volume I: Long Papers

except for a small mistake - he believes that the players can choose from a list of ten numbers instead of nine -
he correctly explains the rules of the game. In contrast, Dyad 2 overall shows a high collaboration quality. After
collaborators gained a good overview of the code, they jump to specific sections of the code in order to answer
open questions. The dyad is able to explain the general functionality of the game.
          In the remainder of this section, we describe the dyads' collaboration in more detail with reference to
the dimensions of the rating scheme, and intertwine the descriptions with results from gaze analyses. Table 1
summarizes the ratings of the dyads' collaboration quality. Our goal in this contribution is to identify whether
strong contrasts in ratings are reflected in behavioral measures.

Table 1: Collaboration quality of the two contrasting cases.

                          Collaboration       Mutual          Technical       Task      Particiation
                                Flow        Understanding   Coordination     Division   Symmetry
                Dyad 1          -2                -2              -2            4           -2
                Dyad 2           2                2               2             1            2

Collaboration Flow
The collaboration flow of Dyad 1 is very bad. Mostly Red is talking, and he hardly reacts to Blue's attempts to
interrupt  his monologue.  Only    infrequently, Red  addresses his  partner to ask for his opinion.  The unequal
collaboration seems to frustrate Blue, and apparently, he capitulates: When recording the answer, Blue is no
longer providing any back-channeling while Red engages in a monologue of almost four minutes. In contrast,
Dyad 2 shows a high collaboration flow. Only during reading the instructions, there is a short period where
none of the subjects talk; but then they engage in a mutual discussion for the rest of the problem solving, and
react to each other's questions and proposals.
          The two cross-recurrence plots that correspond to the 10 minutes of interaction are strikingly different
(see Figure 2). For Dyad 1, the density of recurrence points on the diagonal is not very marked. The numerous
white stripes are indicative of frequent scrolling. For Dyad 2, clearly defined rectangular areas appear along the
diagonal of the plot. This pattern is indicative of gaze coupling, Red and Blue look at the same parts of the code
within a few seconds of each other, and hence explore the code together, one criteria for a good collaboration
flow. The square patterns are also indicative of some level of stationarity in the exploration of the code (maybe
also related to the difficulty of the task), i.e. if the collaborators were constantly changing their focus, only a thin
line would be visible on the diagonal. Off-diagonal rectangular patterns show that the dyad iterates through the
code by revisiting sections of the code on several occasions.

Figure 2. Gaze Cross-recurrence Plots for Dyad1 and Dyad2. The bold rectangle delimits the moment where the
 dyads speak about the "check for winner" method and is analyzed below under "mutual understanding" (Full
                 resolution images are available at http://bit.ly/9KQslc and http://bit.ly/aQbhk4).

Sustaining Mutual Understanding
Dyad 1 displays difficulties in gaining a common ground. Although Blue sometimes uses verbal references to
point out which part of the code he is looking at, the lack of back channeling from Blue indicates that he has
difficulties in understanding his partner's comments. In contrast, Dyad 2 successfully builds a common ground
by frequently back-channeling, answering with relevant next turns, and providing verbal or deictic references to
draw   the partner's  attention to specific sections of the code.   For instance, towards   the beginning of their
collaboration, Red suggests, "shall we check the check for winner method?" and thereby guides his partner's
attention. Similarly, during their collaboration, Blue highlights a line of the code to ask his partner to explain

© ISLS                                                                                                           188
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                  Volume I: Long Papers

him  the  function    of the  line. However,     the  relation between  selection     and  mutual  understanding     is not
straightforward.  From    the dyadic  data   that we  are currently analyzing  on     42  dyads we  see  that  there is  no
correlation between the proportion of interaction time during which subjects select some part of the code and the
cross-recurrence. Selection alone is not favoring higher cross-recurrence. Indeed, in Dyad 1, at moments Red
frantically selects text in pace with his own reading and speaking activity but without the intention to ground the
focus of conversation with his partner.
          To illustrate  the  correspondence      between  cross-recurrence  plots,   gaze   patterns and  dialogue,    we
compared the interaction of both dyads while they analyze the method "check for winner" in Figure 3. Red who
is assisted by Blue only for a vocabulary question dominates the interaction for Dyad 1. While Red selects
elements quite often while speaking, Blue does not follow his gaze. In Dyad 2, the two collaborators traverse the
code   synchronously     and produce    a socially distributed  production  started   by   Red  and  completed   by  Blue
(Roschelle & Teasley, 1995).

                                                                Dyad 1: 56:40 to 57:17
                                                                Red: and this part, "check for winner", it
                                                                actually, p, eh, first look p is for player and those
                                                                indexes are, eh, for their, their list of taken
                                                                numbers, and at one moment it simply ... eh ...
                                                                gives those indexes and gives what eh what
                                                                player eh
                                                                Blue: are chosen, yes,
                                                                Red: yeah thanks, and if that sum is equal to 15 it
                                                                will simply return p + 1
                                                                Blue: hm hm

                                                                Dyad 2: 17:49 to 18:05
                                                                Red: oh look the initial, the start <select int
                                                                before i1> of the loop <select int before i2>is
                                                                different each time <select int before i3>
                                                                Red: here
                                                                Red: first I1 <select i1> starts at 0 <select 0>
                                                                Red: i2 starts at ...
                                                                Blue: yeah i2 will start a 1 ... and i3 will start a 3
                                                                Red:            <select 1 after i2>
                                                                Red: yeah so we take the first second and 3rd
                                                                number and we iterate like that-

       Figure 3. Fixation Plot with the Corresponding Cross-recurrence Plot Detail (left) and Transcript for
     Explanations Given by Dyad1 and Dyad2. Both explanations are about the "check for winner" method.

Technical Coordination
Dyad 1 has a hard time to effectively coordinate the usage of the technical environment. Red is frequently
scrolling up    and down.    The   scrolling obviously  hampers   Blue  in his attempts     to understand the    code:  He
frequently tries to counter steer by scrolling in the other direction and even explicitly addresses his difficulties
"It's just hard to navigate into the program". Still, the difficulties remain, and it is not clear if Red realizes that
the screen   is shared   and  scrolling up   and  down  affects both partners. Dyad       2 successfully coordinates    the
technical environment. Already at the start of the collaboration, Red addresses the technical coordination by
asking his partner if the scrolling also affects his screen. Also in the further progress of the collaboration, they
frequently explicitly coordinate the scrolling; for instance, Blue asks his partner if he agrees to scroll further
down. Furthermore, the dyad uses the highlighting function to guide their partner's attention. Symmetric white
stripes in the cross-recurrence plots indicate scrolling. In Dyad 1, the scrolling stripes are much more dense than
in Dyad   2. An  indication   for  effective technical  coordination is that gaze     is recurrent soon  after a scrolling
episode, indicating that collaborators did not loose their partners when changing the focus. Because this is not
very apparent on the plots, an associated numerical indicator would probably be more informative.

Task Division and Participation Symmetry
The  interaction  of  Dyad    1 is  characterized  by a high   amount  of  individual    work  phases and task   division.
During the interaction, there are several sequences about a minute and longer where they collaborators do not

© ISLS                                                                                                                   189
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                 Volume I: Long Papers

engage in interaction. The collaboration of Dyad 2 looks fairly different. There is only a short individual work
period at the start of their problem solving where each collaborator reads the instructions; then they engage in
mutual interaction. Task division results in low recurrence if it implies that collaborators look at different places
of the workspace. Recurrence plots would feature a sequence of off-diagonal elements followed by diagonal
recurrence at the end of the interaction if parallel work ended by sharing and reviewing the results. With Dyad 1
however, the low recurrence seems to stem more from asymmetrical interaction rather than coordinated division
of  labor. Red  basically    answers  the  question  on  his  own;   even  though  Blue   first tries to  engage  in    the
collaboration, he seems to give up during the further course of the interaction. In contrast, both partners of the
Dyad   2   are equally  engaged    in the  participation,   even though    with slightly  different   roles: While   Blue
frequently asks questions for further clarification, Red provides more explanations. The different roles may be
explained by the differences in the partner's prior knowledge.
         Gaze   recurrence   is  closely linked with   effective dialogue.   In Dyad   1, sustained   audio   signal only
appears at minute 3 and is afterwards clearly asymmetric in favor of Red. Blue joins in for two minutes between
12 and 14 but then remains silent for the rest of the interaction. Blue only speaks for 4% of the time, whereas
Red speaks for 15% of the total time. In Dyad 2, the Blue and Red collaborators hold the floor for respectively
41% and 43% of the total time. Of course, the asymmetry of the audio signal is much easier to measure than the
level of gaze recurrence and is certainly a simpler indicator for participation asymmetry.

Cross-recurrence in Quantitative Approaches
We have seen the descriptive value of cross-recurrence plots by contrasting two examples of "good" and "bad"
interaction  quality.  In more   quantitative  approaches    to  interaction analysis, researchers    need   a  numerical
counterpart to the visual patterns that represent the coupling of the collaborators gaze. High recurrence is visible
on a cross-recurrence plot where points on the diagonal are dark. More, we are not only interested by the main
diagonal (collaborators look at the same target exactly at the same time) but by an "interaction span" during
which  subjects'   gaze follows  their   partners'. The  graph  in  Figure 4 shows   the  rate of cross-recurrence   as  a
function of time shifts between the fixations of one subject and the other. Each value on the x-axis corresponds
to the time span between the main diagonal on the recurrence plot and a parallel diagonal shifted in time. The
values on the y-axis represent the proportion of dark pixels on this diagonal. The cross recurrence is highest in
the period of -2 to +2 seconds around the main diagonal, and we used the average value of the cross recurrence
rate during this time span as a numerical indicator. The rate could be computed for longer periods of time (e.g.
+- 4 and +- 6 seconds). When computed on a larger sample, the resulting indicators are highly correlated with
the cross-recurrence    rate for a span  of +-  2   seconds. Cross-recurrence   at much   higher  time   shifts might   be
indicative of the collaborators revisiting of shared areas of interest (see our discussion above about off-diagonal
regions in Figure 1) but does not indicate close coupling anymore.

    Figure 4. Cross-Recurrence Proportions by Time shifts for Dyad 1 (dashed line) and Dyad 2 (full line).

Conclusion
Contrasting    two dyads  provided   first insights into how    gaze cross-recurrence  is related  to dimension   of    the
quality of collaboration. The most promising result is that high gaze recurrence seems to be typical of a "good"
dyad where the flow of interaction is smooth and where partners sustain each other's understanding. It is now
necessary to qualify the correspondence between the structure of interaction and graphical patterns in recurrence
plots more systematically. One way to do this consists of computing numerical features that reflect graphical
structure of the plots (e.g. symmetry, density, gaze transition paths from targets to targets) and to use them to
discriminate   between    categories  of interaction  quality.  An   important  question  for   these indicators  is  also
whether they are task-specific and whether they depend on the stimulus displayed on the screen. Normalization
of the recurrence measure with regards to a random baseline is required to be able to generalize the approach.
         The   use of  low-level   indicators that  can  be computed   in  real time would     allow  to a)  automate   the
collection  of evidence   to provide  real-time feedback,    b)  to inform and  enrich   the analysis  of   interaction by
researchers.

© ISLS                                                                                                                  190
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                   Volume I: Long Papers

Bibliography
Cherubini, M., Nüssli, M.-A., & Dillenbourg, P. (2008) Deixis and gaze in collaborative work at a distance
          (over  a  shared  map):   a computational    model     to detect   misunderstandings.   In  Proceedings     of the
          International Symposium on Eye Tracking Research & Applications (ETRA2008), p. 173-180. ACM
          Press, 2008.
Cherubini, M., Nüssli, M-A., & Dillenbourg, P. (2010). Indicating and looking in collaborative work at distance.
          Journal of Eye Movement Research 3(5):3, 1­205.
Clark,  H. H.,  &   Brennan,   S.  A. (1991).  Grounding     in  Communication.     In Resnik,  L.  B., Levine,    J. M.  &
          Teasley, S. D. (Eds.). Perspectives on socially shared Cognition. Washington: APA Books.
Dale, R., & Spivey, M. J. (2006). Categorical recurrence analysis of child language. Language Learning.
Dale, R., Warlaumont, A. S., & Richardson, D. C. (in press). Nominal cross recurrence as a generalized lag
          sequential analysis for behavioral streams. International Journal of Bifurcation and Chaos.
De Wever,      B., Schellens,  T.,  Valcke,  M.,   & Van   Keer,    H.  (2006).  Content   analysis  schemes    to analyze
          transcripts of online asynchronous discussion groups: A review. Computers and Education, 46, 6­28.
Diziol, D.,   Rummel,   N., Kahrimanis,     G.,  Guevara,    T., Holz,   J., Spada, H.,   & Fiotakis,   G. (2008).    Using
          contrasting cases to better understand the relationship between students' interactions and their learning
          outcome. In G. Kanselaar, V. Jonker, P.A. Kirschner, & F. Prins (Eds.), International perspectives of
          the learning sciences: Cre8ing a learning world. Proceedings of the 8th International Conference of
          the Learning Sciences (ICLS 2008), Vol 3 (pp. 348-349). ISLS
Eckmann, J.-P., Kamphorst, S.O., & Ruelle, D. (1987) Europhys. Lett. 5, 973.
Firestone, W.   A.  (1993). Alternative   arguments   for  generalizing    from  data  as applied  to qualitative  researh.
          Educational Researcher, 22(4), 16-23.
Lord, R. G., & Levy, P. E. (1994). Moving from Cognition to Action: A Control Theory Perspective. Applied
          Psychology: An International Review, 43(3), 335-398.
Meier, A., Spada, H. & Rummel, N. (2007). A rating scheme for assessing the quality of computer-supported
          collaboration processes. International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 2, 63-
          86.
Nüssli, M.-A., Jermann, P., Sangin, M., & Dillenbourg, P. (2009) Collaboration and abstract representations:
          towards predictive models based on raw speech and eye-tracking data. In CSCL '09: Proceedings of the
          2009 conference on Computer support for collaborative learning. ISLS, 2009.
Pietinen,  S.,  Bednarik,  R., Glotova,   T.,  Tenhunen,   V.,   &  Tukiainen,   M. (2008)   A  method     to study   visual
          attention aspects of collaboration: eye-tracking pair programmers simultaneously. In Proceedings of
          the 2008 symposium on Eye tracking research & applications (ETRA '08) (pp. 39-42): ACM, New
          York, NY, USA.
Richardson, D. C., & Dale, R. (2005). Looking to understand: The coupling between speakers' and listeners'
          eye movements and its relationship to discourse comprehension. Cognitive Science, 29, 1045­1060.
Richardson,    D. C., Dale, R.,   and Kirkham,     N. Z. (2007).    The art  of conversation is coordination:    Common
          ground and the coupling of eye movements during dialogue.Psychological Science, 18(5):407-413.
Roschelle, J., & Teasley S. D. (1995). The construction of shared knowledge in collaborative problem solving.
          In C. E. O'Malley (Ed.), Computer-supported collaborative learning. (pp. 69-197). Berlin: Springer-
          Verlag
Rummel, N., Deiglmayr, A., Spada, H., & Kahrimanis, G. (2011). Analyzing collaborative interactions across
          domains and settings: an adaptable rating scheme. In: S.Puntambekar, C. Hmelo-Silver, & G. Erkens
          (Eds.), Analyzing interactions in CSCL: Methodologies, approaches and issues. (pp. 367-390) New
          York: Springer.
Rummel, N., & Spada, H. (2005). Learning to collaborate: An instructional approach to promoting collaborative
          problem-solving in computer-mediated settings. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 14(2), 201-241.
Soller, A., Martinez, A., Jermann, P., & Mühlenbrock, M. (2005). From mirroring to guiding: A review of the
          state of  art technology    for   supporting   collaborative   learning.  International   Journal   of Artificial
          Intelligence in Education, 15, 261­290.
Strijbos, J.-W.,   Martens, R.  L.,  Prins, F. J., & Jochems,    W.   M. G.   (2006).  Content  analysis:  What    are   they
          talking about? Computers & Education, 46, 29-48.
Suthers, D., Law, N., Lund, K., Rose, C., & Teplovs, C. (2009). Common objects for productive multivocality
          in  analysis. In  C.  O'Malley,    D.  Suthers,  P.    Reimann,    &  A.  Dimitracopoulou     (Eds.),  Computer
          Supported    Collaborative  Learning     Practices -   CSCL   2009   Conference   Proceedings,   (pp.  225-226).
          International Society of the Learning Sciences.

Acknowledgements
This   research    was  funded    by  the   Swiss   National     Science   Foundation   (grants   #K-12K1-117909         and
#PZ00P_126611) as well as by a STELLAR incubator grant to the second author, Dejana Mullins.

© ISLS                                                                                                                   191
