CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                         Volume I: Long Papers

                       Training in Virtual Training Environments:
                                   Connecting Theory to Practice
        Johannes Moskaliuk, University of Tuebingen, Germany, johannes.moskaliuk@uni-tuebingen.de
     Johanna Bertram, Knowledge Media Research Center, Tuebingen, Germany, j.bertram@iwm-kmrc.de
         Ulrike Cress, Knowledge Media Research Center, Tuebingen, Germany, u.cress@iwm-kmrc.de

          Abstract:    Many  institutions,    such  as  the  police,  use   virtual  environments     as part  of   their
          training and education programs. Typical scenarios that are being trained virtually are of high
          complexity, require intensive communication between team members, consist of situations in
          which individual human beings are in danger, and are not trainable in real-life situations. In
          this paper   we   describe     the  virtual  training   environment      VirtualPolice.    Its theory-based
          development process is explicated to show how theory was connected to practice. We present
          which   specific  needs   were   evaluated    in order   to  define   training  goals.  We     introduce  our
          theoretical base and argue why such virtual training environments can support the acquisition
          of knowledge-in-use,      the  ability  of  team   members     to  take   the  perspective   of   others, and
          reflection of team performance. This makes it possible to identify those features of virtual
          training environments     that   enable  successful     training, and   to  point  out  how    these may   be
          implemented.

Introduction
Members    of  institutions such    as the police  force,    fire department    or  rescue   teams are   often  confronted     with
scenarios in the course of their work which could not be trained before because of the high costs, the danger,
time or effort that such training would have required. Nevertheless, these members of such teams have to react
adequately to their daily challenges. They have to act as real teams, solve complex problems, ensure their own
safety and   avoid  dangerous   incidences.    They    need   adequate   preparation     for this type   of teamwork      that will
ensure that they can handle their jobs efficiently, flexibly and safely. Many institutions have recognized the
potential of   virtual worlds   and    serious games    as   tools to train  their   teams   for  challenges   which   could   not
possibly  be   trained in  reality. This   has resulted    in various    virtual  training   environments    (VTEs)    that    were
developed for different training purposes, and which are often integrated into vocational education and training
programs (Rose, Attree, Brooks, Parslow, & Penn, 2000). In the health care sector, for example, the use of
virtual realities for training purposes is on the increase (Riva, 2002). VTEs have also been developed to train
fire fighters (Julien & Shaw, 2003).
          A Virtual Training Environment (VTE) allows people to experience difficult situations without taking
any physical risks, and without the need of going to the limits of their physical strength. Any errors made during
this training  will   not  lead to  negative   consequences,       and   trainers  have   the   flexibility to  define    different
scenarios.   Such  typical  scenarios    that may    be  trained   virtually are   of high   complexity     and  have  no   single
"correct" solution. They are based on a specialization of tasks within a team, require intensive communication
between   team  members,    consist    of  situations  in  which   individual   human    beings   are  in   danger, and   are  not
trainable in real life situations.
          From the point of view of computer-supported collaborative learning, both theory and practice, these
complex training scenarios and virtual training environments are very interesting. The focus here is not only on
knowledge, but also on the members' experiences with complex situation that will influence the performance of
the entire team. So the aim of a VTE is to combine the different knowledge and skills of the individual team
member    to a high-performing      team.    This leads   to the   three key    aspects, which    are  the  base of  our  goal  to
connect theory to practice:
(1)       Knowledge-in-use: Team members need knowledge-in-use to handle complex scenarios. Knowledge-
in-use is a  combination    of  different  types  of  knowledge     that  are   necessary    to perform  a  given   task, solve  a
problem, or handle a complex situation.
(2)       Perspective Taking: Team members have to learn to take the perspective of the others in a complex
situation. They have to know about their own skills as well as the skills of other team members, and have to
build a shared mental representation of knowledge that exists within in the team in order to respond adequately.
(3)       Team  Reflection:    Performance     of a   team   depends   on   its ability  to  integrate diverse   knowledge     and
construct a shared understanding of complex situations. Teams need to reflect about own strategies, behaviour
and  performance.     This requires    a permanent    exchange     of one's   own    experience   and  the  shared   experiences
within the team.
          We argue that VTEs can support the acquisition of knowledge-in-use, the ability of team members to
take the  perspective   of  others, and    a  reflection  of  individual  knowledge      and    team  performance.   This   paper
explicates the theory-based development process of a VTE, as part of our design-based research program. It

© ISLS                                                                                                                          192
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                    Volume I: Long Papers

starts with a description of the specific needs of our target group, a federal state police department in Germany.
We introduce our theoretical base and argue why such virtual training environments can support what we call
the three key aspects: knowledge-in-use, perspective taking, and team reflection. We introduce the co-evolution
model (Cress and Kimmerle, 2008; Cress, Kimmerle, & Held, 2010), which focuses explicitly on the interplay
between   individual   and  team    learning,  and   use  this  model  as   a  framework    to   integrate  our  theoretical
assumptions. The paper concludes with some features of a successful VTE, connecting theory to practice, and
presents the VTE Virtual Police, which was developed as part of our work.

Field: Virtual Training for Police Officers
Police officers are confronted with a variety of problems every day. To be prepared for difficult and dangerous
situations, they need permanent and constantly updated training, regardless of their level of tenure, education
and experience. So the police of the German state of Baden-Wuerttemberg has adopted a broad training and
education  concept.   It is based  on  an   education and   knowledge     management      system that  is  run by the state
Ministry of the Interior, a system which integrates and coordinates different educational provisions, ensuring a
continuous   improvement     of the  skills of police    officers in  the state. This  knowledge-management       platform
combines   conventional     education  with training  sessions    and e-learning,  and  the virtual  training  environment
VirtualPolice is, so to speak, an extension of this platform.
         VirtualPolice    makes  it possible   to  train operations,  which   were   previously  untrainable,   such as the
interaction between officers on the ground with a helicopter crew. Due to the specific requirements of using
helicopters (for example, availability, organizational effort, keeping down costs and noise), such operations can
only be trained restrictively. So far, only so-called Special Forces have been trained intensively for such cases.
But all  police  officers  (22,000  in the  state) might   be  confronted   with   a  helicopter call, so  such  training is
relevant to all of them.
         The   development    of VirtualPolice    is part of  a design-based     research program,   and   based on  strong
cooperation between partners with different backgrounds. The technical development of VirtualPolice is carried
out by TriCat, a software company specialized on programming complex virtual environments. Police trainers
from   a local  training  and competence     center  and   the  helicopter  crew   are involved   in   the development    of
VirtualPolice as domain experts. Our part within the project is to accompany the development of VirtualPolice
as researchers and connect theory to practice.
         The first step of our development process and goal to integrate theory and practice was to become
acquainted with the specific training needs of our field partners, the police force of Baden-Wuerttemberg. Due
to the high complexity of the tasks that were to be trained and in the absence of tested and standardized work
routines, we decided to use non-standardized interviews and expert workshops to identify current problems and
training  goals. Officers,   police   trainers and   members      of  helicopter  crews   were   interviewed    about their
experiences, and corresponding operations were staged and analyzed. Subsequently, specific training needs were
identified, based on the outcome of the analysis, which we had conducted. These training goals may be assigned
to the three key aspects, which are listed below.
         Knowledge-in-use: Specific courses of action, which are required in dangerous operations, need to be
trained. Police officers have to react adequately and fast in every situation. A sense of danger should evolve and
be retained in every situation. At the same time, the presence of the helicopter leads to greater stress, due to the
noise produced by the helicopter, to which the police officers are not adapted. Their teams have to decide under
enormous pressure, even if the available information is sparse.
         Perspective Taking: Many problems resulting from interaction between officers on the ground with a
helicopter crew are due to a lack of knowledge of what a helicopter and its crew are really able to do. Police
officers may, for example, misjudge what the helicopter crew can see from above. In addition, both the team on
the ground and the helicopter crew need to adjust their communication style to the situation. The helicopter crew
will, for example, need to be informed about intended actions on the ground.
         Team Reflection: One central need is to make individual experiences available to other team members.
If team  members      have  finished  an  operation,  it  should   be ensured    that problems   that  occurred   and their
successful solution are communicated to the other members. This should lead to individual learning and, at the
same   time, a  higher   performance   of the  whole  team.    The   same  is true of  the integration  of  experiences   of
helicopter crews into the training of ground forces. Integrating such different experiences makes it possible that
the entire team is able to reflect on their knowledge and team performance.          As helicopter crews, so far, have not
been trained together with officers operating on the ground, the opportunity of training together will improve
learning at an organizational level.
         The next step of our design-based research program is to find theories that provide insights in how
these training goals may be achieved.

© ISLS                                                                                                                  193
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                       Volume I: Long Papers

Theory: Knowledge-in-use, Perspective-taking, Team Reflection
Current constructivist approaches assume that active construction of knowledge required active collaboration,
using real or digital objects as epistemic artifacts. This has led to a plethora of theories that deal with situations
in which    groups  use  some    shared  digital artifact to construct    knowledge.   The    knowledge      building concept
(Scardamalia   &   Bereiter, 1994)   addresses   how  a   community     of learners  will  manage   to   develop    knowledge
jointly. This approach focuses, to a large extent, on using computer technologies to form a knowledge building
community. A knowledge building community acts like a scientific community, with the aim of constructing
new  knowledge     and  developing   some    theory to  understand    the  environment.    The   knowledge     creation  spiral
(Nonaka,    1994;  Nonaka    &   Toyama,   2003)   mainly  focuses    on  the building    and transfer   of   tacit knowledge
(Polanyi, 1966).   Most    knowledge    is contained  in  the  experience   of   individuals, and  can    only  be   expressed
verbally and transferred to others with some difficulty. The authors describe four processes, which dynamically
build on each other: socialization, externalization, combination, and internalization. The knowledge building
model of Stahl (2000) describes how social knowledge building and personal understanding take places and
influence   each  other.  It also  highlights  how   cultural  artifacts   that are used   in activity    influence   personal
comprehension and learning. The knowledge creation metaphor (Paavola & Hakkarainen, 2005) focuses on a
mediated process of knowledge creation, where shared objects of activity are developed jointly. The mutual
creation  of   new  material  and   conceptual   artifacts leads   to an   advancement     of  knowledge,      discovery    and
innovation. The idea of knowledge maturing (Schoefegger, Weber, Lindstaedt, & Ley, 2009) describes how
knowledge matures in the course of time from expressing individual ideas, collaboration on shared artifacts,
standardization in documents, to a creation of learning objects and standardized training programs. During this
process, knowledge will develop, be more and more integrated in an organization, and shared between all its
members
          These   theories,  which  were   outlined  here  very  briefly,  all  share  the idea   that   the  development    of
knowledge takes place within communities and that epistemic objects (digital or real world objects) will support
this development of shared understanding and community knowledge. These theories are also a good base to
understand how training in a virtual environment leads to a connection of different knowledge and skills of
single team member to achieve a high-performing team. To connect theory to practice in our present context, we
focus on the three key aspects knowledge-in-use, perspective taking, and team reflection. These are the basis of
the features of the VTE, which we developed.

Knowledge-in-use
Theoretical assumptions: To solve complex situations and difficult tasks, the team as whole and its individual
members need a great deal of experience from similar situations. This experience results from practice and well-
tested sequences    of action    during team  members'     work. Knowledge       of the  type that is    meant  here  may    be
described   as knowledge-in-use     (De  Jong    &  Ferguson-Hessler,     1996). Knowledge-in-use        is a combination    of
different types of knowledge that are necessary to perform a given task, solve a problem, or handle a complex
situation. Knowledge-in-use may be defined as knowledge about activities or tasks that are performed frequently
and  therefore    well established  in   the action routine   of a  person.     Knowledge-in-use      is embedded     in daily
challenges and in most cases implicit, because it is based on experienced work routines, which are often carried
out unconsciously (Smith, 2001). Knowledge-in-use is highly situated (Greeno, 1998), as it is tied to specific
contexts, situations   or  circumstances.    Individuals  build  situational    knowledge,  that  is, a  relation   between   a
situation that requires certain knowledge and the knowledge itself, about "situations as they typically appear in a
particular domain" (De Jong & Ferguson-Hessler, 1996). This relation helps to identify relevant features of a
current  problem,   to build  an  adequate   representation   of the  problem,   and   to retrieve additional    (declarative,
conceptual or procedural) knowledge to solve a problem. In contrast to declarative or conceptual knowledge, it
is not  easy   to transfer knowledge-in-use      from one    person  to  another.   The   larger part  of   knowledge-in-use
consists of implicit knowledge about sequences of action (Polanyi, 1966). Members of an organization have to
be  aware   of their   individual work   routines   and   experiences.  They    have  to  draw   general    conclusions     from
situated knowledge-in-use, which can then be presented as abstract knowledge and transferred to other situations
and contexts. Others than have to internalize this transferred knowledge and integrate with own experience in
order to make it adaptive.
          Adoption to VTE: VTEs are a good means to support the development of knowledge-in-use. The VTE
is a tool to simulate real situations. This should help a trainee to draw the relation between a specific situation
and the  relevant  knowledge-in-use,     which   is necessary   to respond    adequately.  This   will   not  only  lead to  an
appropriate  reaction   in   the trained situation, but   also allow    a  transfer of  knowledge-in-use      to    similar real
situations.  The observation of what other members of a team are doing will also lead to a form of learning
through socialization (Nonaka, 1994). Experiences are shared and tacit knowledge can be communicated from
one person to another only through direct experience. So experiences can be transferred through observation and
imitation, and, as a result of this transfer, the observer acquires knowledge, but this will also remain tacit.

© ISLS                                                                                                                       194
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                    Volume I: Long Papers

         A VTE provides opportunities, close to real experience, to acquire new knowledge-in-use by observing
other users. Team members can observe strategies and actions of other members and learn from their success or
failure. Even if trainees are not part of a current scenario themselves, they will benefit from their position as
outside observers. They can adopt the observed strategies as part of their own knowledge, and give feedback to
others  from  a  third-party  position. It   should be   emphasized    here   that learning is a  socio-cognitive    process.
Different strategies of team members to handle a specific situation or to solve a problem may conflict with each
other. To  become     a well  functioning    team,  they have  to find   a  common   understanding    of the   situation   and
develop adequate strategies. A VTE can serve as a cognitive tool to highlight different strategies and provide
possible alternative solutions to conflicts, which may occur by training together. In this way, a learning team
will be  formed  in   which   all  members     with different  backgrounds    and   experiences   can  bring   in their  own
knowledge to the benefit of all.
         Summary: Knowledge-in-use is an essential outcome of this form of training. Team members have to
acquire  knowledge-in-use     to   integrate different types  of  knowledge     and  solve  a  given  task. A    VTE   should
support this acquisition of knowledge-in-use.

Perspective Taking
Theoretical assumptions: The concept of perspective-taking describes the "process of imagining the world from
another's vantage point or imagining oneself in another's shoes" (p.110) (Galinsky, Ku, & Wang, 2005). From a
social psychology point of view, perspective-taking results in an overlap of a mental representations of the self
and  the other   and    leads to   a decreasing  of  stereotype   expression    and  in-group   favouritism    (Galinsky    &
Moskowitz, 2000). What is relevant in the context of knowledge-in-use acquisition is that perspective-taking
will also influence interaction and coordination within a team. Perspective-taking leads to higher similarity of
the  group members'     behavioural   strategies   and fosters the    coordination  of social  behaviour  (Galinsky    et  al.,
2005).  A  team  member    has    to build   a mental  representation    of his or  her own    perceptions,   strategies   and
competences and those of the others. The team as whole will then develop a shared understanding of complex
situations and strategies to act as a team. This shared understanding does only include knowledge about the
others' expertise (cf. the concept of a transactive memory system (Wegner, 1986)) but also knowledge about
how to act together and handle a complex situation. This team knowledge is an important part of knowledge-in-
use that is required to solve a complex task. Taking the perspective of other team members will also help to
prevent  communication     failures.  Members    who   know    about  different    vantage points within    a team   (e.g. the
different perspectives of helicopter and ground crews members) are able to improve their interaction strategies
in an adequate way. They adapt their communication to the perceived knowledge of the other members (Krauss
& Fussell, 1991). This supports the common ground (Clark, 1996) within a team and is an important condition
of success even in hazardous situations.
         Adoption to VTE: We argue that a VTE can support perspective-taking within a team by simulating the
perspective of other members. A team member is in a position here to experience the virtual world from the
perspective of another member who has different tasks and commissions. The VTE enables the team easily to
swap positions, equipment or viewpoints in order to build an understanding of the others' perspectives and of
the whole situation. As a result, the team will build a shared mental representation, which can be used in similar
situations in real-world settings. Moreover, VTEs provide the opportunity to review finished virtual training
sessions several times from different perspectives. One team member can experience the training session from
the vantage point of another member. Then a trainee builds a mental representation of the whole situation and
integrates the different perspectives and tasks of single team members into his or her own knowledge-in-use.
         Summary: The ability to take the perspective of others is an essential outcome of successful training.
Team   members    have   built   a   shared  mental representation    to   perform  as  a  team.  A   VTE     should   support
perspective-taking by providing the opportunity to switch between different perspectives.

Team Reflection
Theoretical   assumptions:     There   are   two   relevant   outcomes     of training:    Individual learning    and   team
performance. Both outcomes influence each other because integration of different experiences leads to reflection
on one's own knowledge, and enables a development of the whole team. The VTE acts as an epistemic artifact
that can visualize the actions of the team members and support reflection processes. This mutual evolution of
the individual and the team is described by the co-evolution model, as proposed by Cress & Kimmerle (2008).
This model refers to the work of Scardamalia and Bereiter (2003, 2006), but points out, at the same time, that
individual learning and collective knowledge building are two parallel and equally important processes, which
support each other. Individual learning describes the internal processes that take place during collaboration and
lead to better understanding of the environment and greater conceptual knowledge. Knowledge building, on the
other  hand,  as a  collective   creation   of public  knowledge,     is regarded   as an   improvement     of   ideas or  the
development of new ideas, not as a search for a perfect or true solution. It is as a discourse-oriented process in
the  sense of joint   problem  solving.   Shared    digital artifacts can  support  knowledge    building,    as they  enable

© ISLS                                                                                                                     195
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                  Volume I: Long Papers

participants   to contribute  their own    theories,  models,  examples,  visualizations,   notes,  and other    epistemic
artifacts. The    shared  digital artifact  initiates a dynamic     and self-organized   process,   in which     ideas  are
formulated, discussed, revised, or rejected. The co-evolution model regards the exchange of knowledge as an
interplay between individuals and a community.
           Adoption to VTE: The co-evolution model offers a framework to describe the mutual development of
individual knowledge and team performance during virtual training. The co-evolution model does not explicitly
focus on knowledge-in-use, but knowledge building will, of course, also take place if learners handle authentic
real-life  problems   that require  knowledge-in-use.      A  VTE   can support    this co-evolution   of  the members'
individual  knowledge    and  team  performance      by providing   a platform for   mutual   action. This form   of  joint
training within a VTE leads to a permanent exchange of individual and shared experiences within a team. This
leads  to  an integration  of diverse  knowledge,     and  constructs a shared    understanding  of   complex  situations.
Unlike real-life training, it is possible in a VTE to record a complete training scenario and replay it later from
different  perspectives.   Team   members   can review     and observe   their own   behavior  and    identify failures or
potential for improvement. The VTE provides a form of objective feedback on one's own reactions and strategy,
for example,      by  measuring   reaction   times,   replaying  communication       behavior  or  visualizing   strategic
components. This supports and validates the subjective feedback of trainers or other team members, and will
certainly improve individual development. The team performance will also be developed further through such
mutual training and the possibility to review training scenarios. This can help to detect communication failures,
misconceptions     or conflicts   during the  collaboration.   Deficits  can   be  identified  and  different  viewpoints
integrated  into  shared   team   knowledge. This     also leads to learning   at an organizational   level,  because   the
different experiences that were made during virtual training scenarios can be stored and retrieved later. Thus,
experiences made by other teams are available to others, who can review their own behavior and connect it to
their own knowledge-in-use. This facilitates the integration of different experiences and the collective creation
of knowledge-in-use at the organizational level.
           Summary:   The  mutual   development   of    individual  knowledge  and   team  performance    is  an essential
outcome of training. Team members reflect about their own behaviour and develop individual knowledge, at the
same time team performance will evolve during the virtual training. A VTE should support this co-evolution by
providing the opportunity to switch between different perspectives, record and replay finished scenarios.

Connecting Theory to Practice
Coming back to the specific needs of our partner from the field, we can connect theory to practice and formulate
those features of a VTE, which provide ideal conditions for training complex and dangerous scenarios. We use
the three key aspects to structure these features, bearing in mind most of them are relevant to more than one key
aspect.
           Knowledge-in-use: A VTE supports the acquisition of knowledge-in-use by providing a flexible and
reviewable training space.
    (1)    Training is possible even if training in reality would be too dangerous or too expensive.
    (2)    Specific  courses  of  action demanded     by   typical operations  may   be  trained  many  times    and   with
           different team configurations, in order to acquire some routine and flexible reactions.
    (3)    The difficulty  of a   task may  be  modified,    for example,  by  starting  with  a   reduced   scenario  and
           increasing its complexity.
    (4)    The VTE can provide additional scaffolds to support trainees at an early stage of training, and this
           support can be faded out later.
    (5)    Training may pause at any time, to reflect on the current status, define possible problems and re-adapt a
           strategy.
           Perspective Taking: A VTE supports perspective taking within a team by simulating the perspective of
other members.
    (1)    A VTE can simulate the vantage point from which other team members view the situation.
    (2)    Team Members can see their own behavior from the perspective of others, e.g. by seeing the helicopter
           crew's view of the ground.
    (3)    Team   members    can  take  the position    of an outside   observer,  looking  at scenarios   from  a wider
           perspective. This supports the acquisition of strategic knowledge.
           Team reflection: A VTE supports team reflection, which will enhance individual learning and team
performance.
    (1)    Completed training scenarios are stored and can be retrieved later.
    (2)    Team members can learn from others' experiences by reviewing them later.
    (3)    Recorded communication, e.g. between helicopter crews and ground forces, may be analyzed to detect
           communication failures.
    (4)    Data on the performance of team members can be aggregated to visualize, for example, navigation
           routes and resulting dangerous situations.

© ISLS                                                                                                                  196
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                            Volume I: Long Papers

The VTE VirtualPolice
The virtual training environment VirtualPolice was constructed to train both ground forces and helicopter crews,
although the integration of fire fighters, emergency medical services or other emergency services in a police
operation can also    be implemented, making this VTE      highly adaptable. VirtualPolice simulates 150       square
kilometres of accessible terrain, with villages and towns characterized by individual townscapes (see figure 1).
Some building structures are accessible, and open areas in the countryside and woodlands exist as well. Day and
nighttime in the simulation can be influenced and weather conditions be set, so that training scenarios can be
adjusted to specific training needs. The trainees are represented by avatars, dressed either like police officers or
suspects. Each participant perceives what is going on visually and with sounds through his or her own ego
perspective, and can move freely through the VTE. Furthermore, the scenario can be populated by autonomous
agents, guided by artificial intelligence. In addition, police patrol cars and normal vehicles are available.

                                      Figure 1. Screenshot of VirtualPolice.

         The available helicopter is represented with realistic pictures and sounds, as seen by the participating
ground forces, and can be navigated either by trainers or helicopter pilots. A helicopter pilot in the simulation
can choose between natural day/night view, use image-intensifying glasses at night and an infrared camera in
order to provide a heat image of the scenario (figure 2).

              Figure 2. Helicopter Perspective within VirtualPolice Using the Infrared Camera.

         The training participants use headsets to communicate through spoken language. Trainees, trainer and
helicopter pilots can use a simulated two-way-radio, and when they are close enough to each other in the VTE,
they can hear each other without the need to use this transmission. This simulates real-world conditions in which
the ground force team talk to each other face-to-face, but have to communicate by radio with crews further way
or with the helicopter pilot. The trainer's monitor can show any position in the scenario and switch between
different trainees' views and the helicopter view. He or she can communicate with the simulated police officers,
with the suspects, or with all of the participants at the same time. This allows the trainer to give additional
support, providing scaffolds or interrupt the training. The trainer can re-arrange the training scenario by placing
any participant, the helicopter or the suspect into any position within the VTE and re-start the training.

© ISLS                                                                                                             197
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                            Volume I: Long Papers

         VirtualPolice is designed to train up to 12 participants simultaneously, and the system requirements of
the software are low, so it will run on standard computers with no need for further equipment - only a keyboard,
mouse and headsets are required. The VTE is part of the organizational network of the state police and can be
used online. The trainees can remain in their local police stations or departments, but train together with other
teams. Virtual Police provides the option to record the entire training scenario and replay it later from different
perspectives. The trainer can set markers and written comments during the training in order to highlight relevant
situations, for example, communication failures or dangerous behavior of the trainees. These markers can used
to provide a structured feedback after the virtual training.

Application of the Training
The training concept of VirtualPolice consists of a preparatory stage with theoretical information, a practical
stage using the VTE, and a feedback phase, which also integratesthe VTE. During preparation, the trainer first
explains to the participants the content and the importance of this training. To underline this point, videos of real
operations with dangerous    developments are introduced       and discussed. Then, information on appropriate
behavior during such operations is provided and discussed. Finally, the training goals are defined explicitly,
pointing out the focus of the practical stage. In this stage the participants are first instructed how they have to to
use the VTE and how to navigate within it, and are given some time to acquaint themselves with the VTE.
Subsequently, the prepared training scenarios are executed. The trainees are seated in single cabins in front of a
24-inch monitor and wear a headset with integrated microphone, as an attempt to isolate them as widely as
possible from environmental influences (figure 3).

                              Figure 3. Police Officer Trains Using VirtualPolice.

         After each scenario, a feedback phase is conducted. The scenario is discussed and every action can be
replayed from different perspectives, allowing all participants to take the others' perspectives and to see their
own actions from others vantage points. After the practical stage the participants receive feedback from their
trainer depending on their performance and progress during the training. Newly acquired skills and knowledge-
in-use can be discussed and real-world applications can be illustrated.

Summary
This paper explains our theory-driven approach to the development of a VTE for police officers, focussing on
knowledge-in-use, perspective taking and team reflection. We consider these as key factors for efficient virtual
training, and try to highlight the importance of sound theoretical foundations and assessments when applying
VTEs. But the theoretical basics should not only be kept in mind when designing and developing a training
environment. There should also exist, at least in the early stage of implementation, a feedback loop between
trainers, trainees, psychologists and software developers. In our example VirtualPolice, we conducted after each
newly released version of the VTE a training stage to test and explore the training environment, and we also
arrange regular workshops involving police trainers, helicopter crew members, ground forces, psychologists and
software developers, to discuss future improvements of the VTE. During our training and workshop sessions we
discovered, for example, the necessity to have personalized avatars and identifiable streets and city areas. With
such feedback loops, we intend so secure a high standard of training, permanently refresh our assessment of
training needs, encourage communication between trainers, ground forces and helicopter crews, and connect
theory to practice.

© ISLS                                                                                                          198
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                Volume I: Long Papers

References
Clark, H.H. (1996). Using language. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Cress, U., & Kimmerle, J. (2008). A systemic and cognitive view on collaborative knowledge building with
         wikis. International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 3(2), 105-122.
Cress,  U., Kimmerle,    J., &    Held, C. (2010).   The interplay   between   individual  and   collective knowledge:
         Technologies for organisational learning and knowledge building. Knowledge Management Research
         & Practice, 8, 33-44.
De Jong, T., & Ferguson-Hessler, M.G.M. (1996). Types and qualities of knowledge. Educational psychologist,
         31(2), 105-113.
Galinsky, A.D., & Moskowitz, G.B. (2000). Perspective-taking: Decreasing stereotype expression, stereotype
         accessibility, and in-group favoritism. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 78(4), 708-724.
Galinsky, A., Ku, G., & Wang, C.S. (2005). Perspective-taking and self-other overlap: Fostering social bonds
         and facilitating social coordination. Group Processes & Intergroup Relations, 8(2), 109-124.
Greeno, J.G. (1998). The situativity of knowing, learning, and research. American Psychologist, 53(1), 5-26.
Julien, T. U. S., & Shaw, C. D. (2003). Firefighter command training virtual environment. In Proceedings of the
         2003 conference on Diversity in computing (pp. 30-33). Atlanta, Georgia, USA: ACM.
Krauss,  R.M.,  &     Fussell, S.R.    (1991). Perspective-taking   in  communication:     Representations   of  others'
         knowledge in reference. Social Cognition, 9(1), 2-24.
Nonaka, I. (1994). A dynamic theory of organizational knowledge creation. Organization science, 5(1), 14-37.
Nonaka,   I., &  Toyama,       R. (2003).  The   knowledge-creating     theory  revisited: knowledge    creation  as a
         synthesizing process. Knowledge Management Research & Practice, 1(1), 2-10.
Paavola, S., & Hakkarainen, K. (2005). The Knowledge Creation Metaphor ­ An Emergent Epistemological
         Approach to Learning. Science & Education, 14(6), 535-557.
Polanyi, M. (1966). The Tacit Dimension. Garden City, NY: Doubleday.
Riva, G. (2002). Virtual reality for health care: the status of research. Cyberpsychology & Behavior: The Impact
         Of The Internet, Multimedia And Virtual Reality On Behavior And Society, 5(3), 219-225.
Rose, F.D., Attree, E.A., Brooks, B.M., Parslow, D.M., & Penn, P.R. (2000). Training in virtual environments:
         transfer to real world tasks and equivalence to real task training. Ergonomics, 43(4), 494-511.
Scardamalia, M., & Bereiter, C. (1994). Computer support for knowledge-building communities. The Journal of
         the Learning Sciences, 3(3), 265-283.
Scardamalia, M., & Bereiter, C. (2003). Knowledge Building. In Encyclopedia of education (pp. 1370-1373).
         New York: Macimillan Reference.
Scardamalia, M., & Bereiter, C. (2006). Knowledge building: Theory, pedagogy, and technology. In K. Sawyer
         (Ed.), The    Cambridge     handbook    of the  learning   sciences  (pp.  97-115).  New   York:   Cambridge
         University Press.
Schoefegger,   K., Weber,    N.,  Lindstaedt,  S.,  & Ley,   T. (2009). Knowledge       Maturing Services:  Supporting
         Knowledge      Maturing    in  Organisational  Environments.   In   D.  Karagiannis,  &  Z. Jinpeng,    (Eds.),
         Knowledge Science, Engineering and Management: Third International Conference, KSEM 2009 (pp.
         370-381). Berlin: Springer.
Smith,  E.A.   (2001).  The    role of  tacit  and  explicit knowledge   in  the   workplace.  Journal  of  Knowledge
         Management, 5(4), 311-321.
Stahl, G. (2000). A model of collaborative knowledge-building. In Proceedings of ICLS 2000 (pp. 70-77). Ann
         Arbor, Michigan, USA: University of Michigan.
Wegner,  D.   (1986).  Transactive   memory:    A  contemporary    analysis of  the group  mind. In  B. Mullen,   &  G.
         Goethals (Eds.), Theories of group behavior (pp. 185-208). New York: Springer.

Acknowledgments
The research presented here is part of a cooperation project of the Knowledge Media Research Center and the
University Tuebingen together with the Polizei Baden-Wuerttemberg (federal state police department of Baden-
Wuerttemberg),   the   MFG     Baden-Wuerttemberg     (centre   of excellence  for  IT, media, and  film),  the TriCAT
GmbH and T-Systems.

© ISLS                                                                                                               199
