CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                  Volume I: Long Papers

   Analyzing Discourse Synthesis ­ Use of Semantic Information for
                   Collaborative Writing in Secondary Education
          Crina Dama, InterMedia, University of Oslo, Postboks 1161 Blindern 0318 Oslo, Norway,
                                           crina.damsa@intermedia.uio.no
Gijsbert Erkens, Jeroen Janssen, Research Centre Learning in Interaction, Utrecht University, the Netherlands,
                                  Email: G.Erkens@uu,nl, J.J.H.M.Janssen@uu.nl

         Abstract:     Discourse   synthesis    refers  to   writing  activities  that   involve   synthesizing
         information from multiple textual sources for writing a new text. This study investigates the
         way groups of secondary education students use semantic information from multiple sources,
         while undertaking a collaborative, computer-supported writing history task. We analyzed the
         products of 10 groups (32 students) and the chat discussions of the group members, and we
         assessed the quality of the group products. The results of the study offer an insight into how
         students select and integrate semantic information. Most noticeable results show that groups
         synthesized   the information   selected  from    sources   based on ideas  rather than   sources    and
         created new conceptual connections among these ideas. Relationships were found between the
         quantity and type of information and the products quality, while weak or no relationships were
         found between type and frequency of chat talk with the degree of integration in the group
         products.

Introduction
Discourse synthesis refers to reading and writing activities within a specific type of writing task, which requires
subjects to  synthesize   information  from   multiple   textual sources   (see  Spivey,   1995).  To   a certain  extent,
discourse synthesis    is employed    at all  educational    levels, from  primary   school    to university  and   in   all
disciplines. The products of this activity can vary from reports to essays or literature studies. Such tasks are
often used for evaluating students' capacity to synthesize information from different sources and to build an
argument. The educational practice shows that the evaluation of this type of written tasks is mainly realized by
only considering the final text, and very rarely based on the process that took place in order to produce that text.
Nevertheless, there is more about discourse synthesis tasks than this final text. The cognitive and meta-cognitive
processes taking place while performing such tasks are of importance. Research studies show that a series of
cognitive activities differentiate this type of task from other writing tasks and often make the difference between
a good and a mediocre composition (Segev-Miller, 1997). While many studies of discourse synthesis focus more
on the product and its characteristics (content, composition), the more recent ones attempt to gain insight into
the cognitive and meta-cognitive landscape of the discourse synthesis process. This research study focuses on
one specific aspect of the discourse synthesis process, i.e., the way students use the semantic information from
the multiple textual sources.

Discourse Synthesis
Studies on discourse synthesis tasks have been conducted with two purposes: firstly, to identify the cognitive
and meta-cognitive mechanisms of the process and secondly, to identify the differences in performance between
successful and unsuccessful synthesizers, and the factors that might cause these differences. However, strategies
identified by the mentioned studies are not unique to the discourse synthesis process. Many strategies identified
in the synthesizing    process  have  been found   also  in  general  writing task, such   as: selecting  ( Kants,  1998;
McGinley, 1992; Higgins, 1992; Spivey & King, 1989), planning (Kantz,1989, McGinley, 1992); elaborating
(Higgins, 1992),  organizing    ( Higgins,   1992;  McGinley,    1992;  Kantz,   1989);    evaluating,  (Higgins,   1992;
Segev-Miller, in press), revising (Kantz, 1989; Higgins, 1992; McGinley, 1992).
         Some  analyses    also provided   an   insight into the characteristics  of the  discourse  synthesis    tasks. A
number of studies concerned with the cognition within the writing tasks pointed at the fact that synthesizing
information  from     sources occurs  both   at textual  and  conceptual   level.   Spivey  (1997)  calls   the  cognitive
processes in discourse synthesis processes textual transformations. The production of the new text happens by
cognitive means which are: selecting, organizing and connecting transformations. Segev-Miller (1997; in press)
tried to gain a more comprehensive view on the cognitive processes underlying the performance of this task at
academic  level. The    element   of  novelty   in Segev-Miller's     approach   is the  category   of  transforming     or
intertextual strategies.  These   can be  briefly  described  as   cognitive  strategies that  subjects   use in  order  to
synthesize information provided by more textual sources and use it for contracting a new idea, phrase or text.
Based on her studies, Segev-Miller (1997) categorizes transformations in conceptual, rhetorical and linguistic.
         We explore first activities at the conceptual level. The activity of selecting information occurs mainly
during reading, in the context of meaning making. Spivey (1997) maintains that, during reading, meaning is
constructed and then text is produced in order to `signal' that meaning to others. She considers it important to

© ISLS                                                                                                                  200
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                      Volume I: Long Papers

distinguish  between   two   products  of  discourse     processes:  mental  products   and textual  products.      The mental
product   is actually  the   meaning   the individual     is constructing   using   the reading   text together     with prior
knowledge as input. The writer, actively producing the mental meaning, is also producing a written product,
meant to be read by the others. According to Spivey and King (1989), selecting is guided by a very clear goal
that the reader sets, which is to find relevant input for the own text. It is not possible or necessary for the reader
to use all information from the given sources. A number of criteria are identified based on which readers select
information (Spivey, 1995). These criteria are:          textual relevance, which refers to the hierarchical placement of
content within the whole text; intertextual relevance refers to the information occurring in more than one source
and again, the placement of the content within the various text sources; the contextual criterion involves that
writers choose   the  information  that    is most    relevant   to the type of   message   being    written;   the  rhetorical
relevance refers to the fact that writers use certain information from sources for particular audiences, and adapt
their selection process to the type of audience.
          Although    named   differently, comparable      conceptual   activities   have  been  identified     by  Spivey   and
Segev-Miller in their studies. Spivey (1997) identifies more types of connecting transformations: the topical
connections are made within texts as well as across texts and have the purpose to maintain the coherence of the
discourse clause by clause; the whole-text connections are transformations that occur at a lager scale, and are
usually intertextual; nonlinear connections are comparable with the connections made while using hypertext.
Segev-Miller (1997) uses the term conceptual transforming, which consists of deliberate intertextual processing
of the   source  texts    in order to    identify     conceptual    connections   between      them, and     the    creation  of
macropropositions, in order to connect the proposition from the sources. When exploring activities at rhetorical
level, Higgins (1992) identifies activities such as structuring, shaping and re-shaping materials from the various
source  texts. The    connection  between     the  separate  semantic   entities  is realized  by means      of  manipulating
propositions   originating   from  the  source,    such   as  arranging    text into high-  and   low   level    propositions,
discovering relations between ideas, or looking for super-ordinate categories in order to subsume items. Spivey
and King (1989) consider organizing as supplying the content with a new structure. Writers are busy creating
different semantic chunks which are fit into the organizational patterns of the original text, but mostly are being
used to generate a new kind of organizational pattern (Spivey, 1995). In this type of organizational strategy the
writer provided an integrated presentation of the material that has been selected from different sources. Segev-
Miller (1997) identified rhetorical activities, which serve to translate the conceptual connections to text. Five
rhetorical strategies were identified and classified, based on the degree of cognitive demands every strategy
requires. Summarizing      one source   text  is a less   demanding   strategy.  Listing   the source  text,    compared   with
Bereiters and Scardamalia's (1987) knowledge-telling, is a strategy which consists of summarizing every source
text and presenting these summaries after each other . Incorporating source texts in one source text is applied by
using one text as a frame for incorporating information; and by adding information from other texts order to
replace deleted information from the frame text. The strategy of decomposing and recomposing source texts is
considered as being of intermediate difficulty, and consists of `synthesizing by ideas rather than by authors`
(Segev-Miller, 1997, p. 22). It involves breaking one sources text into propositions, and then looking across the
other  source  texts  for  propositions that   can    be related  to these  propositions   from  the   first source.    Finally,
synthesizing the source texts involves more than two source texts, requires a high level of intertextual processing
and is considered the most difficult rhetorical activity.
          Finally, Segev-Miller (1997) identifies linguistic strategies, used in order to compensate for the low
degree or lack of conceptual transforming and intertextual processing. Examples of such activities are speech
acts, which consists of using certain type of semantic means (usually words) in order to create the impression of
connection   between    the  different  ideas    that are  presented;   or lexical   repetition, such  as    paraphrasing     or
repetition, used to increase the degree of cohesion at thematic level in their texts.

A Model of Writing Based on Multiple Sources
We constructed a model of text writing, which attempts to emphasize the way information from multiple sources
is used for writing a new text. A first phase in the process includes the selection of relevant information. In
previous studies, little was said about the quantity and type of the selected information, or the choice for certain
sources  during selection.   Integration   of information     is another   phase. In  this phase, subjects      try to create a
conceptually meaningful representation based on the selected information, in order to compose the new text. In
addition, the research studies mentioned activities at meta-cognitive level, such as planning, monitoring and
evaluating, which are meant to offer the guidance and support for the actual writing in process. The recurring
assertion of researchers regarding the cognitive activities in writing is that this process of writing is not just a
rigid sequence of processes and sub-processes, but more a set of activities organized by the writers in a certain
order,  depending     upon  intermediate   results    of the process.   The  result  of these   activities   is visible in   the
intermediate versions of the text (drafts). The way students deal with information from sources during these
phases, the   type of  information they    use   from    sources and    how  they  manage   their writing    process    will be
reflected in the final product.

© ISLS                                                                                                                       201
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                       Volume I: Long Papers

       Source 1

                                      Selection                  Integration
       Source 2                       processes                  processes                Drafts               Final text

       Source                                      Meta-cognitive
                                                     activities

                                   Figure 1. Model of Writing from Multiple Sources.

         In   relation   to the above,   the  following  research     questions    will be   answered:  1. How    do  groups    of
secondary     school  students   make    use  of  semantic  information       from  multiple   sources  while   undertaking     a
computer supported inquiry history task? and 2. What meta-cognitive activities are reflected in chat discussions
of groups of secondary school students, when undertaking a computer supported discourse synthesis history
task? We expect the `quality' of written text to correlate with the amount of information that students use from
the given sources; in other words, students that select and integrate more information from sources will write
better texts. Another expectation is that the quality of written text would correlate with the type of information
that students use from sources; in other words, students that use information from sources that are considered
essential will write better texts. In addition, we expect that there will be a relationship between the type (on- or
off-task) and frequency of chat talk with the degree of integration in the final text product.

Methods
The participants in this research project were 32 (mean age of 16 years, SD = .58) eleventh-grade students,
along  with   their  history   teachers,  from  a  secondary     school    in the  Netherlands.  Participating    students  were
randomly assigned to a group of three or four by the researchers, in order to obtain heterogeneous groups with
respect  to   gender   and   ability. During    the experiment,    students     collaborated    in the  Virtual   Collaborative
Research    Institute  (VCRI)   designed     by Erkens,  Janssen,     Broeken     & Jaspers   (2002).  VCRI    is  a groupware
program  designed     to  support  groups    of students during    collaborative    projects  or inquiry   tasks. A  number     of
tools, such as Chat, Sources and Co-writer, were used in order to perform this collaborative writing task, and
other tools e.g., the Statusbar, Forum, Planner, were employed to organize the process.
         Students worked in collaboration on a history inquiry task with the title `Witches and the prosecution of
witches'. Based on the six given information sources (and on additional sources, found independently) students
had to perform seven assignments, by answering different questions with regard to the topic and write their
answers as short descriptive texts, or argumentative essays. Students worked together in groups of 3 or 4, using
the VCRI environment to collaborate. In VCRI, groups had access to the sources, could make notes, drafts,
communicate with the other members of the group, etc. Through the Co-Writer every member of the group
could see how the draft (shared text) evolved to a final version, and the other's contribution to the text. The
result of their work was an argumentative text of 700 words about witch prosecution. The sources used for this
assignment were original historical texts or translations of original texts about witch prosecution in the 16th and
17th century. The student groups worked the inquiry group task for a period of four weeks. In the first lesson, the
teachers introduced the task and gave the necessary instruction regarding to the task, and the most important
features of   the CSCL-environment        were   explained.     Seven more     history  lessons  were  devoted    to the   inquiry
group task. Students were allowed to work on the inquiry task outside normal classrooms hours.
         In   order   to  answer   the  first research  question,     two    types  of  analyses   were conducted.    First,   we
conducted a semantic text analysis of the text sources, of the drafts and of the final group products. For this
purpose, a parsing procedure was developed based on the theory of semantic representation of Kintsch and Van
Dijk (1978). Two types of parsing rules were applied: the macro rules defined by the semantic representation
theory (generalization and construction), and the second set of rhetorical rules, developed in order to determine
the morphological     structure  of   the propositions.  A  first  aspect     treated  by these  rules is  the structure   of  the
(semantic) propositions and the use of grammatical aspects. According to these rules the standard structure of a
proposition   is: subject,   verb, object,    specification of    the object.   The   subject and   the verb   are   compulsory
elements  of    the unit.   Some examples     of  these rhetorical    rules   are: the  nouns  are always   singular,     with the
exception of the situation when a generalization is necessary; or verbs are always used with their infinitive form,
present tense and passive voice.         This is an example of text: "Amongst the women was one of unbelievable
beauty who was telling all kinds of fabulous stories about what she had done; amongst others, she told she
could fly..." (Translation from Dutch from Batavische arcadia, by Johan van Heemskerk), which can be parsed
as follows: Woman is beautiful, Woman says (woman can fly). We constructed two different lists of words and
their  synonyms,    used    on  sources   or  used  in the  text  assignments.     One    of the synonyms      was   chosen    and
consistently used in all situations. Examples are: devil, was used for devil, spirits, demons; illusion(s) was used

© ISLS                                                                                                                         202
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                    Volume I: Long Papers

for hallucination,    visions;  women     was   used   for  girls, women.    The   second   list regarded   the syntactical
components of the propositions. Examples from this list (verbs list): accept was used for to confess, to accept;
accuse was used for to officially accuse, to call for blame, to give the blame.
         Once sources and group products were parsed, we analyzed the way groups selected and integrated this
semantic material. The following aspects were considered: 1) The quantity of semantic information selected
from sources and used in the drafts and final group products; 2) The type of semantic information             - from core of
secondary   sources;     3) The origin    of the   selected information     (from  which    source). When     analyzing the
integration of semantic information from sources in the text products three dimensions have been considered: 1)
The  way   in which   selected  semantic     information   evolved    along the drafts;  2) In  which  succession  students
arrange the semantic information selected from sources; 3) The degree of integration of semantic information
selected from the given sources in the final products. The number of propositions was chosen as an indicator
when quantifying the semantic information. A proposition was considered the equivalent of a proposition that
caries semantic   meaning     independently,     or of a   construction   of  two  propositions   that   need each  others'
completion in order to carry semantic meaning. For analyzing the degree of integration of semantic information
selected   from the   given  sources   in the final  products,  the   number    of switches  made    between   propositions
selected from one particular source to propositions selected from another given source was used as indicator.
The  following  types    of  switches  were  examined:    between     segments  of propositions   selected  from the given
sources (Sbb); between units selected from the same given source (Sb1b1); between a unit selected from a given
source and a unit selected from another given source (Sb1b2). For examining the degree of integration between
propositions selected from the given sources and propositions selected from other sources (others text books, or
written sources found by students themselves, internet sources), the following switches were examined: between
propositions selected from a given source and propositions selected from another source, no matter in which
direction (SB0);    between    propositions   selected from   a given   source  and   propositions   selected from  another
source (Sb0); between propositions selected from another source and propositions selected from given sources
(S0b); between propositions selected      exclusively from other sources (S00).
         The second type of analysis was the assessment of quality of group products and was conducted by
using an assessment instrument. This instrument focused on three major aspects of the group products: use of
sources, content and/of argumentation, and structure and language use. Every assessed aspect was rated on a
three point scale (from 0 to 2). Use of sources, consisted of two elements: complete use of sources and copying
and pasting. Content and argumentation considered what students actually did with the information from the
given  sources  (or   from   other sources)   in order to   compose    a coherent    text. The   component    Structure and
language use, focused on the organization of the text and on language use. An 80% total agreement between the
two evaluators was reached when using this instrument, with a value of .66 for the Cohens kappa coefficient.
         In   order   to answer    the second    research   question,  an   analysis  of   chat  discussion protocols   was
conducted. Based on iterative readings of the chat protocol a coding system was developed, consisting of the
following  coding   categories:  1)  Selection   -  statements  about  the  selection of   semantic  information  from  the
given  sources  (e.g.,   "..and for   con-arguments    that  witches    are  blamed   for   everything"); 2)  Integration -
statements regarding the structure of the group products and the use of the selected semantic information in the
texts (e.g. "...maybe we should say that witch prosecution was good, because if a witch is prosecuted other
witches get to scared to go on with witchcraft..."); 3) Planning - statements regarding the planning of selection,
integration and writing acts (e.g. " who is going to do the comparison?"); 4) Monitoring - statements regarding
the monitoring of selection, integration and writing acts (e.g. " I begin with the arguments for assignment 3"); 5)
Evaluation - statements regarding the evaluation of selection, integration, and the progress of the text (e.g. " no,
there  are too  many     arguments  for   witch  prosecution");    6) General   Information  -   general statements on  the
progress of the group product and the writing process (e.g. " I'll look at some arguments from supporters, will
you look at some from the opponents?"); 7) Other - any other statement not included in the other categories (e.g.
" I will go on with chapter 3"). To select and code the text material we used the Multiple Episode Protocol
Analysis (MEPA), a software program (Erkens, 2003) which offers the possibility to visualize and categorize the
VCRI files.

Findings on Use of Semantic Information
Regarding the selection of semantic information we report on a number of aspects. Concerning the quantity of
semantic information selected from sources, percentages of the propositions selected from sources show how
quantity of information is distributed per draft, per group along the drafts and in the final product. The average
quantity of semantic information selected from sources represents more than a third (35.9%), from the semantic
information identified in the final products. A noticeable aspect is the high range between different groups. In
both drafts and final texts the differences between groups in the selected number of propositions were big: in
draft 1 the range is 79%; in draft 2 it is 65.9% and in the final text it is 58.5%. These differences show that some
groups relied almost completely on the given sources for collecting semantic information for their assignment.
Other groups, such as group 201 (9.9%), used especially information selected from other than the given sources.

© ISLS                                                                                                                   203
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                Volume I: Long Papers

         Regarding the type of semantic information from sources on average 35.9% of the semantic content in
the final group products is represented by information selected from the given sources. More than half (55.5%)
of the selected and used propositions was core information; about a third (33.5%) was secondary information.
These results show that groups concentrated on selecting core information and that students were less interested
in selecting semantic information unrelated to the assignment. The quantity of semantic information selected
from each source was quantified in relation to the total number of propositions per group product. The pie chart
in Figure 2 shows that almost two thirds (63.8%) of the quantity of semantic information used for writing the
final group products was selected from other sources than the six given sources.

                                                                                       1: 8.8%
                                               Source 1                                2: 13.4%
                                                             Source 2                  3: 5.6%
                                                                                       4: 7.6%
                                                                Source 3               5: 0%
                                                                Source 4               6: 0.8%
         Other sources                                       Source 5Source 6          X: 63.8%

         Figure 2. Quantity of Semantic Information Selected from Each Source and from Other Sources.

         Only 35.2% of the propositions are selected from the given sources and the chart shows the division of
the quantity selected from each source, in relation to the total number of propositions identified in the final
group  products. These     proportions  also indicate   that groups   had a   strong  preference for   certain sources;
especially for source    2 (13.4%   from the total number    of  selected propositions).  The   content of the  sources
explains this  preference:  this source  contains  a great   number  of explicit pro- and  con-arguments    that  could
almost literally be used when writing the assignment text. Source 1 (8.8%), source 3 (5.6%) and source 4 (7.6%)
contain  a number     of clear   arguments  as well.  From   these   sources  content was    selected, but in  a  lower
percentages. No units were selected from source 5. The percentages of propositions selected from other sources
or invented by groups themselves are unexpectedly high in comparison with the percentages of units selected
from the given sources.
         When examining how students integrated semantic information selected from the given sources in their
texts, a number of aspects were considered. The average quantity of semantic information selected from sources
represents more than a third (35,9%)    from the semantic information identified in the final group products; in the
second draft, the percentage was four percent higher than in the final version (39.4%); and in the first draft half
(50.3%) of the semantic content was selected from the given sources. It is noticeable that group 201 is the only
group for which the percentage of the propositions selected from sources is higher in the final group product
than the proportion in the first and second draft. For all the other groups this proportion is higher in the first
draft and gradually becomes smaller, while the writing activities process heads towards the end. Regarding the
succession  of the    propositions selected from  sources   in  the new text, no stable  succession    pattern could be
determined  when      looking at the  organization of   the units in each  group  product  and   when   comparing    the
succession of the sources between the group products. Even so, some features of the succession could be named:
six out of the ten groups started their text with propositions selected from source 2; in eight out the ten products
source 2 was used in the first half of the texts; with one exception, sources 1 and 4    were used in the second half
of the text; information units from source 3 and source 6 were randomly distributed in the semantic structure of
the texts; information units from sources 1, 2, 3, and 4 were used on various locations in the texts.
         To   determine    the degree   of  integration,    two aspects   were examined:     the integration   of  only
propositions selected from given sources and the integration of all propositions (from given and other sources).
From the switches made between propositions selected exclusively from the given sources an average of 87.7 %
were   made between      propositions selected from   the   same  source; 12.3%   were   made    between   propositions
selected from   different   given  sources.  This  last percentage,   together   with the percentage    indicating   the
integration of the segments of units, shows that the degree of integration of information units selected from
different given sources was rather poor.     Figure 3 presents the degree of integration per group in the form of
switches between: units selected from given sources (Sbb, blue bar); units selected from given sources and units
from non-given sources (SB0, purple bar); units from other sources (S00, white bar). With only one exception
(group 203), the percentages of switches between units selected from given sources and the units from other
(SB0) is higher than the percentage of switches between units from other sources (S00). Also, in five of the ten
texts the percentage of switches between units from given sources and units from other sources (SB0) is lower
than the units only selected from given sources (Sbb).

© ISLS                                                                                                               204
                 Frequencies
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                                   Volume I: Long Papers

                              100
                               90
                               80
                               70
                               60                                                                              Sbb- given sources
                               50                                                                              SB0-dif.sources
                               40                                                                              S00-other sources
                               30
                               20
                               10
                                0
                                     201    202    203    205    207     301   302    307    401    402
                                                                   Groups

                                                Figure 3. Percentage of Switches per Group.
         Overall, the results show that 25.6% of the switches were made between units from different sources.
Furthermore, 22.9% of the switches were made between units from the same source. Half of the total switches
were made between units selected from other sources, and in this case there is no specification whether these
propositions were selected from. The low percentage of switches between units selected from sources and units
from other sources and the high percentage of switches between other sources supports the statement that the
degree of integration is moderate.
         A correlation analysis conducted to determine the relation between quality of group products and the
quantity  and  type           of  semantic    information     shows  a positive,   but low   (r  = .24,  p  <  .10) and  non       significant
correlation between the obtained scores and the quantity of semantic information selected from sources. This is
a correlation in the expected direction but does not confirm the expectation formulated at the beginning of this
study, that groups which will select more semantic information from the given sources will also score better by
the assessment of their final products. The result reveals that the obtained scores were influenced by the quantity
of semantic information selected from sources, but not in a decisive manner. On the other hand, the correlation
analysis between the assessment scores and the proportion of core information selected from sources showed a
much   higher  degree             of correlation.   A   positive correlation     of .69   was   found,  and   this correlation      was   also
statistically significant            (p  < .05).   The  expectation    that  the groups    that  selected  more    semantic       information
labelled as core information will receive higher scores is confirmed by this result.

Findings on Meta-Cognitive Activities and Assessment of Group Products
The  percentages             calculated    in relation  to the  total number     of chat-statements     indicate   that statements     about
Planning occurred least frequently (0.4 %) and the statement on Other aspects most frequently (24.1%). The
Selecting and   Integrating              activities (defining   for   the discourse    synthesis   activities) are  discussed       in 1.1%,
respectively in 2% of the total statements. Also the discussion of Evaluation and Monitoring activities took
place infrequently. In relation to the coded statements, the results show that more than half of the statements
(58%) belonged to the category Other aspects. Statements coded as General information represented a third of
the total. Planning, monitoring and evaluating were discussed in 9%, while selecting and integrating activities
were only discussed in 7.6% of the coded statements. Furthermore, the statements regarding coded activities
represented almost half percent (43.7%) of the total number of statements.
         These results indicate that little discussion was held between the group members during the writing of
the assignment.              Observations     indicated  that  group   members      split tasks  and performed      them       without much
consultation.  The            results    show,  in  general,   that  the  category  Other   aspects     is strongly  represented       in  the
discussions of all groups. The discussion of one group (307) represents an exception from these findings. This
group discussed about selection and integration of information from sources in their text. A qualitative analysis
of this group's discussion showed that group members selected sequences of semantic information from sources
individually  and            then  discussed    it with  the  other   members,     permanently    discussed    about    the    integration of
selected information in the new text, and that the content, order of ideas, structure of the text, and conclusion
were decided in consultation. Monitoring activities took place and, close to the end of the process, every group
member performed a last evaluation of the text and discussed this with the group.
         The relationship between assessment scores and chat discussion categories is reflected by a series of
correlations. The correlations between the results and the categories Selecting, Integrating, Evaluating, General
information and Other are positive, but low. The correlations between results and the categories planning and
monitoring are negative. None of the correlations are statistically significant.

Table 1: Correlations between chat categories and a) assessment score and b) degree of integration.

© ISLS                                                                                                                                     205
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                      Volume I: Long Papers

 Category                                                               Correlations
                                          Assessment scores                              Degree of integration
 Selecting                                        .28                                              -.20
 Integrating                                      .32                                              -.19
 Planning                                        -.36                                              -.41
 Monitoring                                      -.13                                              .19
 Evaluating                                       .13                                              -.12
 General info                                     .22                                              -.04
 Other                                            .26                                              -.31

         These correlations show that discussing the selection and integration of information (from given or not-
given sources) guaranteed a certain quality of the written text, and that also the fact that these activities took
place is reflected in the better results obtained for assignment 3. As the results presented in Table 1 show, the
correlations between    the  degree   of  integration  of   semantic  information  selected   from    sources  and  the  meta-
cognitive activities are, with one exception, negative. None of the correlations are statistically significant. These
negative correlations indicate that there was no relationship between the frequency with which groups discussed
about discourse synthesis activities and the degree of integration of propositions.

Summary of Findings, Discussion and Conclusion
In the present study we investigated the way groups of students use semantic information from multiple textual
sources  for writing   their   own   text in  collaboration.   The  first research   question  focused    on   how  groups   of
secondary school students select semantic information from multiple sources when performing an inquiry task
for the  discipline   history. When    analyzing   the   quantity  of  semantic  information   selected    from  sources,   the
conclusion is that the differences in the quantity of selected information between groups were considerable.
When    distinguishing  between      the  categories  of   semantic   information  offered   by  the    given  sources   (core,
secondary and other information), a selecting pattern was identified. All groups selected a higher quantity of
core information, merely consisting of arguments pro- and counter witch prosecution. This category of semantic
information  was    important   for  the  quality of  the   final group products,  as   shown  by   the   positive correlation
between the assessment results and the categories of selected information. A much lower quantity of secondary
semantic   information  was     selected  and  used   in   the new  text,  and   hardly  any  from    the category    of Other
information.  An    aspect  that  deserves   attention   is the   work  strategy the majority    of   the groups   used  when
performing   this   writing    task. Firstly, semantic      information   from   the given    sources     was  selected.  This
information was organized based on contextual criteria (superordinate semantic categories), and not based on
the source succession. The propositions selected from sources were organized in semantic sequences, most of
the time units from the same source together. Thereafter, more sources of information were sought and new
semantic   information   was    selected  from    these  sources.   This  information    was   also   organized  in   semantic
sequences,   but it   occurred  more   often  that    semantic    information from   these sources     was   intertwined  with
semantic information selected from the given sources. This semantic structure was completed by groups' own
constructed  propositions,     which  fulfilled   the role  of    connecting  propositions  between     semantic   sequences.
Regarding the degree to which students integrated semantic information from sources, the results showed that
the degree   of  integration   of semantic    information    from  the  given  sources   was   situated   at a quarter   of the
maximum    degree     possible.  The  result  of  such   a  structuring strategy  is a   lower degree     of integration.   The
expectation that groups which use more information from sources will write better texts was not confirmed by
the findings. The expectation that the groups that selected more core information will receive higher scores was
confirmed.
         The    second  research     question concerned     meta-cognitive    activities initiated  by  students   in order  to
regulate their  information    selecting  and  integrating   process.   The  assumption   was  that   statements   concerning
planning, monitoring, and evaluating the writing activities would be identified in the discussions students held
through the chat. The results showed little presence of discussions regarding selecting and integrating semantic
information from the sources. Additionally, other meta-cognitive activities which are characteristic for writing
tasks in general, such as planning, monitoring or evaluating occurred rarely in groups' discussions. The content
of  the virtual discussions    was   dominated    by  statements    regarding  general   aspects   in relation with   the   task
content and performance. The reason for this moderate representation of the meta-cognitive activities can be
found in the fact that most of the groups chose to distribute tasks amongst the members of the group, each of
them being responsible for one or more assignments. The expectation that there will be a relationship between
the type (on- or off-task) and frequency of chat talk with the degree of integration in the final text product was
not confirmed.
         The characteristic of selecting information from sources based on the type of information these sources
offer can be discussed in relation to the way students integrated the selected semantic information in the new
text. The overviews of the semantic structure of the new texts show that groups selected semantic information
from   sources  and   organized   it  according   to   a content-based    structure. According      to  the  classification  of

© ISLS                                                                                                                      206
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                     Volume I: Long Papers

rhetorical transforming   made    by   Segev-Miller   (1997),  the groups    synthesized   the information   selected  from
sources based on ideas rather than based on authors (sources). The strategy adopted by these groups can be
classified as  decomposing     and recomposing      the  source   texts, of  breaking  the  source   into propositions   and
looking across other text(s) for related propositions, which can also be placed under the same superordinate
semantic categories.
          A number of issues need to be considered in relation to this study. First, performing a task in a group
context had certain consequences for the way a student approached the task and the responsibilities to be taken
when performing a writing task. Moreover, when analyzing the products of a collaborative writing task the risk
appears that the analysis of discourse synthesis activities performed at individual level would not be detailed
enough.   In this research    project,  the contribution  of the  individual   participants is studied    in the  context   of
collaborative group work, which might overshadow some of the details of the individual input. On the other
hand, the analysis of the writing activities when performed in a group context can offer extra insights into the
mechanisms of the process. The necessity of consultation and agreement between the group members results in
explication of individual ideas and stances, which provide valuable information about the collaborative process.
Alas, in this research this potential advantage could not be used because of the reduced amount of explicit
discussion on discourse synthesis activities. Second, the task used in this study was an authentic task used in the
Dutch   history  curriculum,  and  not   created especially   for this   investigation on  discourse    synthesis activities.
Therefore,   the sources  were   not   selected with  an  eye  on  the   discourse  synthesis  task. The   texts  were   very
complex    and  presented  a  high degree    of difficulty. Especially   the selection  of information    might   have   been
affected by this complexity. It is possible that students avoided selecting information from the difficult sources
and relied more on the rather accessible source texts. Third, an inter-rater reliability analysis should have been
applied for establishing the reliability of the coding system for the chat protocols. Due to practical reasons this
analysis was replaced by the researcher scoring the analyzed dialogues twice.
          In sum,   this study   provided   some   valuable  information    on  the way    groups  of   students  select and
integrate  semantic    information   from    multiple  textual   sources,   and the    discussions   of the   groups   while
performing this task. Further research is needed for a more specific investigation of the degree of integration of
semantic information from various sources, wherein the use of information from other than the given sources or
students' prior knowledge are also considered. Moreover, further investigation of the group discussions around
the task-related activities is recommended.

References
Erkens, G., Janssen, J., Broeken, M., Jaspers, J. (2002) VCRI. Retrieved March 23 from Utrecht University,
          department of Educational Sciences Web site: http://edugate.fss.uu.nl/~crocicl/vcri.html.
Erkens,   G.   (2003).   Multiple  episode      protocol  analysis  (MEPA).Version       4.9.  Utrecht    University,    The
          Netherlands.
Higgins, L. (1992). Reading to argue: helping students transform source texts. In A. Penrose & B. Sitko (eds.),
          Hearing   ourselves    think: cognitive   research  in  the college   writing classrooms.     (pp. 77-101).    New
          York: Oxford University Press.
Kantz, M. (1989). Written rhetorical synthesis: processes and products. (Technical report no. 1). The Center for
          the Study of Writing, Pittsburgh, PA & Berkeley, CA, Retrieved on August 15, 2005, from National
          Writing Project, U.S. Department of Education web site: http://www.writingproject.org/TR17.pdf.
Kintsch,  W.   &Van   Dijk,   T. (1978).   Towards  a model    of  text  comprehension    and  production.   Psychological
          Review, 85, 363-394.
McGinley,    W.J.  (1992).  The   role  of  reading and   writing  while  composing    from   sources.  Reading   Research
          Quarterly, 27 (3), 226-249.
Segev-Miller, R. (in press). Cognitive processes in discourse synthesis. On the differences between successful
          and unsuccessful synthesizers. A paper presented at the 9th International Conference on the EARLI on
          Writing, Geneva, Zwitserland (September, 2002).
Segev-Miller,    R.   (1997). Cognitive     processes in  discourse    synthesis:  The  case   of  intertextual  processing
          strategies. In Cognitive processes in discourse synthesis. (Dissertation). The Hebreuw University of
          Jerusalem, Retrieved on Mei 15 2005 from http://www.staffs.ac.uk/personal/sciences/mt15/writing.doc.
Segev-Miller (2004). Writing from sources: the effect of explicit instruction on college students' processes and
          products, in Educational Studies in language and literature, 4, 5-33.
Spivey,   N.N.,  &  King,  J.R.  (1989).    Readers   and writers  composing    from    sources.  M.R.    Ruddell    (ed.). In
          Theoretical    models   and   processes     of  reading,  (pp.    668-694).   Newark:    International     Reading
          Association.
Spivey,   N.N.   (1995).  Written  discourse:    a  constructivist perspective.     In Steffe,  L.P.  &   Gale,   J. (1995).
          Constructivism in education. Hillsdale: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Spivey, N.N. (1997). The constructivist metaphor. Reading, writing and the making of meaning. San Diego:
          Academic Press.

© ISLS                                                                                                                      207
