CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                     Volume I: Long Papers

Online Role Play Simulation to Tackle Groupthink ­ Case Study of a
                                     Crisis Management Training
                Lawrence Leung, Nancy Law, The University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam Hong Kong
                                       Email: h8690182@hku.hk, nlaw@hku.hk

         Abstract:     Decision-makers     have  to   face many   challenges  during     crisis management:     ill-
         structured problem, time stress, incomplete information and involvement of multiple parties.
         Groupthink     is a term    coined   by   psychologist   (Janis,  1972),  Groupthink      victims ignore
         alternatives and tend to make irrational decisions in facing crises. Many researchers suggest
         that   role  play simulation   (RPS)   is  a suitable  tool  for crisis management      training  for the
         realisation of collaboration and authentic situation awareness. In this paper, a case study of
         crisis management training in the context of law enforcement using online RPS is illustrated.
         By using Bales' Interaction Process Analysis (IPA) method, the interactions of participants in
         training are observed and categorised. The results show that using online role play simulation
         in crisis management training has positive effect on the reduction of Groupthink tendency.

Introduction
Crisis management is a set of actions taken to exert control over the events of a crisis to minimize losses. It is
similar  to risk management,     except  that the   events  are real, not  potential, and   action takes   precedence   over
planning    (Sniezek,  Wilkins   &   Wadlington,    2001).    Crisis  management,     to be  effective,   involves   making
appropriate decisions under severe time pressure and uncertainty. The objective of crisis management training is
to enhance the ability to solve problems by adapting very quickly to a fast changing situation. Training in crisis
management      is essential to   many     organisations   nowadays,   especially   law   enforcement      agencies.   Crisis
management is a highly complex subject and decision-making is a core process of it. Decision-making is critical
in nature and also ill-structured, involving multiple parties, a lot of information from various sources. Moreover,
the decision has a very short time frame to make, but the decision may cause a devastating consequence.                 One
important challenge in crisis management training is inducing the psychological processes that associated with
the acute stress experienced in real-world crises. Acute stress is a state that occurs in situations of potential
harm, time pressure, and arousal (Sniezek, Wilkins & Wadlington, 2001). A most important feature of decision-
making in crisis management is that it is group activity, dynamic in nature and hard to teach.
         Crisis    decision-making   in law   enforcement     context  is  considered    to be   naturalistic.  Naturalistic
Decision Making (NDM) research emerged in the 1980s by Gary Klein to study how people make decisions in
real-world  settings.  Realism   is important,  as  lack   of realism can  prevent    transfer  of training, especially   for
performance   under    time  pressure  (Zakay    &  Wooler,    1984).  The  NDM    framework       emphasizes   the  role of
experience   in  enabling  people   to rapidly  categorize situations   to make   effective     decisions (Klein,    Orasanu,
Calderwood, & Zsambok, 1993).           Many researchers agree that role play simulation is a suitable method for
crisis management      training (Klieboer, 1997;    Friedman    2004; Borodzicz   &   Haperen,     2002;  Borodzicz,   2005;
Miller, 2009). Their arguments include: offering trainees a setting approximating real-life experiences to learn
how to apply insights from crisis management theories, supporting "learning by doing" in a safe environment,
engaging    collaboration   and   adopting    scenario-based    training.  Effective     crisis management      simulations
encourage participants to perceive the scenario as a threat, with time limitations for effective data gathering.
Simulations should produce the similar reactions and feelings in participants as real life crisis events, such as
tension, uncertainty, time pressure, sense of inadequate information and frustration (Gredler, 1992).

Groupthink
Groupthink was originated by Irving Janis in his book Victims of Groupthink in 1972, and explained how group
made   poor  decisions  during   the decision-making     process. Janis   coined  the term  "Groupthink"     to refer  to "a
mode of thinking that people engaged in when they are deeply involved in a cohesive in-group, when members'
striving for  unanimity    override  their motivation   to  realistically appraise  alternative    courses of  action."   In
summary, Groupthink occurs when the pressure to conform within a group interferes with that group's analysis
of a   problem     and causes   poor   group  decision-making.       Groupthink   victim's  creativity,   uniqueness,   and
independent thinking are lost in the pursuit of group cohesiveness. The hypothesis was supported by Janis's
hindsight analysis of several political-military fiascos and successes that were differentiated by the occurrence
or non-occurrence of antecedent conditions, Groupthink symptoms, and decision-making defects. The political-
military fiascos that Janis studied including: Nazi Germany's decision to invade the Soviet Union in 1941, the
Pearl Harbour Incident, the Bay of Pigs Crisis, North Korean Invasion, the escalation of the Vietnam War and
the Watergate Cover-up.

© ISLS                                                                                                                    208
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                   Volume I: Long Papers

          In groupthink research, case study, laboratory experiment and content analysis are the major methods
used. However, it can be argued that online role play simulation should be more comprehensive in facilitating
decision-making training in crisis management or avoidance of groupthink in specific. The arguments include: (i)
Decision-making       training concentrates  on   process not   outcome     alone and    (ii) Decision-making      is not  a
singularity issue, but combination of multiple decision types and events (Orasanu & Fischer, 1997). In fact,
these arguments align with Mohamed & Wiebe (1996)'s conclusion in Groupthink research that, Groupthink is a
continuous process, rather than a list of discrete events. Furthermore, the process flow of Groupthink is non-
deterministic    and  probabilistic instead  of deterministic   or  statically formulated.     In other   words,   it is  not
necessary for the entire antecedent conditions have to be present for Groupthink to occur. Rather, the more
antecedent conditions that are present the greater the risk of developing the symptoms of Groupthink (Rosander,
Stiwne and Granstorm, 1998). Moreover, Esser and Lindoerfer (1989) have revealed the similar findings with
Rosander, Stiwne and Granstorm. Therefore, it can be concluded that more Groupthink symptoms then lead to a
greater probability of defective decision-making.

Tackling Groupthink with Online Role Play Simulation
Role Play Simulation (RPS) is being increasingly appreciated as a useful technique to foster virtual learning
processes (Lombard & Biglan, 2009). RPS takes inspiration from "situated constructivism" approaches, which
state that an educational experience has to be as authentic and genuine as possible, so that learners can observe
and   critically reflect  on real situations (Winn,   1993).  Moreover,     RPS   is directly  rooting  from   the situated
learning approaches of Goal-Based Scenario (Schank, 1997); where the learner is engaged in pursuing a goal
within  a simulated    environment   in order  to master  a set  of skills. Role  Plays   are  techniques  based   on  such
principles; which are increasingly being adopted in CSCL contexts (Persico D., Pozzi F. & Sarti L., 2008). In
fact,  RPS is a new area in CSCL research that     professional learning can apply.
          Online role play simulation, a special form of CSCL, is complied of a set of technologies in an online
environment for collaborative learning. Online RPS is designed to support and structure group interactions for
the  purpose    of  information   exchange,  problem  solving   and  decision-making.     Through    the  development     of
various   scenarios,   the crisis decision  process  can  be  realised   and monitored.    Online    role play simulation
supports activities such as idea creation, message exchange, project planning, document preparation, and joint
planning and decision-making that Group Support System (GSS) usually provides (Poole & DeSanctis, 1989).
Moreover, features of online role play simulation are believed to break down hierarchies that dominate typical
meetings (Zigura, Poole & DeSanctis, 1988) and to equalise the participation of all group members. In terms of
the context of group decision support, online role play simulation usually consists of networked computers with
monitors for group members in simulating crisis decision-making and aggregating group opinions. Researches
have   proved    that computer    technology based   system   can   help mitigate    the negative  effects  of antecedent
conditions   of  Groupthink.    These systems   usually   include  process   structuring,  a  public  screen,  anonymity,
simultaneity,    extended    information    processing,   and   access   to  external    information    (Miranda,     1994;
Chidambaram, Bostrom & Wynne, 1991). System with anonymity, simultaneity, process structuring, and the
public screen can foster productive conflict management (Miranda, 1994). As those features contribute to a task-
focus thereby preventing unproductive conflict that is unrelated to the issue at hand. Those features also promote
group members' freedom to participate in the discussion. As such, a high amount of issue-based conflict results.
As   a matter    of fact, such  constructive conflict can   also promote    an understanding      of the  problem     and of
opposing frames of reference as well as an exploration of alternatives. Consequently, a greater differentiation
among group members' opinions may occur. When a group possesses Groupthink antecedents, it may not be
possible or even desirable, to change the group's structure. However, it is possible to prevent the development
of Groupthink by ensuring that each specific group decision is made under conditions of vigilance (Janis, 1982).
This implies that the group examines a wide range of alternatives, carefully evaluates and re-evaluates these
alternatives within the context of the group's objectives, search for relevant information, accurately processes all
information, and undertakes detailed implementation and contingency planning.

Using Interaction Process Analysis to Understand Groupthink Processes
The Bales' (1950) IPA method and theory work on a relationship between social-emotional and tasks-based
communication acts. It is generally agreed by researchers that there are two main dimensions of group life, task
and social aspects (Frey, 1999), and these two dimensions are used to accomplish tasks and maintain group
relationships. Bales' IPA can provide a detailed observational scheme at micro level for coding group members'
communicative behaviour, such that it can be recorded, isolated and interpreted. By coding member's behaviour
into   discrete  categories,   researchers are  able to  interpret  whether    participants'   comments    are helpful    or
disruptive to the group and whether the communication acts are balanced (Schultz, 1999). Other coding schemes
explored, Roter's (1991) (doctor-patient) and Eyberg & Robinson's (1983) (parent-child), are applied to specific
domain    of group    interactions  and are  not  appropriate   for this  study.  In  Bales's   IPA,   spoken  or     written
communication will be broken into "units" consisting of a single thought or the equivalent of a simple sentence.

© ISLS                                                                                                                    209
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                    Volume I: Long Papers

According to coding scheme, each communication or interaction unit can be assigned to one of 12 mutually
exclusive categories. Details of the Bales' IPA coding scheme are illustrated in Table 1.
         The Watergate cover up was confirmed as a Groupthink case by Cline (1994). Cline used Bales' IPA to
analyse transcripts of the Watergate cover up case that were known to have made flawed decisions and found
that too much emphasis on agreement resulted in unsuccessful outcomes. In "real life", groups that were found
to be associated with Groupthink, the level of agreements were ten times higher than disagreement and, when
Groupthink occurred in laboratory studies, agreement was seven times greater.              Furthermore, Cline highlighted
three components on contributing/avoiding Groupthink ­ Agreement, Task-based and Disagreement. According
to Cline`s research, too much agreement might decrease the chance of constructive conflict in decision-making;
which was considered to be healthy. It was because under conflict situation more alternatives could be reviewed
and decisions could be fully reviewed. Cline also found out that decision-making process was more task-based
than socio-emotional based, as the discussion process was mainly focus on the solution finding, information
gathering and sharing.

Table 1: Bales' 12 interaction categories (adopted from Bales,1950, p.9).

Code   Category                                                                                          Remark
1      Shows   solidarity     ­ Raises    other's status, gives help,  encourages   others, reinforces Social Emotional
       (rewards) contribution, greets others in a friendly manner, uses positive social gesture.         Area: Positive
2      Shows   tension   release     ­ Jokes,   laughs,   shows satisfaction, relives   or attempts  to Reactions
       remove tension, expresses enthusiasm, enjoyment, satisfaction.
3      Agrees   ­ Shows       passive  acceptance,    acknowledges     understanding,   complies,   co-
       operates with others, expresses interest and comprehension.
4      Gives suggestion ­ Makes firm suggestion, provides direction or resolution, implying Task Area:
       autonomy for others, attempts to control direction or decision                                    Neutral
5      Gives opinion ­ Offers opinion, evaluation, analysis, express a feeling or wish. Seeks
       to analyses, explore, enquire. Provides insight and reasoning.
6      Gives information ­ Provides background or further information, repeats, clarifies,
       confirms. Brings relevant matters into the forum, acts that assist group focus.
7      Asks for information ­ Asks for further information, repetition or confirmation. Acts
       used to request relevant information and understand the topic.
8      Asks for information ­ Asks for further information, repetition or confirmation. Acts
       used to request relevant information and understand the topic.
9      Asks   for suggestion      ­   Asks  for   suggestion,   direction, possible  ways   of action.
       Requests for firm contribution, solution or closure to problem.
10     Disagrees ­ Shows passive rejection, formality, withholds help, does not support view Social Emotional
       or opinion, fails to concur with view, rejects a point, issue or suggestion.                      Area: Negative
11     Shows tension ­ Shows concern, apprehension, dissatisfaction or frustration. Persons Reactions
       interacting are tense, on edge. Act that express sarcasm or are condemning.
12     Shows   antagonism       ­    Acts used    to deflate others status, defends   or   asserts self,
       purposely blocks another or makes a verbal attack.

         Previous     studies   that have   successfully   used the    IPA  method   to  investigate  various aspects   of
communication including: Hiltz and Turoff (1993) - comparison between face-to-face and computer mediated
communication   (CMC),     Cline     (1994) - Watergate      cover up  case research,   and Gorse   and  Emmitt   (2003) -
construction meeting using CMC.

Study Design

Research Questions
1.   In what ways does socio-emotional and task-based communications affect Groupthink tendency?
2.   Can participation in Online Role Play Simulations be an effective means to reduce Groupthink tendency?

Method
This   study involved   16  trainees   from   a   law enforcement   training  institute in  Hong   Kong   using  role play
simulation exercise as part of the 4-week crisis management training programme. In this exercise, trainees were
randomly assigned to 4 different teams namely: Alpha (), Beta (), Gamma () and Delta () with specific
functional roles in a crisis scenario. Each team was located in different rooms of the exercise vicinity without
face-to-face  contact.  The   facilitator or  exercise  controller  at the  control room    could  communicate   with   the

© ISLS                                                                                                                  210
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                  Volume I: Long Papers

trainees of all groups through a computer networked role play simulation platform called SIMS (Scenario-based
Interactive Role Play Simulation System). Participants did not know the scenario of the role play beforehand
until  the commencement      of  the exercise.   SIMS   provides   all the   simulated  communication      tools for  law
enforcement training, including chat-box, e-mail, beat radio, telephone and video conferencing system. Trainees
can use the tools provided to carry out decision-making and Command & Control (C&C) operation during the
role play simulation. In addition, Controller can also send out instant multimedia information (such as TV news,
video  clips) according   to  scenario  development   or   enhancing   realism   of the crisis  situation. All  role play
interactions and communications are logged by the system for data analysis and debriefing.

Procedure
The whole exercise was divided into two phases with two debriefings. Both Phases I and II were role play
simulation, each phase had the same duration of 2 hours. At the beginning of the exercise, participants had to
complete the 40-question Groupthink Index (Glaser, 1993) questionnaires, which were used to measure their
Groupthink tendency before the exercise. Debriefing I was conducted after the completion of Phase I, in this 30
minutes session, the facilitator delivered a short introduction about Groupthink to participants. After a break,
Phase II commenced. The Debriefing II was the post-exercise discussion. Facilitator discussed with participants
about  the  exercise   that was    conducted. After   the  exercise,  participants  completed    the  Groupthink   Index
questionnaires again to understand the change of Groupthink tendency.

Data Collection and Method of Analysis
The interactions of the exercise were recorded by SIMS, including text (chat-box, e-mail), audio (simulated beat
radio, telephone) and video (video conference). All the recorded transactions were then transcribed for analysis.
Transcripts were coded according to IPA and in order to examine the impact of status differentials, a percentage
(%) figure indicating the relative number of "units" by each team was computed to give an indication of their
proportionate contribution to the overall interactions. Representative sections (10%) of text were double-coded
by  two  independent    raters  to assess inter-rater reliability. The   guidelines  for IPA    coding   were  clear  and
consequently agreement between raters approached 97%.

Result and Analysis

Measurement of Groupthink Tendency
Glaser's Groupthink Index (1993) is the instrument used in this paper. According to Glaser, the significance of
Groupthink    in decision-making    can be divided    into different  categories  by severity,  it is suggested    that an
overall score (over the eight `Groupthink symptoms') of less than 93 indicates `Very insignificant' groupthink
tendency;   94-111    indicates  `Insignificant' groupthink    tendency;   112-129   indicates  `Moderate'    groupthink
tendency; 130-147 indicates `Significant' groupthink tendency; and a score greater than 148 represents `Very
significant' groupthink tendency.
           The change of Groupthink Index of each team, between the Phase I score and the Phase II score were:
Team Alpha (-15.11%, Groupthink tendency reduced from High to Moderate), Team Beta (-8.48%, Groupthink
tendency reduced from High to Moderate), Team Gamma (-17.88%, Groupthink tendency reduced from High to
Moderate) and Team Delta (-20.49%, Groupthink tendency reduced from High to Moderate). As a whole, all
teams had decrease in Groupthink tendency from High to Moderate but in different degrees. Interestingly, the
performance   of  Team   Beta    was significantly  lower  than   the  other 3   teams. The    reduction   of Groupthink
tendency indicates that online RPS may be a factor to trigger the change. However, it is not sufficient to reach a
conclusion at this point, unless the positive effect between online RPS and change of Groupthink tendency is
established.  Therefore,  the   following IPA    analysis  is to investigate this   relation. The  coded   profile of   the
interactions are summarised in Table 2 in sorting order of mean.       From Table 2, it can be observed that the IPA
category with highest mean is "Gives information (6)" and the lowest mean is "Shows antagonism (12)".                 The
table reflects that exchange of information, suggestion and opinion are the dominant activities, compare to other
social-emotional interactions.     In fact, this implies that crisis decision-making has gone through the process of
information gathering, discussion and team work.       This distribution of IPA codes is significantly different from
the study by Bales (1950), which was a face-to-face free form play. However, the distribution of IPA codes is
similar to the study by Hiltz (1978) in certain extent on problem solving via computer conference. To address
the research  questions,    two levels of analysis  are   performed.   The first level  analysis  is on  the  relationship
between socio-emotional/task-based communications. The second level analysis is on the relationship between
the 4   interaction   categories   (Positive/Negative Socio-emotional      and   Giving/Asking     Task-based)   and    the
Groupthink tendency.

Table 2: Bales' IPA categories ­ sorted by mean.

© ISLS                                                                                                                  211
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                Volume I: Long Papers

       IPA Category (code)           Mean         Std. Dev.     Team (%) ­ in % order
       Gives information (6)         45           17.166        (26.55), (20.29), (17.35), (15.17)
       Asks for information (7)      37.25        7.5           (18.62), (17.51), (17.26), (16.30)
       Gives suggestion (4)          25           10.296        (13.77), (11.98), (10.18), (8.97)
       Gives opinion (5)             24.75        10.079        (12.8),     (12.68), (11.06), (7.59)
       Asks for opinion (8)          24.25        3.304         (15.17), (12.39), (9.68), (9.42)
       Asks for suggestion (9)       22.5         2.517         (15.86), (11.06), (8.76), (8.33)
       Agrees (3)                    18           5.354         (10.6),     (8.33), (7.97), (6.64)
       Disagree (10)                 8.5          5.916         (15.5), (5.4), (2.07), (1.77)
       Shows solidarity (1)          4.5          2.646         (5.56), (1.81), (1.33), (0.92)
       Shows tension release (2)     3.75         2.217         (2.54), (2.07), (1.38), (0.88)
       Shows tension (11)            2.25         1.708         (1.45), (1.38), (1.98), (0)
       Shows antagonism (12)         0.25         0.5           (0.69), (0),(0),, (0)

First Level Analysis - Social-emotional and Task-based Interactions
Interaction data gathered using the Bales' IPA can be studied from a number of different perspectives. In this
paper, the first level of analysis is the social emotional and task-based components of communication and their
relationship with the change of groupthink tendency. There are 6 social-emotional acts (that is shows solidarity,
shows   tension   release, agrees    disagrees,   shows   tension and   shows    antagonism)    and the  6  task-based
communication acts (that is gives suggestion, gives opinion, gives information, asks for information, asks for
opinion, and asks for suggestion).
         Figure   1   presents the interaction for all teams observed   during    the role play simulation  exercise. It
shows   consistent  patterns   of interactions during  the exercise.  The   percentage  between  Socio-emotional   and
Task-based interaction are 17.25% and 82.75% respectively. The distribution of categories shows the pseudo-
normal pattern typically found in task-oriented group (McGrath, 1984). Categories relating to task performance
(4-9) occur more frequently than those relating to socio-emotional behaviours (1-3) and (10-12). Interactions
concerned with giving information (4-6) are more frequent than that aim at eliciting information (7-9). It can be
expected that task solution involves information exchange and interpretation and where roles during decision-
making   processes    largely  involve reporting  of  information gathered   by   individuals between  teams. Positive
socio-emotional interactions (1-3) are more common than negatives categories (10-12), suggesting a healthy
level of interpersonal interaction. This distribution can reveal that crisis management interaction is more task-
based, with 43.92% on Giving tasks (Categories 4,5&6) and 38.94% on Asking tasks (Categories 7,8&9). On
the other hand, socio-emotional tasks contribute 12.17% on Positive socio-emotional (Categories 1,2&3) and
4.89%   on Negative    socio-emotional   (Categories   10,11&12).  Of   all the four  teams,  Team  Beta has  the most
interactions on   Shows  solidarity  (Category    1) with  5.52%  and   the least interaction percentage  on  Disagree
(Category  10)  (2.07%)    and  Shows    tension  (Category 11)   (0%).  In  addition,  Team   Beta has  also the least
percentage on Task-based interaction (13.33%) among all four teams. According to Cline (1994), Team Beta
has shown a high degree of socio-cohesion, which can contribute Groupthink among team members and they do
not engage   in conflict   during  the  exercise. However,   conflict in    discussion is  considered to be useful for
Groupthink avoidance (Cline, 1994).

                                          Figure 1. IPA Profiles of Teams.

© ISLS                                                                                                              212
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                  Volume I: Long Papers

         To further understand the interaction pattern of Team Beta, the IPA profile in Phase I and Phase II are
illustrated in Figure 2.

                                           Figure 2. Team Beta (IPA Profile in Two Phases).

         It can be revealed from Figure 2 that some decrease on Positive socio-emotional interaction ­ Shows
tension (Category 2) and Negative socio-emotional interaction ­ Disagree (Category 10) and Shows antagonism
(Category 12). However, not much improvement on Show solidarity (Category 1), Agrees (Category 3) and
Shows   tension (Category     11). It can   also be seen    that the major   improvement  is on  task-based  interaction,
especially for the 4-9 categories.
         Figure   3   is a  graphical comparison    of various   Groupthink   studies by  Cline (1994)  and  the  "Crisis
Management" of this study. In this graph, the three major components on contributing/avoiding Groupthink are
displayed  in terms      of percentage  of  interactions.   It can be   seen that "Crisis Management"     has  the least
percentage  (8.33%)      of interaction on  Agreement,    which   refers to  Category 3  of IPA.  According  to   Cline`s
research, too much agreement may decrease the chance of constructive conflict in decision-making; which is
considered to be healthy. It is because under conflict situation more alternatives can be reviewed and decisions
can be fully reviewed. In addition, the percentage of task-based interaction of Crisis Management (82.75%) is
also the highest among other studies. It can observed that due to anonymity, simultaneity, extended information
processing, and access to external information of the online role play simulation environment, participation of
group members is encouraged. Such that the hierarchies or process structures that dominate traditional meetings
can be broken. Furthermore, the percentage of Disagreement (Category 10) interactions is 3.94%, also lowest
among   the studies.     "Crisis Management"     scores   a roughly   2:1 Agreement    and  Disagreement   ratio, which
implies a low Groupthink tendency according to Cline.

                                  Figure 3. Comparison of IPA Profiles on Groupthink Studies.

Secondary Level Analysis ­ Interactions vs Change of Groupthink Tendency
The second level of analysis looks into the social-emotional and task-based components for more details.            It is
necessary to  find    out  whether the  4 interaction  categories    (associated with the positive and  negative  social-
emotional interaction, and giving and asking task-based interaction) are significantly related to the change of
groupthink tendency. In this investigation, the interactions collected are divided into two groups, the successful
group, that is transactions from teams      ,  and, and unsuccessful group, that is transactions from team.
To examine    the social-emotional      and task-based  categories,   individual  IPA  categories  are grouped  together
accordingly.  Positive    social-emotional  categories  comprise     of the  aggregated data from  Category   1  (Shows
solidarity), 2 (Shows tension release) and 3 (Agrees). Negative social-emotional categories are also split into
two groups ­ giving and asking task-based interaction. Giving task-based interaction included Category 6 (Gives
information), 7 (Gives opinion) and 8 (Gives suggestion). Asking task-based interaction includes Category 7
(Asks for information), 8 (Asks for opinion) and 9 (Asks for suggestion). Table (3) provides a summarised
comparison    and   statistical  analysis of social-emotional      and  task-based  interaction against  the change  of

© ISLS                                                                                                               213
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                     Volume I: Long Papers

Groupthink    tendency.   Finally,   the Pearson's     Chi square   (2)    is used  to   examine  the  relationship  between
interaction levels and the change of Groupthink tendency. The findings are reported as probability               values (),
the degrees   of  freedom    are   also  stated. The   findings   are used    as evidence   supporting   or rejecting of  the
hypothesis. The hypothesis is based on the acceptance that the level of interaction had a significant relation
associated with the change of Groupthink tendency. In this paper, a significant difference is recorded as               =<
0.05. The result shows that2 is 14.994, degree of freedom (df) = 3 and  value of < 0.02, which is considered
to  be highly  significant.  Therefore,   the    hypothesis   is accepted, such   that   Groupthink   tendency   reduction is
highly related with the Positive/Negative socio-emotional and Giving/Asking task-based interactions.

Table  3:  Results    of  positive   and negative    socio-emotional     interaction,  and   giving  and  asking  task-based
interaction: Groupthink tendency reduction successful and not successful. (SPSS output).

Groupthink Pos. Social-emotional            Neg.Socio-emotional        Giving Task-based      Asking Task-based     Total
tendency
reduction
Successful     82                           40                         333                    264                   719
Not            24                           4                          46                     71                    145
successful
Total          106                          44                         379                    335                   864

          In order to demonstrate the relationship of the hypothesis with the full set of IPA categories, a further
analysis is carried out, and the results are tabulated in Table 4.

Table 4: Results of 12 IPA categories: Groupthink tendency reduction successful and not successful. (SPSS
output).

 Groupthink        IPA1    IPA2    IPA3   IPA4      IPA5   IPA6   IPA7   IPA8    IPA9    IPA10    IPA11     IPA12 Total
 tendency
 reduction
 Successful        10      12      60     87        88     158    122    75      67      31       9         0       719
 Not successful    8       3       12     13        11     22     27     22      23      3        0         1       145

          The result shows that2 is 31.842, degree of freedom (df) = 11 and  value of 0.002 (Assmp. Sig (2-
sided))< 0.05, which is also considered to be highly significant. Therefore, the hypothesis is accepted, such that
Groupthink tendency reduction is highly related with the 12 IPA categories.

Conclusion
From the result of the analysis, it is shown that participants have achieved a reduction of Groupthink tendency
after the Online RPS exercise. Moreover, the results of the IPA analysis have also proved that online RPS has
positive  effect in   the reduction   of Groupthink       tendency. Online    RPS   has  the potential to   provide  scenario
planning  that is  a  cost  effective   supplement     to traditional face-to-face  training. This   new  form   of planning
simulation provides      flexibility and ease    of preparation   while  stimulating   creative  and  critical thinking. The
design of SIMS aligns with the NDM framework, such that SIMS allows representation of actual crises and
provides immersive interface contributes to acute stress. With the adoption of multimedia technology, the audio-
visual effects and simulated tools of SIMS enhance the degree of realism. In addition, critiques and arguments
are allowed;   mode   of  interactions   is multi-way     and  without   hierarchy.  Moreover,   trainer can   assess trainee
actions  instantly  and   intervene  constructively.    Trainer  has  made    use of  the  logged   interactions in SIMS   to
discuss  and  elaborate   a  specific   concept  or  knowledge     among   trainees   during  debriefing,   which cannot   be
achieved without technology. This paper describes the procedure to use Bales' IPA for analyzing electronic
discussions,  and   the   analysis   demonstrates   that  the group   is clearly  task-based  and    discussions  are mainly
concerned with the exchange of information or opinion. With a closer inspection of data or discussion dialogues,
the group  is characteristically     by generally   positive  interpersonal   relations, with little antagonism   or  conflict
evident. The group functioned well in terms of task content and process. However, it should be acknowledged
that the data generated are limited in scope and a more detailed content analysis based on qualitatively derived
coded may be necessary to fully capture the detailed characters of the group.

References
Bales, R. F. (1950). Interaction process analysis. Cambridge, MA: Addison-Wesley.

© ISLS                                                                                                                    214
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                               Volume I: Long Papers

Borodzicz,    E., &   Haperen, K.    V.  (2002).  Individual and    group learning in crisis  simulations. Journal  of
           Contingencies and Crisis Management, 10(3), 139-147.
Borodzicz, E. P. (2005). Risk, Crisis and Security Management. West Sussex, England: John Wiley &Sons Ltd.
Chidambaram,      L., Bostrom, R.    P. & Wynne,     B. E.  (1991).  A Longitudinal   Study  of the Impact  of Group
           Decision Support Systems on Group Development. Journal of Management Information Systems, 7(3).
Cline, R. J. W. (1994). Groupthink and the Watergate cover up. The illusion of unanimity. In L. R. Frey (Ed.)
           Group Communication in Context: Studies of Natural Groups. New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Esser,  J. K.,  &  Lindoerfer, J.  L.   (1989). Groupthink   and the   space shuttle Challenger  accident:  Toward  a
           quantitative case analysis. Journal of Behavioral Decision Making, 2, 167­177.
Eyberg, S.M., & Robinson, E. (1983). Dyadic parent-child interaction coding system: A manual. Psychological
           Documents, 13, 2424, Ms. No. 2582.
Friedman, S. (2004), Learning to make more effective decisions: changing beliefs as a prelude to action, The
           Learning Organization,    11(2), 110 ­ 128.
Frey, L.R. (1999). The handbook of group communication theory and research. London. Sage.
Glaser, R. (1993). Groupthink Index, Organizational Design and Development, King of Prussia.
Gorse, C. & Emmitt (2003). Investigating interpersonal communication during construction progress meetings:
           Challenges and opportunities. Engineering,Construction and Architectural Management, 10(4), 234-44.
Gredler, M. E. (1992). Designing and evaluating games and simulations. London: Kogan Page.
Hiltz, S. R., Johnson, K., & Agle, G. (1978). Replicating Bales' problem solving experiments on a computerized
           conference: A pilot study (Research Report No. 8). Newark: New Jersey.
Hiltz, S. R. et Turoff, M. (1993). Social and Psychological Processes in Computerized Conferencing. In The
           Network Nation: Human Communication via Computer. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
Janis, I. L. (1972). Victims of Groupthink, Houghton-Mifflin, Boston.
Janis, I. L. (1982). Groupthink, 2nd ed. Houghton-Mifflin Company, Boston.
Klein, G. Orasanu, J. Calderwood, R. & Zsambok, C.E. (Eds.) (1993). Decision Making in Action: Models and
           Methods    (pp. 327-345). Norwood, NJ: Ablex.
Kleiboer, M. (1997). Simulation methodology for crisis management support JCCM 5(4): 198-206
Lombard, R. and Biglan, B. (2009). Implications of Role Play and Team Teaching as Strategies for Information
           Technology Pedagogy, Information Systems Education Journal, 7(20).
Miller, L. (2009). Psychological Principles and Practices for Superior Law Enforcement Leadership in Police
           Chief.
Miranda, S M. (1994). Avoidance of groupthink. Small Group Research, 25(1), 105-136.
McGrath, J.E. (1984). Groups: Interaction and Performance, Englewood Cliffs, N.J: Prentice-Hall.
Mohamed & Wiebe (1996). Toward a process theory of Groupthink. Small Group Research, 27(3), 416-431.
Orasanu, J. & Fischer, U. (1997). Finding decisions in natural environments: the view from the cockpit. In C.E.
           Zsambok & G. Klein (Eds.), Naturalistic Decision Making . Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Persico, D., Pozzi, F., & Sarti, L. (2008). Fostering collaboration in CSCL. In A. Cartelli, M. Palma (Eds.),
           Encyclopedia of information communication technology,       (pp. 335-340). Idea Group Reference.
Poole, M.S., & DeSanctis, G. (1989). Use of Group Decision Support Systems as an Appropriation Process,
           Proceedings of the Twenty-Second Annual Hawaii International Conference, 4, 149-157.
Rosander,   M.,   Stiwe, D., & Granström,    K.   (1998).  Bipolar  Groupthink: Assessing    groupthink tendencies  in
           authentic work groups. Scandinavian Journal of Psychology, 39, 81-92.
Roter, D.L. (1991). The Roter Method of Interaction Process Analysis (RIAS Manual).
Schank, R. (1997). Virtual Learning: A revolutionary approach to building a highly skilled workforce. New
           York: McGraw-Hill.
Schultz, B.C. (1999). Improving group communication performance, an overview of diagnosis and intervention.
           In: L.R. Frey. The handbook of group communication theory and research. London, Sage. 371-394.
Sniezek,   J. A., Wilkins, D.  C.,   and Wadlington,    P. (2001).  Advanced  Training   for Crisis Decision Making:
           Simulation,   Critiquing, and  Immersive     Interfaces, Proceedings  of  the 34th   Hawaii  International
           Conference on Systems Sciences, Maui, Hawaii. January 5-7, 2001.
Winn,   W.    (1993). A  constructivist  critique of the   assumptions of  instructional design. In  T. M.   Duffy, J.
           Lowyck, & D. H. Jonassen (Eds.), Designing environments for constructive learning, 189-212. Berlin:
           Springer-Verlag Conference on System Sciences ( HICSS-34), 3, 2001.
Zakay, D., & Wooler, S. (1984). Time pressure, training and decision effectiveness. Ergonomics, 27 (3), 273 -
           284.
Zigurs, I., Poole, M. S., & DeSanctis, G. (1988). A study of influence in computer mediated group decision
           making. MIS Quarterly, December, 625-644.

© ISLS                                                                                                             215
