CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                    Volume I: Long Papers

  Play and Augmented Reality in Learning Physics: The SPASES
                                                       Project
       Noel Enyedy, UCLA, Moore Hall 2323, 405 Hilgard Ave, LA , CA 90095, enyedy@gseis.ucla.edu
  Joshua A. Danish, Indiana University, 201 North Rose Ave, Bloomington, IN, 47405, jdanish@indiana.edu
          Girlie Delacruz, UCLA, Moore Hall, 405 Hilgard Ave, LA, CA 90095, gdelacruz@cse.ucla.edu
           Melissa Kumar, UCLA, Moore Hall, 405 Hilgard Ave, LA, CA 90095, mjdkumar@ucla.edu
        Sylvia Gentile, UCLA Lab School, 330 Charles Young Dr N, LA, CA, 90095, sgentile@ucla.edu

          Abstract: The Semiotic Pivots and Activity Spaces for Elementary Science (SPASES) Project
          was implemented as a proof of concept. Our goal was to demonstrate that with the right set of
          technological supports, young children can start their learning trajectory in science off on the
          right  foot by   engaging  in   rich  scientific investigations   into  complex   science   topics.  The
          SPASES      curriculum   was    successfully implemented     in   two   multi-age  classrooms     of   43
          students aged 6-8 years at a progressive elementary school in Los Angeles, CA. Pre/Post-test
          results show that these 6-8 year old students were able to develop a conceptual understanding
          of force,   net force, friction and  two-dimensional   motion     after participating  in the  SPASES
          curriculum which leveraged their prior experiences and ability to engage in embodied play as
          a form of scientific modeling.

Introduction
Early elementary science instruction has not kept pace with the developmental literature on young students'
cognitive competencies that can be used as building blocks for understanding science concepts (NRC, 2007;
Metz, 1995). In fact, young children can, under the right circumstances, do more and learn more complicated
ideas than we currently ask of them in early elementary science education.             One argument against `ambitious'
science   instruction  (1) is that   aspects   of classical experimental    design  such    as  controlling   variables  and
separating hypotheses from evidence have proven difficult for young children (Klahr, 2000; Schauble, 1996;
Siegler & Liebert, 1975). However, alternative studies have shown that asking students to produce and evaluate
models    of the real  world  to  help  them    generate   predictions can  make    it possible  for   them   to effectively
participate  in the process   of scientific  knowledge     production  and  learn the  content  being   studied  (Lehrer  &
Schauble, 2006). Models--and in the case of the SPASES project, hybrid models that leverage both computer
simulations   and  physical   embodiment     to   describe  Newtonian   force and   motion--are     a  critical  part of the
scientific inquiry  process   and can  help  students  coordinate   theory  with   evidence  (Schwarz    &  White,    2005).
However,     while modeling   is  within  reach   of early  elementary  students,   they  still do  not  progress   very far
without carefully scaffolded experiences (Lehrer & Schauble, 2000).
          In this paper we describe how first and second grade students learned about the physics of force and
motion through a series of technologically enhanced modeling activities.          At the heart of the project was a set of
augmented reality and motion-capture technologies called SPASES (Semiotic Pivots and Activity Spaces for
Elementary Science) that were used to leverage students' existing competencies in pretend play and transition
them   to formal   and  symbolic  models    of  force and   motion. Briefly  (a   fuller description  is provided     below),
cameras filmed the area at the front of the classroom.        The video feed was passed through object recognition
software that recognized and tracked (e.g., the position and orientation) a predefined set of geometric patterns.
Students held or wore these patterns as they moved about the room.            A projection of the SPASES simulations
software was displayed on an interactive whiteboard.          The simulation software showed the video feed of the
students moving around the room.          The   simulation  software   also displayed    an image   of the  object  that the
students were play-acting (e.g. a ball) superimposed by the computer software over their image in the video
feed.  The superimposed objects would move around the projection in real-time as the students themselves also
moved around the room.

Theoretical Framework and Design Principles

Young Children and the Concepts of Force and Motion
Infants develop an intuitive notion of objects, including their permanence and their properties. By preschool
these intuitions have developed into a sophisticated sense of mechanical causality and understanding of the links
between unseen causes and observable results (Bullock, Gelman, & Baillargeon, 1982; Yoachim & Meltzoff,
2003,).   Additionally,   pre-school children   can  distinguish between    distance,  speed,   and time  when    observing
objects in motion (Acredolo, Adams, & Schmid, 1984; Matsuda, 2001). Even so, some concepts of force and
motion are difficult for young students to grasp and these core but challenging concepts were the target of our
instructional intervention.

© ISLS                                                                                                                    216
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                             Volume I: Long Papers

         The first concept that SPASES focused on was force, including: the causal relationship between force
and motion; the difference between force and speed; the fact that once a force ended, the speed of an effected
object continued (i.e. inertia); and that impulse forces were an interaction between objects but not the objects
themselves.  These topics correspond to some of the key conceptual stumbling blocks to understanding force
and motion (Lehrer & Schauble, 1998).      Second, we focused on quantifying the relationship between force and
speed (i.e., net force).  Third, students investigated friction as a force. Finally, the curriculum focused on net
forces in two dimensions.

Description of the SPASES Environment and Technology
There were two key components to the SPASES system: 1) an augmented reality system that used computer
vision to record and display the students' physical actions and locations, and 2) software that translated this
motion into a physics engine and generated a response based on the sensing data.        The SPASES system used
commercially available, open source forms of motion tracking and pattern recognition technologies to create an
inexpensive alternative to virtual reality within the physical classroom (a 12' x 12' carpet at the front of the
classroom). Motion tracked by the system could be instantly imported into a computer simulation that allowed
students to model their understanding of force and motion and compare their predictions to simulated results.

       Figure 1. The Progression from Physical Objects and Motion to a Physics Microworld in SPASES.

         We will describe one example activity to illustrate how the SPASES technologies supported successful
modeling.  In this activity the students were asked to predict how a series of forces would influence the motion
of a ball. The students were split into two teams.   The first team decided which forces to initially apply to a ball.
The second team then chose the forces necessary to stop the ball on a given spot.      The target concept was net
force, addressing a common intuition that the ball would go in the direction of the last force. We expected that
students holding this intuition would predict that when given a force in one direction followed by a smaller force
in the opposite direction, the ball would reverse direction rather than slow down.
         Susie, "playing" the role of the ball, demonstrated her prediction by walking across the rug wearing the
symbol for a ball on a hat.   As she walked, she responded to the forces she encountered by speeding up. The
system tracked her movement in real time.      While the students saw her move across the rug, they could also see
a ball projected in   the  SPASES     microworld move   across   the whiteboard, mimicking her  movement   in the
physical  classroom.      As Susie-as-the-ball passed   arrow    symbols, her  peers were also  involved through
evaluating whether they agreed with her prediction.    Did she speed up and slow down in the right places? By the
correct amount?
         After Susie    finished, the students were   invited to debate her  embodied  prediction. They began by
discussing how many forces were in each location and what their impact would be on the ball.        Some students
expressed common, but incomplete or inaccurate, intuitions while others shared more idiosyncratic ideas.      The
students then  had    the chance  to compare   their embodied  predictions  with the microworld that mirrored the

© ISLS                                                                                                           217
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                     Volume I: Long Papers

choices they had made with the physical objects. Since the cards representing forces had already been laid on
the floor as part of their activity, and because the system recognized these patterns as forces that operate in
particular ways in the physics engine, all that the students had to do to see if they were right was reposition
Susie-as-the-ball back to the beginning and press a button to run the simulation.            Now the physics engine took
over Susie's ball and displayed what would happen for that same scenario in a Newtonian world using the same
space and representational system as the children's pretend play.       Ultimately, everyone was surprised when their
predictions did not quite match the computer simulation, and in the ensuing discussion students made explicit
some of their implicit thinking. This discussion provided a key building block for a series of activities that led to
the majority of the students in the group to build on what they already knew (or thought they knew) about how
things  move  and   to begin   to reason in  a more    normative manner     about   how  forces  contribute   to  an objects
motion.  Thus   the   students started the activity using   pretend  play   skills, but by   the end   of the activity were
engaging   in a discussion     about   modeling and    concepts  of  net force.     Through   this game-like    experience,
SPASES makes it possible for 6-8 year-old students to interrogate their own understanding and explore these
physics concepts.     We now turn to the broader theoretical framework that guided our design.

Design Principle #1: Play and Participatory Modeling
For young students in particular, it is important to develop modeling abilities by starting with what they can
already do.   This is a fundamental premise of constructivism--that students' existing schemata are modified,
added to, and reorganized, but not abandoned during the learning process (Smith, diSessa, & Roschelle, 1994).
An  understanding     of modeling    begins  with symbolism,     as  models  stand   for   something   else   and often use
collections of symbols to do so.     Importantly for the SPASES project, as early as pre-school, children are able to
distinguish toys,   pictures,  and video   images   as representations   of real    objects, and  can  use  representations
successfully to reason about the world (DeLoache & Burns, 1994).
         In addition to nascent symbolism, young students have another important competency at their disposal
for representation--one that is not traditionally thought of as a building block for science, but which we believe
can be effectively marshaled to that end--this competency is play.          Play, particularly embodied, socio-dramatic
play where children use their bodies and movements to enact a scene or situation, is an activity that young
children are competent at and familiar with from an early age, and which is closely tied to the development of
symbolic representation (Nicolopoulou, 1993; Piaget, 1952).
         The   defining  feature  of   pretend play is not  that it is  fun (although   it often  is). Rather,  its defining
feature is the  combination    of  an  imaginary  situation with   a set of  rules  (Vygotsky,    1978).   In pretend  play,
students are  able  to   engage   with quite complicated   rule  sets.  For example,    when   "playing   house,"   children
typically control their behavior based on a set of rules about what fathers do, what mothers do, and what babies
do. It is this focus on a set of rules that makes play a potential resource to help students learn science.       Scientific
phenomena are often described as a set of rules or laws--for example, Newton's three laws of force and motion.
         The rules in pretend play are what make play a valuable part of the learning process and a type of
informal inquiry (Youngquist & Pataray-Ching, 2004). In play children often attempt to govern their behavior
by following a set of rules that they do not yet fully understand. Additionally, through play, the rules that govern
a situation become visible and often explicit for children (Rosenberg, 1987).                Understanding the rules that
govern the world is one of the central aspects of scientific modeling.        For this reason, researchers have argued
that play is an early form of simulation (Bruner, 1986).
         To   incorporate  play   into the SPASES      curriculum,  we   engaged    students  in developing     and  refining
participatory  models    (Danish,  2009).  Participatory models     are  embodied,   dramatic    skits where    the students
enact a key principle of the system being studied, and leverage their body motion and position as a resource for
displaying their understanding.    Participatory modeling builds upon the kind of productive engagement that has
been seen in participatory simulations (Colella, 2000) while shifting the focus on rules to be more explicit and
reflective for the participants. By identifying these play activities as participatory modeling, we are highlighting
the fact that students were presenting, through embodied enactment, their model of how the ball would move.
         To   facilitate productive    modeling   throughout  the    curriculum,    SPASES    began    with   a first-person
experience--an    important    building  block  for young   students'    scientific  understanding--where       one  student
pretended to be the ball and used his/her own physical motion to predict and represent the motion of the ball. It
has been shown that when learning difficult science concepts, students benefit from examining the system from
multiple perspectives, particularly in computationally supported environments where the technology can help
students take   perspectives   beyond    their own  perceptual   capabilities   (c.f.,  White,   1993).    Like   traditional
computer simulations, SPASES offers the outside observer's perspective as well, where one can look down from
above and observe forces, friction and motion, running experiments and measuring the phenomena (see Figure
1). However, given the age of our students, SPASES began with a first-person experience and then transitioned
to an abstracted third person perspective.

© ISLS                                                                                                                   218
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                             Volume I: Long Papers

Design Principle #2: Progressive Symbolization
An additional intersection between play and scientific activity is the role of symbolism in play.       In play, the
child can choose which features of the situation are relevant and meaningful and which features can be ignored.
This is exactly what children have difficulty with, when engaging in formal scientific investigations. Young
students frequently insist on fidelity, especially visual fidelity, requiring that the model and representation look
the same (e.g., water is blue, leaves are green, etc.). For example, a child who pretends a blue cloth is a lake that
her toy boat must cross has somewhat rigidly used the similarity in color to assign a symbolic meaning to the
cloth. At the same time, she has flexibly chosen to ignore other aspects of the cloth, such as its square shape and
lack of wetness, and by not assigning them significance, making them semiotically invisible.         Thus, in play
students  are able  to fluently use symbolism   and  abstraction in ways that  remain  difficult for them    in other
contexts such as formal investigations.
          In  SPASES    the artwork   and  symbols  that populated the system  were  all invented   by the   students
themselves. Like previous work in progressive symbolization (Enyedy, 2005), the students refined their symbols
as a   group, determining   which  aspects  of the  phenomenon   would  be  captured in  a  symbol   and  iteratively
refining those symbols so that they would be effective in their future modeling activities.

Design Principle #3: Cycles of Activities and Semiotic Resources
After making embodied predictions, the students seamlessly transitioned into a physics microworld to compare
their embodied predictions to what would actually happen in a perfect Newtonian world. Students positioned
objects within SPASES using either the shared interactive whiteboard, or the augmented reality objects.         Like
prior effective microworlds (c.f., White, 1993), SPASES allowed students to see and manipulate a situation in
ways impossible in the real world (e.g., turning off friction). Asking students to place objects on the whiteboard
or in the physical classroom had the added benefit of creating public and open tools for discussion (Danish &
Enyedy, 2007; Hutchins, 1993).        This openness  was  an important feature of SPASES,      allowing   students to
interrogate their peer's choices or propose alternative predictions for what they thought would happen.
          However, students also engaged in non-computer-mediated experiences and investigations in the real
world, as well as play-acting without technology, or technology without pretend play and tracking.        This range
of activities was intended to connect student understandings at multiple levels of abstraction--from actual balls
they could touch to symbols about motion devoid of any reference to the objects doing the moving.

Methods

Participants
The SPASES curriculum was successfully implemented in two multi-age classrooms with students aged 6-8
years (x=7.1 years) at the UCLA Lab School (n=43).         The forty-three students were roughly even in terms of
first and second   grade students (Twenty   two 1st graders & twenty one 2nd  graders) and  in terms of   gender (21
boys & 22 girls). The ethnicity of the children roughly mirrors the ethnicity of the state of California (although
Latinos are under-represented in our sample); 53% Caucasian, 22% African American, 14% Latino and 11%
Asian.
          The curriculum lasted 15 weeks (2/18/09 through 6/8/09) and consisted of 26 one to two hour sessions.
The average length of a lesson was 90 minutes.      Four major topics were covered; force and speed (5 lessons),
net force in one dimension (11 lessons), friction (4 lessons), and two-dimensional motion (7 lessons).

Procedures
Students were individually interviewed before and after the unit with a protocol based in part on a modified
version   of  the Force  Concept  Inventory    (Hestenes, Wells, &  Swackhamer,    1992).   To document      learning
processes and how the curriculum was enacted by the teachers, we videotaped two case study groups (students
were organized into small groups of 8-9 students) and all whole-class activities.
          The pre- and post-test interviews were transcribed and coded for degree of conceptual understanding.
Reliability for each item was determined by calculating the Intra-class Correlation Coefficients (ICC) for each
item. Five of the 34 items were dropped because of low inter-rater reliability. An additional ten items were
dropped   due  to a   high proportion of  missing answers.   These  missing answers  were   due  in  part to student
attendance, but also due to variability in the way that various members of the research team administered the
interview, and the difficulty in parsing the continuous transcript into discrete answers. As a result, the final pre-
test and post-test scales were comprised of nineteen items. Reliability analyses were conducted on the pre-test
and post-test items to ensure that the data had a unidimensional structure. The Cronbach's alpha for the pre-test
scale was .34. The Cronbach's alpha for the post-test scale was .57. Two explanations may account for the low
alpha values. First, the sample size was small; with a larger sample reliability estimates are expected to be
higher. Also, our participants were young children who had very little knowledge of the concepts prior to the
study. For example one student thought acceleration was a type of vegetable.      Therefore, the low consistency

© ISLS                                                                                                            219
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                              Volume I: Long Papers

among   items  on the   pre-test may be  an artifact  of their age and understanding,   rather  than poor  inter-item
correlation. This assertion is supported by the dramatic increase in reliability after the intervention.

Results
Descriptive statistics were obtained on performance on the pre-test and post-test items. For the 43 students, the
average pre-test score was 5.42 (SD = 1.55) out of a possible of nineteen points. The average post-test score was
8.60 (SD = 2.07). A paired-samples t-test was conducted to compare pre-test scores and post-test scores. Post-
test scores were significantly higher than the pre-test scores, t(42)= 10.43, p < .005.       Correlational analyses
examined the relation between grade level, age at the start of the study, gender, pre-test and post-test scores.
Results indicate there is no correlation between any of the demographic variables and the assessment scores (see
Table 1).
         Scales were formed for our four content objectives: Force and speed, friction, net forces, and two-
dimensional motion. However, due to the small number of items per scale, the reliability of each scale was
extremely low. Therefore, in order to examine differences in content understanding on these four specific topics,
we have analyzed four exemplary questions. A Wilcoxon signed rank test was computed to examine changes in
scores on each of these items. The Wilcoxon signed rank sum test is a non-parametric version of a paired sample
t-test, which we chose to use because it requires fewer assumptions about the distribution of the data.
         For the topic of force and speed, we analyzed the question that asked students "What is a force?"       The
highest  value  was   given to   answers that  reflect the understanding    that either force  makes  something    go
proportionately faster or slower, or that forces change the speed of an object. Partial credit was given to answers
that describe forces as a verb (e.g., it makes something move) or as a noun (i.e, provides an example of a force).
The sign test indicated that 28 (65%) of the students received higher scores on the post-test than on the pre-test,
Z = 4.83, p < .005.
         For the topic of friction, we analyzed responses to a scenario that asked students to explain why a
moving soccer ball slows down when rolling on a grassy surface. The highest value was given to students who
described the resulting action and the mechanism of the friction (e.g., "Because those things sticking out of it, it
will hold them back, it will try to push the ball back and stop."). Partial credit was given to answers that either
described the  surface   quality of the  grass (e.g.,  "So that's why  it slows  on the  grass, because   it's a little
bumpy.") or connected the change in speed to friction or the grass (e.g., "Because it's really high friction right
here, that's where it stops.").  The sign test indicated that 16 (37%) of the students received higher scores on this
question during the post-test than on the pre-test, although the results were marginally significant, p = .052.

Table 1: Pearson correlations between background variables and test scores.

                          Pre-test          Post-test          Age at start         Grade             Gender
       Pre-test             1.00                .416**            0.26              0.21                 -0.14
                                               0.01               0.09              0.16                 0.38
       Post-test            .416**             1.00               0.11              0.19                 0.05
                            0.01                                  0.48              0.23                 0.75
   Age at start             0.26               0.11               1.00               .835**              0.15
                            0.09               0.48                                 0.00                 0.35
        Grade               0.21               0.19                .835**           1.00                 0.23
                            0.16               0.23               0.00                                   0.14
       Gender             -0.14                0.05               0.15              0.23                 1.00
                            0.38               0.75               0.35              0.14

         For the topic of net forces, we analyzed responses to the questions "What size force would you give to
stop a ball that got the large size force? Why would you do that?" The highest value was given to responses that
provided the correct amount of force (i.e., the same amount of force) and explained that an equal number of
forces must be applied in order to stop an object (e.g., "Same force hitting each other would probably just stop."
Partial credit was given to students who simply provided the solution but no explanation. The sign test indicated
that 14 (33%) of the students received higher scores on this question during the post-test than on the pre-test,
although the results were marginally significant, p = .12.
         For the topic of two-dimensional motion, we analyzed the response to the modified FCI item that asked
students to predict the path of a puck that received another hit (see Figure 2). The sign test indicated that 29
(67%) of the students got higher scores on the post-test than on the pre-test, Z = 4.67, p < .005.

© ISLS                                                                                                             220
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                  Volume I: Long Papers

                                Figure 2. Modified FCI Question about 2-D Motion.

          In sum, students demonstrated significant improvement on all of the key measures, including, the fact
that 91% of the students showed a pre- to post-test gain (Z = 5.71, p < .005).

Conclusion
SPASES is an important proof of concept project. We aimed to demonstrate that young children can begin their
learning trajectory in science off on the right foot--both in terms of the complexity of science content and the
type   of ambitious   science   instruction  that will  lead to  generative    inquiry skills and    a robust  scientific
epistemology.   Pre/Post-test results show that these 6-8 year old students were able to develop a conceptual
understanding of speed, force, friction and two-dimensional motion.
          What we have shown here is that the students are able, with the SPASES technology and activities to
learn force and motion concepts at an earlier age than thought possible.
          We were pleased to see that neither gender nor age were correlated to post-test performance.         We were
initially concerned that the SPASES environment might appeal more to and therefore provide a greater benefit
for boys.  The environment overlaps with many of the stereotypical interests and styles of boys'--it involves a
mechanical   topic,   involves  physical   activity, and heavily    depends on  computer     simulations  and  gaming.
Nevertheless, from our videotapes we saw that girls were just as deeply engaged during the activities as boys
and contributed substantially, if not to a greater extent, during the whole-class and small group discussions.
          We were particularly surprised by two of our findings. While our overall results were encouraging, the
sub-topic results showed some unevenness in student learning.       We had relatively small gains in students' ability
to quantify the relationship between speed and distance and their understanding of friction.         In contrast, we had
relatively large gains in students understanding of two-dimensional motion, a topic that has proven difficult for
much older students.
          With regards to friction, much of the students' difficulty can be traced back to two factors.          First,
students came in with more experience with friction both in and out of the classroom, and thus scored higher on
the pre-test on these items.    Second, students' intuitions conflicted with our example of ice as a low friction
environment.  As stated above in our third design principle, we were committed to having some sort of physical
and familiar environment for students to be able to explore.         Given this commitment, we had relatively few
inexpensive options of familiar non-friction/low friction environments--air hockey tables and ice.          Neither was
ideal in that both introduced new mechanisms (an upward force and lubrication respectively).           We choose ice on
the assessment  (and   oiled surfaces   as  an alternate to  ice in the activities) because   the net  balance between
gravity and the upward air pressure in the hockey table seemed to necessitate a discussion of gravity--a topic
that was not covered by our curriculum.      Perhaps because our dramatic play activities were kinesthetic in nature,
we found that a large number of students were bringing in their memories of falling on ice, and the sensation of
their legs speeding up as they fell.    As a result, students inferred that in no/low friction environments, objects
sped up rather than maintained their inertia.        This interpretation of their past experience interacted with our
activities in unanticipated ways, contributing to our weaker results on this topic.
          The results for two-dimensional motion, however, surprised us for the opposite reason.            Given how
entrenched the intuition is that an object will travel in the direction of its last hit, and the difficulty that older
students have shown on this FCI assessment item, we had modest expectations for this topic in our curriculum.
While the majority of our students at the time of the post-test were limited to a qualitative sense of the direction
and speed of the new vector, we were encouraged that our results were similar to the results obtained by White's
(1993)  seventh grade   students  after  the Thinker   Tools software   and curriculum.     Based on our preliminary
analysis of the video records, we attribute the students' success in this area to the additional semiotic resources
the students  had  in  the augmented    reality environment.     Further,  the ways    in which   embodied  action was
annotated and formalized helped to create what others have called semiotic fusion (Nemirovsky, 2003), liminal
spaces (Ochs, Gonzales, & Jacoby, 1996) and conceptual blends (Fauconnier & Turner, 1998).                  In our case,
embodied   actions    laminated with symbol    systems   invented   by the students  were   used  as a  key resource to
ground abstract aspects of the students' models of force and motion. This line of reasoning warrants future

© ISLS                                                                                                               221
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                    Volume I: Long Papers

study, as it is at the heart of the question of why the SPASES environment worked and would help determine
what might generalize from this study to other studies and other computer-mediated environments.

Endnotes
(1)  We have adapted the term `ambitious math instruction' (Lampert, Beasley, Ghousseini, Kazemi, & Franke, 2010)
     which was used to refer to instruction that simultaneously targets conceptual understanding, procedural fluency and
     productive dispositions towards the domain.

References
Acredolo,   C., Adams,   A.,   &  Schmid,    J. (1984).  On   the  understanding    of  the relationships  between  speed,
         duration, and distance. Child Development, 55, 2151-2159.
Bruner, J. (1986). Actual Minds, Possible Worlds. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.
Bullock, M., Gelman, R., & Baillargeon, R. (1982). The development of causal reasoning. In W. J. Friedman
         (Ed.), The developmental psychology of time. New York: Academic Press.
Colella, V. (2000). Participatory simulations: Building collaborative understanding through immersive dynamic
         modeling. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 9(4), 471-500.
Council, N. R. (2007). Taking Science to School: Learning and Teaching Science in Grades K-8. Washington,
         DC: National Academies Press.
Danish,   J.   A.   (2009).   BeeSign:    A  computationally-mediated        intervention   to   examine     K-1  students'
         representational     activities in the  context  of  teaching complex      systems  concepts.   Unpublished   PhD
         thesis, University of California.
Danish,  J.  and   Enyedy,    N. (2007).    Remember,     We   Have    to do    all the  Parts  of the   Rose:   Negotiated
         Representational Mediators in a K-1 Science Classroom. Science Education 91:1-35.
DeLoache,    J. S., &   Burns, N.  M.    (1994).   Early understanding    of the    representational function  of pictures.
         Cognition, 2(52), 83-110.
Enyedy, N. (2005). Inventing Mapping: Creating cultural forms to solve collective problems. Cognition and
         Instruction 23(4), 427 - 466.
Fauconnier, G., & Turner, M. (1998). Conceptual integration networks. Cognitive Science, 22(2), 133-187.
Hestenes, D., Wells, M., & Swackhamer, G. (1992). Force concept inventory.
Hutchins,   E.  (1993).  Learning    to  Navigate.   In  S.   Chaiklin &     J. Lave    (Eds.), Understanding     Practice:
         Perspectives on Activity and Context (pp. 35-63). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Klahr, D. (2000). Exploring science: The cognition and development of discovery processes. Cambridge, MA:
         MIT Press.
Lampert,  M.,   Beasley,  H.,  Ghousseini,   H.,   Kazemi,    E., & Franke,  M.     (2010). Using  designed    instructional
         activities to enable novices to manage ambitious mathematics teaching. Instructional Explanations in
         the Disciplines, 129-141.
Lehrer, R., & Schauble, L. (1998). Reasoning about structure and function: Children's conceptions of gears.
         Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 31(1), 3-25.
Lehrer, R., & Schauble, L. (2000). Inventing data structures for representational purposes:              Elementary grade
         students' classification models. Mathematical Thinking and Learning, 2, 49-72.
Lehrer, R., & Schauble, L. (2006). Scientific thinking and science literacy. In R. W. Damon, K. Lerner, A.
         Renninger    &  I. E. Sigel (Eds.),    Handbook    of child psychology,     6th edition,  (vol. 4). Hoboken,   NJ:
         Wiley.
Matsuda,  F.    (2001). Development      of  concepts    of interrelationships   among   duration,   distance, and  speed.
         International Journal of Behavioral Development, 25, 466-480.
Metz, K. E. (1995). Reassessment of Developmental Constraints on Children's Science Instruction. Review of
         Educational Research, 65(2), 93-127.
Nemirovsky,     R.    (2003).  Three     Conjectures  concerning     the  Relationship      between   Body    Activity and
         Understanding Mathematics. Paper presented at the PME 27, Honolulu, Hawai-I.
Nicolopoulou, A. (1993). Play, cognitive development, and the social world: Piaget, Vygotsky, and beyond.
         Human Development 36(1), 1-23.
Ochs, E., Gonzales, P., & Jacoby, S. (1996). "When I come down, I'm in a domain state": Grammar and Graphic
         Representation in the Interpretive Activity of Physicists. In E. Ochs, E. A. Schegloff & S. Thompson
         (Eds.), Interaction and Grammar (pp. 328-369). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Piaget, J. (1952). Play, dreams and imitation in childhood. New York, NY, US: W. W. Norton & Co, Inc.
Rosenberg, H. S. (1987). Creative Drama and Imagination. New York, NY: Holt, Rinehart & Winston.
Schauble,   L.  (1996). The    development      of scientific reasoning   in knowledge-rich      contexts.   Developmental
         Psychology, 32(1), 102-119.
Schwarz, C., & White, B. (2005). Meta-modeling knowledge: Developing students' understanding of scientific
         modeling. Cognition and Instruction, 23(2), 165-205.

© ISLS                                                                                                                   222
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                            Volume I: Long Papers

Siegler, R. S., & Liebert, R. M. (1975). Acquisition of formal experiment. Developmental Psychology, 11, 401-
         412.
Smith, J. P., diSessa, A. A., & Roschelle, J. (1994). Misconceptions reconceived: A constructivist analysis of
         knowledge in transition. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 3(2), 115­163-115­163.
Vygotsky,  L. S. (1978).   Mind  in  society : the development  of higher psychological processes. Cambridge:
         Harvard University Press.
White,  B. (1993).    Thinker tools: Causal  models, conceptual change, and  science education. Cognition and
         Instruction, 10(1), 1-100.
Yoachim, C. M., & Meltzoff, A. N. (2003, October). Cause and effect in the mind of the preschool child. Paper
         presented at the biennial meeting of the Cognitive Development Society.
Youngquist, J., & Pataray-Ching, J. (2004). Revisiting "Play": Analyzing and Articulating Acts of Inquiry Early
         Childhood Education Journal     31, 171-178.

© ISLS                                                                                                          223
