CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                     Volume I: Long Papers

           Group Sense Making of Multiple Sources in a Hypertext
                                                    Environment
   Sarah A. Sullivan, Katherine D. Knight, Sadhana Puntambekar, Department of Educational Psychology,
                                          University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI
              Email: sasullivan2@wisc.edu, kknight@wisc.edu, puntambekar@education.wisc.edu

         Abstract:    Collaboration    is important    for learning  science    through  inquiry.  Hypertext     and
         hypermedia     environments     are increasingly     being used  to   help support   inquiry   and   enable
         students to build background conceptual knowledge. Previous research has found that students
         have   difficulty   reading   multiple   texts  in   groups,  so   this   study  explored   collaborative
         discussion of multiple sources in a hypertext system after students read individually. Results
         indicated    that the group   that  engaged    most  frequently    in monitoring  the understanding        of
         group members, evaluating ideas and generating questions to share with the class developed
         the  most    sophisticated    scientific   conceptions.  Simply    navigating    the  hypertext      system
         effectively   and  engaging   in  elaborated   science  reasoning     was not  sufficient for  students    to
         develop sophisticated conceptual understandings, reiterating the importance of helping young
         learners   to  actively    reflect  on   their understanding       and  question   development       during
         collaboration.

Introduction
Inquiry-based learning is an increasingly important part of many science classrooms. Learning science through
inquiry requires collaboration to make sense of the multiple forms of information that students are asked to
reason about and integrate in order to learn about scientific concepts (NRC, 1996; Olson & Loucks-Horsley,
2000; Varelas & Pappas, 2006). One resource that students are often asked to make sense of is scientific texts,
especially  digital   text  in the    form   of  hypertext    and   hypermedia     systems.   Hypertext   and     hypermedia
environments can be an effective way to present multiple sources of information as well as support learning by
making relationships among information sources visible through the structure of the system (e.g., Rouet, Potelle,
& Goumi, 2005; Gerjets, Scheiter, Opfermann, Hesse, & Eysink, 2009). Including digital texts as part of the
inquiry process can help students build the background conceptual knowledge that they need to supplement their
in-the-moment experience with an understanding of the concepts underlying their activities. Students in inquiry
classrooms   are frequently    required   to reason    about  multiple   texts. But  even   though   reading     is largely  an
individual activity,  students  are   often  asked  to  read  and make   sense   of these  multiple  texts    in collaborative
groups.  Previous   studies  that have   investigated   groups   collaboratively   reading multiple     texts have   identified
problems   with  this  arrangement,    such  as   a lack   of active  engagement     by  the  entire group    with   the texts
(Schwarz, 2003) and a lack of engagement in evaluation of the text resources and text content while reading
collaboratively (Wiley & Bailey, 2006). However, since collaboration is an essential part of learning science
through  inquiry,   more   research is needed    on how    students  can  productively   work  together   to   actively  make
sense of multiple textual sources to support their inquiry activities.
         Facilitating   active   engagement      when   thinking    about   scientific   concepts    is important      because
relationships are very often complex, and learners may have difficulty understanding conceptual relationships.
For example, common to the findings of researchers investigating momentum and impulse is that students lack a
coherent  understanding     of momentum,      confuse   the   scientific terms   of  momentum      and  impulse     with  their
meanings   in everyday     language,   and   are very   poor  at making   causal   connections  between       momentum    and
impulse (e.g., Bryce & MacMillan, 2009; Lawson & McDermott, 1987). A recent review by Nussbaum (2008)
concluded that collaborative group discourse can enhance conceptual understanding of content when diverse
student views of conceptual principles are considered and evaluated and group members model elaborative and
metacognitive strategies. Additionally, research has found that groups in which students facilitated members'
comprehension of content by asking for explanations and challenging each other's conceptual understanding
showed   greater  learning  gains   than  groups  that  only  engaged    in explanation   construction   (e.g.,  Asterhan,   &
Schwarz, 2009).
         One potential solution to help facilitate engagement with texts and still allow time for the collaborative
discussion important to inquiry is to have students read the texts individually and then come together as a group
to make sense of what each student has learned. In a previous study (Smith, Sullivan, & Puntambekar, 2009), we
found that students who navigated in a hypertext environment individually and then came together to discuss
were less off-topic and shared more information about science concepts than students who discussed content
while  they   were    navigating  as  a   group.  Therefore,     we  conducted     this study  to  examine       how   students
collaboratively made sense of information presented in multiple documents in the hypertext system that they had
read   individually to prepare    for their  hands-on   inquiry   exploration.   Our goal  was  to   examine     the   kinds of

© ISLS                                                                                                                       224
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                             Volume I: Long Papers

discourse that seemed to help students to successfully develop a more sophisticated understanding of physics
concepts  and what    kinds of  support could be   provided  either by the system   or the teacher to improve  their
discourse and learning.

Methods
The  data  were  collected   in an 8th  grade science    classroom  in which  students  used the   hypertext system
CoMPASS (Puntambekar, 2006) as part of a science unit on Forces and Motion (see Figure 1). Students used
CoMPASS to learn about concepts related to forces and motion in order to prepare for five design explorations
throughout the unit. The goal of the unit is to design roller coasters and other rides for an amusement park. Prior
to the Forces and Motion unit, students completed a unit on Work and Energy, in which they also used the
hypertext system CoMPASS. Thus this was at least students' eighth experience using the CoMPASS system,
and they were therefore familiar with its navigation and layout. For this study, students navigated CoMPASS
individually for approximately 30 minutes to research concepts for the Stop the Car exploration, which required
them   to figure out  how  to stop their  roller coaster car safely by  applying  concepts such   as momentum   and
impulse to their design. For this exploration, students should have focused on concepts within the topic of linear
motion. After navigating individually, students were given approximately 10 minutes to meet in their groups and
discuss what they had learned about the physics concepts for their exploration. The class in which data were
collected consisted of five groups with three students in each group. The teacher determined group composition
based on students she felt could collaborate productively. Groups were named after elements: Helium, Oxygen,
Argon, Sodium, and Zinc, and consisted of both boys and girls. In addition to discussing how concepts would
inform the design for their hands-on exploration, another group goal was to develop questions about concepts
they didn't understand in order to prepare for a whole class discussion.
          The CoMPASS hypertext system was developed as part of a design-based physics curriculum in which
students  engage  in  design  exploration challenges   and investigations. CoMPASS      provides  navigable  concept
maps that were designed by physics experts to mirror the conceptual structure in physics, affording students a
visual representation to help them gain a rich understanding of concepts and their numerous relationships. The
CoMPASS system provides two representations: a navigable concept map and text that describes the concepts.
The concept that the student selects to read about becomes the center (focal) point of the map and the other
concepts move accordingly based on the strength of their relationship to the center concept.

  Figure 1. Screenshot of the CoMPASS Page for the Concept of Momentum in the Topic of Linear Motion.

Data Sources and Analysis
For this  study, we   used  multiple sources  of  data from  five  groups  of 8th grade students.  We  looked at (i)
students' individual initial conceptions of the concept of impulse using a pretest (described below) that was
given before they began the unit, (ii) patterns of navigation exhibited by each of the group members while using
CoMPASS, (iii) group audio of students' dialogue as they attempted to make sense of the information from the
multiple texts in CoMPASS, and (iv) students' conceptions of impulse at the end of the unit after the Stop the
Car exploration using the same question as the pretest.

Pre and Posttest Conceptions of Impulse
As part of the pre/posttest, students were given an open-ended essay question about impulse. The purpose of the
question was to elicit students' initial conceptions about impulse and to see whether they developed a more

© ISLS                                                                                                            225
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                    Volume I: Long Papers

sophisticated understanding of impulse throughout the unit. Students were required to write a short paragraph
addressing the following scenario:

         Imagine throwing two identical eggs with the same amount of force. The first egg is thrown
         against a cement wall. The second egg is thrown into a deep pile of hay. The egg thrown into
         the wall breaks, but the egg thrown into the pile of hay does not. Please use science concepts
         impulse and momentum to explain the different results.

         Pre and   post-test  responses   were  scored    using  a  0 to  5  point scale.  Categories   were   drawn from
research on students' understanding of momentum and impulse (e.g., Bryce & MacMillan, 2009; Lawson &
McDermott,   1987)    that  examined   common     initial conceptions,   especially  the  difficulty with  which   students
make causal connections between momentum and impulse. The increasing scale represents student responses
that suggest differential    understanding   beginning    with  everyday    language, inclusion  of   appropriate  science
concepts, recognition     of a  causal relationship,   and    finally the   identification of  a mechanism      within  the
relationship. For example, a level-1 response would be, "The egg landing in the hay has soft impact compared to
the one thrown into the cement wall." Whereas a level-5 response would be exemplified by:

         Both eggs have the same mass and velocity, so they have the same momentum. But, since the
         cement wall has very little give, the egg hits it with a greater force because the time isn't
         spread out. But the egg which hits the hay doesn't break because although both eggs hit with
         the same impulse, the hay extends the time it takes for the egg to stop which decreases the
         force that it hits with.

         We combined the scores for all three of the group members in order to obtain a score that represented
the level of understanding of impulse for the group. We did this because we wanted to focus on development of
understanding by the group as a whole. A group's score on the question could range from 0 to 15. Using these
scores we broke the groups down by their level of understanding of impulse: Low 0 to 5, Medium 6 to 10, and
High 11 to 15 points.

CoMPASS Navigation
Computer log files were used to look at students' navigation behavior, while they used CoMPASS to conduct
research for their hands-on exploration, in order to examine whether navigation patterns were related to group
dialogue and understanding of impulse. The log files recorded in chronological order the topics and concepts
that students visited and the time spent on each. In order to understand student navigation in relation to the goal
of  the hands-on   exploration,   log  files  for the  Stop    the Car   exploration  were    analyzed    using Pathfinder
(Schvaneveldt, 1990). Pathfinder is a graph theoretic technique used to create network representations consisting
of  nodes and   links  that  characterize a   group's  navigation     patterns in  CoMPASS,      allowing   us  to look at
similarities and differences in navigation paths and whether students missed key information. The graphics of
the  navigation patterns   (see Figure 2)  show   the  number    of times   students  "navigated   to"  a concept  and  the
number of times students "navigated from" a concept and from which concepts students navigated to others. For
example [3:2] means that a student "went to" a concept three times and "went from" that concept to another
concept two times. Navigation patterns make visible the choices that a reader makes in following links, and help
us  to  understand    the process with which    a  reader  constructs    the meaning   of  the text   (Bolter,  1998). We
combined   the  navigation   patterns of  all three of    the members    in  each  group  in order   to obtain  a complete
representation of all concepts visited by students in the groups.

Analysis of Student Discourse
We transcribed the audio of the student discourse during the time that students came together in their small
groups to discuss what they had learned on CoMPASS to help them with their Stop the Car exploration. We
were interested in understanding the types of student discourse that helped students to actively think about their
understandings of the science concepts in order to prepare them for their whole class discussion and hands-on
exploration. Total audio data consisted of approximately one hour of audio and 33 pages of transcripts. A coding
rubric was developed based on prior work examining students' collaborative talk when using CoMPASS in the
classroom (e.g., Bopardikar, Sullivan, & Puntambekar, 2009). A process of axial coding (Strauss & Corbin,
1998) was then employed whereby the existing coding rubric was applied to the transcripts and modified based
on the types of discourse that emerged from the initial analysis of the transcripts, resulting in eight codes (see
Table 1).
         We coded the transcripts at the utterance level, which we defined as an individual turn at talk by a
student. All groups had the same amount of time to discuss the content (10 minutes), but varied in the degree to
which they were on task and focused on physics ideas. As a result, transcripts were reviewed to identify the

© ISLS                                                                                                                  226
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                            Volume I: Long Papers

areas in which students were discussing physics concepts, and only these sections of the transcripts were coded.
Utterances could be multiply coded, and utterances that could not be assigned a code were eliminated. The first
two authors applied the coding rubric to 20% of the transcripts and established an interrater reliability of 90%.
Disagreements     were   resolved  through  discussion.     The  first   author     coded   the   remaining  transcripts.       We         then
counted the number of times that the various types of talk were coded for each group.

Table 1: Codes used for student discourse.

 Code:                       Definition:                                             Examples:
  SE: Surface Science        Stating a definition, formula, or science idea without   "It says...well it said something...about
  Explanations               elaborated explanation. This includes just reading       ((reading)) law of conservation states that total
                             from notes.                                              momentum is the same before and after a
                                                                                      collision."
  ER: Elaborated Science     Going beyond stating a definition or formula to          "That there's a...there's a -- there isn't velocity,
  Reasoning                  elaborately explain ideas or concepts with discourse     so there shouldn't be any momentum."
                             related to interpretation, analysis, evaluation,
                             reasoning, and problem-solving skills employed to
                             think through science ideas and concepts. For            "Yeah 'cause the oil...like, [you] grease it up
                             example, using concrete explanations or examples to      before and... it reduces the friction."
                             better understand the abstract concepts in
                             CoMPASS.
  SM: Science                Making an incorrect statement about science              "If you have impulse, you have momentum. If
  Misconceptions             concepts.                                                you don't have impulse, you don't have
                                                                                      momentum."
  QR: Question Raising       Questions raised by group members about science          "Would friction cause brownies to get stuck to a
                             concepts for group discussion.                           pan?"
  RC: Reference to           Reference to specific content about concepts coming      "It says online -- er, on the thing that it was a
  Information from           from CoMPASS and discussion of what information          force."
  CoMPASS                    was read or found by group members.
                                                                                      "Or wha -- like...yeah, did anybody look up
                                                                                      anything on Newton's laws? I didn't."
  RE: Reference to Current   Reference to the exploration for which they are          "That would help us with the stop the car
  Exploration                using CoMPASS to investigate concepts.                   exploration because it's like..."
  CD: Ideas for Class        Reference to ideas or questions for class discussion.    "Um, maybe we can do that in the class
  Discussion                                                                          discussion when ..."
  GM: Group meaning          Recognizing a personal lack of understanding about       "I don't understand how friction can be a force."
  making processes           an idea or concept and sharing this with the group.

                             Checking the understanding of other group                "Okay. Do you understand it now [S3]?"
                             members.
                                                                                      "But it couldn't push it by itself."
                             Challenging a science idea articulated by another
                             student.

Results
We will first address the changes in students' conceptions of impulse from the pre to the posttest by looking at
the group score on the impulse question. We will then attempt to relate the change, or lack of, in students'
understanding of impulse to their discourse when discussing in their small groups what they had learned from
the multiple texts in CoMPASS while navigating individually.

Prior Knowledge and Final Conceptions of Impulse
Groups' scores on the impulse question could range from 0 to 15. We will discuss groups by their level of
understanding    of   impulse: Low     0 to 5, Medium       6 to 10,          and High 11     to  15. In  terms of       students'      prior
conceptions    of  impulse,    the Helium    and  Oxygen        groups         both  started     out  at a  low  level        conceptual
understanding. The Sodium, Zinc, and Argon groups all started out with a middle level conception of impulse
(see Table 2).
         The only group in which all students achieved a high level of understanding of impulse on the posttest
was the Helium group. In fact, all students in this group achieved a level 5 score on their responses to the
impulse  question,    which  was   the   highest score      possible.    The      Oxygen    group     remained  at      a  low   level      of
understanding, and Sodium, Zinc, and Argon all remained at a middle level conception of impulse, with only a
slight increase or decrease in score for these four groups (see Table 2). Only one student in each of these four
groups made learning gains from pre to posttest, and the other two group members either made no gain or
decreased in score.

© ISLS                                                                                                                                     227
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                            Volume I: Long Papers

Table 2: Group totals for students' pre and posttest conceptions of impulse.

                                  Group            Pre Total   Post Total
                                  Helium           4           15
                                  Oxygen           2           5
                                  Argon            10          8
                                  Sodium           8           9
                                  Zinc             8           9

Group Navigation Patterns
The    differences in  navigation patterns among  the groups can be illustrated    by looking at the graphics
representing navigation patterns of students in the groups (see Figure 2).

  Figure 2. Combined Navigation Patterns for Group Members in Helium, Oxygen, Sodium, Zinc and Argon
                                                   Groups.

© ISLS                                                                                                          228
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                 Volume I: Long Papers

           These graphics represent all of the different texts about various concepts that groups visited and which,
therefore,  had the   potential  to be brought   up in the  group    discussion. For members    of  the Helium    group,
navigation within the topic of linear motion primarily focused on impulse and transitions between impulse and
momentum. Darker lines in the graphics indicate multiple transitions among concepts. Impulse and momentum
are two highly related concepts that students needed to understand and be able to apply to the design for their
Stop   the Car  exploration   (see  Figure 2). In contrast,   members  of  the   Oxygen  group   did not   focus on  any
particular concepts and visited most of the concepts in linear motion only one time, rather than focusing on
concepts they needed to understand to complete the exploration (see Figure 2). Since these graphics represent
combined navigation patterns of all students in a group, this means that only one member of Oxygen visited the
concepts   of momentum       and impulse,   which   were   essential concepts  for their exploration.   The  navigation
patterns for members of the other three groups, Sodium, Zinc and Argon, showed varying degrees of focus on
the concepts    that  were   important  for  the  challenge,  including   momentum      and   impulse  (see  Figure   2).
Nevertheless,   none   of these  three  groups'  navigation   behaviors  showed    only  one  visit to the  concepts  of
momentum and impulse, as did that of the Oxygen group.

Group Discourse
As explained above, there were both boys and girls in each group of three students, and the goal of meeting in
small  groups  was    to discuss how   concepts  informed   students'  design  for their hands-on    exploration and  to
develop    questions  about   concepts  that they   didn't understand   for a    whole  class discussion.   There  were
differences in the types of talk that occurred in each of the groups (see Figure 3).

                 Figure 3. Number of Occurrences of Different Discourse Types in Each Group.

           Figure 3 represents the number of utterances that were coded with each of the eight identified discourse
types for each of the five groups. Viewing the comparison of the groups' discourse in this way reveals some
interesting and significant   patterns. In summary,    the Helium    group  members    differed from   the other groups
primarily in their much more frequent use of group meaning making discourse (GM) and in that they were the
only group to develop questions for the whole class discussion (CD). To reiterate, the group meaning making
code   (GM)   focused  on  recognizing  one's  own  lack   of understanding   of a concept   and sharing   this with  the
group, checking the understanding of other group members and challenging science ideas articulated by other
students. The Argon, Sodium and Zinc groups all had various positive exchanges, such as elaborated science
reasoning (ER), talking about the application of concepts to the current exploration (RE), and question raising
(QR).  Nevertheless,     the members    of these  groups   lacked discourse   in  which  they   identified any   lack of
understanding in themselves or other group members, challenged ideas, or identified specific questions to raise
in their whole class discussion. The Oxygen group only shared the information that they read on CoMPASS at a
surface level (SE) without elaborating on the science and had many misconceptions (SM) without being aware
of any lack of understanding.

© ISLS                                                                                                                229
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                   Volume I: Long Papers

Discussion
In  this study, we    examined  how    students  collaboratively   made   sense  of  information    presented     in multiple
documents in a hypertext system to learn about science concepts in preparation for their hands-on inquiry. Our
goal   was  to  examine   the  kinds of   discourse  that   appeared  to  help students    develop  a  more    sophisticated
understanding   of   physics  concepts   and determine    what  kinds  of support    could  be provided   to   improve   their
discourse and learning.
          The many instances of group meaning making (GM) by the Helium group, as evidenced by challenges
to one another's ideas as well as an awareness of members' incomplete understanding of concepts in order to
develop questions for the class discussion (CD), seemed to support the development of their conceptions of
impulse. This outcome aligns with the findings of Asterhan & Schwarz (2009), in that students in the group that
challenged and questioned their conceptual understandings showed greater learning gains than groups that only
engaged   in  explanation  construction.    Further, this group   also navigated     among  goal-related   concepts     in the
hypertext system (see Figure 2). As described above, the Helium group was also the only group to move from a
low to a high level conception of impulse. In fact, all three group members received the maximum score on the
impulse question. Conversely, the Argon, Sodium and Zinc groups all remained at a middle level understanding
of impulse, despite the fact that these three groups navigated to goal-related concepts (see Figure 2), which may
have been facilitated by the representation of the relationships among concepts made visible by the concept map
(Rouet, Potelle, & Goumi, 2005; Gerjets, Scheiter, Opfermann, Hesse, & Eysink, 2009). Additionally, these
students  engaged    in elaborated   science reasoning    (ER)  throughout   their   group  conversations.   However,      our
results indicate that although students from these three groups navigated to goal-relevant concepts and engaged
in elaborated   science   reasoning, their  discourse  showed    a lack   of evaluation of   understanding     and   question
development     by  the group  and   did not appear    to help  students  form a   more   sophisticated   understanding     of
impulse.   In  contrast to the  other  groups,   the Oxygen     group  started out   with   and  remained  at   a low   level
conception of impulse. The Oxygen group did not focus on goal-related concepts (see Figure 2) during their
navigation and group members focused primarily on reporting surface information (SE) from individual texts in
the system.    This  group did  not  elaborate   on  conceptual  relationships   or  evaluate   alternate conceptions      and
misconceptions about the concepts. Therefore, according to the review of effective collaboration by Nussbaum
(2008),  it is  not surprising  that this group    did not  make   substantial learning    gains  given   that they   did  not
evaluate student ideas and used few elaborative and metacognitive strategies. Although we only had five groups,
and thus cannot make causal claims, the results indicate that conceptual understanding may be facilitated by
helping students to not only just talk science but also by supporting them in helping each other to evaluate
understandings and collaboratively develop questions with an explicit connection to the goal.

Implications for Practice
The results of this study suggest that the ability to evaluate what they knew and use metacognitive processes to
assess conceptual understandings before going into the hands-on exploration seemed to help students develop a
more advanced conception of impulse. Although the structure of the hypertext environment may have helped
students to be aware of conceptual relationships, most groups could have benefited from support of evaluative
and  metacognitive    monitoring     strategies to  help  them   think about   which   concepts    they   did  and   did   not
understand. This finding is consistent with that of Wiley and Bailey (2006) in that most groups exhibited a lack
of engagement in evaluation of the text content. Mercer and Littleton (2007) raise a salient point that students
often "work in groups but not as groups" (p. 26), emphasizing that students are focused on individual activities
rather than working together on the task at hand. They further add that students are seldom taught how to engage
in productive discourse and are often asked to "discuss this in your group" (p. 67). According to them, students
need to be supported for productive collaboration. One way to support this productive discourse may be through
prompts in the hypertext or hypermedia system, another through norms for discourse, such as those suggested
by  Mercer     and  Littleton, and   third,  through   teacher  support   of  collaboration    by  prompting      evaluation,
monitoring,    elaboration and  question    development     in group  discourse. When      integrating multiple   digital   or
traditional text-based resources into their inquiry units, teachers should focus not only on helping students to
explain  what   they  have  learned  but  also  place  just as  much   emphasis  on   supporting   students    to help  them
develop questions about what they don't understand.
          Although having students read individually before meeting with their groups may facilitate increased
discussion   of scientific concepts  (e.g.,  Smith,  Sullivan,  &  Puntambekar,      2009), students   attempting    to make
sense  of   multiple  documents   while   collaboratively   conducting    scientific inquiry   need help   to  monitor     and
evaluate their understanding of the text content. They also need support to actively challenge others' ideas and
conceptions, and use metacognitive strategies to successfully identify questions that can then be shared with the
class as part of the inquiry process. While our coding rubric allowed us to identify that these kinds of group
meaning     making    and  question  development     processes   appear   to  be important     to developing      conceptual
understanding, it only allowed us to identify these processes at the level of the individual utterance. However,
future research will involve the identification of these kinds of discourse processes in more groups and look at

© ISLS                                                                                                                     230
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                            Volume I: Long Papers

the relationships among     these  processes within  the  group   collaboration as a  whole   as  well as identify
relationships among the contributions of individual students. Since collaboration is an essential part of learning
through inquiry, supporting groups to engage in discourse that stresses evaluation, monitoring, and question
development may help them make connections among activities by encouraging them to actively think about
what they are learning from each part of the inquiry process.

References
Asterhan, C. S. C., & Schwarz, B. B. (2009). Argumentation and explanation in conceptual change: indications
         from protocol analysis of peer-to-peer dialog. Cognitive Science, 33, 374-400.
Bolter, J. D. (1998). Hypertext and the question of visual literacy. In D. Reinking, M. McKenna, L. Labbo, & R.
         Kiefer (Eds.), Handbook of Literacy and Technology, Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Bopardikar, A., Sullivan, S. A., & Puntambekar, S. (2009, April). Small group science talk in a design-based
         classroom: An exploratory study. Proceedings of the annual meeting of the National Association for
         Research in Science Teaching, Garden Grove, CA.
Bryce, T. G. K. & MacMillan, K. (2009). Momentum and kinetic energy: Confusable concepts in secondary
         school physics. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 46(7), 739-761.
Gerjets, P., Scheiter, K., Opfermann, M., Hesse, F. W., & Eysink, T. H. S. (2009). Learning with hypermedia:
         The influence of representational formats and different levels of learner control on performance and
         learning behavior. Computers in Human Behavior, 25, 360-370.
Lawson,  R.   & McDermott,     L.C. (1987).  Student understanding  of the work-energy    and impulse-momentum
         theorems.    American Journal of Physics, 55 (9), 811-817.
Mercer,  N.,  & Littleton,  K.  (2007). Dialogue   and   the development  of children's thinking: A sociocultural
         approach. London: Routledge.
National Research Council. (1996). National science education standards. Washington, DC: NAP.
Nussbaum, E. M. (2008). Collaborative discourse, argumentation, and learning: Preface and literature review.
         Contemporary Educational Psychology, 33, 345-359.
Olson,  S., &  Loucks-Horsley,   S. (2000).  Inquiry and  the national science  education  standards:  A guide for
         teaching and learning. Washington, DC: National Academies Press.
Puntambekar, S. (2006). Learning from digital text in inquiry-based science classes: lessons learned in one
         program. Proceedings of the 7th International Conference of the Learning Sciences (pp. 564-570).
Rouet,  J-F., Potelle,  H., &  Goumi,   A. (2005). The   role of content  representations in hypermedia   learning:
         Effects of task and learner variables. In S.-O. Tergan & T. Keller (Eds.), Knowledge and Information
         Visualization (pp. 343-354). Berlin: Springer-Verlag.
Schvaneveldt, R. W. (1990). Pathfinder associative networks. Norwood, NJ: Ablex.
Schwarz, B. (2003). Collective reading of multiple texts in argumentative activities. International Journal of
         Education Research, 39, 133-151.
Smith, G. W., & Sullivan, S. A., & Puntambekar, S. (2009, June). When to collaborate: Individual and group
         exploration   of a  hypertext  environment  within   an inquiry  science classroom.  Proceedings  of  the
         Computer Supported Collaborative Learning Conference, Rhodes, Greece.
Strauss, A., & Corbin, J. (1998). Basics of qualitative research: Grounded theory, procedures and techniques.
         Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Varelas, M., & Pappas, C.C. (2006). Intertextuality in read-alouds of integrated science-literacy units in urban
         primary  classrooms:    Opportunities for   the development   of thought  and  language.  Cognition   and
         Instruction, 24(2), 211-259.
Wiley, J. & Bailey, J. (2006). Effects of collaboration and argumentation on learning from web pages. In A.M.
         O'Donnell,    C.   E. Hmelo-Silver  &   G.  Erkens    (Eds.)  Collaborative Learning,    Reasoning,  And
         Technology (pp. 297-321). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.

Acknowledgements
CoMPASS research is supported by the National Science Foundation: IERI #0437660 & Institute of Education
Sciences: CASL #R305A08050

© ISLS                                                                                                          231
