CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                   Volume I: Long Papers

                        Formulating WISE Learning Experiences
Vanessa Svihla, University of California, Berkeley, Graduate School of Education, Tolman Hall, Berkeley, CA,
                                                 vsvihla@hotmail.com

          Abstract:   This study  reports   two  cases   of  computer-supported    activity  drawn   from   intact
          classrooms    implementing   a  Web-based     Inquiry   Science   Environment     (WISE)   unit   in the
          disciplinary context of global climate change. The two cases contrast balanced and uneven
          collaboration, and related learning activity. Interactions across scaffolded activity types are
          also contrasted, finding that narrative explanations provoked greater generativity as compared
          to other assessment formats. Analyzing the dyadic interactions from a Learning as a Member
          Perspective   (LAMP)    (Stevens,  2010),     interactive visualizations   emerged    as  much    richer
          sources of learning opportunities, particularly when embedded in inquiry sequences. Design
          considerations are discussed.

Introduction
Technology    enhanced   learning   commonly     involves    scaffolds intended   to structure  student  learning  through
inquiry (Blumenfeld et al., 1991; Edelson, 2002; Quintana et al., 2004). Software scaffolds might guide students
through   phases of   inquiry,  such  as  exploring    data, interacting  with  dynamic     visualizations, and  reporting
findings, or  help    students track their  progress.   For  instance,  the   Web-based     Inquiry Science    Environment
(WISE) (Slotta & Linn, 2009) includes an inquiry map. Technology scaffolds may problematize the content
(Reiser, 2004) or interrupt the deceptive clarity of a scientific model through activities that cause students to
distinguish  ideas (J.  Chiu   &  Linn,  in press).   Pivotal   cases, which   provide   an  opportunity  for   students to
restructure their ideas, may be scaffolded as predict-observe-explain sequences, and have been used in WISE
units across various disciplinary topics as a means of making science accessible to students.
          In a meta-analysis of studies on computer-supported learning, significant advantages were found for
collaboration, particularly    when  completing   a   difficult task,  with   mixed-ability groups,  and  with   single-sex
groups (Lou, Abrami, & d'Apollonia, 2001). Technology may scaffold collaboration in numerous ways (e.g.,
Rummel,    Spada,     & Hauser,   2009)and      this has  been   shown    to   be beneficial    to  developing   integrated
understanding    (Bereiter &   Scardamalia,     1989).  The  interactions   may   be logged   when   the  technology  also
provides communication for physically distributed collaborators, but in face-to-face interactions between two
participants using one computer, de facto collaboration cannot be assumed, even when deliberately scaffolded
(Nussbaum et al., 2009). With co-located groups, interactions are reportedly very diverse (Volet, Summers, &
Thurman, 2009). In such cases, "reciprocal interaction" (Rummel, et al., 2009, p. 72) may occur when there is
symmetry in learning-related interactions (Dillenbourg, 1999). To evaluate the quality of collaboration, various
dimensions    have    been   identified:   communication,       information    processing,   coordination,     interpersonal
relationship, and  motivation    (Meier,  Spada,  &    Rummel,    2007);  problem    solving  contribution,    frequency of
participation (Barros & Verdejo, 2000); emotional state; collaboration behavior (Barron, 2003; Barron & Sears,
2002; M. M. Chiu, 2008); and sustaining mutual understanding, dialogue management, information pooling,
reaching   consensus,   task   division, time   management,      technical    coordination,  reciprocal  interaction,  and
individual  task orientation   (Meier, et  al., 2007).  Recognizing    the    potential for students to  differently frame
learning when learning technologies are brought into a classroom, and particularly when they face a challenging
task, Lantz-Andersson notes the need to analyze how students frame their interactions (2009). This study reports
research on computer-supported dyadic activity occurring in middle school classrooms. Rather than assuming
these are de facto collaborative learning interactions, two cases are presented to consider how students might
(not) formulate the interaction as being a (collaborative) learning interaction. The symmetry of contributions
across two dyads and across different activities is explored.

Global Climate Change
We designed a WISE unit called Global Climate Change, incorporating NetLogo visualizations (Wilensky &
Stroup, 2000) representing the earth and atmosphere. The unit was designed according to the four main tenets of
knowledge integration, making the content accessible, helping students learn from each other, making thinking
visible, and promoting autonomous lifelong learning (Linn & Hsi, 2000). The knowledge integration pattern
involves first eliciting ideas- both normative and non-normative, from the student's repertoire, then adding new
ideas, then   developing   and  applying   criteria  to distinguish    ideas. The  KI   pattern foregrounds    connections
between ideas (Linn, 2006).

© ISLS                                                                                                                   232
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                Volume I: Long Papers

Methods
The  participants  of  this  study were   two  dyads  drawn   from  two    different intact middle  school  classrooms
implementing the WISE Global Climate Change unit. The dyads were video recorded as they worked through
the unit over seven days in 30-40 minute class periods. A high definition video camera was positioned behind
each dyad, creating a record of the computer screen, computer usage, gestures that occurred between the two
students,  and  direction   the students  faced.  Thus, in   most cases,   students' faces  were  not recorded.  Lapel
microphones    provided    high quality  audio  recording  of the conversations,   even  in the context of  a crowded,
noisy classroom. Finally, log files provided time-stamped sequences of actions on the computers. Videos were
transcribed, including gestures visible between the students and actions taken with the computer, and all names
were   replaced with   pseudonyms.     Interaction  analysis  (Jordan &    Henderson,   1995)   focused on  identifying
moments in which students formulated the activity as being about learning, adopting a Learning as a Member
Perspective (LAMP) (Stevens, 2010). Stevens argues that learning must "be shown to be a mutual concern of
participants" (p. 84). This "endogenic" perspective on learning is useful for understanding the interactions that
take place in a middle school classroom using "learning technology." Cases were not drawn with respect to their
representativeness of the larger sample, but rather sought for their particularizability (Donmoyer, 1990); thus
dyads  were  deliberately   selected  from a  larger corpus   based on individually-completed     post-unit interviews.
Cases were sought in which both students, and in which only one student could provide coherent explanations
of what they had learned. A constant comparison method was used (Vogt, 2002), contrasting the two dyads, and
contrasting the interactions across different activities in the unit (Table 1) to understand ways participants might
or might not formulate their activity as collaborative learning.

                        Figure 1. Dimensions Compared across Cases and across Activities.

          Students   first completed   a pretest (Activity 1)  in which    they made  various   predictions including a
narrative  detailing  the  role of energy, then  completed    an  activity designed  to introduce a few  key  concepts
(Activity 2). The remaining activities involved a sequence of interactions with NetLogo visualizations that let
them experiment with variables to learn about global climate change (Table 1). Interactions with the first five
activities are reported here.

Table 1: Five activities and their structure.

                   Activity      1           2                3                 4             5
                   Predict       X          X              None                 X             X
                  Observe       None     Text andfiguresSolar radiation     AlbedoNetLogoNetLogoAtmosphereNetLogo
                   Explain      None        X                 X                 X             X

Results

Brian and Valerie: Uneven Collaboration
In their post-unit interviews, Brian provided a coherent explanation, including mechanisms and evidence, for
global climate change, whereas Valerie struggled to explain even simple relationships from the unit, leading to a
question of the origins of these two partners' very different understanding. For this case, gender roles may seem
particularly salient.  In transcript 1, for instance, as Brian and Valerie write a story to explain how the earth is
warmed by energy, Valerie quickly abandons an accurate idea, then prompts Brian to provide a correct answer,
which is arguably less accurate than her answer, then she affirms his answer. Although this interaction is not
rich in terms of learning, it does lead Brian to hesitate and break ("and it moves? (.) How does it move?") from
the routine process observed when answering more traditional multiple choice assessments, in which he quickly
identifies the  an answer    and   is confident  on  what  is expected  in  terms  of explaining  his answer   ("Yeah.

© ISLS                                                                                                               233
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                              Volume I: Long Papers

((indicating an answer)) And then say, like, that is the one we chose because, one day, means that global, global
climate is heating up. It would have to be a long period of time.").

Transcript 1
B:       ((reading)) `Write a story to explain to Gwen how the earth is warmed by energy. Be sure to include:
         Where     energy    comes    from::,  How     energy    moves,     Where   energy    goes,    How    energy
         changes/transforms.' °okay ° So ener:: energy (0.9) ((beginning to type as he speaks)) comes (.) from
         (2.1) the (1.8) sun (2.2) and it moves (1.2) How does it move?
V:       ((shifting computer towards herself)) It moves (.) in waves ((looks at B for confirmation, then very
         quickly shifting)) Just kidding! ((covers face, both laugh)). Um, you should         know this.
B:       Well, you should also.
V:       I already did, I (inaudible) waves. ((she pokes him in the arm, then smiles))
B:       I don't. (2.4) Energy comes from the sun and it moves (1.5) in rays.

         However omni-relevant gender may be to these interactions, we can also observe other, perhaps more
subtle, differences in how they interact as they move across the unit, engaging with inquiry activities that elicit
their ideas, add new ideas, prompt for reflection and criteria-generation, or distinguishing ideas. Across these
interactions, the roles the two students adopt vary, as do the interactions they have in relation to differing types
of assessment steps and across sets of inquiry activities. For instance, Brian vacillates between two primary
roles, teacher and learner. However, much of Brian's "teaching" is not framed by an inquiry perspective. We
can see various instances in which Brian adopts a teacher-as-task-master role, prompting Valerie to read aloud
("You read that part"), trying to get her back on task ("So some of 'em get deflected and some go in the earth
and then -- Valerie!" and "So the purple ones -- Valerie! -- the purple ones are radiation"), giving directives
related to   being a   good  student  ("Let's listen to her  ((the  teacher))"), and   correcting  her spelling  and
pronunciation. For instance, as she is sounding out infrared, he says inferred and thereafter they talk about
inferred energy. Some of Brian's prompting of Valerie is about learning ("Don't just guess").Valerie sometimes
formulates her role matched to Brian's, as a task-completer, checking a box as instructed, typing what Brian
says, and taking his directives. However, there is also evidence for Valerie formulating the situation to be about
learning. When she asks a question (Transcript 2), Brian is busily engaged with his own learning and does not
acknowledge her question (meaning he sometimes switches to a learner role).        They attend to different aspects
of the  NetLogo    visualization, such that   although  they are both   in  learner-roles, their learning cannot  be
considered collaborative.

Transcript 2
B:       And then some go in the earth and create those little things or some (.) and then they go out in heat rays
         (3.9) Whoa. (1.9) Look how fast they're going! ((Nudges V, they both laugh briefly. They click watch
         a sunray and follow its progress))
V:       ((pointing to the screen)) Uh-huh. Cool. ((inaudible)) could never go that fast.
B:       (16.9) Watch a sunray. Oh so those are the sunrays. ((pointing to sunrays)) That one went in but now
         it's ((his finger traces an expected path with the energy leaving the earth but the energy stays in the
         earth)) But now?
V:       [What about that green line? ((pointing to land surface))]
B:       [Now] Now it's doing conduction and now it went out as a heat ray. Okay.

         As Brian and Valerie work on the albedo NetLogo, which is more inquiry-oriented than the previous
activities, their interaction shifts as they both adopt learner roles (Transcript 3). While Brian remains unsure of
what type of energy is being represented, Valerie simply describes the shapes (e.g., purple triangles) but in
doing   so, recognizes  an  important relationship that Brian   had   missed, that the "purple   triangles"  (infrared
radiation)  become    sparse when   there is  high albedo.   In  this case, attending  to  differing aspects  of the
visualization is productive, at least for Brian who integrates his own understanding with Valerie's observation
when answering an Explain prompt (Transcript 4).

Transcript 3
B:       It looks like the energies are ((pointing at the screen)) or whatever that ((indicating yellow triangles))
         the solar radiation goes down, then up.
V:       Ummhmm ((agreement))
B:       ((clicks reset, then clicks farms again)) Farms.
V:       Or  like  when  the yellow  ones are  going  down   the purple  ones are  going   up ((pointing  up towards
         ceiling then down)) and when the yellow ones are going up the purple ones are going down
B:       Farms ((clicking reset then farms again)) Most of `em (1.4) aren't getting absorbed=

© ISLS                                                                                                            234
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                               Volume I: Long Papers

V:       =Umhm.
B:       Er:: well. °Depends° (((21.0) clicks desert then clicks reset them clicks desert again, V leans in,         B
         clicks watch a sunray and it reflects, clicks watch a sunray and it is absorbed)) So this one, for desert,
         it's going down. (10.2) Just keeps on going down (8.1) Okay! (((19.1) clicks reset then clicks ice, then
         clicks ice repeatedly- he does this each time- click-click-click-click-click then resets, then clicks ice
         again. Drags    slider   again making  albedo   first low then     back to high))   Okay   it's ((referring to
         temperature)) going down. Look at it go.
V:       Wow. (12.9)
B:       ((clicks watch a sunray, which reflects))
V:       There's like, no more purple ones.
B:       Oh, ye::ah.(1.7) Not a lot of `em are getting absorbed (.) It's reflecting it.

Transcript 4
V:       ((reading)) `Which of the following environments had the most [ener.
B:                                                                               [Oh!   The  purple things!   Well    it
         wasn't the ice. The ice barely had any!

Aamina and Holly: Balanced Collaboration
In their post-unit    interviews, both  Aamina  and Holly   provided coherent,   elaborated   explanations  for global
climate change. The interactions between Holly and Aamina are very different from those between Brian and
Valerie. Holly  and   Aamina    modify  each other's  ideas (transcript 5,  in which    they are answering   the same
question  presented   in transcript 1)  and negotiate their understanding.     This interaction  appears   much  more
collaborative, and more frequently seems to be about joint learning.

Transcript 5
A:       How energy moves:::s, um, ((taps fingers on edge of computer)) How does it move? Or where does it
         move? Oh where energy goes. How does it move? Hmm?
H:       It moves through radiation? ((looking at A)) (29.7)
A:       ((typing)) And then where energy goes?
H:       Through the earth's atmosphere.
A:       ((typing)) It enters earth's atmosphere::re (.) as heat? ((types))
H:       (22.1) Or visible light?

         Although the computer use appears to be imbalanced, with Holly more commonly in control of the
keyboard,  an important    difference   between the  two dyads   was observed;    whereas    Brian  assigned  tasks  to
Valerie who generally completed them as instructed, when Aamina directed Holly, she sometimes negotiated
the task, or deferred it. For instance, when they begin the activity on albedo, the girls skip past the Observe step,
believing it to be a repeat of the earlier NetLogo. When they reach the Explain prompts, Holly realizes they
have missed something ("Let's go back"). However, when they reach the NetLogo, Aamina persists in thinking
"We already did this," until Holly shows her the NetLogo (Transcript 6).

Transcript 6
A:       We already did this. ((reading)) `What happens to global temperature when you select an environment.'
H:       ((scrolling down to the NetLogo, skipping directions))
A:       Oh! So you can! ((Pointing at environments)) Let's do ocean.
H:       Let's see. ((clicks ocean))
A:       Let's hit run and then ocean.
H:       ((clicks run))
A:       Ocean.
H:       ((clicks ocean again then slows model speed down))
A:       Try to hit one of these ((pointing to environments)) I don't know what it's on right now.

         As they continue to work with the NetLogo, Aamina offers directives which Holly accepts or defers.
Aamina   makes  no    attempt to   take the computer  control   from her,   but  occasionally  expresses   uncertainty
(Transcript 6, "I don't know what it's on right now.") in response to Holly's actions. Holly is less vocal than
Aamina, but it is the negotiation of the interactions that makes this dyad seem more collaborative. There is
evidence that the girls formulate this activity as a learning activity. When Aamina prompts Holly to return to the
Explain step (Transcript 7, "So the global temperature decreases? Ok. I think we can go back to 4.4"), Holly
acknowledges the suggestion but instead begins a new investigation (Transcript 7, "Yeah. So forest ((clicks
forest)) Let's reset it and then watch it on forest"), indicating that she was still trying to understand the NetLogo.

© ISLS                                                                                                               235
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                               Volume I: Long Papers

There is also evidence that that although they, like Brian and Valerie, attend to different things in the NetLogo,
they achieve coordination. For instance, Aamina notices that the NetLogo provides the percent of light each
environment reflects (Transcript 7, "Oh! It tells you the albedo up here") while Holly is trying to determine this
same information through the watch a sunray function. Once this information is shared, both girls move through
the environments,     sometimes   with Aamina    prompting, sometimes   with   Holly   clicking. As they   do so,  they
achieve a joint understanding and together conclude correctly that ocean has the lowest albedo.

Transcript 7
H:       So, desert. ((clicking desert)) Desert. ((clicks watch a sunray)) and then ((pointing at screen)) so ice
         was, like, whitish.
A:       Uhhh:::
H:       ((clicks farms))=
A:                       =ummhmm=
H:                                     =farms ((clicks watch a sunray)) (5.3)
A:       So farms doesn't do that much.
H:       Farms doesn't do it so we just have to check that one ((indicating and clicking forest then clicks watch
         a sunray))
A:       Actually I think forest does it less than farms. And the ocean?
H:       ((clicks ocean several more times, then clicks forest then ocean))
A:       So the global temperature decreases? Ok. I think we can go back to four point four ((the explanation
         step that prompted Holly to return to the observe step))
H:       Yeah. So forest ((clicks forest)) Let's reset it and then watch it on forest ((clicks reset then clicks forest
         several times, clicks reset several times, then clicks forest several times then clicks watch a sunray))
A:       Oh! It tells you the albedo up here ((pointing)) for each one. That's forest, now try ocean.
H:       ((clicks ocean))
A:       Five percent ((still pointing, but moves finger over to farms))
H:       ((clicks farms))
A:       Farms 40 percent ((moves finger to desert))
H:       ((clicks desert))
A:       Desert's seventy-five percent
H:       ((clicks ice))
A:       Ninety-five percent=
H:                           =So they're=
A:                                          =so the least has=
H:                                                           =ocean=
A:                                                                   =yeah.

Representing Learning and Collaboration
Models of the dyadic interactions were constructed for the three activities containing NetLogo visualizations
(Figure  3). To  approximate     the symmetry    of participation, conversational   moves    and  actions  taken  (e.g.,
clicking ocean)   were   covered  by   grey rectangles,  approximating the  relative   length of  turn (and   with one
members' utterances mirrored). Utterance length in seconds could have been used, but neither method is without
flaws;  as  such the   resultant representations are  low fidelity models   that allow   for  quick visual  check  for
symmetry.    Thus, time  progresses   from  top  to bottom, allowing  the viewer    to quickly   judge symmetry,   and
reducing the likelihood of perceiving one member as positive and one as negative.
         Overlain on this, are vertical bars representing computer control; when two bars of equal saturation are
present, the computer was being shared, but when one of the vertical bars is of lesser saturation, the computer
control was contested. Boxes indicate when students were interacting with a NetLogo visualization, and the
sequences of activity are aligned by onset of the Observe phase of activity.
         Finally, at the outer edges of the bounding boxes, are blebs indicating points in the transcript in which
the students appear to be formulating the interaction as a learning interaction. For example, the interactions in
transcripts two, three, five and seven were coded as cases in which the participants formulated their interaction
as a learning interaction. Not all co-occurring learning interactions are collaborative because in some cases,
particularly with Valerie and Brian, the questions they pose or seek to answer are not in a shared problem space.
While   the  accuracy  may   be  low,  this approach  provides a   simple way    to visualize  potentially interacting
dimensions as they unfold over a sequence of activity.
         These   representations  (Figure   3) highlight both  the differences between   the  two   dyads, as well  as
differences across the steps. Most of Valerie's control of the computer is during explanation phases, and a much
greater percentage of her interactions with the computer occur as contested, either because she is carrying out
Brian's instructions, or because she is struggling to keep/gain control. Although some of the time Holly is in

© ISLS                                                                                                              236
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                            Volume I: Long Papers

           Figure 3. Representations of the Interactions across Predict-Observe-Explain Sequences.

© ISLS                                                                                                          237
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                     Volume I: Long Papers

control of the computer (punctuating their exploration of the albedo NetLogo, for instance) this is moderated by
her willingness   to  resist, to renegotiate  with    her partner. It is  also clear that  Brian's   turns  are longer  than
Valerie's, whereas greater symmetry is seen in the turns taken by Aamina and Holly. Though Aamina is more
vocal than Holly, because Holly negotiates computer control, she also contributes, making the interaction more
symmetrical.
           In both cases, the participants tend to formulate the interactions as learning while using the NetLogo
visualizations, particularly when they are working with the more complex albedo and atmosphere NetLogos that
are scaffolded    by  a series  of predictions   and   explanations.  In  the  case  of   Brian  and Valerie,   though  they
concurrently formulate the activity as learning, they do so in an asymmetrical manner, such that only Brian
pursues the questions he poses. For Holly and Aamina, though they attend to different aspects of the NetLogo,
they   jointly pursue   questions, resulting  in  interactions that   can be   considered   to   be both  collaborative and
learning.

Discussion and Implications
As  has    been noted   elsewhere    (Volet, et  al., 2009),  the  interactions  observed     were   diverse. In  examining
symmetry    (Dillenbourg,     1999), or  "reciprocal  interaction"  (Rummel,     et  al., 2009,  p.  72)  many   dimensions
provided   relevant   information    for  understanding    the  collaboration.    In both     cases, computer     control is
asymmetrical, as are verbal contributions, yet only in the case of Brian and Valerie was the learning distinctly
asymmetrical. By adopting a Learning as a Member Perspective (LAMP) (Stevens, 2010), the asymmetry is
understood to be consequential for Brian and Valerie; even when both formulated the activity as learning, they
held different learning goals, and with Brian both controlling the computer and dominating the conversation,
Valerie  rarely   pursued  her   questions,  and  her  turns with   the  computer   tended    to occur   during  explanation
phases, but functionally she did not explain her ideas; rather, she typed Brian's explanations. Given that teachers
commonly encourage students to take turns "driving" the computer, it would be useful to provide guidelines to
ensure that both students interact with complex simulations. A simple-to-implement solution might be to include
an even number of steps between those containing NetLogo visualizations, though this would not likely have
helped in the case of Brian and Valerie. Perhaps, in this case, the findings that mixed-gender groupings tend to
be less beneficial is relevant (Lou, et al., 2001). Scaffolding students through a jigsaw activity in which partner
is responsible for information that must then be integrated might support better collaborative learning as well,
but  further   work   is  needed   to   understand    whether  such     activity would     actually  interrupt   unbalanced
collaboration as seen with Valerie and Brian.
           In addition to differences across the two dyads, the LAMP framing revealed differences in interactions
by  the type   of prompt  and    level of inquiry.    The narrative assessments     are   associated with   more  generative
activity compared to the more traditional multiple choice plus explain prompts, the former of which tended to
result  in more   attempts at  negotiation,   the latter  of which    were  routinized    and did   not, in these particular
instances, provoke discussion. Students have schema for answering such questions, and even when selecting
incorrect answers and providing shallow explanations for their answers, students appeared confident in their
responses.
           The  NetLogos   that  were  scaffolded  with   predictions   and observations    tended   to  be associated  with
learning. While the initial questions students explored tended to be about clarifying the models, as in the first
NetLogo,    the explanation    prompts   encouraged    the students   to revisit the NetLogo     visualizations   to explore
further. What emerges is that the more complex tasks tended to be when students formulated the activity as
learning, and also that Holly, Aamina, and Brian all benefited from the observations of their partners, which
relates to why previous research has noted an advantage to collaborative learning when completing a difficult
task (Lou, et al., 2001).

References
Barron, B. (2003). When Smart Groups Fail. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 12(3), 307-359.
Barron, B., & Sears, D. (2002). Advancing understanding of learning in interaction: How ways of participating
           can influence joint performance and individual learning. Computer support for collaborative learning:
           Foundations for a CSCL community, 593-594.
Barros, B., & Verdejo, M. (2000). Analysing student interaction processes in order to improve collaboration.
           The DEGREE approach. International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education, 11(3), 221-241.
Bereiter, C., & Scardamalia, M. (1989). Intentional learning as a goal of instruction. In L. B. Resnick (Ed.),
           Knowing, learning, and instruction: Essays in honor of Robert Glaser (pp. 361-392). Hillsdale, New
           Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Blumenfeld, P. C., Soloway, E., Marx, R. W., Krajcik, J. S., Guzdial, M., & Palincsar, A. S. (1991). Motivating
           project-based learning: Sustaining the doing, supporting the learning. Educational Psychologist, 26(3),
           369-398.

© ISLS                                                                                                                    238
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                   Volume I: Long Papers

Chiu,  J., &   Linn,  M.   C.  (in press).  The   Role   of  Self-Monitoring   in  Learning   Chemistry      with Dynamic
          Visualization.   In A.   Zohar  & Y.  J.   Dori (Eds.), Metacognition     and   Science Education:      Trends in
          Current Research. London, UK: Springer-Verlag.
Chiu,  M.  M.   (2008).  Flowing   Toward    Correct   Contributions    During    Group   Problem Solving:    A   Statistical
          Discourse Analysis. [Article]. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 17(3), 415-463.
Dillenbourg, P. (1999). What do you mean by collaborative learning. Collaborative learning: Cognitive and
          computational approaches, 1-19.
Donmoyer,    R.  (1990).   Generalizability   and    the  single-case   study. Qualitative    inquiry  in education:    The
          continuing debate, 175-200.
Edelson, D. (2002). Design Research: What We Learn When We Engage in Design. Journal of the Learning
          Sciences, 11(1), 105-121.
Jordan, B., & Henderson, A. (1995). Interaction Analysis: Foundations and Practice. Journal of the Learning
          Sciences, 4(1), 39 - 103.
Lantz-Andersson,      A. (2009).  The  power  of  natural    frameworks:  Technology      and the question   of   agency in
          CSCL settings. International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 4(1), 93-107.
Linn, M. C. (2006). The knowledge integration perspective on learning and instruction. In K. Sawyer (Ed.), The
          Cambridge handbook of the learning sciences (pp. 243-264). New York: Cambridge University Press.
Linn, M. C., & Hsi, S. (2000). Computers, teachers, peers: Science learning partners: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Lou, Y., Abrami, P. C., & d'Apollonia, S. (2001). Small Group and Individual Learning with Technology: A
          Meta-Analysis. Review of Educational Research, 71(3), 449-521.
Meier, A., Spada, H., & Rummel, N. (2007). A rating scheme for assessing the quality of computer-supported
          collaboration processes. International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 2(1),
          63-86.
Nussbaum, M., Alvarez, C., McFarlane, A., Gomez, F., Claro, S., & Radovic, D. (2009). Technology as small
          group face-to-face Collaborative Scaffolding. Computers & Education, 52(1), 147-153.
Quintana, C., Reiser, B. J., Davis, E. A., Krajcik, J., Fretz, E., Duncan, R. G., et al. (2004). A Scaffolding
          Design  Framework       for Software    to Support   Science   Inquiry.  [Article].  Journal    of the  Learning
          Sciences, 13, 337-386.
Reiser, B.  J.  (2004).   Scaffolding  Complex     Learning:   The    Mechanisms    of  Structuring   and  Problematizing
          Student Work. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 13(3), 273-304.
Rummel, N., Spada, H., & Hauser, S. (2009). Learning to collaborate while being scripted or by observing a
          model. International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 4(1), 69-92.
Slotta, J., & Linn, M. C. (2009). WISE Science: Web-Based Inquiry in the Classroom. New York: Teachers
          College Press.
Stevens, R. (2010). Learning as a Members' Phenomenon: Toward an Ethnographically Adequate Science of
          Learning. National Society for the Study of Education, 109(1), 82-97.
Vogt,  F.  (2002).    No  ethnography     without comparison:     the methodological      significance of    comparison  in
          ethnographic research. In G. Walford (Ed.), Debates and developments in ethnographic methodology
          (Vol. 6, pp. 23-42). Oxford: Elsevier.
Volet, S., Summers, M., & Thurman, J. (2009). High-level co-regulation in collaborative learning: How does it
          emerge and how is it sustained? Learning and Instruction, 19(2), 128-143.
Wilensky,   U.,  &    Stroup, W.   M.  (2000).  Embodied     science  learning:    Students   enacting complex     dynamic
          phenomena      with the  HubNet  architecture.    Paper presented    at the Annual  meeting     of the  American
          Educational Research Association. Seattle, WA.

Acknowledgments
The author   would    like to thank   the members    of  the WISE  research    group,  the Video-analysis    Seminar,   and
reviewers   whose     comments    strengthened    this  paper, and    acknowledge     the NSF   funding    for   this work,
(Cumulative    Learning    using   Embedded    Assessment      Results, CLEAR,      NSF    #  0822388)    which   does  not
necessarily represent the views of the NSF. Thanks are also due to the teachers and students who participated in
various ways.

© ISLS                                                                                                                   239
