CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                    Volume I: Long Papers

                        Students Producing Thick Descriptions
                Richard Alterman, Johann Ari Larusson, Computer Science, Brandeis University
                               Email: alterman@cs.brandeis.edu, johann@brandeis.edu

         Abstract: The work students do to appropriate talking frames is a significant element of the
         coursework    for    any class. The  talking  frames    provide  a   viewpoint   from which  the  course
         material  "appears"    connected   and  cohesive,    from which    "sense"  can   be made.   The actual
         sense that is made is an explanation. The talking frames are semiotic tools that mediate the in-
         class discussion led by the teacher and later mediate an online collaboration, sans the teacher,
         in  a co-blogging     community.   Assigned      readings and    the   teacher's lecture provide  talking
         frames for explaining course material. In the co-blogging environment, the students practice at
         "speaking" with the talking frames, appropriating the talking frames by using them to mediate
         the   collaborative  production   of   thick description  about    phenomena     relevant to the  course
         content.

Introduction
It is the teacher's job to explain how the elements of the course material fit together.       The teacher's explanations
use talking  frames   that  compose    the semiotic   of  the  targeted   field. The appropriation    (Baker  et al, 1999;
Koschmann, 2002) of talking frames by the students is a significant element of the coursework for any class. In-
class discussion provides some opportunities for the students to learn to explain with these "official" frames,
opportunities to explain in the "appropriate" manner. Unfortunately, class time is a limited resource and there is
insufficient time for students to practice.   Outside of class, there is a coordination problem that makes it difficult
for students to practice with one another.       Online discourse communities potentially reduce the coordination
problem by enabling students to discuss course material even though they work at "explaining" at different
times and places.     With this scheme, the talking frames are semiotic tools that mediate the in-class discussion
led by the teacher and later mediate an online collaboration, sans the teacher, in a discourse community, where
the students work at appropriating the talking frames.        At issue is the form of the discourse community and the
content that is produced.
         This paper presents a case study of undergraduate students in an Internet & Society course who co-blog
throughout the semester. As they co-blog, the students decipher the "codes" that compose the semiotic of the
course material, learning how to explain the relevant phenomena with the talking frames they are learning. The
students' online work in the co-blogging community manifests itself as the collaborative production of thick
descriptions (Geertz, 1973; Ryle, 1968).

Appropriation of Talking Frames
There is an explanatory framework ­ the talking frame ­ and there are explanations.            The talking frame provides
a viewpoint  from     which   the course  material   "appears"   connected    and cohesive,   from  which  "sense"  can be
made.   The    actual sense   that is  made  is the   explanation. Given    a   talking frame, students may   or   may  not
converge on the same explanation for a piece of phenomena in the target domain.
         An example of how this works is the accident at the nuclear power plan at Three-mile Island in 1979
(Gamson, 1992).    Nine years before Three-Mile Island there had been a similar kind of incident in Detroit, but
at that time the "interpretive packages" available were frames like faith in progress or one step back for every
two steps forward.    By the time the incident at Three-Mile Island occurred there were competing frameworks ­
public accountability, small is beautiful ­ for explaining the exact same kind of event.
         In  a class   like   Internet &   Society    the students    are both   learning  the course  material  and   also
appropriating  the    talking frames,  which    they  use to  generate    their explanations.  It is the second part, the
appropriation of the talking frames that is the subject matter of this paper.      The students practice with the talking
frames  by  using  them    to generate   explanations     of the relevant  phenomena.       This  learning process  can be
described as appropriation (Baker et al, 1999):

         Children are said to appropriate cultural objects (material and semiotic tools), when they learn
         from other members of the culture how those cultural objects are used, and what they are used
         to accomplish. Appropriation is not a process of rote-learning, in which the individual simply
         adopts  the   facts  and   assumptions    of  the   culture. Children    appropriate  these  objects by
         participating in their use with more expert members of that culture. Learning results from the
         child's own experiences and practice with the object under the guidance of an expert. Thus, it
         is not a matter of information transmission from the expert to the novice, but of the novice
         "making this tool his own" (Leontjev, 1981).

© ISLS                                                                                                                  240
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                          Volume I: Long Papers

           The   goal   is for   the students  to  appropriate      the semiotic  of    the teacher  for discussing    the  course
material. The talking frames the teacher uses in class are the semiotic tools that mediate the in-class discussion.
In the blogosphere, the students generate explanations using these frames sans the teacher.                      As the students
contribute   to  the    blogosphere,  the  talking  frame,  a    semiotic  tool,  is appropriated.   The    trajectory is from an
interpsychological      plane  with   the  instructor,  to one    without   the  instructor,  to  an  intra psychological   plane
(Vygotsky, 1978).       In each case, the talking frames are the semiotic tools that mediate the activity.
           Initially the line of arguments, the explanations provided by the teacher are thin, skeletal. The students
need to work at making them more bushy, exploring their meaning, seeing how they interact with other ideas
and explanations, filling out the details, making it substantial. In the blogosphere, students are deciphering codes
and producing thick descriptions (Ryle, 1968; Geertz, 1973) of the course content.                   They are producing "piled
up structures of inferences and implication" (Geertz, 1973). Ideas and concepts are poked, prodded, and played
with.  The goal here is not convergence.          The students need to play with the talking frame. Use it. Analyze it.
Run    it, and  see  how    it works.    The  externalization    of  descriptions,   reflections,  explanations,    analyses,  and
arguments makes them accessible to other students, sedimenting (Stahl, 2006) the collaborative sense that is
made with the talking frames available to the class. The talking frames become a part of the parlance of the
students, but agreement on their exact usage is not required.                Because the appropriation of the talking frame
requires   play,    the more   the   students produce   explanations      and   descriptions  with  a  given talking   frame,  the
thicker    will be  the  set  of  descriptions, the more      it is a part   of the  assumed    background    knowledge     of the
students.
           To summarize this discussion:
    1.     Assigned readings and the teacher's lecture provide talking frames for explaining course material.
    2.     In a co-blogging community, the students practice at "speaking" with the talking frames.
    3.     In a co-blogging community, students appropriate the talking frames by using them to mediate the
           production of thick descriptions about phenomena relevant to the course content.
    4.     Through the use and application of the talking frames, the students enrich their common background
           knowledge, collectively producing better, richer, more nuanced and textured descriptions, explanations,
           analyses, and arguments.

Co-blogging as Practice with Semiotic
A  discourse    community      is   where  students question,     criticize,  explore,  negotiate   meanings,    share  expertise,
constructing and developing new understanding and a "common mind and voice" (Brown et al,1993; Wertsch,
1991).     Participating   in an  online  discourse community       is  a  social activity.  Students  can  collaborate    without
"meeting" at the same place or at the same time, thus increasing the opportunities for fruitful discussion.
           Within a discourse community, the contributions of the students are published and broadcast to the rest
of the  class,   emerging     in an  open  space,  giving   students    exposure     to multiple  viewpoints   and   perspectives
(Stahl, 2001; Suthers, 2005). Knowledge communities, arguing to learn, discussion forums, and co-blogging
environments are all collaborative activities that to a greater or lesser degree function as discourse communities.
The students can explain to one another, argue, negotiate, and reflect, which are all activities that positively
impact learning (de Vries et al, 2002; Andriessen et al, 2003; Salmon, 2002; Scardamalia & Bereiter, 1996).
           In the study presented in this paper, the students participate in a discourse community: they co-blog
throughout      the semester.    In  the co-blogging   community,       each  student   has a blog.  The    blog is composed    of
multiple posts written by the blog owner. Students can read each other's blog posts and comment on them. Some
features of the student co-blogging activity are:
    1.     Volume: Posts link to other material in the blogosphere or refer to material introduced in other venues
           like the lecture, but they are also self-contained.          Each post is relatively long: the average post length
           during the semester was 277 words and the median 248 words.
    2.     Open     format:    Students   have  freedom    to self-select   the  mode   of  their contribution,  e.g.,  reflective,
           argumentative, analytic, or recapitulative (Du & Wagner, 2005). Less scaffolding reduces the time it
           takes to learn and to use the co-blogging application.
    3.     Emergence of identity: Each student has her own blog, and she has full control over its content, thus
           establishing    personal   and  intellectual ownership       of her  work    (Ferdig  & Trammel,    2004).     Students
           develop an individual style and voice.
    4.     Convergence is not necessary:          Students do not converge on any preferred viewpoint.           Each post, with
           its comments, is a self-contained conversation that explores some of the implications of the initiating
           post.    The    blogosphere    supports  a   more     textured    view   of  complicated    ideas  without     requiring
           agreement.
    5.     Overhead:       Because   co-blogging   is  Web    2.0   technology,   the   "buy-in"   for students  is  fairly cheap
           (Glogoff, 2005; Duffy 2008).        Because co-blogging has relatively less scaffolding than other forms of
           discourse community, the overhead in learning to use the co-blogging environment is low: a typical
           student takes one in-class lab to learn to co-blog.

© ISLS                                                                                                                         241
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                  Volume I: Long Papers

          Students in a co-blogging environment are free to explore talking frames, deciphering their meaning
and usage as they explain relevant phenomena.          Contributions can vary among alternate modes of discursion,
including reflection, argument, analysis, (re-)articulation, and story telling.    The openness, volume, and lack of
convergence are all contributing factors to the emergence of the co-blogging environment as a space to practice
with the semiotic of the course.

Case Study
In  the Internet  &   Society course    taught in  Fall 2008,   25  students collaboratively   blogged   throughout   the
semester.  The course explored the impact of the Internet on society.      Topics for the course included the Internet
revolution, identity, information versus knowledge, technology and social inclusion, copyright and patent law,
and democracy     and  the Internet. An   important    part of the class was   for the  students to  integrate what  they
learned with their general knowledge about the everyday world they live in.         The students were undergraduates
from a variety of disciplines. There were 3 science majors and 1 science minor in the class.             There were 12
students majoring in the social sciences and 8 minoring in the social sciences.         The remainder of the class was
either in the humanities or fine arts. There were 8 females and 17 males.
          Lectures were presented using slides that summarized the key points of the lecture.        At the beginning of
each lecture, hard copies of the slides were handed out to support student note taking.             PDF versions of the
slides were downloadable from the class website.         The lecture slides were used as a basis for identifying the
important course topics and themes.
          The co-blogging environment has been developed over a number of years in several different courses
(Larusson & Alterman, 2009). The students were required to blog at the pace of one post per lecture: there were
two lectures per week.   A typical post was 2 paragraphs in length.       The students were also required to read and
comment on other contributions to the blogosphere. The co-blogging work of each student counted for 35% of
his or her grade.
          All of  the  students'  online  work  was    automatically   recorded in  a   transcript, which enabled    both
quantitative  and qualitative   analyses. The  transcripts   can be treated  as an  event  log file  and accessed   using
database queries. Additional tools enable a large variety of alternate analysis methods, including discourse and
ethnographic.
          At the end of the semester a survey was distributed; questions were on a 6-point Likert scale (from 1,
not useful, to 6, very useful); the survey also included open-ended questions. Student assessment of the co-
blogging activity was positive. When the students were asked to rate the value of their online co-blogging work
as a means of giving them first-hand experience with online collaborative learning, the average response was
5.6. In response to the question of whether the students felt the co-blogging community was useful, the average
response  was  5.3.   When  queried   about    the usefulness   of the blogosphere     for writing  papers,  the average
response was 4.5. When asked as a yes/no question whether re-reading and reusing the blogging text helped the
students write their papers, 67% answered in the affirmative.

The Blogosphere
The lecture and discussion in the class is a collaboration between the teacher and the students to understand the
material. But the collaboration is of a particular kind. The collaboration is asymmetric.           There is an authority,
the teacher, who is the presenter ­ the    "guardian" of the "official story" on the course material.        The teacher
employs   talking frames   that  reveal important   relationships  within  the material.   The texts of the course are
"coded" in the semiotic of the field, couched in forms and terms that compose an "authentic" discourse. When
the discussion   moves   to   the blogosphere,     the conditions  of  the collaboration    change   significantly.  The
blogosphere   is  a   student-owned  space  (Oravec,    2002).     The students    must "appropriate"    the teacher  led
dialogue. The students learn to "talk" in their own "voices" about the material: they are practicing and learning
to talk and reason about the material, firming up their "grasp" of the material, collaboratively thickening the
initial descriptions and explanations, embellishing and adding to the skeletal structure that was first presented in
an assigned reading or during lecture.
          Contributions to the blogosphere refer to and re-articulate course topics and themes, developing the
associated talking frames.    The contributions explore the semiotic of the course, deciphering codes as they layer
descriptions of the relevant phenomena.
          Contributions also refer to the common background of the students, either as co-participants in the
class (e.g. their common experience of reading an assigned text) or as undergraduates at the same institution
(e.g., using Google to help do their schoolwork).      The cases, examples, issues, analyses, and arguments that are
drawn from the common, shared, and individual backgrounds of the students further ground each contribution
and the conversation it engenders.
          Contributions to the blogosphere have one or more talking points, issues that are addressed in the post
or comment.    The talking points function to coordinate student effort to expand on, and refine, the individual
and collective conception of codes and their application. The bulk of a post is grounded in examples and cases

© ISLS                                                                                                                 242
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                               Volume I: Long Papers

(Kolodner,   2006),   which    may    be   drawn    from   personal   experience     or  transcribed     from    other   course-related
activities like lecture or reading the text.       The mode of a contribution can vary: an individual post can alternate
between discursive modes of argument, (re-)articulation, reflection, analysis, and story telling.
          The opening text of a blog post is where a student directly or indirectly connects his or her commentary
to what  he   or she  assumes     is common      knowledge     among      the  students  in   the class     (see Figure   1).  Students
explore  the  semiotic    of   the   class  by   referring  to  and    quoting    the   text, explicitly     referring   to   examples,
arguments,    and distinctions    made     in the   text  (1). Other     semiotic   relevant  activities    they   introduce    into the
ongoing discourse are in-class discussions (2), and the presentation slides of the instructor (3). Students ground
their contributions in experiences that are likely to be common amongst the students like other activity in the
blogosphere (4), internships (5), googling (6), and studying abroad.                Frequently posts begin with multiple kinds
of links,  mixing    together    references     to  assigned   readings     and   class  discussions     (semiotic)    with    common
experiences (ground) like pop culture (7) and previously introduced cases (8).

1.   Information      vs.   knowledge        is  an    important      distinction       presented        in   The   Social    Life    of
     Information.       I have   to   agree     that   information       on   its own    is   not   good    enough,    not    complete
     enough   to  qualify     as   knowledge.       I  see  knowledge       as ...
2.   Talking   in   class     about   limits     of   information        on the   internet     made      me  think   that       we cant
     expect   internet      to   solve   all    ours   problems       at  once.   The   cant   expect       that   Amazon     will   buy
     us  book  automatically         catered     to   our  preference.      We   cant   expect...
3.   I've  been   thinking     a   bit   about     the  limits    of   information,      especially         the  second   to       last
     question    asked    in  the    slides:     "What    kind  of    critical    commentary      does      this  lead   you    to make
     about   the  huge    amounts    of   information       that   are    being   generated     on      the Internet?"
4.   After    doing   some     reading     and     viewing     some    blogs,     I  began     to     feel    that   the    amount    of
     information      that    is  offered     to    internet    users     is   having    a  major       effect   on  the    world    and
     the  type   of   news   that    is  being     presented.      One   of   the  blogs    commented       on   the   question    that
     was  presented     in   one   of   the   class    slides:    "What     kind  of  critical        commentary     does   this   lead
     you   to    make   about     the    huge    amounts       of  information        that    are       being    generated      on   the
     Internet?"
5.   Each  summer     millions     of   students      participate       in  summer    internships         in  a      diverse       range
     of  industries.       Students     spend    countless      hours     researching      the    fields      they  are   interested
     in.  Students      acquire    information        about    the technical      skills      necessary       as well    as   the  soft
     skills   they    will   need    to  apply     in  the   workplace.       This   is  the   accumulation         of   information.
     Last  summer     I engaged      in  my   first    investment      banking    internship      ...
6.   What   I  found    to   be   very    useful      whenever     I  have     problems    with     my    computer     is   to  google
     it...
7.   On  page  21   of    their  book,     John    Seely   Brown     and  Paul    Daguid    assert      that   companies      that   use
     the  prefix   "info"     multiply      their     market   values.      Considering     how   so    far   about    4 people    have
     read  my    blog,    I'm  expecting      12-16    comments       for   this  one.     I'm    going     to   continue     with   the
     pop-culture      themes   I've     used  in    my  other   blogs,      because,    well,   that's      how   I think....
8.   On  the  other     hand,    like    Nadine     mentioned      how    her   friend   and    her     dad   works    from    home.   I
     know  that   I   can't   concentrate        when   I  am  in  my    room...     but  when    I   am   able   to   concentrate     I
     can  do  the   work    anywhere.      I  get   distracted     when     I  am in   my   room,     then    again  when     I have   a
     test  or  something      it   does   not    matter    to  me  where    I  study    because       I stay   focus.
                                                 Figure 1. Excerpts from Posts.

          In  the blogosphere,       the range     of  discussion     is  broad   and   bushy   with     multiple    viewpoints,     and
conversations,    emerging.    Each     post  is the   root of  a  new      "conversation"    tree.     Each    conversation    is self-
contained,   encapsulated,     but   it  can  also    link  to  other    blogs   and  conversations         within  the  blogosphere.
Discussions develop as smaller chunks of interaction. The opening of a comment links to the initiating post
and/or earlier comments on the post.          Each comment on a post links to at least one of the talking points in the
initiating post; less often they respond to an earlier comment.               Sometimes a contribution to a conversation will
link to a different conversation. For each theme or topic several conversation trees may develop. Comments can
agree  and   expiate  on  a   contribution    made     in the  initiating   post  or negotiate    over    its conclusion,     providing
alternate arguments, examples or cases to consider ­ all of which contribute to the collaborative production of
thicker descriptions.

Co-blogging on the Frame Working Home Alone
A tremendous amount of information is produced each day on the Internet.                      Can this information solve/change
everything?      Can  agents/bots     help    us   to  manage     all the   information?      What      is  the  difference     between
information and knowledge?         Does access to information mean that people will be able to work home alone and
that they  no longer    need   to  work    in the   office?    How    much     does  collocation      matter?   Issues   like these  are
explored in The Social Life of Information.            Although they have a balanced view, Brown & Duguid (2002) are
intent on  showing      the limits   of  information.      Their   exploration    of  these   issues    provides    many    motivating
examples, presenting alternate viewpoints, and arguments.
          One issue in The social life of information           concerns the pros, cons, and conditions of working home
alone. This is a theme that has several topics associated with it. Does the information available on the Internet
free people to work home alone? Is collocation at the office still necessary? Working home alone is a talking
frame that can be used to explain a number of things regarding the limitations of information, the relation of
information to knowledge, and so on.

© ISLS                                                                                                                               243
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                            Volume I: Long Papers

          How does the co-blogging activity of the students thicken the initial talking frame for working home
alone?  The students re-articulate, clarify, expand upon, and contextualize the semiotic introduced by the lecture
and assigned texts.   They explore, expand, contest, and re-explain the major arguments. They provide cases and
examples  that further  deepen  the discussion, grounding it in the individual and  common  experiences     of the
students. In the blogosphere, the students collaboratively develop a thicker description of the course material: a
more nuanced and textured position on when and how the talking frame applies to the relevant phenomena and
what it means and its limitations.
          There were 6 posts and 10 comments on posts with regard to the topic of working home alone (see
Table 1). There were a total of 3088 words produced collaboratively in the blogosphere on this theme.          The
average post length was 341 words; the longest post was 507 words and the shortest 113.   The average comment
length was 104 words. Taken together the posts weigh the pluses and minuses of working home alone versus
working with others in the same location.    The posts and comments develop descriptions, explanations, and
arguments of the conditions under which working home alone will be effective and conditions where collocation
matter.
          The first post (P1 - 314 words) on this topic begins with a quote of The Social Life of Information
text.  The post mentions some advantages of being able to work home alone ­ e.g., savings on commute time.      It
also references the discussion in class of an example presented in the text: the difficulties of fixing technical
problems when working home alone. The key talking point analyzes isolation as a potential problem of working
home alone, concluding that working home alone should not "eradicate the office place."      The one comment
(c1) on this post links to the theme of isolation, grounding the commentary in the common student experience of
"attending classes and living with fellow students." In the space of this one post and one comment, links are
established to the text and class discussion and the collective description of these topics is re-articulated and
thickened with the addition of new talking points on isolation and the common experience of all students in the
class.

Table 1: Summary of collaborative thickening of talking frame working home alone.

         LINKS (SEMIOTIC & GROUND)          THICKENING ELEMENT(S)
P1       Text (quote, issue)                Re-articulation; analysis (isolation)
 c1      Link to TP in post                 Example (college experience)
P2       Text; class discussion             Re-articulation; 2 new cases (Friend's brother; Father); position
 c1      Responsive to post                 Example (home-business); analysis (discipline)
 c2      1st comment (discipline); post     New example (studying library or room)
 c3      Discussion (text; class); c1&2;P1  Re-articulate; common exp. (Brandies); analysis (self-discipline)
P3       Other co-blogging activity         Re-articulation; analysis (time); reflection (studying library)
 c1      Text (quote, argument); P1&3       Re-articulation; argument
 c2      Post (argument)                    Example (friends); analysis (social aspect)
 c3      1st comment (quote, arg.); P3      Re-explaining post; Re-articulation; position
P4       Common   exp.   (internship)       2 new Examples (internships); analysis (collocation)
 c1      Post (example)                     Re-articulation
P5       Text (argument; example)           Re-articulation; position
P6       Text (argument)                    2 new cases; argument
 c1      Post (argument; example)           Example (Online colleges)
 c2      Post; c2 of P2; P3                 Re-articulate; analysis(discipline; perseverance); position;example

          The second post (P2 - 507 words) opens by linking to both the class discussion and book. The bulk of
the second post presents two cases of people who successfully worked home alone, one is a friends' brother and
the other is the poster's father.  The third and last paragraphs of the post take a position that counterbalances
(qualifies) the two positive cases she just discussed, concluding that working home alone can be very successful
but "people need to be able to motivate themselves," the office "will not become obsolete any time soon," and
the office place is still "useful for teaching newcomers the things they need to know." (The last quote refers to
an argument made in the book.)
          The first comment on this post talks about niche markets and home-based businesses: the example is
part time work selling insurance through forums and chat rooms. The talking point picks up on the post's point
about motivation: working home alone requires "discipline." The second comment links to the first comment on
the discipline to work home alone: the author of the second comment goes to library rather than working in his
room, and "totally" agrees with post that this does not mean people cannot get work done in their rooms.        A

© ISLS                                                                                                          244
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                    Volume I: Long Papers

third  comment refers      to argument    about fixing technology   when   working    home   alone that  was     in the book,
discussed in class, and re-articulated in the post.    The student also acknowledges the point on self-discipline that
was made in the two previous comments.            His comment also addresses the talking point of studying in one's
room, grounding his discussion in the cost of commuting to school to study: "Why go through all the hassle?"
The   conversation    that emerges     from post  two  is self-contained  in the sense  that the   initial post   reproduces
enough context for other students to carry on a discussion.           Old arguments are re-discussed.         For the second
time, the point on commuting is explored.          Between     the first conversation  on working   home      alone  and   the
second, the point on commute time has been explored and the following factors explicated: yes, working home
saves   commute    time    (post   1), but  loneliness/isolation   reduces   productivity and   collocation      increases  it
(comment on post 1), but on the other hand, with self-discipline (comments 1 and 2 on post 2) and with the
evidence provided by two examples of people working home alone (provided by post 2), why should a student
go through the hassle of commuting (comment 3)?
         The third post (P3 - 434 words) was written by the student who wrote the second comment on the
second post, roughly two hours after writing his earlier comment. (Over the entire semester, roughly 35% of the
reading events occurred while students were authoring blog posts.)             The third post begins by linking to the
previous blogging activity: "I know there are a few blogs about working home alone, but I still want to write
one more just to let my thoughts out."          It also specifically links to the second post: "On the other hand, like
Nadine mentioned ..."      One talking point in this post concerns time management and the skill set of the person
working home alone.        Working home alone "all depends on the person."       This author of the post reflects that he
cannot concentrate when he is in his room (reflection); this implicitly refers to previous conversation.)               In the
second  paragraph     of this  post, the  student re-capitulates,  in words  of  this student, the issue   of    dealing with
technical problems when working home alone.
         The first    comment    on   the third post  links to the  discussion  from  an  earlier  post:   it uses  the  word
"isolation" which was originally used in the first post.       The first comment also attempts to find neutral ground
between the pros and cons of working home alone, repeating a line from the initiating post: "it all depends on
the person." The second comment opens by linking to the phrase "it all depends on the person." Where the first
comment picks up the theme (from the book and lecture) that working home alone misses the social aspect of
office situations and the possibilities for learning, the second comment mentions friends who work "remotely"
but would have been more effective in the office.         The third comment is written by the author of the initiating
post.  It is an attempt to clarify his position: he was focusing on how it is possible to work from home, it is an
option,  but agrees with first comment on social networking ­ but then again people working home alone may
have different priorities.
         The fourth post (P4 - 248 words) provides two cases, personal examples of internships.                  In one case
the interns collaborated      online:  30 interns working    in different  places were    able to  interact    weekly   in an
effective manner via a web seminar. In the other case, interns worked in an office. The student intern asked his
supervisor whether he thought his job could be outsourced.            The answer was no, because financial advising is
based on trust, which depends on a face-to-face meeting. The one comment this post received says that there is
"a level of employees who need to meet customers in person" but also predicted that "we will see lot more types
of internships in the future online."

         The first four posts on the topic "working home alone" occur within a week of the lecture that
         discussed this topic.     Half the comments were contributed to the blogosphere within that same
         time period.      After a gap of over two weeks, two additional posts were made on this topic
         (these were made by students who had fallen behind on their blogging).

         The fifth post (P5 - 113 words) is short. It refers to an example taken from the text that was also
briefly discussed  in    class. It personalizes   the discussion,  declaring  some    people "just prefer     to work   home
alone", explaining that if you can deal with problems that may arise (because you have the needed background),
then working home alone may increase productivity and creativity.          There were no comments on this post.
         The sixth post (P6 - 432 words) is the last post on this topic.          It is a lengthy post and it makes "the
depends argument": it is written in a way that shows the student did not read the earlier discussion on the topic
of working home alone. The post extensively discusses each of the student's parents, in one case working home
alone was not appropriate and in the other case it worked.        In case one, her mom is a project engineer who needs
to be in contact with her group.       In the case of her dad, he is a software engineer, who does a majority of his
work at home. Despite the fact that the focus of discussion in class had moved on to another of the assigned
books, this post attracted two comments.          The first comment agrees with the points about the dad's job, and
claims the post makes the perfect argument against online colleges, which is an example discussed elsewhere in
the book.   The second comment is made by a student, who earlier, within a week of the relevant lecture, had
made a comment on the second post on this topic.            The commenter says there is no right or wrong answer.           It
"boils down" to one's discipline (a recurring talking point) and perseverance to excel/succeed.                The student's

© ISLS                                                                                                                     245
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                             Volume I: Long Papers

commentary is grounded in the example of student study venues: equal number of students who prefer to study
at home versus study in library.      This example was initially presented in the discussion of the second post:
"Students ultimately choose their study spots according to their effectiveness and productivity at these places."
This was also discussed in post 3.

Thick Descriptions
Figure 2 shows a tree map of student contributions to the blogosphere on topics related to the book The future
of ideas.    There are five major themes for the book.   The theme "control" covers the largest area in the tree,
which means there were more topics associated with this theme than any other theme.       Since the theme "three
layers" (which is in the upper right corner and mostly hidden) covers the least amount of space in the map so it
had the fewest number of topics.
          Each   rectangle within  a  given area represents a topic.  The brighter the color of the rectangle,  the
greater the number of contributions in the blogosphere on that particular topic.   In terms of thickness these are
topics that accrued the thickest set of descriptions.   For example, the three brightest rectangles for the theme
new    rules are "versus   old rules",  "vinyl  records and   CD's",  and  "new ways   of music    production   and
distribution".

               Figure 2. Tree Map of Contributions to Blogosphere on the Book The Future of Ideas.

          It is not coincidental that the topics where the descriptions were thickest are topics that directly relate
to the common interests and experiences of the students: the two brightest rectangles for the entire tree map are
"copyright law" and "new rules of music production versus old rules".       Why would students be interested in
these topics? The students in the class grew up with the new rules of distribution being the norm.  The topics for
this theme have to do with copyright, distribution and access to multimedia content, and making money.          It is
easy   to ground  discussion   in the students'  shared interests in music and  movies  and  their concerns about
copyright infringement, making money, and being rewarded for creativity. They are the biggest consumers and
the largest population of users practicing "civil disobedience" and "youthful rebellion" against the old rules.

Concluding Remarks
The exploration and appropriation of the talking frames is a significant element of the coursework for any class.
It is the teacher's job to explain the course material, explaining how the elements of the course material fit
together.    The teacher's explanations use the relevant talking frames.   The students appropriate (Baker et al,

© ISLS                                                                                                           246
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                              Volume I: Long Papers

1999; Koschmann, 2002) these talking frames by practicing at talking with them about the course material and
other relevant phenomena in a co-blogging community. The trajectory is from an interpsychological plane with
the instructor, to one without the instructor, to an intra psychological plane (Vygotsky, 1978).    In each case, the
talking frames are the semiotic tools that mediate the activity. The students' online work manifests itself as the
collaborative production of a "many-layered sandwich" of thick descriptions (Geertz, 1973; Ryle, 1968). Ideas
and concepts are poked, prodded, and played with using the talking frames. The talking frames become a part of
the parlance of the class.    The more the students produce explanations and descriptions with a given talking
frame, the thicker will be the set of descriptions, the more it is a part of the assumed background knowledge of
the students.

References
Andriessen, J., Baker, M. and Suthers, D. (2003)     Editors, Arguing to Learn. Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Baker, M., Hansen, T., Joiner, R., and Traum, D. (1999). The role of grounding in collaborative learning tasks,
         In  P.  Dillenbourg    (Ed.),  Collaborative  learning: cognitive  and  computational   approaches.   31-63,
         Pergamon.
Brown,   A.   (1992).  Design   experiments:     Theoretical and  methodological    challenges in  creating complex
         interventions in classroom settings. The Journal of Learning Sciences, 2(2), 141-178.
Brown J. & Duguid, P. (2002). The social life of information. Harvard Business School Press.
de Vries,   E.,  Lund,    K., &  Baker,   M.  (2002).  Computer-mediated     epistemic dialogue:   Explanation   and
         argumentation as vehicles for understanding scientific notions. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 11(1),
         63­103.
Du, H. S., & Wagner, C. (2005) Learning with Weblogs: An empirical investigation. In Proceedings of the 38th
         Annual   Hawaii   International    Conference on    System Sciences (HICSS'05)   (pp.7b). Washington,   DC:
         IEEE Computer Society.
Duffy, P. (2008). Engaging the YouTube Google-eyed generation: Strategies for using Web 2.0 in teaching and
         learning. The Electronic Journal of e-Learning, 6(2), 119­130.
Ferdig, R.  E.,  &    Trammel,  K.   D.   (2004)  Content delivery  in the "Blogosphere".  T.H.E.   Journal  Online:
         Technological Horizons in Education, 31(7), 12­16.
Gamson, W. (1992) Talking Politics. Cambridge University Press.
Geertz, C. (1973) Thick description: Toward an interpretive theory of culture. In The Interpretation of Culture,
         Basic Books.
Glogoff, S. (2005). Instructional blogging: Promoting interactivity, student-centered learning, and peer input.
         Innovate: Journal of Online Education, 1(5).
Kolodner, J. (2006). Case-based reasoning. In Swayer, R. (Editor), The Cambridge Handbook of the Learning
         Sciences.
Koschmann, T. (2002) Dewey's contribution to the foundations of CSCL research. Proceedings CSCL, 17-22.
Larusson, J.A., & Alterman, R. Wikis to support the "collaborative" part of collaborative learning. Computer-
         Supported Collaborative Learning, 4(4), 371-402, 2009.
Oravec, J. A. (2002). Bookmarking the world: Weblog applications in education. Journal of Adolescent & Adult
         Literacy, 45(7), 616­612.
Ryle, G. (1968) The thinking of thoughts: What is `Le Penseur' doing? University Lectures, no. 18.
Salmon,   G.  (2002).     Mirror, mirror,   on   my screen   ... Exploring   online reflections.  British Journal  of
         Educational Technology. 33(4), 379-391.
Scardamalia,    M.    and  Bereiter,   C. (1996)   Computer    Support  for  knowledge-building    communities.    In
         Koschmann, T. (editor), CSCL: Theory and practice of an emerging paradigm.         LEA.
Stahl, G. (2001)   WEBGUIDE:       Guiding   Collaborative   Learning  on  the Web   with Perspectives.    Journal of
         Interactive Media in Education, 2001 (1)
Stahl. G. (2006) Group Cognition. MIT Press.
Suthers, D. (2005) Technology affordances for intersubjective learning: A thematic agenda for CSCL.         CSCL.
Vygotsky, L. S. (1978). Mind in society. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Wertsch, J. (1991), Voices of the Mind: A Sociocultural Approach to Mediated Action, Harvard University
         Press.

Acknowledgments
Thank   you   to all  four reviewers    for their thoughtful  comments   on  the submitted  version  of   this paper.

© ISLS                                                                                                             247
