CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                     Volume I: Long Papers

 Technology for Supporting Learners in Out-of-School Learning
                                                  Environments
  Tamara L. Clegg, University of Maryland, College Park, 2117A Hornbake, South Wing, College Park, MD
                                                  20742, tclegg@umd.edu
Christina M. Gardner, School of Interactive Computing, Georgia Institute of Technology, 85 Fifth Street, NW,
                                   Atlanta, GA 30308, Christina.Gardner@gatech.edu
  Janet L. Kolodner, School of Interactive Computing, Georgia Institute of Technology, 85 Fifth Street, NW
                                          Atlanta, GA 30308, jlk@cc.gatech.edu

          Abstract: In this paper, we present an evaluation of the role that software played in promoting
          collaborative scientific participation in a learning community driven by learners' interests and
          goals. In our analysis of an out-of-school learning environment we designed and implemented
          to promote scientific engagement, we found that the software was not always at the forefront
          in the learning environment.      However, it played an essential role in providing an organized
          repository   of   the  community's     experiences   and placed   this   information   at learners'  and
          facilitators' fingertips.

Introduction
We aim to help learners see the value of science in their everyday lives and come to see themselves as scientists.
But many learners are turned off by science, finding it boring and irrelevant (Chinn & Malhotra, 2001).              Many
learners  also   face difficulties engaging    in scientific inquiry.  For  example,     learners often  end  investigations
prematurely, forget the purpose of experimentation, and fail to recognize the importance of scientific situations
(Gleason & Schauble, 1999; Quintana et al., 2004). To help learners overcome these difficulties and become
interested and engaged in science, education researchers suggest we engage learners in the type of scientific
participation scientists engage in.    This type of scientific participation involves addressing real world problems
that are  interesting  to   learners  and collaboratively  explored   with  others  who   share   their interests (Chinn  &
Malhotra, 2001; Crowley & Jacobs, 2002).
          Our approach to addressing these needs has been to move outside of school and engage learners in
science in contexts that are motivating and relevant to their lives.     We have started with the context of cooking.
We   created     a learning environment    where   participants  engage  in    scientific practice  by  designing   cooking
experiments to learn about scientific phenomena underlying the dishes they make (e.g., what role do eggs play
in brownies?).     They then use their understanding of how these phenomena work in their dishes to perfect more
complex dishes to suit their tastes.       In this out-of-school context, we aim to promote the development of a
community     of   learners that engages   in science  in  contexts  relevant   to their lives. This   community   does  not
simply consist of learners, but also mentors or facilitators, older adults who share a love for cooking and value
for scientific investigation with learners.
          While cooking is a rich context for scientific exploration, there are many challenges to helping learners
engage scientifically in contexts where learners are participating in order to pursue personal interests. It is often
difficult  to be   prepared  to  help  learners   pursue  their own   interests  and  goals (Clegg     & Kolodner,   2007).
Furthermore, cooking activities are physically demanding. In the midst of busy, messy, and exciting projects,
learners need help focusing on the relevant scientific aspects of their experiences (Gardner, Clegg, Williams, &
Kolodner, 2006). We therefore designed software to scaffold learners' collaborative cooking experimentation in
hopes  that   it would  promote    scientific engagement     as they  pursued   their cooking   goals.   In  this paper, we
present an evaluation of the role that software actually played in promoting collaborative scientific participation
in an active learning community driven by learners' interests and goals.

Background
The    aspects   of  scientific practice  that   learners can   best  learn through   cooking     activities are  design  of
investigations, interpretation of data, use of data as evidence, and explanation. Such practice includes, but is not
limited   to  generating  research    questions,  designing  experiments    to  answer   questions,  making   observations,
taking measurements, developing theories, and studying others' research (Chinn & Malhotra, 2001; Osborne,
Collins, Ratcliffe, Millar, & Duschl, 2003). While these actions may be encouraged in traditional classrooms,
they   are   typically  enacted    in experimentation     that  is   simple  and   fixed   which    is  different from   the
experimentation of scientists. In contrast, authentic scientific practice that scientists engage in involves doing
science (1) in the context of real-world problems, (2) where the full range of variables can be tested and the full
range  of  outcomes    may   be  unknown,   and   (3) where   procedures    for answering   questions   are  chosen at least
partially by participants (Chinn & Malhotra, 2001; Gleason & Schauble, 1999).

© ISLS                                                                                                                   248
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                   Volume I: Long Papers

          Engaging learners in such scientific practice and facilitating the development of a learning community
involves many challenges.      The   difficulties learners face   engaging   in scientific practice    must be addressed,
learners' exploration   must  be  in  the context  of their  interests, and  collaboration    must  be  promoted   for the
development of the learning community.        Technology can help learners and facilitators overcome some of the
challenges   by supporting    learners'   scientific practice  and   the collaboration     of the   learning community.
Technology can help learners overcome difficulties engaging in scientific practice by scaffolding the processes
of inquiry.   Specifically,   learners need   help   articulating the important   parts of    their experiences,   making
quantitative observations, and making plans for experiments (Clegg & Kolodner, 2007). Quintana et. al., (2004)
point out several software systems that have been successful at this type of scaffolding.         However, in designing
this help for out-of-school environments, the challenge becomes presenting it as an opportunity in the context of
helping learners achieve their goals.
          Technology support can also promote the development of a learning community in several ways. First,
it can help learners build a shared history in their community by allowing them to contribute to the community's
repository of shared history in different ways (Scardamalia & Bereiter, 1996). Second, technology support can
help learners structure their work, share their ideas, and get feedback from others. This is especially important in
a context where learners choose projects to work on and may choose projects that they need help with. Our
experiences with promoting learning with this type of software show that we need to give learners both free-
form and scientifically-structured means of sharing their ideas and asking for help from the community (Clegg
& Kolodner, 2007). Software can also serve to help learners reify their expertise in the community, providing
them a platform for pointing out and highlighting their accomplishments and contributions.
          While the literature points out ways technology can promote science learning and the development of a
learning community, we still need to understand what roles technology can play in a context where learners'
motivation determines their participation.    We therefore ask in the context of out-of-school environments:
          (1) How can technology promote collaborative scientific participation?
          (2) What roles can technology play in supporting collaborative scientific participation?

Design of Environment
We have studied these questions in the context of Kitchen Science Investigators (KSI), an out-of-school learning
environment we designed for middle-school kids to learn science in the context of cooking. In order to create an
environment   where    participants could  learn  to use  scientific practices  and pursue    ideas that were  personally
interesting to them, we designed two activity sequences. In early sessions KSI participants engage in a semi-
structured activity sequence to familiarize and scaffold them in engaging in the scientific practices of asking
questions, designing experiments, making observations, measuring, sharing results, and drawing conclusions.
Once they have become somewhat proficient at carrying out scientific reasoning, participants engage in more
flexible exploratory activity sequences where they can use the science they learned during the semi-structured
activities to iteratively perfect recipes of their choosing.
          The goal of the semi-structured activity sequence is to engage participants in conducting cooking and
science experiments that are focused on understanding what makes foods rise or thicken. Together, learners and
facilitators design experiments that highlight the effects of varying amounts or types of ingredients in a recipe.
The  cooking    experiments   highlight   the effects  of  ingredients   (e.g., increased  height,   volume,   density  or
thickness) in the context of the recipe they are preparing. For example, participants make pudding with different
types of starch thickeners and the facilitator helps them to make observations and compare the different textures
and thicknesses of the puddings. These experiments are designed as a whole group. In small groups, learners
carry out each variation and then share their results, taste their dishes, and draw conclusions as a whole group.
          After several semi-structured sessions, learners are given the opportunity to use what they have learned
about particular ingredients to prepare recipes of their choice and make them come out with their preferred taste
and texture. During these sessions, called choice days, learners ask new questions and practice using results and
conclusions drawn from the semi-structured experiments to design experiments that answer their questions. At
this point, they are not yet fully proficient at asking questions, using results, drawing conclusions, or designing
experiments, but they do know that these are activities they need to engage in to design their own recipes.
          We designed the software in KSI to prompt several aspects of scientific reasoning. We wanted learners
working   in small    groups  to fluently   use  the  software  during   the choice    days   to record   questions, plan
experiments, enter data, and draw conclusions. We therefore needed to design it in such a way that it not only
supports those activities but it supports them similarly across the contexts of semi-structured and choice days.
          During semi-structured days, the software supports: experiment design as learners engage in a large
group to design experiments, data collection as they work in small groups, compilation of data collected across
groups,  and interpretation   of that  data and   question  answering    by  the large group     after experimentation  is
complete. It also supports each of those functions during choice days. However, choice days are more flexible
than   semi-structured  days.  The    software  therefore  also   needs  to support  learners    in sharing  their diverse
experiences scientifically.

© ISLS                                                                                                                 249
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                              Volume I: Long Papers

         We designed the software such that it provides the same support across semi-structured and choice day
sequences.   However, the software offers affordances particularly suited for each type of activity.     The software
provides support for designing a controlled experiment for each recipe in the system.         It prompts learners to
formulate   questions  they  want  to answer   with  the experiment,  to select one ingredient  to vary,  to identify
dependent   variables  to  measure,   and  to identify variables they will  control to answer   their question.  The
software then guides learners in carrying out the procedures for each variation of the recipe, encouraging them
with prompts at each step to make observations. During semi-structured experiments each group carries out one
variation of the recipe.   During choice days one group may carry out all of the variations of an experiment, or
they   may  only try  one  variation  of a recipe.  Once  learners  have completed  their  variation(s), the software
prompts them with questions about their results that they can enter into the software.     These questions are pre-
determined by facilitators, and are the questions learners will be able to answer with the particular experiment
they designed.
         To support learners' scientific understanding of underlying mechanisms (e.g., starch molecule structure
and function) in their dishes, we used paper-based scaffolds to provide visualizations and information. We also
used   paper-based goals   charts to  help learners describe specific characteristics they wanted  their  choice day
recipes to have.   We wanted learners to think of their new, complex dishes in the same terms they described
previous experiment results so that they could draw upon their previous experiments more naturally.          We used
paper-based scaffolding for these aspects of learners' scientific engagement because we created these scaffolds
week-to-week specifically based on learners interests and understanding.
         Learners could also create and edit stories of their experience and explanatoids (short "Did You Know"
facts  they  discovered   or were    introduced  to while  creating their recipes).   Stories and  explanatoids   are
particularly useful   for enabling   learners to share their diverse  experiences on   choice days.   They   can then
navigate to the experiment results page (Figure 1) where they can view results from all of the variations run in
the experiment.

                                   Figure 1. Experiment Results Page in the KSI Software.

         This page displays a chart that allows learners to compare results across variations, with respect to the
questions they asked.   Learners' explanatoids and stories from the experiment are listed and can be viewed from
this page.  As they look across results, they can enter in conclusions they have drawn from their results.

Methods
Recall that the questions we seek to answer in this paper are: (1) How can technology promote collaborative
scientific  participation?   and  (2) What    roles can  technology   play  in  supporting  collaborative    scientific
participation?
         The cases presented in this paper were taken from data collected in an enactment of the KSI program,
run throughout the 2007-2008 school year. We offered the program afterschool one day a week as part of a
larger afterschool initiative by a local YWCA to engage teen girls in science and technology related activities.
Participants in the study were from the same suburban middle school where the population was 99% African
American. Thus, all participants were African American girls. Participation varied over the 9-month period, but
we had 15-20 consistent participants (7-9 6th graders, 7-10 8th graders, one 7th grader). A team of 3 facilitators,
the authors of this paper, led the KSI sessions. In every session, video recordings of each group were collected
and transcribed. In addition, after each session, facilitators recorded post-observation field notes that captured
the significant learning events that occurred during the session.

© ISLS                                                                                                             250
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                   Volume I: Long Papers

          Data used in this analysis was collected as part of a larger study focusing on which aspects of the
learning environment influenced participants' development of scientific reasoning identities.           This investigation
involved    the selection  of four   focal learners in KSI:   Amber,  Malaysia,    Candyce,    and  Sharonda. All    of the
learners were 6th graders, with the exception of Amber, who was an 8th grader. These learners were purposefully
selected to represent a range of participation styles and interests.
          The first author did a sequence of three in-depth semi-structured interviews with the focal learners.
The interviews were structured similar to Seidman's (1991) phenomenological approach. They, however, were
spaced out over the second half of the program ­ to capture learners' change in scientific participation and
identity throughout their participation in KSI. Conducting three interviews with each participant allowed us to
attain reliability (Seidman, 1991) and to monitor changes in learners' goals over time and the meaning they were
making   of  their   experiences  in KSI.  In order  to  triangulate the  data   gathered   from  the interviews with   the
learners, we used video observation from their participation in the program, interviews with their parents, and
interviews with their science teachers. We conducted initial and ending interviews with focal learners' parents
and science teachers to measure the change they saw in the learner. Interviews with parents were focused on
learners'   scientific participation at  home    (especially when cooking).      Interviews  with  science teachers   were
focused on learners' interests, skills, and participation in science class.
          Our analysis began with the identification of scientifically meaningful experiences learners had in KSI.
Facilitator field notes and learner interviews were coded (and triangulated with parent and teacher interviews) to
pinpoint specific scientific experiences in KSI that were meaningful for learners as evidenced by their reporting
of them   or   their reports  of  extending   particular KSI   experiences in    meaningful    ways.  Learners'  scientific
practice was identified by coding data using Chinn & Malhotra's (2001) framework for scientific reasoning.
Their  framework     particularly illustrates what  scientific participation looks     like as it progresses from    simple
science   typically   done in   the  classroom   to authentic  scientific participation     as practiced  by professional
scientists.  The     framework    breaks   down  many    of  the inquiry   processes    involved    in authentic  science
investigation (e.g., selecting and controlling variables, planning measures, planning procedures).
          Next,  we    analyzed  the set of scientifically   meaningful  experiences   that  involved  technology    use to
understand the role the technology played in supporting learners' experiences.           Within those experiences there
were three themes that emerged: the technology-supported scientifically-meaningful experiences by (1) collating
and indexing experiment results, (2) enabling learners and facilitators to make free-form contributions, and (3)
serving  as  a  resource  for further information.   These   themes  were  observed    multiple   times   (typically across
multiple  groups)    and  had later  impact   on learners'   experiences  (e.g., their reporting   of the meaning    of the
resulting experience in interviews, their later expansion of the activity).      We then selected illustrative examples
of each of these aspects of technology support.      We analyzed each example to understand the context of the use
of the technology and the role of the technology in supporting the experience.           Validity was established in the
discussion of the selected episodes with the second and third authors and by their subsequent review of each
episode.

Findings
Eighteen scientifically meaningful experiences were identified across the four focal learners (5 experiences for
Amber and Sharonda, 4 experiences for Candyce and Malaysia). Next, we present three cases ­ one for each
aspect of the technology that supported learners' scientifically meaningful experiences. For each case we point
out the context of the technology use and the role of the technology in supporting the experience.

Collating and Indexing Experiment Results
The KSI software prompts learners to make observations of their dish once they finish preparing their variation.
It then collates the observations of each variation into a chart. Facilitators were able to refer learners to these
charts on later days as they made decisions about how to prepare more complex recipes to meet their specific
cooking goals.   This theme was observed in multiple scientifically meaningful experiences for Candyce.

Context
Day 16 was a choice day where the goal was to create a complex dish using what learners knew about different
starch thickeners to make the texture of the dish come out the way they wanted it to. Malaysia and Candyce, two
sixth graders, chose to make fruit tarts with Janet (a KSI facilitator). Before they began cooking, they wrote out
their goals for their fruit tart on a paper-based goals chart. They wanted their fruit tart to be soft, creamy, moist,
and smooth with a sweet and "fruitiliscious" taste.      Janet then asked them what thickener they wanted to use in
their tart filling. She prompted them to refer back to Day 12's pudding experiment results chart in the software.
The chart (Figure 1) presented the results of a pudding experiment they had done as part of the semi-structured
activity
          They then used the pudding results chart to select the thickeners that produced the pudding that best
matched their goals for their fruit tart filling. They decided to use arrowroot because they wanted the taste to be

© ISLS                                                                                                                  251
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                               Volume I: Long Papers

sweet and creamy and white rice flour because they wanted a creamy texture. They were very pleased with their
fruit tart's texture and taste, and they were especially excited to take mini tarts home to their families.
         In the next session (Day 17), when they re-prepared the fruit tarts using the same thickeners and recipe,
their custard became "rubbery."              Candyce used her memory of the results from the chart to reason about their
unexpected results.    She described her reasoning in a later interview, "Um, because when we were reading about
the different puddings we saw that arrowroot kind of made it creamy and thick but not too thick.                       So, I think we
added too much of that because of the description." She also later used her memory of this chart as she worked
in different groups on Days 18 and 20 to make decisions about what thickener to use in new recipes she made.
She based  her     decisions  on her         goals for    the new  recipe  and    her memory   of     the results  for each  thickener
variation of pudding.

Role of the Technology
The experiment results chart provided an index of learners' previous experiences. Most often the facilitators
pointed participants to those charts at times when they needed to make decisions, but sometimes participants
remembered what they had seen in the charts when they had looked at them previously, and sometimes they
accessed the charts themselves. Whichever was their way of accessing the data in the charts, use of the data led
them to make their decisions based on evidence.                Although facilitators pointed other learners and groups back to
previous experiment results pages, Candyce's case was particularly meaningful because of the extent to which
her group used the results to inform their decision and because of the extent to which she referred back to the
results later.

Making Free-form Contributions ­ Stories and Explanatoids
Facilitators often had to prompt learners to write stories and explanatoids.                  They also needed to ask learners
specific questions about their experiences and type learners' dictation in order to create stories. However, three
groups created 7 explanatoids, or simple explanations, and 10 stories were created by 8 groups.                           Stories and
explanatoids were created over 11 sessions of the program and in 4 of the experiences identified as scientifically
meaningful.      The following example was representative of the way stories were written and used in the learning
environment.

Context
On  Day  20,     Malaysia   worked    with      a  larger  group   of  all 8th graders  (Amber,       Patience,  Soleil,  and Angela)
making fettuccine alfredo (with pasta made from scratch). This was the last day of the program, and after their
cooking  activity,   learners'  parents        were  invited    to eat the  food    learners prepared     and   to listen to  learners'
presentations of what they did and learned in KSI.
         The group made several observations as they were preparing their pasta.                          For example, they noticed
their pasta became much larger when boiled and that there was white residue in their boiling water after the
pasta was removed.         The facilitator working with them, Christina, took the opportunity to discuss the science
behind some of the things they were observing.                  She explained that pasta is made of starches (i.e., flour) and
how the starches work in making pasta.               She used paper-based explanation cards to provide visualizations of
different types of starches and how they absorb water.                She then connected the changes they were observing in
their pasta to the explanations. In preparation for their presentation, Christina helped them create an explanatoid
of what they learned as they made their pasta by asking questions about what they had discussed earlier and
typing learners' responses (Figure 2).

                                                     The Science Behind Pasta
Q. What is pasta made of?                                           Q. What is the white sticky stuff in the the pasta pot after you boil
Pasta is made of flour, water, oil, and salt                        pasta?
                                                                    The white residue is starch. Specifically, it is amylose that doesn't
Q. What is flour made of?                                           absorb water.
Starch granules and gluten
                                                                    Q. How does the starch get there?
Q. What are starch granules made of?                                The amylose starches in the pasta came out because they don't absorb
Amylose and Amylopectin                                             water.

Q. How does Amylose work?                                           Q. What happens when you boil the pasta in water? The pasta expands
Is a starch molecule in starch that doesn't absorb water.           in the water.

Q. How does Amylopectin work?                                       Q. Why does the pasta expand?
Is a starch molecule in starch that doesn't absorb water.           The Amylopectin starch molecules they absorb water and swell.
Amylopectin is shaped like a branch and the branch structure
traps the water.                                                    Q. What happen when you over boil pasta?
                                                                    It will stick and clump up and get gooey.
          Figure 2. Part of an explanatoid created on Day 20 about what the group learned as they made pasta.
    Although this was created in the software as one explanatoid, it actually represents several explanatoids.

© ISLS                                                                                                                                      252
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                  Volume I: Long Papers

         Several of the group members left before the presentations began.          However, Malaysia, Patience, and
Amber stayed to present their experience and dish to their parents.         The group began their presentation of the
fettuccine alfredo by reading the explanatoid they created to talk about the science behind pasta.         Patience asked
the questions in their explanatoid while Malaysia and Amber took turns answering them.                 Their explanatoid
(Figure 2) addressed amylose and amylopectin, their differences in absorption of water, and their impacts on
pasta.
         While   the  group   mainly  read their explanatoid,   their  impromptu    corrections and  answers   to  others'
questions showed their understanding and familiarity with the scientific concepts they discussed. For example,
Malaysia corrected Amber's pronunciation of a science word in the explanatoid ­ residue. She also knew that
gluten is found in flour when Christina asked. During their presentation of their fettuccine alfredo, Tammy (the
first  author and  KSI  facilitator)  asked, "Well  do   you  think    you could  make   whole   grain [pasta]?"   Amber
affirmed that they could, "it would just be a different flour." Mentioning a different type of flour prompted
Malaysia to ask, "Is whole grain that little wheat stuff?"      When Amber affirmed Malaysia's question, Malaysia
made a connection to branch-shaped amylopectin stating, "It looks like amylopectin, or amylose."

Role of the Technology
The   technology   combined    the  voices of  the facilitators and    learners.  The facilitator helped   learners share
relevant aspects of their experiences in the explanatoid.     She also prompted learners to use scientific vocabulary
(e.g., amylose,   amylopectin).     But because    she documented      the learners'  responses   to her   prompts, their
explanatoid   (and    stories in other  cases) were  reflective  of    learners'  and facilitators'  perspectives  of  the
experience. The learners were then able to use the software to present scientifically relevant aspects of their
experiences to the group.

General-Purpose Technology as Resource for Further Information
Another category of technology use emerged that we did not anticipate.              Learners and facilitators also used
general-purpose technology (e.g., digital cameras, the internet) for their collaborative scientific participation.
This was observed in five of the experiences identified as scientifically meaningful.           The following example
details one particularly compelling case of general technology use to support collaborative scientific inquiry.

Context
On Day 11, Sharonda, Esha, Treeva, Rachel, and Christina (the facilitator) worked together making biscuits
from   scratch and    gravy   using store-bought gravy   packets.   They   simply  needed  to  add   liquid to the  gravy
package contents and stir over heat.     All participants were sixth graders, except for Rachel, an eighth grader.
The groups were transitioning from exploring leaveners (used in biscuits) to thickeners (used in gravy).
         Sharonda began preparing the gravy with Christina as her group finished the biscuits. Christina and
Sharonda made the gravy and explored the question posed earlier in the whole group discussion: What makes
gravy thick? As they stirred the gravy packet contents and water on the stove, Christina encouraged Sharonda to
look at the ingredients list on the gravy packet and guess which ingredients thickened the gravy.              Sharonda
initially thought it was the baking soda in the gravy that made it thick.          However, she continued to read the
ingredients list on the packet and ask Christina about them.        When Christina did not know what one ingredient
was, she suggested an online search. When Christina was called away, she told Sharonda where to look online
for the definition and left.     Once  Sharonda    found  the first word,   she  called  out, "Ms.  Christina, I found  a
definition!"
         When Christina returned, they read the definition and Christina asked, "So do you think this is gonna
thicken it?"  Sharonda replied, "no" and they continued to search for the ingredients on the online dictionary. As
Sharonda read the definitions, she came across some complex words and definitions (e.g., folic acid).           Christina
helped her to interpret the meaning of each and keep track of which ingredients they had looked up that could
possibly serve to thicken the gravy.       When Sharonda's science teacher (who was present) asked them about
what   they were   doing,   Christina explained,   "We're trying    to figure out  what  made   our  gravy  thick,  in the
packet."  Sharonda added, "And we're having fun."        Later, Sharonda discussed how the experience was useful to
her:
         Um, it really...it told us about the words. It helped us um ... know what the words mean so
         when we go home --if our parents ask us about a word we just looked up, we would know
         what it means.

Role of the Technology
In this case,  the Internet   supported a  one-on-one    search  between    the  learner and  facilitator. The facilitator
needed to be there to help the learner with the difficult language and concepts and to help her think through the
function of each of the ingredients. The technology provided information Christina, the facilitator, did not know,

© ISLS                                                                                                                 253
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                  Volume I: Long Papers

and it enabled her to model the process of searching for answers to questions to the learner.       The technology also
helped Christina multitask between the investigation and her responsibilities with other groups.          When she had
to step away from the investigation, Sharonda carried out more searches while she was gone, then discussed
each   term and  definition  she  found with   Christina  when   she    returned. The technology    also  helped position
Sharonda as an expert.

Discussion
We found that the software never became as central a part of the environment as we expected.              Throughout the
semi-structured sequence and exploratory activities, the cooking activities remained the focal point of learners'
activity. However,    even   though the software    remained  in    the background    of the learning  environment    and
activities, it still played an essential role in promoting collaborative scientific participation.     We now return to
our research questions:
          How   does   technology   promote    collaborative  scientific  participation?   We   found  that  because  the
technology acted as a repository of learners' experiences, it scaffolded having and sharing scientific experiences
while cooking.   We designed the scaffolding to be used directly by learners.          We're guessing that if KSI had
progressed, learners would have eventually taken initiative to use the resources themselves. In the meantime,
however, having that function there allowed the facilitator an easy time helping learners draw on their scientific
experiences to make decisions for new recipes, create scientific artifacts of their cooking experiences that they
could share with others, and find scientific answers to their own questions about the recipes they made.
          The technology     also  facilitated collaboration  between    the facilitators  and  learners.   It did so by
supporting the roles of both learners and facilitators.     The structured software support helped facilitators help
learners match their cooking goals with previous experiment results.         It also helped facilitators by providing an
easily accessible tool to point learners to in helping them cook scientifically.    Creating explanatoids (and stories)
helped facilitators help learners highlight scientific aspects of their experiences. The presence of the function in
the software, even though it was the facilitator who did the typing, allowed learners to present their experiences
to others.  Finally, general-purpose technology use supported learners and facilitators in answering their own
questions.
          What roles can technology play in supporting collaborative science participation?           The technology in
KSI played two essential roles in the learning environment.         First, it helped connect science to the context of
cooking.    The  experiment   results page     compiled  each group's    cooking   variation into   a chart that allowed
learners to compare across variations.     This chart then helped learners to compare their later cooking goals to
their experimental results. Creating stories and explanatoids helped learners to share their cooking experiences
scientifically with others ­ using scientific terminology and presenting relevant aspects of their experiences.
Use of the Internet enabled learners and facilitators to explore scientific aspects of the dishes they were creating.
          The second role the technology played in the learning environment was documenter, or recorder of
experiences.  Although it never played a central role in the learning environment, the software kept track of
learners experiment results as well as the scientific discussions learners had during their cooking experiences.
Its presence allowed facilitators to easily point back to those artifacts for use of the data to make decisions in
new recipes and for sharing scientific experiences and understanding with others.
          Although the software was not always at the forefront in the learning environment, its presence enabled
it to  play essential  roles in  facilitating  learners' scientific participation  as well   as their collaboration with
facilitators. In other CSCL work, the software plays a central role in the learning environments they are situated
within. Learners use the technology to communicate and it drives the activity (e.g., Hickey et. al., 2003; Reiser
et al., 2001) or the   software  functions drive   conceptual engagement     as   learners use  it together (Dasgupta  &
Kolodner, 2009; Scardamalia & Bereiter, 1996).           Our work makes a contribution to the CSCL community in
showing that technology does not have to play a central role in the learning environment to be important and
effective for scaffolding learners and supporting collaboration. Specifically, we have shown that when software
is used to prompt science connections and to record experiences and understanding, it can promote collaborative
engagement in science talk and scientific reasoning by learners and promote productive interactions between
facilitators and learners.
          On the other hand, the sequencing of learning activities and facilitation support were central aspects of
the learning environment.    Analysis of the role of the facilitators and activities in KSI is beyond the scope of this
paper. Yet, it is important to acknowledge in considering the role of technology in environments supporting
scientific collaboration in the context of learners' interests and goals.    Learning activities sequenced from more
to less structured all in the context of learners' goals were important for sustaining motivation and promoting
scientific participation. Facilitators then played critical roles in helping learners focus on scientific aspects of
their experiences, understanding relevant scientific phenomena, and engaging in scientific practice.            At times,
their interactions with learners resembled that of teachers in traditional classrooms.       However, unlike teachers,
facilitators were not bound to a set curriculum, they were bound to learners' interests, curiosities, and questions.
Technology    therefore needs   to support    such collaboration between    facilitators and learners  by   providing the

© ISLS                                                                                                                 254
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                  Volume I: Long Papers

structure needed   to   scaffold  science  learning and   the  freedom   needed  to document,    share,  and  learn from
diverse, dynamic experiences.
          Our  work    is limited   in  that it  presents data    from a  small  sample   of   learners in one    learning
environment.   The technology we presented does not provide any new types of computer support, and some of
the support was quite simple (e.g., providing space to write stories).       We did not have to implement any fancy
functions to effectively support participants' and facilitators' collaborative engagement in scientific practices.
The key   was  integrating   use  of the software   into  the complex   physical environment     (Roschelle, 2003).   The
facilitators had to play a critical role in getting the kids to use the software.  However, once used, it provided an
organized repository of the community's experiences and put information at learners' and facilitators' fingertips
(via the Internet) that simple paper and posters could not have easily provided.

References
Chinn, C. A., & Malhotra, B. A. (2001). Epistemologically authentic scientific reasoning. In K. Crowley, C. D.
          Schuunn     & T.   Okada   (Eds.), Designing    for science:   Implications from     everyday  classroom,   and
          professional settings (pp. 351-392). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc.
Clegg, T., & Kolodner, J. (2007). Bricoleurs and planners engaging in scientific reasoning: A tale of two groups
          in one learning community. Research and Practice in Technology Enhanced Learning, 2(3), 239-266.
Crowley, K., & Jacobs, M. (2002). Building islands of expertise in everyday family activity. In G. Leinhardt, K.
          Crowley & K. Knutson (Eds.), Learning conversations in museums. Mahway, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
          Associates.
Dasgupta, C., & Kolodner, J. L. (2009). Designing case libraries to encourage creative design. Paper presented
          at the Creativity and Cognition, Berkeley, CA.
Gardner, C. M., Clegg, T. L., Williams, O. L., & Kolodner, J. L. (2006). Messy learning environments: Busy
          hands  and    less engaged    minds.   Paper presented    at the  Seventh   International  Conference    of  the
          Learning Sciences Bloomington, IN.
Gleason, M. E., & Schauble, L. (1999). Parents' assistance of their children's scientific reasoning. Cognition and
          Instruction, 17(4), 343 - 378.
Osborne, J., Collins, S., Ratcliffe, M., Millar, R., & Duschl, R. (2003). What "ideas-about-science" should be
          taught in   school science?   A  delphi  study  of  the expert community.   Journal    of Research   in Science
          Teaching, 40(7), 692-720. doi: 10.1002/tea.10105
Quintana,  C., Reiser,    B. J., Davis,  E.  A., Krajcik, J., Fretz, E.,  Duncan,  R. G., .  . . Soloway,  E.  (2004). A
          scaffolding   design   framework    for software    to  support  science  inquiry.   Journal  of the Learning
          Sciences, 13(3), 337-386.
Roschelle, J.  (2003).    Keynote   paper:   Unlocking   the  learning value of  wireless mobile    devices.  Journal  of
          Computer Assisted Learning, 19(3), 260.
Scardamalia,   M.,    &   Bereiter,  C. (1996).   Computer    support   for knowledge-building      communities.    In T.
          Koschmann (Ed.), Cscl: Theory and practice of an emerging paradigm (pp. 249-268). Mahwah, NJ:
          Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Seidman, I. E. (1991). Interviewing as qualitative research: A guide for researchers in education and the social
          sciences. New York, NY: Teachers College Press.

© ISLS                                                                                                                 255
