CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                  Volume I: Long Papers

    Visualisations for Longitudinal Participation, Contribution and
                 Progress of a Collaborative Task at the Tabletop
Roberto Martinez, Judy Kay, Kalina Yacef, School of Information Technologies, University of Sydney, Sydney,
                                                  NSW 2006, Australia
                   Email: roberto@it.usyd.edu.au, judy@it.usyd.edu.au, kalina@it.usyd.edu.au

         Abstract: One of the challenges for facilitators in collaborative work is that they typically see
         only the final product of a groups' interactive work. This is a problem as it means that the role
         of each individual may be hard to determine. This paper proposes a set of visualisations which
         aim  to give     teachers  insights   into  longitudinal  participation  of  each  group  member,    an
         indication of the extent of each learner's contribution and the building process of the group
         product in terms of overall activity towards a good solution. We exploit the affordances of
         tabletops    to capture the  data  in  order  to infer  these  visualisations. We   evaluate these   by
         assessing    whether  facilitators  could   answer    key questions  about    aspects  of groups.   Key
         contributions of the paper are the design of new visualisations, results of their evaluation and
         the implementation of a tabletop concept mapping application which was carefully designed
         to both support collaboration and capture of the history of the collaborative process.

Introduction
One of the challenges for teachers and facilitators in collaborative learning contexts is that they typically see
only the final product of a group's interactive work (Race, 2001). This is a problem as it means that the group
work itself and the relative contribution of each individual to the group product may be hard to determine. This
problem  can  dissuade    teachers  from   using    group work.   Yet,  there is acknowledged      value  in collaborative
knowledge creation in which learners create artefacts, such as tools, symbols, concepts, and texts; and make use
of processes  like grounding     and  negotiation    (Paavola  &  Hakkarainen,   2005).  Such   artefacts can capture the
common understanding of subject matter and innovative ideas of the group. One method to facilitate discussion
of a content area is through the construction of concept maps (Suthers, 2008). We have chosen this well studied
technique for our work as it has proven useful in education for externalising knowledge. Concept maps can be
considered as external reflectors of internal learner's knowledge (Tergan, 2005).
         Interactive tabletops provide a new way to support collaborative tasks because they permit face-to-face
interactions between     individuals  and,  at the   same time,   present information   to  the group through    a  shared
device.  However, they also introduce new challenges, both at the technical and social levels.               Our research
explores the affordances and challenges of supporting groups to externalise their knowledge of a domain by
providing a tabletop interface and making the mapping process visible to learners' teachers.
         We present the design and evaluation of a set of visualisations that reflect the activity of a small group
of users building an artefact, such as a concept map, using a multi-touch tabletop. These visualisations provide a
mirror of the learners' actions (touch/verbal participation radar), an indication of the extent of each learner's
contribution  (contribution    chart) and   the   evolution of  the artefact  through   its building process   (evolution
diagram) in terms of complexity of the group product. We aim to determine the visualisation features that give
useful information about the collaboration of the group at the tabletop. These visualisations aim to summarise
and make visible the actions of the group members to help facilitators detect problems in group interactions.
         We   evaluated    the visualisations   by   assessing  whether   teachers could    answer  key   questions about
participation, contribution and the process of the collaborative activity of the group. Our key contributions are
the design of these new visualisations, the implementation of a tabletop application for concept mapping and an
evaluation which indicates that teachers can answer 4 of the 5 key questions related to longitudinal equity and
quantity of participation, contribution of group members and collaboration.
         The  remaining    of  this paper   is structured   as follows.  In  the next  section, we  present  our tabletop
application for concept mapping and the design of our visualisations. Then, we describe the evaluation. We
conclude with reflections on the visualisations and our research agenda.

Related Work
Several  researchers   have  explored  how     to exploit the  potential  of  digital tabletops in educational   contexts.
Morgan and Butler (2009) proposed settings that encourage learning with high levels of collaboration at multi-
touch displays, grounded in theories of Situated Cognition. They designed systems for storyboarding, group
concept mapping and building phonemic awareness between dyads. Busine et. al. (2007) described the use of
interactive tabletops to support group creativity through the construction of mind-maps. Additionally, Sugimoto
et al. (2004) showed     how   tabletops,  used   in conjunction   with personal  devices,  can  support   discussion and
negotiation in face-to-face collaboration with learners manipulating private and shared objects.

© ISLS                                                                                                                  25
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                  Volume I: Long Papers

         Research     in  tangible  tabletops has    also explored   their affordances   for detecting   interference  in
collaboration (Falcao & Price, 2009), analysing division of labour (Jermann et al., 2009)              and to aid mind-
mapping (Oppl & Stary, 2009). However, a recent study failed to show significant learning benefits at a tabletop
compared with working on a single desktop computer (Do-Lenh, Kaplan, & Dillenbourg, 2009). In this study,
those  learners using    the multi-touch   tabletop  tended to work  in parallel  and   had difficulties drawing all  the
pieces together at the end of the trial. This finding highlights the need for an effective support at the tabletops.
         There has been considerable work exploring the importance of group visualisations to externalise the
activity of groups and, in many cases, to reveal relationships between observable patterns and the quality of the
group work. Erickson et al. (1999) created the social proxy, a visualisation of chat sessions of a group. This
resulted in improved collaboration and better support for people to learn how to collaborate. In the same way,
sociograms have been extensively used in the CSCL field to visualise learner interactions and they have also
been applied for representing the lines of communication within social networks (Sundararajan, 2010). Donath
(2002) went a step further, showing the nature of participation in a visualisation of group activities. In         (Kay,
Maisonneuve, Yacef, & Reimann, 2006) a set of visual representations of long term activity of groups was
designed, based on a model of small group teamwork. These present salient aspects of group activity, including
the level  of participation,  interaction  between   members     and leadership.  The   Narcissus  project introduced  a
visualisation of group    activity  which   enables  a user  to  navigate  through   to see  the detailed  evidence  that
contributed to each part of the group work (Upton & Kay, 2009). In addition, Janssen et al. (2007) explored the
effects of visualisation of participation in groups of learners. They found that visual representations of activity
mirrored to the group can be useful for encouraging coordination and regulation of the members.

The Collaborative Learning Environment
We  now   describe    the context  of our  work   to design and   then evaluate  visualisations  of group  activity in a
collaborative concept mapping system. We used the tabletop system called Cmate (Martinez, Kay, & Yacef,
2010). This was designed to be used in two stages: first, an individual stage, where each group member creates
their  own concept    map;   and  a group   stage,  where   they come  together   to create  a collaborative map.   This
approach was also used by Engelmann & Hesse (2010) with the difference that we provided a shared tabletop
for the group phase. For the individual stage, participants used CmapTools (Novak & Cañas, 2008), a desktop-
based concept mapping application. These individual concept maps are used to extract the personal vocabulary
of concepts and links, and make them available to the learners in the group stage at the tabletop. Importantly,
this stage enables each individual to focus on the cognitively demanding task of externalising their knowledge,
by  drawing   their individual  maps    in private.  Then,  they come  to  the tabletop  to  compare   and discuss  their
different perspectives of the subject matter and create a collaborative concept map (left of Figure 1). In this
stage, participants can use the concepts and links they previously included in their individual artefacts and relate
them with other participants' pieces of map to build a new mutually accepted map.
         We designed Cmate to maintain the collaboratively created group map as well as one layer per user,
showing their individual map contributions. The basic actions that learners can perform are: create a concept,
drawing a circular outline with the finger; create directed link, drawing a line in between two nodes; move
concept/link, touching the node and dragging it with the finger; delete a node, moving the node to off-screen;
and edit a node word, double tapping a node and modifying the word through a virtual keyboard.
         The   tabletop   used  in  the   studies had  a  46-inch LCD      touch screen  with  a  display  resolution  of
1920x1080 pixels, offering enough space for up to four participants. The tabletop hardware can detect multiple
touches at a time, but cannot recognise which user is providing an input.            For our study, every touch on the
tabletop  was  logged    and  the  entire sessions  were  videotaped   using a   fixed  camera   above the tabletop  and
another camera at one side. Sound was recorded with individual headphones worn by each participant.
         In order to aid facilitators, it is crucial to know who is doing what and what has been done on the
tabletop. Morgan and Butler (2009) proposed four approaches to track the contribution made by each person at

Figure 1. Tabletop concept mapping. Cmate in action with 4 people, 2 at each long edge of the table (left).
                 Personal spaces for tracking individual participation on the tabletop (right).

© ISLS                                                                                                                 26
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                Volume I: Long Papers

the tabletop: by defining fixed workspaces where each person should work; by claiming "ownership" on the
objects; establishing a production line, in which each object is sent to a task bar of each person at least once to
work on it; or by defining roles, in which each person is allowed to do just some specific actions. We created a
different approach    to  track individual participation. We  provided  a moveable  circular personal      area  on the
tabletop for each participant. Users can initiate all actions just inbounds of these areas. To perform actions on
the concept map, participants move their personal area above the target element and then perform the actions.
This technique increases the load of touches on the tabletop but gives personalised concept/linking word lists for
creating nodes, orients the elements towards the user and also supports tracking of all the touches that each
participant does (right of Figure 1). For the position of   learners around the tabletop, it has been shown that this
has an   effect on    the  division of  labour   spontaneously  adopted by  the learners (Jermann,      et al.,  2009).
Consequently, we had participants in pairs along both long sides of the rectangular tabletop. This gave each
participant equal opportunity to participate, access the resources, and perform the full range of actions. Where
the group had three participants, we had to settle for a slightly less ideal spatial disposition.
          We ran the study with 10 participants in 3 groups, each of 3 or 4 participants. All groups were asked to
build concept maps individually at a desktop and then a group map at the tabletop, on the topic: how does the
water cycle work? First, participants were introduced on the concept mapping technique. Then they read a two
page text on the water cycle and were asked to draw an individual concept map. Participants could use any
terms, any number of concepts in their maps and were not restricted to follow any hierarchical arrangement of
concepts.  However,      we provided   a   list of suggested words,  extracted  from the instructional     text.   After
completing their concept maps the learners were asked to generate a group solution concept map at the tabletop.

Design of Visualisations
We  now    describe    the  four  visualisations   we designed: the  Touch/verbal   Participation   Radar,   the   Map
Contribution Chart and the Map Evolution Diagram.

Touch/Verbal Participation Radar
This first visualisation was strongly influenced by the circular social proxies of Erickson (1999). We also drew
on  previous  work    in  collaborative  learning,  with  a focus on  the  learning impact   of    the equity   of  oral
participation and  decision     making (Bachour,    Kaplan, &  Dillenbourg, 2010).  In addition,    grounding   on  the
procedure to study levels of participation at the tabletop proposed by Harris et. al. (2009), we chose to focus on
two dimensions: the physical events on the tabletop, measured in terms of the quantity of touches; and time of
verbal participation, measured in seconds.

                                                                                                       Minutes

                                                                                                           2.5 min

Verbal

                                                                                                           250 touches
Touch

    Figure 2. Participation radar. (left) First five minutes. (center) Between minute 10 and 15 (right) Between
                                                   minute 20 and 25.

          As a result, we designed a pair of radars: the radar of verbal participation (top of Figure 2, blue shaded
radars) and the radar of touch participation (bottom of Figure 2, red shaded radars).The time window for each
visualisation covers the previous 5 minutes of activity. So for example at time 15, the radars show the number of
events between minutes 10 and 15. Each coloured round marker corresponds to one learner at their circular
personal space: orange, yellow, green and purple for participants 1, 2, 3 and 4 respectively. The position of these

© ISLS                                                                                                               27
  CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                     Volume I: Long Papers

 markers indicates the level of participation; the closer the marker is to the centre, the less active they were in the
 last five minutes.
             The  shape  of  the  radars depicts  the  symmetry      of activity,    an  important aspect   of  collaboration
 (Dillenbourg, 1998). For example if there are 4 learners, a perfect symmetric square indicates that the number of
 touches or the talking time are the same for each learner. In the radars shown at the right of Figure 2 (at time
 25), we can observe that the participant corresponding to the yellow marker (at 3 o'clock) did not touch the
 tabletop at all but did most of the talking. This could possibly be a clue that the participant was influencing the
 actions of others by talking but, without further information, it could equally means that he/she was engaged in
 a conversation that had nothing to do with the task.

 Contribution Chart
 Concept mapping has the potential to drive collaboration because it provides an externalisation of each learner's
 different   perspective  (Tergan,  2005).   For  this reason,   we  propose    the  contribution  chart,   which  shows   the
 proportion of actions from each team member that resulted in a change in the collaborative artefact. The actions
 which    add   substantial  knowledge    to the  map   are the   creation,    editing   and  deletion  of  nodes.  The  map
 contribution    chart  gives an  overview   visualisation  of   the proportion      of these  actions that  each  participant
 performed. Figure 3 shows three of these charts for the same group, at minutes 5, 10 and 20, and also shows the
 total number of concepts and links created in the group artefact. The design of this visualisation aims to show if
 any of   the  participant's  perspectives is leading  the  construction   of  the   concept   map or   if they are equitably
 contributing to it. This visualisation complements the radar of participation by indicating the amount of activity
 that has indeed made a substantial impact on the group artefact. For instance, the first chart in Figure 3 (at
 minute 5) shows that one person (in pink at the top) contributed about half the concept map's elements, two
 people (green and yellow) contributed a quarter, and one (red, at the right) much less than the others. At time
 10, however, we can observe that the other three participants increased their contribution greatly (especially
 yellow and red), and later on (at time 20), the same participant (pink) contributed the most to the artefact again.
 The relative dimension of the contribution between two given moments is indicated by the overall number of
 links and concepts and also symbolised through the relative size of the charts.

Links: 3                                 Links: 7                                    Links: 14
Concepts: 12                             Concepts: 10                                Concepts: 15

  Figure 3. Map contribution chart. (left) After 5 minutes. (centre) After 10 minutes. (right) At after 20 minutes.

 Evolution Diagram
 The third visualisation is the Evolution Diagram (Figure 4). This shows the key temporal events in the group
 concept     map. The   vertical axis shows   the number    of propositions    added    to the group   concept  map   and  the
 horizontal    axis represents   time measured    in minutes.    The graph     has two   sparklines: i) the  upper  blue  line
 includes coloured circles indicating addition of each proposition by a given participant; ii) the lower red line
 shows the number of propositions that match those in the master concept map (created by the teacher). So, the
 upper line shows the total number of propositions and the lower line shows how many of these propositions
 match    the  expert   map.  To calculate   the distance between    the   group     map  and  the master   map,  we   use an
 automatic    open-ended    concept   map  scoring   technique   based  on Pathfinder    associative   networks  (Taricani &
 Clariana, 2006).
Propositions                                                      Propositions                          Collaboration

     Collaborative group
                                                                               Split
                                                                               work

                                                  Time (minutes)                                                  Time (minutes)
          Figure 4. Map evolution diagram. (left) A group of four learners working collaboratively most of time.
                     (right) A group of three learners who divided the work during the first 20 minutes.

  © ISLS                                                                                                                    28
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                       Volume I: Long Papers

          In the upper line, the coloured markers represent the user who added the proposition(s). In Figure 4
(left), the  visualisation  shows   that    the group    has worked    for more   than thirty minutes    and has   created  16
propositions. Observing the purple markers (User 4) we see that this user created more propositions that were
present in the master map, as the purple markers coincide with signs of progress of the group map towards the
master map. In contrast, the map evolution diagram on the right shows that, up to Minute 20, this group added
many links to the map but these actions did not result in any matching with the expert map, suggesting that users
were working independently. Note that, in this visualisation, the similarity with a master concept map is not
used to score the group map but just as an indicator of the quantity of the group's propositions that match those
in the teacher's perspective.

Evaluation
The aim of the evaluation is to ask a number of facilitators to give             answer to a set of questions regarding the
equity   of  participation,  quantity      of participation,  collaboration,  equity   of  intellectual  contribution  of   the
members of the group (Dillenbourg, 1998; Stahl, 2006) and the process of the concept map construction. We
expect   that the support    offered   by   our   visualisations should    make   visible some  facets   of the  collaborative
process   to  facilitators and   hence  lead   to improve    the feedback    they can  offer to the group.   Specifically,  we
aimed to evaluate five hypotheses: The set of visualisations provide useful information about:
    ·     (H1) the equity in the roles and participation of group members;
    ·     (H2) the amount of participation of the group members;
    ·     (H3) the group in terms of collaboration;
    ·     (H4) the equity of intellectual contribution of group members;
    ·     (H5) the creation process of the map in terms of the relative contributions of group members and the
          effectiveness of the group work.
           To  assess  these   hypotheses,     we  ran   evaluation sessions  with   five different skilled  facilitators with
experience    in working    with   groups.    We  provided    them  with   a set  of the  visualisations generated  from    the
tabletop  sessions    of   two   groups:    A   and  B.  These   visualisations   included:   snapshots   of   the Radars   of
Participation and Contribution Chart corresponding to minutes 5, 10, 15, 20, 25 and 30, the Evolution Diagram
and the final group concept map. We also provided the final maps, from both the individual and collaborative
stages.   Then,  we invited    the  facilitators  to respond  a  set of  questions   regarding  the equity   of  participation,
quantity of participation, the collaboration, the equity of intellectual contribution of the group members and the
usefulness of the visualisations to depict the creation map process in terms of contribution and group work.
Each question corresponded to one of the hypotheses posed above, and they were answered on a 7-point Likert
scale in which 1 represents strong disagreement and 7 strong agreement. We allowed them to mark a question as
"unanswered" if the visualisations did not give enough support for taking a decision. We asked the facilitators to
justify their responses and state which visualisations they used.

Inspection of the Session Videos
As a basis to compare the information inferred by the facilitators from the visualisations, we inspected the video
recordings of each group's session grounding on the theories of collaborative learning of Dillenbourg (1998).
Next, we describe the results of these observations.
          Group   A   was    highly    collaborative     from the   beginning.    They   immediately    focused  on  working
collaboratively and they built the concept map as a group. They never divided the task. All members of the
group discussed every single part and action each group member performed. They worked in parallel for brief
periods   but never   loosing    awareness     of others'  actions.  They    added   key  concepts  and  links,  and  tried to
eliminate redundant concepts by "generalising" them to come up with a clearer map. It is really important to
point out that before finishing the trial they realised that the concept map shape should be a circle, given that the
water cycle is indeed one. Notably, in the individual maps, none of the participants drew a cyclic map.
          Group B worked independently from the beginning and then started collaborating at the second half of
the session. At the beginning, they added many concepts and links to the tabletop, explaining and giving brief
comments to the others about their actions, which concepts they considered important and asking if they had
already added specific concepts that they may use. The concept map at the tabletop, as shown at left of Figure 5,
is itself a  visual aid  because    it highlights    the different propositions   added   by each   participant. This  feature
proved to be really useful for this group. They divided the task and worked in parallel without collaborating
until minute 20. At minute 21 one member of the group expressed: "your area has more green colour, mine is
purple   and  yours   more   yellow    ... we  really came    up with  three  distinct parts. There  should    be  more   links
between   them".  They     tried to collaborate    after  minute   20. The   evolution   diagram shows    this  change in   the
group's behaviour (right of Figure 4). Then they worked together to decide which links could best connect the
different three main areas of the concept map. However, they ran out of time and the final map was complex and
was a poor response to the task.

© ISLS                                                                                                                       29
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                       Volume I: Long Papers

Figure 5. (left) The coloured links of the map as a visual indicator of contribution itself. (right) Overview of the
 results of the questions related to: equity of participation (Q1A for group A and Q1B for group B), quantity of
                             participation (Q2A, Q2B) and collaboration (Q3A, Q3B).

Results
All the facilitators  were  able to   easily understand      the  visualisations  and  complete     the questionnaire   without
difficulty. Participants were highly engaged in the inspection of the visualisations, and expressed their thoughts
verbally, permitting   the  experimenter     to take  note     of  which visualisations   influenced     their comments      and
answers about the groups of learners.
          The facilitators neither watched the videos nor had access to any summary of what happened during the
group sessions. They inspected the visualisations carefully before giving an answer to each posed question for
both groups, A and B. To look for an explanation of the acceptance or rejection of each hypothesis, we validated
the responses to the questions at two levels. Firstly, we refute a hypothesis if its respective question could not be
answered by two or more facilitators. This filter refutes a hypothesis if the facilitators could not find evidence
from the visualisations to give an answer. Then, the next step was to ascertain whether their answers matched
the observations of video recordings of the group sessions. Table 1 summarises the questionnaire responses.
Columns   Q1,  Q2     and Q3 were     used to   generate    the  graph of   Figure  5  (right). Table   2 summarises     which
visualisations the facilitators used to give an answer to each question.
          (H1) These visualisations provide useful information about the equity in the roles and participation of
the group members. The focus of this hypothesis is to assess whether the visualisations portray the symmetry of
participation of the group members (Dillenbourg, 1998). All facilitators used both the radars of voice and touch
together with the contribution charts to answer this question (see Table 2). For group A, the participation was
somewhat   equitable   but  one  participant    slightly    dominated   most    of  the verbal   participation.    This  can be
observed in Figure 2. In Figure 5 (right, Q1A) we notice that in general the responses of the facilitators did not
confirm that the group was neither symmetric nor asymmetric.             In general, the facilitators judged group B to be
symmetric (right of Figure 5, Q1B). In fact, the video recordings showed that group B members worked in
parallel and did not influence each other. Thus, we accept the usefulness of the radars of physical and audible
participation based on the direct observations of the facilitators who remarked that the coloured shaded radars
and the concentric circles were useful to quickly detect if the participation of a group was symmetric or not.

Table 1: Summary of the questionnaire responses. Columns: questions asked to the evaluators. Rows: AVG:
Average of 7-point Likert scale answers. STD: Standard deviation. * Not all facilitators answered Q4.
            Group A              Q1                  Q2                 Q3                 Q4                 Q5
                               Equity              Quantity         Collaboration      Contribution         Process
              AVG                4                   3.8                5.8                6                 6.25
              STD               1.95                 1.8                0.45               *                  0.5
             Lickert           neutral             neutral             agree              agree              agree
            Group B
              AVG                5.4                 6.2                4.5                6                 6.25
              STD               1.95                 0.8                1.2                *                  0.5
             Lickert            agree               agree          somewhat agree         agree              agree

          (H2) These    visualisations  provide    useful    information  about    quantity  of  participation    of the group
members.   The   focus  of this  hypothesis     is to assess    if the visualisations   depict  the  quantity   and  equity  of
participation of the   group members;      therefore,    it is also related  to   H1. However,   in  this case,   three  of five
facilitators used the Contribution Chart in addition to the radars of Participation and the Map Evolution Diagram
to answer this question. Group A was reluctant to do physical actions compared with Group B. They focused
more on the discussion and negotiation of each proposition to be created and each element to be deleted. By

© ISLS                                                                                                                        30
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                          Volume I: Long Papers

contrast, Group B divided the task and added a large number of propositions. Indeed, the facilitators strongly
agreed that in general group B members highly participated in an equitable way. For group A they noticed that
the members did not perform many actions and some evaluators expressed that they were talking too much and
physically working very slowly (see right of Figure 5, Q2A and Q2B). Therefore, we accept the usefulness of
the map Contribution Chart in conjunction with the Radars of Participation and the Evolution Diagram because
they gave insights to facilitators to size the quantity of participations of the group of learners.
          (H3) These visualisations provide useful information about the group in terms of collaboration. The
focus of this hypothesis is to assess if the visualisations can offer hints to the facilitators to indicate whether the
group was collaborative or not. To answer the question related to this hypothesis, the facilitators used all the
visualisations  including    the final  product   map.    All   evaluators  agreed     that group A    was   collaborative,  even
though their final product was a small concept map. Moreover, the facilitators considered that in this group the
participants interacted with others based on the high levels of talking observed in the verbal radars and the
sparse add link events shown in the Evolution Diagram (left of Figure 4). In the case of Group B three of five
facilitators concluded that the group divided the work most of the time given the low levels of talking and the
creation of many links in a short time window (right of Figure 4). Moreover, the facilitators agreed that the
group tried to collaborate in some way before the end of their activity (see right of Figure 5, Q3B). We can
conclude that the visualisations aid in the perception of various forms of collaboration; however, these results
should be confirmed with more case studies.
          (H4) These visualisations provide useful information about the equity of intellectual contribution of
the group members. The purpose of this hypothesis is to assess if the facilitator considers that the content of the
concept map reflects intellectual contribution of each member of the group. We refute this hypothesis given the
fact that just one of the five facilitators responded to the question related to it (see Table 2). All of them tried to
infer  intellectual contribution    based    on  the Contribution      Chart    and the  Radar    of  Voice     participation,  but
afterwards, they concluded that it is difficult to infer the intellectual contribution without knowing the content of
the utterances. Indeed, new knowledge is created through the content of the discourse of the group (Stahl, 2006).
          (H5) These visualisations provide useful information about the creation process of the map in terms of
the relative contributions     of  group     members    and     the effectiveness   of  the  group   work.    We  validated     this
hypothesis  by  the   direct  answers     to the corresponding      question.   All facilitators  somewhat      agreed    with  the
usefulness of the visualisations because they provide information about the process of map creation in terms of
the physical and verbal actions.
          Ultimately, the facilitators could answer four of five questions. These give insights into the usefulness
of  such  tools for   monitoring    the   collaborative    situation   at the  tabletop  even   when    the   facilitator   has the
opportunity  to  observe     the actions     of the  group  in   situ. Thus,    the visualisations    aim    to complement      the
qualitative function of facilitators by providing quantitative insights about the group. Even when the results
match well with the qualitative observations on equity, quantity, and the most important, the presence of real
collaboration,  the   goal of the  visualisations    is to aid   the qualitative  assessment,    not   to take  its place   (Stahl,
2006).

Table 2: Visualisations that were used for the facilitators to answer each question.

                                                                    Evaluators
Questions                  1                          2                       3                    4                      5
    1               Radars - Chart               Radars ­ Chart         Radars - Chart        Radars - Chart      Radar (t) - Chart
    2               Radars - Chart               Radars ­ Chart            Radars             Evolution map        Radars - Chart
    3       Final product - Evolution map        Radars ­ Chart            Radars             Final product           Radars
    4                   none                        Chart                   none                  none                 none
    5         Radar (v) - Evolution map             Radars                  none                  All                 Radars

Conclusion
We have presented a set of visualisations that externalise the activity of groups working together at the tabletop
to build a group artefact. The Participation Radars provide a mirror of learners' actions both verbal and physical.
The Contribution Chart gives an indication of the extent of each learner's contributions to the group artefact.
The Evolution Diagram depicts the building process of the artefact relating this to a master artefact and with
each participant's contribution. These visualisations trace different aspects of a group, and the combination of
the three visualisations with the final group artefact can help the facilitator better understand the nature of the
collaboration in order to make improved decisions regarding the guidance of the group of learners.
          The ultimate goal of this line of research is placed in the context of fostering co-located collaborative
knowledge building tackled through the study of the digital footprints of the learners. Future research will focus
on evaluating these visualisations outside the laboratory, in real learning contexts. We also will explore ways to
identify the significant patterns of interactions. Given the complexity of group interactions, we believe that it is

© ISLS                                                                                                                            31
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                              Volume I: Long Papers

really important to link the quantitative indicators with other forms of empirical assessment of collaborative
accomplishments.

References
Bachour, K., Kaplan, F., & Dillenbourg, P. (2010). An Interactive Table for Supporting Participation Balance in
          Face-to-Face Collaborative Learning. IEEE Transactions on Learning Technologies, 3(3), 203-213
Buisine, S., Besacier, G., Najm, M., AmézianeAoussat, & Vernier, F. (2007). Computer-supported creativity:
          evaluation of a tabletop mind-map application. In Proceedings of EPCE 2007, (pp. 22-31).
Dillenbourg, P. (1998). What do you mean by 'collaborative learning'? Collaborative Learning: Cognitive and
          Computational Approaches. Advances in Learning and Instruction Series. (pp. 1-19): Elsevier Science.
Do-Lenh,  S.,  Kaplan,    F., &  Dillenbourg, P. (2009).   Paper-based  concept map:  the effects  of tabletop on  an
          expressive collaborative learning task. In Proceedings of BCS-HCI 2009, (pp. 149-158)
Donath,   J. (2002).  A   semantic approach   to visualizing   online conversations. Communications    of the  ACM,
          45(4), 45-49
Engelmann,    T., &    Hesse,  F.  (2010). How   digital   concept maps  about  the  collaborators'   knowledge   and
          information influence computer-supported collaborative problem solving. IJCSCL, 5(3), 299-319
Erickson, T., Smith, D., Kellogg, W., Laff, M., Richards, J., & Bradner, E. (1999). Socially translucent systems:
          social proxies, persistent conversation, and the design of "babble". In Proceedings of SIGCHI 1999,
          (pp. 72-79).
Falcao, T. P., & Price, S. (2009). What have you done! the role of 'interference' in tangible environments for
          supporting collaborative learning. In Proceedings of CSCL 2009, (pp. 325-334)
Harris, A., Rick, J., Bonnett, V., Yuill, N., Fleck, R., Marshall, P., & Rogers, Y. (2009). Around the table: are
          multiple-touch   surfaces  better    than  single-touch   for  children's  collaborative  interactions?  In
          Proceedings of CSCL 2009, (pp. 335-344)
Janssen, J., Erkens, G., Kanselaar, G., & Jaspers, J. (2007). Visualization of participation: Does it contribute to
          successful computer-supported collaborative learning? Computers & Education, 49(4), 1037-1065.
Jermann, P., Zufferey, G., Schneider, B., Lucci, A., Lepine, S., & Dillenbourg, P. (2009). Physical space and
          division of labor around a tabletop tangible simulation. In Proceedings of CSCL 2009, (pp. 345-349)
Kay, J., Maisonneuve, N., Yacef, K., & Reimann, P. (2006). The Big Five and Visualisations of a Team Work
          Activity. In Proceedings ITS 2006, (pp. 197-206) .
Martinez, R., Kay, J., & Yacef, K. ( 2010). Collaborative concept mapping at the tabletop. In Proceedings of
          Interactive Tabletops and Surfaces 2010, (pp. 207-210).
Morgan,   M.,   &  Butler,    M.  (2009).  Considering  multi-touch   display technology  for collaboration    in the
          classroom. In Proceedings EDMEDIA 2009, (pp. 674­683)
Novak, J., & Cañas, A. (2008). The Theory Underlying Concept Maps and How to Construct and Use Them. In
          TRIC 2006-01 (Ed.): Florida Institute for Human and Machine Cognition.
Oppl, S., & Stary, C. (2009). Tabletop concept mapping. In Proceedings of TEI 2009. (pp. 275-282)
Paavola, S., & Hakkarainen, K. (2005). The Knowledge Creation Metaphor ­ An Emergent Epistemological
          Approach to Learning. Science &amp; Education, 14(6), 535-557.
Race, P. (2001). A briefing on self, peer & group assessment. Assessment Series N. 9. Learning and Teaching
          Support Network.
Stahl, G. (2006). Group Cognition: Computer Support for Building Collaborative Knowledge: MIT Press
Sugimoto, M., Hosoi, K., & Hashizume, H. (2004). Caretta: a system for supporting face-to-face collaboration
          by integrating personal and shared spaces. In Proceedings SIGCHI. (pp. 41-48)
Sundararajan, B. (2010). Emergence of the Most Knowledgeable Other (MKO): Social Network Analysis of
          Chat and Bulletin Board Conversations in a CSCL System. Journal of e-Learning 8(2), 191-208.
Suthers,  D.,  Vatrapu,   R.,   Medina,   R., Joseph,   S. &    Dwyer,  N. (2008).   "Beyond  threaded    discussion:
          Representational    guidance  in asynchronous    collaborative  learning  environments."  Computers     and
          Education. 50(4), 1103-1127.
Taricani, E.,  &  Clariana,   R.  (2006).  A  Technique    for Automatically  Scoring Open-Ended      Concept  Maps.
          Educational Technology Research and Development, 54(1), 65-82.
Tergan,   S.-O. (2005).   Digital  Concept    Maps  for  Managing   Knowledge   and   Information.  Knowledge     and
          Information Visualization. pp. 185-204
Upton,  K.,  &  Kay,   J. (2009).  Narcissus:  Group  and   Individual  Models  to  Support Small   Group Work,    In
          Proceedings of UMAP 2009 (pp. 54-65).

Acknowledgments
This research was funded by the Smart Services Cooperative Research Centre, Australia. We thank Professor
Peter Reimann for his suggestions and the experiment participants for their time.

© ISLS                                                                                                              32
