CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                      Volume I: Long Papers

    Constructing Part-task Congruent Representations to Support
             Coordination of Collaborative Problem-solving Tasks
             B. Slof, University of Groningen, 9700 AV Groningen, The Netherlands, B.Slof@rug.nl
               G. Erkens, Utrecht University, 3508 TC Utrecht, The Netherlands, G.Erkens@uu.nl
          P. A. Kirschner, Open University, 6401 DL Heerlen, The Netherlands, P.A.Kirschner@ou.nl

         Abstract: This study investigated whether constructing part-task congruent domain-specific
         representations supports teams in establishing and maintaining a shared understanding of the
         knowledge     domain     and  negotiating    about   it. This  better coordination   of  team'  discussions
         was,   in turn,  expected    to lead   to better  problem-solving     performance.    In  triads secondary
         education students worked on a case-based business-economics problem in a predefined order,
         but   differed   in the representational     tool(s) they  received.   In  the matched    condition, teams
         received     the three  tools in    a part-task  congruent     manner.  In the  other   three non-matched
         conditions, teams received one of the tools for all three part-tasks, thus a tool congruent to one
         part-task and incongruent for the other two. The results show that coordination processes were
         indeed better which might explain why teams in the matched condition performed better on
         the complex problem-solving task. However, similar results were obtained by teams who only
         received a tool for constructing causal representations for all part-tasks.

Introduction
There has been a recent surge in the interest of educational researchers for studying the effects of computer-
supported tools for fostering team' complex learning-task performance (e.g., Slof, Erkens, Kirschner, Jaspers, &
Janssen, 2010). Carrying out complex learning tasks, such as solving complex problems, often requires learners
to actively engage in a dynamic process of sense-making by articulating and discussing multiple representations
on the problem and their problem-solving strategy. Through externalizing one's knowledge, discussing this with
peers, and establishing and refining the teams' shared understanding of the domain, learners may acquire new
knowledge and skills and process them more deeply (e.g., Hmelo-Silver, Duncan, & Chinn, 2007). It, however,
seems that such meaningful discussions about the domain can hardly be reached when learners are not aware
of each others' knowledge, ideas and do not negotiate about them with their peers. In this respect, it is often
advocated    that collaborative     learning   situations  require   three  main   processes   of  coordination:   (1)  mutual
activation and sharing of knowledge and skills, (2) grounding or creating a common frame of reference, and (3)
negotiation  or   the process    of coming     to agreement   (e.g., Erkens    &   Janssen, 2008).  Research    on    Computer
Supported Collaborative Learning (CSCL) has shown that collaboratively constructing and discussing external
representations can beneficially affect complex learning-task performance. Embedding representational tools in
a CSCL-environment can facilitate learners' construction of different representations of the domain through its
representational   guidance    and,   thereby,    guide their domain-specific      interaction (Fischer,  Bruhn,      Gräsel, &
Mandl,   2002;    Suthers,   2006).    Furthermore,     in  their   discussions  learners   can    refer  to the   constructed
representation (i.e., deictic referencing), thereby supporting them to create a common frame of reference and
facilitating a meaningful     discussion     (Suthers,  Hundhausen,     &   Girardeau,  2003).   These   studies, though  very
valuable, often   neglect    the fact that   problem-solving      tasks are usually composed     of fundamentally      different
phase-related   part-tasks   (1)  problem-orientation      (i.e., determining   core    concepts  and  relating   them  to    the
problem),    (2) problem-solution     (i.e., proposing    solutions  to  the   problem)  and   (3)  solution-evaluation   (i.e.,
determining suitability of the solutions and coming to a definitive solution to the problem). Important here is
that each part-task mostly requires a different domain-specific representation and, thus, requires a tool with a
different kind of representational guidance. When the design of the tool is incongruent with the demands of one
or more part-tasks, learners may experience communication problems and problem-solving performance might
decrease (e.g., Van Bruggen, Boshuizen, & Kirschner, 2003). The study presented in this paper is aimed at
determining whether (1) proper coordination process can be evoked through constructing part-task congruent
representations and (2) such an approach can lead to better problem-solving performance.

Coordination Processes
For meaningful     discussion    to arise,   learners  have   to  properly  coordinate  their  discussions   of   the concepts,
principles and procedures by carrying out communicative activities such as (1) making their own knowledge and
ideas explicit to other group members, (2) focusing, (3) checking and (4) argumentation (Andriessen, Baker, &
Suthers, 2003; Erkens & Janssen, 2008). When made explicit, learners have to try to maintain a shared topic of
discourse and to repair a common focus if they notice a focus divergence. Learners coordinate their topic of
discourse by focusing. Also, not all concepts, principles, and procedures are relevant for carrying out a part-task,
thus, learners also have to guard the coherence and consistency of their shared understanding of the knowledge

© ISLS                                                                                                                        264
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                              Volume I: Long Papers

domain   (e.g.,   Erkens  &  Janssen,     2008).     By  checking,    learners    ground  their    communication         in  a common
understanding, which was found to be one of the major communicative activities in dialogues of collaborative
problem-solving      and  related  to   the  quality    of the problem     solving    process      (e.g., Van  der   Linden,     Erkens,
Schmidt, & Renshaw, 2000). Furthermore, learners have to come to agreement with respect to relevant concepts
principles and procedures. By argumentation they will try to change their partners viewpoint to arrive at the best
way to carry out a part-task or at a definition of concepts acceptable for all. In this argumentation process they
try  to convince     the  other(s) by    elaborating    on  their   point  of    view,  giving     explanations,   justifications     and
accounts (e.g., Kirschner, Beers, Boshuizen, & Gijselaers, 2008).

Constructing Part-task Congruent Representations
In the research reported on in this article, learners collaborated on solving a case-based business-economics
problem in which they had to advise an entrepreneur about changing the business strategy to increase profits.
Due to its different part-tasks, such a problem-solving task require multiple representational tools facilitating the
construction   of different  representations.        The   specific   ontology   (i.e., objects,   relations,  rules     for combining
them) of each tool guides learner interaction in a specific manner by supporting them in using restricted views
of the knowledge domain (i.e., problem representations). To effectively do this, one must carefully match the
tools' ontology to the different part-task demands (Van Bruggen et al., 2003; Slof et al., 2010). Scripting was
employed to ensure this alignment between tool, tool use and part-task demands. According to Dillenbourg a
script is "a set of instructions regarding to how the group members should interact, how they should collaborate
and  how   they      should solve    the    problem"     (2002,    p. 64).   Integrating    scripting     with   the     availability   of
representational tools sequences and makes the different part-task demands explicit so that they can be foreseen
with   part-task  congruent  guidance     in  the     representational  tools    (see   Table 1).   By    doing  so, communicative
activities beneficial for coordinating the collaborative problem-solving might be evoked.

Table 1: Congruence between representational tool and phase-related part-task demands.

 Problem phase            Task demands                     Representational tool     Representational guidance
 Problem-orientation      Determining core concepts        Conceptual                Visualizing concepts and their conceptual
                          and relating them to the                                   relationships
                          problem
 Problem-solution         Proposing multiple solutions     Causal                    Visualizing causal relationships between the
                          to the problem                                             concepts and the possible solutions
 Solution-evaluation      Determining suitability of       Simulation                Visualizing mathematical relationships between the
                          the solutions and coming to a                              concepts and enabling manipulation of their values
                          definitive solution to the
                          problem

         In the problem-orientation phase learners have to explain what they think the problem is and describe
what the most important factors are for solving it. The interaction should, therefore, be guided towards selecting
the core concepts needed to carry out this part-task and discussing how those concepts are qualitatively related
to each other. The design of the representational tool should facilitate learners in constructing and discussing a
global qualitative problem representation by guiding and supporting them in conceptually relating the relevant
concepts.  Figure    1   shows  an   experts'   representation     of the  concepts     and   their  conceptual    interrelationships
involved in this study. The conceptual representational tool facilitates representation of the concepts and their
interrelationships shown in Figure 1. Selecting and relating concepts that the learners may regard as beneficial
for solving the problem supports them in becoming more familiar with those concepts and in broadening their
problem   space.  Learners   receiving      the conceptual     tool   could, for     example, make      explicit that    the   `company
result' is related to the `total profit' and `efficiency result'. This should guide those learners in elaborating (i.e.,
causal, mathematical) on the relationships in the two following problem phases, making it easier for them to find
multiple solutions to the problem and to evaluate their effects.
         In the problem-solution phase learners have to formulate several changes of the business strategy (i.e.,
interventions) and make clear how they might solve the problem (i.e., problem-solution) by describing how they
will affect the outcomes (i.e., company results). The interaction should, thus, be guided towards formulating
multiple  interventions    and  discussing    how      each of these   interventions     affects    the   selected core   concepts    by
further specifying the relationships between the concepts and the proposed interventions. The representational
tool should    facilitate construction      and    discussion  of   a  causal    problem   representation      by  causally      relating
concepts to each other and to possible interventions. Figure 2 shows an experts' representation of the concepts,
the possible interventions and their causal interrelationships involved in this study. The causal representational
tool facilitates  representation     of  the concepts,     interventions   and    their  interrelationships     shown     in   Figure   2.
Selecting relevant concepts and interventions and causally relating them supports the effective exploration of the
solution  space   and,    thus,   of  finding      multiple  solutions    to     the problem.      Learners    receiving     the  causal
representational     tool could,     for  example,      make   explicit    that   an    intervention      such  as   a   employing      a

© ISLS                                                                                                                                265
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                               Volume I: Long Papers

promotion-campaign (e.g., placing an advertisement in a paper) affects `actual sales', which in turn affects `total
profit'. Only conceptually representing the interrelationships of the concepts, as in the first problem phase, is not
expressive   enough   for this  part-task since the relationships   need to  be further specified and learners  need
additional information about the possible solutions. If this is not the case, then learners are forced to come up
with   a solution (i.e., the advice) themselves    without  sufficient understanding  of the   underlying qualitative
principles governing the domain.
          Finally, in the solution-evaluation phase learners have to determine the financial consequences of their
proposed interventions and formulate a suitable and definitive advice for the entrepreneur by discussing the
suitability of the different interventions with each other. The interaction should, therefore, be guided towards
determining and comparing the financial consequences by discussing the mathematical relationships between
the selected concepts. The representational tool must, thus, facilitate constructing and discussing a quantitative
representation by specifying the relationships as equations. Figure 3 shows an experts' representation of the
concepts and their mathematical interrelationships involved in this study. The simulation representational tool
facilitates representation   of the concepts   and  their interrelationships shown in   Figure 3. Selecting relevant
concepts and specifying the interrelationships as equations supports learners in evaluating the effects of their
proposed    interventions  and,   thus,   in coming  to   a  suitable  advice.  Learners  receiving  the  simulation
representational tool could, for example, simulate how an intervention such as employing a promotion-campaign
affects the `actual sales' and whether this affects the `total profit'. By entering values and adjusting them (i.e.,
increasing  or decreasing),   the values  of  the other   related concepts are  automatically computed.   Since such
quantitative representations can only be properly understood and applied when learners have well-developed
qualitative understanding of the domain, this kind of support is only appropriate for carrying out this type of
part-task.

                           Figure 1. Experts' Conceptual Representation of the Domain.

© ISLS                                                                                                             266
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                            Volume I: Long Papers

                            Figure 2. Experts' Causal Representation of the Domain.

                          Figure 3. Experts' Mathematical Representation of the Domain.

Design and Expectations
The    research reported   on  here  was aimed  at determining    whether  constructing   part-task congruent
representations  affects both teams' communicative activities and problem-solving   performance  in  a CSCL-

© ISLS                                                                                                          267
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                         Volume I: Long Papers

environment. In four experimental conditions, student triads had to collaboratively solve a case-based problem
in business-economics that was divided into three problem phases each coupled with a different representational
tool. To study the effect of condition, the tools' representational guidance was either matched or mismatched to
the different  problem   phases;  in other  words      it was either   congruent     or incongruent     with   the    required  task
activities (see Table 2).

Table 2: Overview of the experimental conditions.

            Problem phase         Condition and provided representational tool
                                  Conceptual condition    Causal condition     Simulation condition   Matched condition
            Problem-orientation   Conceptual tool         Causal tool          Simulation tool        Conceptual tool
            Problem-solution      Conceptual tool         Causal tool          Simulation tool        Causal tool
            Solution-evaluation   Conceptual tool         Causal tool          Simulation tool        Simulation tool

         Teams in all conditions were scripted to carry out all the part-tasks in a predefined order, but differed in
the representational tool(s) - conceptual, causal or simulation - they received. In the matched condition, teams
received the  three   tools  in a part-task congruent      manner.    In   the  other three    non-matched   conditions,     teams
received one of the tools for all three part-tasks, thus a tool congruent to one part-task and incongruent for the
other two.   Due   to  this presumed   match      between  tools' representational      guidance     and the part-tasks,     it was
hypothesized that teams in the matched condition would (H1) experience a qualitatively better learning process,
evidenced   by carrying   out   more  communicative        activities  to  coordinate   their    collaborative    problem-solving
process and (H2) achieve a better problem-solving performance, evidenced by arriving at better interventions.

Method

Participants
Participants  were    students  from six business-economics       classes      in three secondary     education    schools   in the
Netherlands. The total sample consisted of 93 learners (60 male, 33 female; mean age = 16.74 years; SD = .77,
Min = 15, Max = 18). The students were, within classes, randomly assigned to a total of 31 teams of learners
(i.e., triads); seven teams in the matched condition and eight teams in each of the three non-matched conditions.

Problem-solving Task and Materials

CSCL-environment: Virtual Collaborative Research Institute
Teams worked in a CSCL-environment called Virtual Collaborative Research Institute (VCRI, see Figure 4;
Jaspers, Broeken, & Erkens, 2005).

                  Figure 4. Screenshot of the VCRI-program; Simulation Representational Tool.

Problem-solving Task and Part-task Congruent Representations
All teams were coerced to carry out the part-tasks in a predefined order (i.e., used the same script) and could,
thus,  only start with  a new    part-task after  finishing   an earlier   part-task.   When     team   members       agreed that a
part-task was completed, they had to `close' that phase in the assignment menu. This `opened' a new phase,

© ISLS                                                                                                                           268
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                               Volume I: Long Papers

which had two consequences for all learners, namely they were instructed to (1) carry out a new part-task and
(2) revise their representation of the domain so it concurred with the decisions they gave to the new part-task.
Learners    in   the non-matched       conditions     were    facilitated  in   elaborating     on   their    previously     constructed
representation.   Since   those   learners      kept the same  representational       tool, all concepts      and  their   relationships
remained    visible  and   could    be revised     as learners seemed     appropriate   for    carrying     out   their  new   part-task.
Learners in the matched condition were facilitated in using a different qualitative or quantitative perspective of
the domain. That is, the previously selected concepts remained visible and learners were instructed to replace
the relationships     by    specifying      them   in a   causal  manner       or  as  equations     with     the  aid    of  their  new
representational tool.

Procedure
All teams    spent   six, 45-minute,    lessons      solving the problem       during which     each  team     member      worked   on    a
separate computer. Before the first lesson, learners received an instruction about the CSCL-environment, the
complex learning task, and the team composition. students worked on the problem in the computer classroom
where all actions and decisions were logged.

Measures

Coordination Processes
To examine the effect of condition data concerning learners' coordination processes was collected by logging
the chat-utterances of the group members. A dialogue act is regarded as a communicative action that is elicited
for a specific purpose representing a specific function in the dialogue (Erkens & Janssen, 2008). Dialog-act
coding was based on the occurrence of characteristic words or phrases (i.e., discourse markers) that indicated the
communicative function of an utterance. The chat-protocols were searched for the occurrence of these discourse
markers     that led  to  the   identification       and coding   of   the  dependent       variables  (see       Table   4). This     was
automatically done with a MEPA-filter using `if-then' decision rules that uses pattern matching to find typical
words   or  phrases.  Reliability    of     the dialogue  act coding   filter   compared    to  hand-coding        is   79%   (Erkens     &
Janssen, 2008). After coding, score-frequencies for each dialogue act were computed and combined resulting in
the dependent variables.

Table 3: Coding of learners' communicative activities.

 Activities        Dialogue Act                            Description                                Example discourse marker
 Focusing          Elicitative proposal for action         Proposition for action                     Shall we get started with the first
                                                                                                      part-task?
                   Elicitative question open               Open question with a lot of alternatives   What do you think we should do
                                                                                                      next?
                   Imperative action                       Command to perform an action               Write the conclusion
                   Imperative focus                        Command for attention                      Look at the representational tool
                   Elicitative question verify             Question that can only be answered         Do you refer to the company
                                                           with yes or no                             result?
 Checking          Elicitative question set                Question where the alternatives are        Are you for / against increasing
                                                           already given (set)                        sales?
                   Responsive confirm                      Confirming answer                          Yes, sure
                   Responsive deny                         Denying answer                             No, not
                   Responsive accept                       Accepting answer                           Oh, Yes
 Argumentation     Argumentative reason                    Reason                                     Because....
                   Argumentative against                   Objection                                  But ...
                   Argumentative conditional               Condition                                  If ... (then ...)
                   Argumentative then                      Consequence                                Then ...
                   Argumentative disjunctive               Disjunctive                                ...or... or
                   Argumentative conclusion                Conclusion                                 Thus...

Problem-solving Performance
To  measure    the   effect of  condition       on problem-solving     performance     an   assessment       form  for    criteria of   the
problem-solving task, such as correctness, elaborateness and suitability of the decisions to all part-tasks, was
developed. All     items were coded as; 0, 1 or 2, whereby a `2' was coded when the answer given was of high
quality (e.g., more suitable).

Data Analyses
In CSCL, team members influence each other (i.e., behave more or less similarly) causing non-independence of
measurement (Kenny, Kashy, & Cook, 2006). This is problematic because many statistical techniques assume
score  independence       and   a   violation      compromises   interpretation     of the     analyses.     Non-independence          was

© ISLS                                                                                                                                  269
 CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                                   Volume I: Long Papers

 determined by computing the intraclass correlation coefficient and its significance (Kenny, et al., 2006), for all
 dependent variables for student interaction. This resulted in non-independence ( < .05) for all tests, justifying
 Multilevel analysis (MLA). MLA compares the deviance of an empty model and a model with one or more
 predictor variables to compute a possible decrease in deviance. The latter model is considered a better model
 when there is a significant decrease in deviance compared to the empty model (tested with a 2-test).

 Results

 Coordination Processes
 MLAs revealed that condition was a (marginally) significant predictor for the communicative activities learners
 exhibited when comparing learners in the matched condition to those in both the conceptual ( = 23.84, p = .06)
 and the simulation conditions ( = 42.00, p = .00). When analyzing learners' communicative activities for the
 conditions separately, several category effects were found (see Table 4). First, a significant category effect for
 focusing   was    found;  learners      in the   matched      condition  were      better  able  to coordinate       what    their  topic    of
 discourse was than learners in both the conceptual ( = 4.22, p = .05) and the simulation conditions ( = 6.68,
 p = .02). Second, a significant category effect for checking was found; learners in the matched condition devoted
 more   attention   to guarding     the   coherence   and      consistency of    their    shared  understanding       of   the domain        than
 learners in both the conceptual ( = 14.08, p = .04) and the simulation conditions ( = 23.03, p = .00). Finally, a
 significant    category  effect    was   found   for  argumentation;      learners      in the   matched        condition   exhibited   more
 argumentative activities than learners in the simulation condition ( = 12.17, p = .02). As expected, learners in
 the  matched    condition      were    better able to   establish   and  maintain       shared   understanding       of the   domain        than
 learners in both the conceptual and simulation conditions. These differences were, however, not obtained for the
 comparison with learners in the causal condition.

Table 4: Multilevel analyses for effects of condition concerning communicative activities.

                          Conceptual              Causal               Simulation                 Matched                   Effects matched
                          condition               condition            condition                  condition                    condition
                        (nlearner = 24)        (nlearner = 24)         (nlearner = 24)           (nlearner = 21)              Nlearner = 93)
                           M (SD)                 M (SD)                M (SD)                     M (SD)               2(3)                  SE
Coordination *      124.33 (59.01)         173.82 (130.42)          87.65 (54.21) -         170.36 (79.22) +          30.06    24.02     19.40
Focusing *           22.87 (8.20) -         31.50 (23.37)           18.13 (12.28) -          31.09 (15.83) +          18.42      4.30        3.52
Checking *           57.33 (31.43) -        88.95 (69.43)           39.17 (26.471) -         84.14 (38.56) +          27.74    14.22         9.84
Argumentation *      44.12 (26.92)          53.36 (43.65)           30.35 (19.95) -          55.14 (32.18) +          20.90      5.41        6.61
Note. * p < .05, ** p < .01; if matched condition significantly > a non-matched condition than the matched condition is indicated with a + and the
non-matched condition with a -.

 Problem-solving Performance
 A   one-way     MANOVA          on  the    total score     for  teams'  problem-solving          performance       showed     a significant
 difference    for condition     (F(3,27) = 4.38,     p = .01).     Bonferroni      post  hoc    analyses    revealed    that  teams   in    the
 matched condition scored significantly higher than teams of learners in both the conceptual (p = .01; d = 1.46)
 and the simulation conditions (p = .01; d = 1.48). When the results for the dependent variables were considered
 separately    - using one-way       ANOVAs       with    Bonferroni    post hoc        analyses  - condition      effects  were  found      for
 `justification' (F(3,27) = 4.85, p = .01) and `correctness' (F(3,27) = 3.97, p = .01). First, teams in the matched
 condition provided more arguments for the decisions to the part-tasks (i.e., justification) than teams in both the
 conceptual     (p = .01; d = 1.56)      and   simulation      conditions (p = .01;       d = 1.56). Second,        teams   in the  matched
 condition used the business-economics concepts and their interrelationships more correctly in their decisions to
 the different part-tasks (i.e., correctness) than teams in both the conceptual (p = .01; d = 3.97) and simulation
 conditions     (p = .03; d = 2.52).     As  expected,      teams   of learners        receiving part-task       congruent  representational
 tools  scored    higher  on    problem-solving       performance.      Although         expected,   no   significant    differences     were
 obtained between teams in the matched condition and the causal condition.

 Discussion
 The results indicate that teams of learners that received the complete array of tools (i.e., matched condition)
 were indeed fostered in their problem-solving performance. That is, those teams formulated better decisions
 with respect to the part-tasks and came up with better definitive solutions to the problem than learners in both
 the conceptual and the simulation conditions. This might be explained by the fact that learners in the matched
 condition exhibited more communicative activities than those in both the conceptual and simulation conditions.
 That is, they were better able to establish and maintain a shared understanding of the domain, which is regarded
 as a prerequisite for having a meaningful discussion of the domain (e.g., Van der Linden et al., 2000). It seems
 that the   deictic power       of the  representational       tool hindered learners       in   establishing     and maintaining     shared

 © ISLS                                                                                                                                      270
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                              Volume I: Long Papers

understanding of the domain (Suthers et al., 2003). In other words, when learners are unable to specify (i.e.,
conceptual tool) or being forced to explicitly specify (i.e., simulation tool) the relationship between concepts
this hinders learners in properly referring to and relating their contributions in CSCL-environments. Although
the results seem very promising, problem-solving performance of teams in the causal condition was very similar
to what was found in the matched condition. Since teams in both conditions received the causal representational
tool they  were   both  facilitated in  constructing and  discussing  a  causal  domain   representation. Supporting
learners' causal  reasoning   seems,    thus, important  for problem-solving.    This result  raises questions  about
whether   constructing  and   applying  multiple  representations of  a  domain   is beneficial  for problem-solving
performance. Additional research seems, therefore, needed to investigate whether learners:
     ·    require qualitative   as  well  as   quantitative  representations during    their complex    learning-task
          performance,
     ·    combine qualitative and quantitative representations during their complex learning-task performance.

References
Andriessen, J., Baker, M., &     Suthers, D. D. (2003). Argumentation, computer support, and the educational
          context of confronting cognitions. In J. Andriessen, M. Baker, & D. D. Suthers, (Eds.), Cognitions:
          Arguing to learn (pp. 1-25). Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Kluwer Academic Press.
Dillenbourg, P. (2002). Over-scripting CSCL: The risks of blending collaborative learning with instructional
          design. In P. A. Kirschner (Ed.), Three worlds of CSCL: Can we support CSCL? (pp. 61-91). Heerlen,
          The Netherlands: Open Universiteit Nederland.
Erkens, G., & Janssen, J. (2008).    Automatic coding of online collaboration protocols. International Journal of
          Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 3, 447­470.
Fischer, F., Bruhn, J., Gräsel, C., & Mandl, H. (2002). Fostering collaborative knowledge            construction with
          visualization tools. Learning and Instruction, 12, 213­232.
Hmelo-Silver, C. E., Duncan, R. G., & Chinn, C. A. (2007). Scaffolding and achievement in problem-based and
          inquiry learning: A response to Kirschner, Sweller, and Clark (2006). Educational Psychologist, 42,
          99­107.
Jaspers, J. G. M., Broeken, M., & Erkens, G. (2005). Virtual Collaborative Research Institute (VCRI). Version
          2.2. Utrecht, The Netherlands: Utrecht University.
Kenny, D. A., Kashy, D. A., & Cook, W. L. (2006). Dyadic data analysis. New York/London: The Guilford
          Press.
Kirschner, P. A., Beers, P. J., Boshuizen, H. P. A., & Gijselaers, W. H. (2008). Coercing shared knowledge in
          collaborative learning environments. Computers in Human Behavior, 24, 403­420.
Slof, B., Erkens, G., Kirschner, P. A., Jaspers, J. G. M., & Janssen, J. (2010). Guiding students' online complex
          learning-task behavior through representational scripting. Computers in Human Behavior, 26, 927­939.
Suthers,  D. D.   (2006).  Technology   affordances  for intersubjective  meaning    making: A   research agenda   for
          CSCL. International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning,1, 315­337.
Suthers, D. D., Girardeau, L., & Hundhausen, C. (2003). Deictic Roles of External Representations in Face-to-
          face and    Online Collaboration.   Designing  for Change   in Networked    Learning  Environments.   In B.
          Wasson, S. Ludvigsen & U. Hoppe (Eds), Proc. International Conference on Computer Support for
          Collaborative Learning (pp. 173-182). Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Van Bruggen, J. M., Boshuizen, H. P. A., & Kirschner, P. A. (2003). A cognitive framework for cooperative
          problem solving with argument visualization. In P. A. Kirschner, S. J. Buckingham Shum, & C. S. Carr
          (Eds.), Visualizing Argumentation: Software tools for collaborative and educational sense-making. (pp.
          25-47). London: Springer.
Van  der  Linden,  J.  L., Erkens,  G., Schmidt,  H., &  Renshaw,    P.  (2000). Collaborative  learning. In P. R. J.
          Simons,  J.  L.  Van der   Linden,  &  T.  Duffy   (Eds.), New  learning   (pp. 1-19). Dordrecht:  Kluwer
          Academic Publishers.

© ISLS                                                                                                             271
