CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                               Volume I: Long Papers

  Virtual Mathematical Inquiry: Problem Solving at the Gestural­
Symbolic Interface of Remote-Control Embodied-Interaction Design
Dragan Trninic, José F. Gutiérrez, Dor Abrahamson, Embodied Design Research Laboratory, Graduate School
                      of Education, University of California at Berkeley, CA 94720-1670 USA
                  Email: trninic@berkeley.edu, josefrancisco@berkeley.edu, dor@berkeley.edu

         Abstract:    What,  if any,   are unique   affordances   of  embodied-interaction  (EI)   design  for
         mathematics    learning?   How,   in turn, might  engineering   and testing  such  design  aid us in
         building theory of learning? We draw on media studies to argue that activities situated at the
         hybrid intersection of two media, for example physical-virtual interfaces, enable both learners
         and their researchers to objectify important notions. We evoke cultural-historical psychology
         theory, which implicates gesture as the ontogenesis of inscription, to interpret instructional EI
         as  offering  analogous  enactive-semiotic    tension and   resolution. We   support our  view  with
         selected empirical data from a design-based research project investigating the emergence of
         mathematical    concepts   from   mediated  engagement    in EI activity. Specifically, we  present,
         analyze, and juxtapose two case studies respectively illustrating student success or failure to
         grope toward a conceptual system (proportions) embedded in a technological system (EI).

                                       The hybrid or the meeting of two media is a moment of truth and revelation
                                       from which new form is born....The moment of the meeting of media is a
                                       moment of freedom and release from the ordinary trance and numbness
                                       imposed....on our senses. (McLuhan, 1964, p. 63)

Objective: The Unique Affordances of Embodied-Interaction Pedagogical
Design as Context for Research on Mathematics Learning
This is a theory-meets-design paper. The design in question is embodied interaction (EI), a form of technology-
supported multimodal training activity. Through engaging in EI activities, users are expected to build schematic
perceptuomotor structures consisting of mental connections between, on the one hand, physical actions they
perform  as  they attempt   to  solve  problems  or  respond   to cues and,  on  the  other hand,  automated   sensory
feedback on these actions. Emblematic of EI activities, and what distinguishes EI from "hands on" educational
activities in general, whether involving concrete or virtual objects, is that EI users' physical actions are intrinsic,
and not just logistically instrumental, to obtaining information (cf. Marshall, Cheng, & Luckin, 2010). That is,
the learner is to some degree physically immersed in the microworld, so that finger, limb, torso, or even whole-
body movements are not only in the service of acting upon objects but rather the motions themselves become
part of the perceptuomotor structures learned. EI is not simply "hands on" but "hands in." The theoretical issue
we seek to address here is how the rising cognitive-science theory of embodied cognition (e.g., Barsalou, 2008;
Hommel, Müsseler, Aschersleben, & Prinz, 2001) and related theoretical debates over the epistemic nature of
enaction might influence design-based researchers' conceptualization and implementation of EI designs. We
contextualize this exploration in our recent efforts to create and research EI activities for mathematics learning.
         As a point of departure, consider the following quotation from a recent Interacting with Computers
special issue  on  "Enactive    Interfaces,"  where    Chris  Raymaekers   characterizes   research into   enaction as
"[striving] to create new types of interfaces, which make use of a user's capacities to learn how a system works
by using it... The computer is in this case a tool that is as invisible to the user as possible: the user interacts
through the computer" (2009, p. 2).
         In this paper, we--a research team investigating the nature of mathematics learning by developing and
implementing innovative instructional technology--reflect on a recent EI study that availed heuristically of this
alleged human capacity to "learn how a system works by using it." In a sense, it is this very capacity that we
design  for, because   we   attempt to create  artifacts that emulate  principles  of historically successful  cultural
mediations, such as children learning the numerical system through learning to count. In a recent study, we
embedded a targeted mathematical system, proportions, as the normative interaction principle for operating a
"mystery"    technological  device  and  studied whether     and  how  students' goal-oriented   enactment  in this EI
microworld   supports   the guided  development     of commensurate    conceptual  systems.   So doing,  however,   we
encountered   certain  challenges  in enabling  students  to  "learn how a  system   works  by using  it." As  we will
explain, the particular challenges in question here relate to very initial steps of getting "into" our EI media.
         When instructional designers create artifacts, students may engage them in unexpected ways that lead
them astray of the designers' intended interaction trajectory. This is true of innovative electronic artifacts in
general (Olive, 2000), possibly because these artifacts are historically new and so both designers and users are
still developing an understanding of their affordances. For example, users of augmented reality technology who

© ISLS                                                                                                              272
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                        Volume I: Long Papers

manipulate tactile artifacts linked to virtual simulacra tacitly expect the virtual objects to interact in accord with
their physical ontology, yet those anticipated affordances may not have been engineered into the interaction
space (see Hornecker & Dünser, 2009). EI designs may preempt such false projection by incorporating generic
remote  controllers   or  even   no  controllers    at  all, such   that  no assumed      ontology  is  evoked.   Yet   EI  users
nevertheless may still encounter challenges in negotiating the physical­virtual gulf. We will attempt, below, to
illuminate  these   challenges   of  futuristic  pedagogical     tools  by  looking    back  to the  works   of  Vygotksy     and
McLuhan as well as contemporary philosophers of Human­Computer Interaction (HCI). We thus expand on the
CSCL 2011 call by connecting outside of the learning sciences to greater circles of inquiry. By looking back to
move forward, we hope also to frame the enduring interdependences of educational design and theory.

Background: Learning as Appropriating Artifact-Bound Conceptual Systems
Much   of  research   in  education     has been    divided   along   a  schism  between    "cognitive"    and  "sociocultural"
perspectives. We posit that this split is a false dichotomy that has, to an extent, undermined our field's efforts in
developing     and  evaluating  cogent    theories   of learning.   Thus    we are   committed   to  a  view   of learning    and
instruction    that sees  the   learner as  a   resourceful   cognitive   agent  operating    in a  sociocultural    sphere   (cf.
Karmiloff-Smith,      1988).    Ultimately,  we   concur,    "These     are  not optional    perspectives,   nor  even    strictly
complementary       ones. Each   perspective    completes     the  other, and    in fact, they  are  probably    not coherently
construed independently" (diSessa, 2008, pp. 427-428). By investigating the ontological nature and pedagogical
roles  of  educational    artifacts, we   hope    to gain    reliable   purchase    on the  interplay   of  the  cognitive    and
sociocultural, specifically because our designs are centered on creating opportunities for mediated discovery. In
particular, EI design studies should be of interest to scholars who are developing models of learning informed
by both cognitive and sociocultural theory, because the studies generate interaction data that bring out in relief
mediation practices for the cultural signification of discipline-neutral schematic action. Through investigating
EI-based   mathematics    learning,   we    are interested   in  theorizing  how    social  interactions  steer  participants  to
leverage perceptuomotor competence in the appropriation of disciplinary forms of reasoning.
          The   intrinsically   embedded,    contextual  nature    of human    artifacts, and   specifically the  ontologically
requisite relations between artifacts and their engulfing normative application structures and activity systems,
implies that these objects are never "objective." Rather, artifacts might be better understood as the embodiments
of certain cultural practices, condensed templates of theory-in-action of doing things as discovered in the history
of human civilization (Stetsenko, 2002). As Leont'ev (1981) eloquently writes, the artifact "mediates activity
and  thus  connects   humans    not  only   with  the   world   of  objects  but also   with  other people.    Because   of this,
humans' activity assimilates the experience of humankind" (Leont'ev, 1981, p. 56, original italics).
          Thus,     adopting  a sociocultural   view,   we   espouse    a position   that learning   is the  residual   effect of
interacting with artifacts--or, more precisely, of engaging one's own fluency-delimited mental construction of
these artifacts--as means of accomplishing one's goals (cf. Salomon, Perkins, & Globerson, 1991). However, in
keeping with our dialectical commitment, we complement this view from a cognitivist perspective to promote a
conceptualization     of  learning   also as  the  iterative  modification   of  existing   goal-oriented   schemes.    That   is,
against the sociocultural backdrop view of learning as imitating, internalizing, and appropriating the elders'
artifact-mediated    actions,   we foreground     a  view    of learning  as  discovering     these artifacts' horizons    in  the
course of explorative problem solving, theory building, and creative inference making.
          We propose that whereas the discovery of cultural knowledge entails coming to engage the world in
newly instrumented ways, achieving these new ways depends on particular heuristics, such as pattern searching
and  cognitive   offloading,    that individuals    draws    on  so as   to empower     their contextual    grip  on  the  world
(Dreyfus & Dreyfus, 1999). That is, individuals do not see artifacts per se but rather tacitly enframe the world as
ad hoc equipment for achieving their contextual goals (Heidegger, 1977). In turn, by virtue of learning to use
this equipment, new views emerge for the learner in the form of utilization schemas inherent to disciplinary
content   (cf. Bartolini  Bussi  &   Mariotti,   2008;   Sfard,   2002;   Vérillon   &  Rabardel,   1995).   Moreover,     in  the
activity of applying these appropriated artifacts, people may reconfigure their strategies dramatically in ways
that experts   recognize  as    pedagogically   desirable    (Abrahamson,    Gutiérrez,   Lee,   Reinholz,  &   Trninic,  2011).
This conceptualization of mediated discovery as effortful yet somewhat inadvertent is epitomized in Vygotsky's
essay on the birth of inscription:

          Gestures, it has been correctly said, are writing in air, and written signs frequently are simply
          gestures   that have   been   fixed....children    frequently   switch    to dramatization,   depicting    by
          gestures what they should show on the drawing; the pencil-marks are only a supplement to
          this gestural representation....Children do not draw, they indicate, and the pencil merely fixes
          the indicatory gesture. (Vygotsky, 1930/1978, pp. 107-108)

          In this view, children's inscriptional productions ought to be conceptualized as initially no more than
fortuitous  signatures    of projected    gestures  onto  an    available   canvas--not    as deliberate,  stylized  expressive

© ISLS                                                                                                                         273
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                               Volume I: Long Papers

depictions. Becoming      literate thus consists of  mastering  the objectification of presymbolic    notions    in new
semiotic  systems embedded     in   a new  media   (cf. Radford, 2003;  Saxe, 2004). We    find this  view  of  nascent
literacy as transitional  negotiations  at the interface  of semiotic  systems  particularly  helpful in  investigating
technologically supported mathematics learning. Specifically, this paper scrutinizes empirical cases of students
engaged in problem-solving activities who learn to appropriate virtual symbolic artifacts--a pair of crosshairs
that mirror their hands on a computer display--as gestural extensions that amplify their inquiry. Building on
sociocultural theory and its semiotic elaborations as well on cognitive and philosophical treatments of HCI, we
ask, What interactive dimensions effectively characterize students' attempts to orient into virtual inquiry?

Data Source and Modes of Inquiry
The current study drew on data gathered in an ongoing design-based research study investigating the emergence
of mathematical concepts from guided embodied interactional activities.
         Our   design   conjecture,   which  built on   the embodied/enactive  approach    (Lakoff   & Núñez,     2000;
Nemirovsky,    2003;   Núñez, Edwards,     &  Matos, 1999),  was  that some   mathematical   concepts  are  difficult to
learn because mundane life does not occasion opportunities to embody and rehearse the dynamic schemes that
would form the requisite cognitive substrate for meaningfully appropriating the concepts' disciplinary analysis
of situated phenomena. Specifically, we conjectured that students' canonically incorrect solutions for rational-
number problems--"fixed difference" solutions (e.g., "2/3 = 4/5" - Behr, Harel, Post, & Lesh, 1993)--indicate
students' lack of multimodal action images to ground proportion-related concepts (Pirie & Kieren, 1994).
         Accordingly, we engineered an EI inquiry activity for students to discover, rehearse, and thus embody
presymbolic   dynamics    pertaining   to the  mathematics   of  proportional transformation.   At the   center  of  our
instructional design   is the Mathematical     Imagery   Trainer  (MIT;  see  Figure  1   and Figure   2;   for detailed
descriptions of the MIT's technical properties, see Howison, Trninic, Reinholz, & Abrahamson, 2011).

            a.                              b.                           c.                              d.
Figure 1. The Mathematical Imagery Trainer (MIT) set at a 1:2 ratio, so that the right hand needs to be twice as
       high along the monitor than the left hand: (a) incorrect performance (red feedback); (b) almost correct
performance (yellow feedback); (c) correct performance (green feedback); and (d) another correct performance.

                              a.                                                       b.
 Figure 2. MIT in action: (a) a student's "incorrect" performance (raising both hands up away from a previous
 "green spot" at equal increments, i.e. fixed distance) turns the screen red; (b) "correct" performance (raising
  both hands up away from green at proportionate increments, i.e. different distances) keeps the screen green.

         The MIT measures the height of the users' hands above the desk. When these heights (e.g., 10'' & 20'')
match the unknown ratio set on the interviewer's console (e.g., 1:2), the screen is green. So if the user then
raises her hands in front of this "What's-my-rule?" phenomenon by proportionate increments (e.g., to 15'' &
30''), the screen will remain green but will otherwise turn red (e.g., to 15'' & 25''; note that this pair of heights is
5'' higher than both the left and right hands, respectively, in the 10'' & 20'' case). Study participants were initially

© ISLS                                                                                                               274
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                            Volume I: Long Papers

tasked to "make the screen green." Once the participants successfully effected a green screen, they were tasked
to "find another green"; then eventually tasked with keeping the screen green while moving their hands.
           The initial condition for green was set as a 1:2 ratio, and no feedback other than the background color
was given (see Figure 3b; this challenging condition was used only in the last six interviews). Once the students
displayed   a  degree  of competence   with  "finding green,"  the  protocol introduced  incremental     layering of
supplementary mathematical instruments onto this microworld. First, crosshairs were introduced that "mirrored"
the location of participants' hands (see Figure 3c). Next, a grid was overlain on the display monitor to help
students plan, execute, and interpret their manipulations and, so doing, begin to articulate quantitative verbal
assertions (see Figure 3d). In time, the numerical labels "1, 2, 3,..." were overlain on the grid's vertical axis to
help students construct further meanings by more readily recruiting arithmetic knowledge and skills and more
efficiently distributing the problem-solving task (see Figure 3e).
           Participants included 22 students from a private K­8 suburban school in the greater San Francisco area
(33% on financial aid; 10% minority students). Care was taken to include students of both genders from low-,
middle-,   and high-achieving   groups as ranked by   their teachers. Students participated either individually   or
paired in a semi-structured clinical interview (duration of mean 70 min.; SD 20 min.).

                            a.                          b.             c.            d.               e.
 Figure 3. The Mathematical Imagery Trainer: (a) overview of the system featuring an earlier MIT version, in
which students held tennis balls with reflective tape. Figures 3b ­ 3e are schematic representations of different
display configurations, beginning with (b) a blank screen, and then featuring a set of symbolical objects that are
 incrementally overlain onto the display: (c) crosshairs; (d) a grid; and (e) numerals along the y-axis of the grid
   (in the actual design, the default range of the flexible grid and corresponding numerals was from 1 to 10).

           Our investigation of the empirical data was conducted as collaborative, intensive microgenetic analyses
(Schoenfeld, Smith, & Arcavi, 1991), and we applied general principles of grounded theory (Glaser & Strauss,
1967) to identify and articulate unfamiliar behavioral patterns in the entire data corpus. For this paper, we focus
on two episodes, both of students navigating the early transition from a blank screen to a screen with interactive
crosshairs (see Figures 3b&c, above; see our other cited publications for analyses of students' later behaviors).
We view these episodes as paradigmatic cases of learning environments wherein crossing the physical-to-virtual
divide is required for students to orient into a symbolically enhanced domain of scrutiny with vastly augmented
inquiry and representational affordances. In particular, these data enable us to examine how students are able to
render visible artifacts "invisibles" so that they can immerse themselves in thinking "through the computer."

Results: Two Data Episodes at the Gestural­Symbolic Interface
In this section, we    present and  discuss empirical data  gathered  around   the introduction of  the  crosshairs.
Whereas crosshairs per se are arguably amathematical objects, their instrumentalization as virtual manipulation
devices is a vital step towards progressive mathematization of the problem space, and, indeed, towards orienting
into   the problem    space  at all. As   such, we    view   the  introduction of   crosshairs  as instantiating    a
phenomenological        breach   of    two    dimensions,     the   embodied/physical/here      ("I")    and      the
inscriptional/virtual/projected ("it"). As we observe in the data, this breach and how the student and instructor
attempt to ford it may render visible some of students' implicit framings of the situation. We now present two
brief episodes: whereas the first showcases a user's capacity to learn a system by using it, the second illustrates
a "lower boundary" of the same capacity.

Fording the Gestural­Symbolic Divide
Asa is a 5th-grade male student indicated by his teachers as low achieving. In this study, Asa was paired with
Kaylen, another 5th grader likewise indicated. Sitting side by side in front of the technology, they each hold and
manipulate one of the two tracker devices and attempt to co-produce a green screen. Prior to the layering of the
crosshairs into their interaction space, the boys were observed to alternate their perceptual attention back and
forth between the hand-held devices and the computer display. They looked at their devices so as to note their
relative positions (e.g., to maintain or change the distance between them), and they looked at the screen so as to
note the color feedback (whether it is green or red). Even when they lifted their hands to the level of their eyes,

© ISLS                                                                                                            275
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                               Volume I: Long Papers

such that the devices were in the same line of vision as the screen, we still note the participants adjusting their
gaze back and forth. JFG, a graduate-student researcher apprenticing through this study, facilitated this activity.
The following transcript captures Asa's utterance prior to the introduction of the crosshairs.

         Asa:      <04:59> Oh I see. So I think what's going on is that they [referring to hand-held devices] have
                   to be the same far... [RH thumb and index gestures a vertical interval] the same distance away
                   from each other [RH, still holding the interval, gestures toward Kaylen's device].

         Above, we note that Asa conjectured what we have called a "fixed distance" interaction conjecture,
namely Asa believes that the distance between the hands should be invariant (see, below, Asa's "theory"). We
also note Asa's use of the pronoun "it" in "...keep it the same distance," which suggests Asa has objectified the
vertical interval between the two devices as the thing to be controlled. JFG now revealed the crosshairs on the
screen.

         JFG:      <12:26> Can you see that?
         A/K:      Yeah. [Some technology recalibration ensues for a few seconds]
         JFG:      So let's see if these help us. [...] See if you can make the screen green.
         Asa:      Well...  [gazing  at screen]  So let's try to find green  again. There.   Stop! Yeah. I think  my
                   theory's right. Oh wait, but we both have to be moving, `cause when we stop...
         JFG:      You both have to be moving? What do you...What do you mean by that?
         Asa:      Seems so... Oh wait, no, that can't be possible. [to Kaylen] Stop! [screen is still green] Yeah
                   it's not true. Go up.

         Asa temporarily considered a new theory, by which the crosshairs must be in continuous motion. He
then quickly refuted this theory in light of the empirical data they gathered.

         JFG:      <13:55> You think you can find another green [gestures higher on screen] kind of up here...?
         Asa:      My theory is obviously wrong.
         JFG:      What was your theory before?
         Asa:      My theory was that there was a specific [RH thumb/index again gestures vertical distance]
                   height that they have to be from each other but [waves hand] that's wrong [shakes head].
         JFG:      So what do you... What do you think now?
         Asa:      Uhhm, I think that the height slowly increases. [Kaylen concurs]

         In contrast to their alternating gazes back and forth between the hands and screen prior to overlaying
the crosshairs  on    the screen, once  the crosshairs appeared   the  children instantaneously  gazed  at them  and
thereafter never looked at their handheld devices while operating them. This transition from here to there led
Asa  to re-examine    his  previous  fixed-distance  conjecture;  in turn, the  increased precision afforded by  this
transition enabled    Asa  to  gather data  that he  interpreted  as rendering  his  conjecture "obviously   wrong."
Furthermore,   the    gestural­symbolic   transition  revealed   one  of   Asa's   implicit framings;  namely,   that
devices/crosshairs "both have to be moving" so as to effect a green screen. At the point in the interview when
the crosshairs were introduced, Asa had interacted with the artifact for approximately ten minutes with only
modest progress along the dyad's inquiry into the mystery device. Then, over a very brief period of time and
without  any   expert  modeling,   Asa  was  able not  only   to disprove  two  of  his conjectures (fixed distances,
moving),   but also   to  produce a  new  conjecture,  correctly noticing  that the distance  between  the crosshairs
should increase as they move up. In sum, Asa rapidly and seamlessly forded the gestural­symbolic divide and
immediately availed successfully of the supplemental inquiry affordances in this virtually extended interactive
problem space.

Stuck in the Gestural­Symbolic Divide
Next, we discuss the case of Boaz, a 5th-grade male student indicated by his teachers as "low achieving." The
text below is a transcription from the early part of the interview, before the crosshairs had been revealed on the
display. Boaz has been attempting to make the screen green. At the beginning of the transcript, he locates a
"green  pair"  on   the   bottom  of  the screen.   DR--another    graduate-student  research   apprentice acting   as
interviewer--asks     Boaz  to explain  his green-making   strategy.  In his response,  Boaz  will  be referring to a
"camera." This is not the video camera recording the session, but a sensor mounted on a tripod, part of the
remote-action technology that picks up the infrared signal in the LED beam emitted by the handheld device the
child operates. As we shall see, Boaz's idiosyncratic fixation on this device impeded his incorporation of the
virtual objects and thus delimited the scope and efficacy of his inquiry into the mystery device.

© ISLS                                                                                                             276
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                Volume I: Long Papers

         DR:      <14:02> Well, then, how did you make it green? [gestures toward computer display]
         Boaz:    Oh! By... uhhm...
         DR:      Are you figuring the green?
         Boaz:    By, uhhhm... [swerves body to the left, orienting torso away from the large monitor and
                  toward the sensor; points toward sensor with both palms] By... So, I guess these two things
                  right here [points to the devices that he placed on the desk] are showing the, uhmm [points to
                  sensor] camera. Like [points back at devices] they're looking at the camera, and, I guess,
                  those light things on it [refers to an obsolete LED array that is still mounted to the sensor, a
                  relic of an earlier design cycle] each have a different color in each column. And so when they
                  move it up or down or equal [mimes accordingly], each one, like, I'm, it's pinpointing....
         DR:      <15:23> So what would you do to make it green?
         Boaz:    I would... [operating in the lower range of the interaction space, just above the desk, Boaz lifts
                  and lowers the two devices independently, monitoring for color on the large display; he stops
                  when the screen turns green and holds his hands fixed at that position] ...try pinpointing it by
                  moving them up and down `til I made green.
         DR:      Ok. So...[DR takes a mimed cue from DA] What if you tried to lift your hands up like this
                  [lifts both hands beside each other into the upper ranges of the interaction space--a "neutral"
                  gesture meant to mask actual locations] and keep it green? Do you know any way to do that?
         Boaz:    [Boaz   imitates   by lifting his hands   up  beside each   other  above   his shoulder  height, still
                  staying  in the  interaction  space.  The  screen turns red]  Oh!  It would    go out of the   motion
                  [gestures toward DR's laptop]. It would go out of the camera [gestures toward sensor].

In the course of explaining to Boaz the boundaries of the physical interaction space, DR mimed contiguous hand
motions, which would not effect a green screen. Boaz, however, does not share DR's framing, and so he cannot
differentiate between DR's intended phenomenal element of vertical up-and-down motion and epiphenomenal
or tactical performance element of contiguous hands. Boaz thus literally imitates the contiguous motions--he
assumes he was supposed to do just so, so that when he effects a red screen rather than the anticipated green
screen, he concludes the approach must be technically in error, i.e., that he is out of detectable range. Surely,
thinks Boaz, the teacher showed him precisely how to make the screen green, so that the red screen could not
have resulted from the teacher's error but from something else. This is incorrect, we note, as in fact the devices
remained well within the interaction space: the screen turned red because DR's instructive gestures deviated
from the desired 1:2 ratio. Thus Boaz inadvertently conflated the system's technical and mathematical aspects--
a legitimate, rational inference, but one that impeded his performance for the remainder of the interview.
         Later on in the interview, when the crosshairs were eventually revealed, Boaz remained physically and
perceptually oriented toward the sensor. Albeit he began tracking the crosshairs in his peripheral vision, his
alternating "I"/"it" utterances suggest he wavered between his hands and projection thereof, between a gesture
and its inscription, and thus between the situation's technical and mathematical aspects. In contrast to Asa, Boaz
remained "stuck" between the two media, greatly impeding his chances to discover the embedded mathematics.

Discussion
In  opening this paper,   we  stated that is was    about theory-meets-design.  It   is particularly about embodied-
cognition theory meets design-based research. Although both the theoretical models of embodied cognition and
the methodological     paradigms   of   design-based    research are   on the   rise in  the  mathematics      education
community, critical questions remain unanswered regarding the interaction of the two--about implementation
of embodied-cognition theory in practice and the use of design to evaluate and produce embodiment theory. We
hold that one promising approach to understanding how these theory and design relate involves examining how
users learn to extend their inquiry into virtual realms through appropriating the affordances of new EI systems.
         Having introduced our design, we turned our attention to two episodes drawn from a recent design-
based  research  study  that investigated the   emergence    of  proportional reasoning   from   EI  activity. The first
episode showcased how the introduction of crosshairs on the screen enabled a student to learn how a system
works by using it. The second episode, in contradistinction, presented the case of a student who remained stuck
between what we deem technical and mathematical dimensions of the situation to the detriment of his inquiry
and learning. Whereas    this latter student was    the only such   case in our data,   this exception  affords  greater
insight into the rule. How might we make sense of Boaz's inability to learn how a system works by using it?
         The introduction of the crosshairs marks a critical incipience in the hybridization of the embodied and
inscriptional spaces (cf. McLuhan, 1964)--when users first realize that their gestures are tracked in real time,
they experience the crosshairs as functional extensions of their manipulations (cf. Gangopadhyay & Kiverstein,
2009). We believe that, akin to children in Vygotsky's study who, whilst drawing, transition from gesture to
inscription, the introduction of crosshairs presents EI users with an opportunity to transition to a new medium.
Children's drawings both mark their gesture and serve to create images; crosshairs likewise bear two potential

© ISLS                                                                                                               277
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                 Volume I: Long Papers

affordances: (1) interaction feedback for monitoring remote-interaction traction (i.e., "you are here"); and (2)
strategic manipulation of the environment in accord with task demands (i.e., maintaining green). As designers,
we  rank  these  two     maintenance   goals respectively   as: (1)    peripheral (technical);  and   (2) central (e.g.,
mathematical). However, the designer's discerning perspective does not necessarily transfer to the child, who
perceives the entire system as one new whole. Indeed, our data suggest that whereas Asa reconciled the two
maintenance goals, Boaz did not. On the contrary, Boaz's actions indicate that, while utilizing the crosshairs'
affordance to  indicate   remote-control  traction, he  misses  out entirely on   their pivotal strategic  relevance in
effecting green. This inability to differentiate between central and peripheral utility is not unlike that of children
in Vygotsky's study, who "[w]hen asked to draw good weather...indicate the bottom of the page by making a
horizontal motion of the hand, explaining, `This is the earth,' and then, after a number of confused upward
hatchwise motions, `And this is good weather'" (Vygotsky, 1930/1978, p. 108). To these children, as to Boaz,
the central activity is in the gesture, not the projected inscription.
         Vygotsky's example of a child representing good weather suggests that Boaz's behavior, an exception
in our particular study, may in fact be learners' modus operandi at the interface of physical and virtual media.
More generally, it appears that users cannot learn how a system works by using it if they do not have some
initial sense of what the system is--if they have not even begun to access its intended envelope of interactivity.
And yet, systems such as the MIT interactive device afford as interactive potential not only designer-intended
schemes, but also a host of unintended schemes, such as fixating on peripheral interaction (cf. Olive, 2000).
         This, of course, is not meant to discourage EI design. Indeed, the remote-control technology giving rise
to EI  design  bears     an implicit yet profound   affordance  for    instantiating progressive mathematization.    In
particular, it enables students to cross the embodied­inscriptional divide that is vital for making mathematical
sense of immersive body-based extended functionalism. For example, crosshairs as virtual objects that mirror
students' hand  positions    bear an  ambiguous semiotic    status: students can   experience   these objects either as
functional extension of the body (tips of "invisible canes") or as data points expressing their embodied inquiry
in a virtual reference field of measurement. Boaz is like a blindfolded person who has been offered a cane but
has learned to use it only as a means of avoiding obstacles and not yet to "see" let alone engage the obstacles. In
other words, whereas Asa incorporated crosshairs into his reasoning and, thus, reasons through them, to Boaz
the crosshairs remain opaque, merely extensional location markers.
         We are now able to provide some preliminary answers to the research questions guiding this work.
First, what are the unique affordances of EI design for mathematical learning? By phenomenalizing proportion
into an interactive mystery device, we rendered mathematics learning as akin to empirical scientific inquiry.
That is, in order to make the screen green, students need to figure out empirically the principles governing this
interactive phenomenon that comes to exist only by doing. Second, how can EI design aid us in developing and
articulating theory? EI design demands that users hybridize the embodied and inscriptional, and the consequent
interaction transition lays open to scrutiny hitherto tacit cognitive activity. Namely, this hybridity presents itself
as a double-edged sword: on the one hand, it provides users with an opportunity to link their inscription to
gesture; on the other hand, the divide between the embodied and the inscriptional may prove too great--it may
bog a student in the doldrums of the intended system's peripheral features.
         Yet our analysis offers insight toward answering another, third question: How might theory influence
EI design? With respect to the issue of crossing the embodied­inscriptional divide, we advocate a markedly
low-tech  approach.      Namely,  we  recommend     looking back    at the seminal   work of   Lev  Vygotsky   and   his
collaborators. They      have already  articulated  the historical  human    achievement   of   fording   the gestural­
inscriptional media divide in the case of drawing on paper. This theoretical precedent, we submit, still holds for
future studies into implementing equally successful media artifacts in the electronic age.
         Whereas the empirical work explored here involved a relatively small group of children and treated
brief interactions, the results suggest not only the methodological value of embodied-interaction design, but also
future directions towards the development of effective computer environments for mathematics learning.

References
Abrahamson, D., Gutiérrez, J. F., Lee, R. G., Reinholz, D., & Trninic, D. (2011, April). From tacit sensorimotor
         coupling     to articulated mathematical   reasoning   in an  embodied   design for proportional     reasoning.
         Paper  presented     at the annual  meeting   of the   American    Educational  Research     Association (SIG
         Advanced Technologies for Learning). New Orleans, April 8 - 12.
Barsalou, L. W. (2008). Grounded cognition. Annual Review of Psychology, 59, 617-645.
Bartolini Bussi, M. G., & Mariotti, M. A. (2008). Semiotic mediation in the mathematics classroom: Artefacts
         and signs after a Vygotskian perspective. In L. D. English, M. G. Bartolini Bussi, G. A. Jones, R. Lesh
         & D. Tirosh (Eds.), Handbook of international research in mathematics education, 2nd revised edition
         (pp. 720-749). Mahwah, NG: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Behr, M. J., Harel, G., Post, T., & Lesh, R. (1993). Rational number, ratio, and proportion. In D. A. Grouws
         (Ed.), Handbook of research on mathematics teaching and learning (pp. 296-333). NYC: Macmillan.

© ISLS                                                                                                               278
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                               Volume I: Long Papers

diSessa, A. A. (2008). A note from the editor. Cognition and Instruction, 26(4), 427-429.
Dreyfus, H. L., & Dreyfus, S. E. (1999). The challenge of Merleau-Ponty's phenomenology of embodiment for
          cognitive science. In G. Weiss & H. F. Haber (Eds.), Perspectives on embodiment: the intersections of
          nature and culture (pp. 103-120). New York: Routledge.
Gangopadhyay, N., & Kiverstein, J. (2009). Enactivism and the unity of perception and action. Topoi, 28(1), 63-
          73.
Glaser, B. G., & Strauss, A. L. (1967). The discovery of grounded theory: strategies for qualitative research.
          Chicago: Aldine Publishing Company.
Heidegger, M. (1977). The question concerning technology and other essays (W. Lovitt, Trans.). New York.
          (Original work 1954): Harper and Row.
Hommel,    B., Müsseler,    J.,  Aschersleben,  G.,   & Prinz,  W.   (2001). The   theory of  event coding  (TEC): a
          framework for perception and action planning. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 24, 849-878.
Hornecker, E., & Dünser, A. (2009). Of pages and paddles: children's expectations and mistaken interactions
          with physical-digital tools. Interacting with Computers, 21, 95-107.
Howison, M., Trninic, D., Reinholz, D., & Abrahamson, D. (2011). The Mathematical Imagery Trainer: from
          embodied interaction to conceptual learning. In G. Fitzpatrick & C. Gutwin (Eds.), Proceedings of the
          ACM CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (SIGCHI 2011).
Karmiloff-Smith, A. (1988). The child is a theoretician, not an inductivist. Mind & Language, 3(3), 183-195.
Lakoff,  G.,  &  Núñez,    R.    E. (2000).   Where   mathematics    comes   from: how    the embodied  mind   brings
          mathematics into being. New York: Basic Books.
Leont'ev, A. N. (1981). The problem of activity in psychology. In J. V. Wertsch (Ed.), The concept of activity in
          soviet psychology (pp. 37-71). Armonk, NY: M. E. Sharpe.
Marshall, P., Cheng, P. C.-H., & Luckin, R. (2010). Tangibles in the balance: a discovery learning task with
          physical or graphical materials. In Proceedings of the 4th ACM International Conference on Tangible,
          Embedded, and Embodied Interaction (pp. 153-160). NYC: ACM.
McLuhan, M. (1964). Understanding media: the extensions of man. New York: The New American Library.
Nemirovsky, R. (2003). Three conjectures concerning the relationship between body activity and understanding
          mathematics. In R. Nemirovsky & M. Borba (Coordinators), Perceptuo-motor activity and imagination
          in mathematics learning (Research Forum). In N. A. Pateman, B. J. Dougherty & J. T. Zilliox (Eds.),
          Proceedings of the Twenty Seventh Annual Meeting of the International Group for the Psychology of
          Mathematics Education (Vol. 1, pp. 105-109). Honolulu, Hawaii: Columbus, OH: Eric Clearinghouse
          for Science, Mathematics, and Environmental Education.
Núñez, R. E., Edwards, L. D., & Matos, J. F. (1999). Embodied cognition as grounding for situatedness and
          context in mathematics education. Educational Studies in Mathematics, 39, 45-65.
Olive, J. (2000). Computer tools for interactive mathematical activity in the elementary school. International
          Journal of Computers for Mathematical Learning, 5(3), 241-262.
Pirie, S., & Kieren, T. E. (1994). Growth in mathematical understanding: How can we characterize it and how
          can we represent it? Educational Studies in Mathematics, 26, 165-190.
Radford, L. (2003). Gestures, speech, and the sprouting of signs: A semiotic-cultural approach to students' types
          of generalization. Mathematical Thinking and Learning, 5(1), 37-70.
Raymaekers, C. (2009). Editorial on enactive interfaces. Interacting with Computers, 21, 1-2.
Salomon, G., Perkins, D. N., & Globerson, T. (1991). Partners in cognition: extending human intelligences with
          intelligent technologies. Educational Researcher, 20(3), 2-9.
Saxe,  G.  B. (2004).    Practices  of quantification from a  sociocultural  perspective. In  K. A. Demetriou   & A.
          Raftopoulos    (Eds.),   Developmental  change:  theories, models,  and  measurement   (pp.  241-263). NY:
          Cambridge University Press.
Schoenfeld,   A. H.,  Smith,    J. P., &  Arcavi, A.  (1991). Learning: the  microgenetic  analysis  of one student's
          evolving    understanding    of a complex     subject matter  domain.    In R.  Glaser (Ed.), Advances   in
          instructional psychology (pp. 55-175). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Sfard,  A. (2002).    The  interplay   of intimations and  implementations:     Generating new   discourse  with new
          symbolic tools. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 11(2&3), 319-357.
Stetsenko, A.  (2002).    Commentary:     Sociocultural activity  as a unit  of analysis: How   Vygotsky   and Piaget
          converge    in empirical   research on  collaborative  cognition.  In D. J.  Bearison  &  B. Dorval  (Eds.),
          Collaborative cognition: children negotiating ways of knowing (pp. 123-135). Westport, CN: Ablex
          Publishing.
Vérillon, P., & Rabardel, P. (1995). Cognition and artifacts: a contribution to the study of thought in relation to
          instrumented activity. European Journal of Psychology of Education, 10(1), 77-101.
Vygotsky, L. S. (1930/1978). Mind in society: The development of higher psychological processes. Cambridge:
          Harvard University Press.

© ISLS                                                                                                              279
