CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                 Volume I: Long Papers

How Are Students' Problems Being Solved? The Quality of Worked
  Solutions on a Popular Open, Online, Mathematics Help Forum
                      Carla van de Sande, Arizona State University, carla.vandesande@asu.edu

         Abstract:    Free,  open,   online,  help forums   connect    students  with  volunteer  helpers who
         provide assistance with specific problems from coursework. One of the most popular existing
         mathematics     help forums,   Cramster,  is  an advocate    of Cognitive  Load   Theory  (CLT),  and
         promotes the provision of worked solutions. The purpose of this project was to ascertain the
         quality of the worked solutions that students are receiving, by analyzing 128 threads from the
         Algebra    thru Pre-Calculus    site archives  from     two  perspectives. First, a  rubric based   on
         research-based design principles of worked examples was used to distinguish poor from well-
         structured solutions. Second, student ratings of solutions they received were examined and
         compared     with  the  research-based    ratings. The   results show    that Cramster   is providing
         students with responses that contain steps, and sometimes goals, as opposed to final answers
         only. However, there is also much misinformation in the responses, and students do not show
         much discernment in their ratings.

Introduction
Students often seek help understanding course material and completing their homework assignments outside of
school hours. Free, open, online, homework help forums are an unregulated Internet-based resource that allow
students to anonymously ask for help on specific problems using threaded discussions. Responses come from
volunteers who have the time, desire, and (perhaps) experience to help. Many such forums exist for a wide
variety  of  school   subjects,  and are  especially   popular    for challenging,  homework-intensive    subjects  like
mathematics. One the largest forums, Cramster, can be found on www.cramster.com. Cramster is a proponent of
Cognitive Load Theory (CLT), with influential educational researcher and theorist, John Sweller, as a member
of its advisory board. Cramster's modus operandi is to give students access to worked solutions, and the site
logo (CrA+mster.comTM, problem solved) reflects the conviction that this is a good ­ if not the best ­ way to
help students learn. At the same time, Cramster recognizes that students are responsible for using the worked
solutions they receive in a productive manner: "The Cramster.com team is comprised of current and former
students and we know that while copying answers on Cramster.com will get your homework finished, it will not
improve your understanding of a subject."
         The purpose of this paper is to explore the nature of the worked solutions that students are receiving on
Cramster in the context of Algebra thru Pre-Calculus. Due to the unregulated nature of the site, the responses
might well consist of final answers only. On the other extreme, there is the possibility that, in accordance with
Cramster's philosophy, the responses look very much like worked examples commonly found in textbooks or
other instructional materials. As part of an ongoing investigation on help forum participation (van de Sande &
Leinhardt,   2007, 2008;   van   de  Sande,  2010,  in press),   this paper  views  the responses  students  receive on
Cramster through the lens of cognitive research on worked-out examples, and also takes into account how the
students themselves view the quality of the help they are receiving. To help situate the reader, a brief description
of Cramster is first provided.

Cramster
Cramster is a global online study community for high school and college school subjects that was launched in
2003 by Cramster, Inc., a private company headquartered in Pasadena, California. Cramster offers spontaneous
online help, in the sense that any member can contribute to the community, regardless of their qualifications. In
addition  to the Q&A     board   (homework    help),  the   site provides access  to   study materials  such as worked
solutions to exercises found in popular textbooks, topic notes, sample problems, and practice exams that were
created by the administration, indexed from the web, or contributed by members. Although general membership
is free, participants enjoy additional benefits and access (e.g., ability to ask more questions per day on the Q&A
board) if they subscribe monthly ($9.95/month) or annually ($49.95/year). The Q&A board has four sections
(Math, Science, Engineering, and Business) with subforums organized by subject area (such as Algebra thru
Pre-Calculus). Members have access to user profiles that include self-volunteered information on school, major,
and expertise. In each contribution, members are characterized by a self-selected username, an optional avatar,
board  level (from    Rookie  to Oracle), and    "Karma."   Karma     points are acquired  through participation in  site
activities (such as answering queries on the Q&A board, submitting solutions to textbook problems, challenging
others' solutions, providing notes, quizzes, outlines, etc., and referring friends to become members), and are
based  on an  intricate  point  system. In   the Q&A   board,    Karma   points  depend on   the rating awarded  by  the
student who asked the question (Lifesaver, Helpful, Somewhat Helpful and Not Helpful) and the difficulty level

© ISLS                                                                                                               280
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                     Volume I: Long Papers

of  the board.  For   instance, answering   a  question   on   the Algebra   thru  Pre-Calculus   forum   posed   by a   non-
paid/gold/platinum member could net 3/4/5 points, respectively, if the response receives a "Lifesaver" rating
from the student who posed the request within 7 days. Similarly, Helpful and Somewhat Helpful ratings would
net Karma points, just fewer. Karma points can be redeemed for gift certificates and merchandise, ranging in
value   from  t-shirts to computers.    On the   part  of students,   rating responses   is voluntary   but does  affect  the
student's "respect score" (the number of answers they have rated divided by the number of answers provided to
them).  This  policy   encourages    students to  rate the   help  received  since students   with  low   respect scores  are
presumably less likely to acquire (timely) help from forum helpers who are seeking to maximize their Karma
points. Students can also leave comments, addressing a helper's response.
         Cramster has recently (July, 2010) altered the look and feel of their site, together with many of their
operative   policies.  The policies    described  above   are  the  ones  that were    in effect  at  the time  of  the  data
collection. The current policies and their intentions were discussed in a phone interview with the Cramster press
contact (Carleigh McKenna, personal communication, September 15, 2010). In the newer version of Cramster,
instead of being able to post a specific number of questions per day depending on subscription type, students
must earn or purchase Karma points in order to post questions. This policy discourages students from opening
multiple accounts with different user names, and, at the same time, encourages students to actively contribute to
the community     (and  thereby    earn Karma    points   so that  they  can have  their  needs   met). Students    also now
specify a time frame in which they need to receive a reply ("fast" for 12-24 hours, "faster" for 4-12 hours, and
"fastest" for 0-4 hours), with each of these designated response speeds "costing" students progressively more
Karma   points.  In  addition   to introducing variable   point   transactions for  speed,  the  Karma    point system   was
recalibrated, so that more Karma points (roughly 10 times as many) are at stake for a given service. Finally, the
rating category "Somewhat Helpful" has been altered to "Needs More Work." The hope is that this change in
semantics will encourage communication between students and helpers, so that helpers will make clarifications
when needed and students can get additional help if the problem has not been resolved for them.

Theoretical Perspectives
Although help seeking once carried with it a stigma of laziness or incompetence, many theorists now recognize
this activity as a potentially legitimate part of the learning process (Karabenick, 1998; Nelson-Le Gall, 1985;
Newman,     1994),   and  one   that underscores   the   Vygotskian    (1978)  notion  of   learning  as  inherently  social.
Whether    or not help    seeking  has  strategic value   for  learning  depends   on  several   attributes of  the situation
(Karabenick & Newman, 2006), including the performance goals of the participants. If the goals are mastery
oriented, then the help-seeking encounter is instrumental and can provide a means of acquiring new knowledge
and skills.   On the other hand, if the goals are dependency oriented, then the help-seeking encounter is not a
legitimate learning activity and instead merely serves as a means of acquiring information or solutions (Nelson-
Le Gall, 1981).
         It  is within   this theoretical  perspective    of help  seeking   that  theories   of learning   come  into   play.
Different  learning    theories offer  us different definitions    of what   constitutes  effective  help and   how  best  to
promote mastery-oriented help seeking, particularly in the context of problem solving. Cognitive load theory
(CLT), in particular, offers several extensively researched principles for the design of instructional materials
(Mayer, 2005). Taking into account the limited capacity of working memory, CLT emphasizes the need for
instructional   design  to minimize     extraneous    cognitive   processing  or  load   and  to  maximize    germane    load
(Sweller, 1989; Sweller, van Merriënboer, & Paas, 1998). The argument is that certain practices contribute to
extraneous cognitive load, making it more difficult than necessary for students to learn and retain the material,
whereas other strategies lower extraneous cognitive load and allow all working memory capacity to be devoted
to schema construction.
         The use of worked examples is one practice that is consistent with reducing extraneous load, and that,
therefore,  CLT   strongly    advocates.  The  provision    of worked    examples   as a  study   tool  has been    shown  to
facilitate near transfer, to shorten acquisition and performance time, and to make learning seem less effortful
than engaging in problem solving or exploration (Paas & Van Merriënboer, 1993; Sweller & Cooper, 1985;
Tuovinen    &   Sweller,  1999;    van  Merriënboer,   Schuurman,     De  Croock,   &    Paas,   2002). These   benefits  are
especially  pronounced     for  students  who  are    unfamiliar   with  the  material   that is being    learned (Kalyuga,
Chandler, Tuovinen, & Sweller, 2001).
         However, worked examples are not all equally effective. The structure of worked examples matters,
and "may substantially compromise the benefits derived from studying them" (Mwangi & Sweller, 1998, p.
174).   Higher  quality   examples    provide  cues   to  students  regarding   the integration    of  various  components
(Atkinson,    Derry,   Renkl,   &  Wortham,    2000).    In  particular, examples   in    which   goals   and  subgoals   are
highlighted, using labels or visual chunking, are more easily learned from than examples presented as a string of
steps (Catrambone, 1995, 1998).

© ISLS                                                                                                                    281
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                    Volume I: Long Papers

Methods

The Corpus
All of the threads from the archives of the Algebra thru Pre-Calculus Q&A board were collected for the month
of September, 2009. This netted 1,246 threaded discussions. Next, in order to have a tractable number of threads
to  analyze  regarding  response   quality, 10   threads from   each      day were  randomly    selected, resulting  in  300
threads. Of these, 235 were deemed topic appropriate for Algebra thru Pre-Calculus. The Algebra thru Pre-
Calculus threads were next coded for the type of response sought according to problem type: Solution (worked
solution to given exercise), Explanation (explanation or description of concept), Clarification (clarification of
solution  retrieved   from other  source),  Verification  (assessment      of  accuracy    for solution), and  Information
(formula). Because this project focuses on the quality of worked examples, only the 211 threads that involved a
student seeking a solution were selected. There were 32 threads in which, against Cramster policy, a student
posed more than one exercise, and these were discarded. Finally, only threads in which the problem statement,
as  presented by  the   student   in the initial  post, was well-defined       (e.g., complete   and  unambiguous)     were
included.  After this culling, the data set amounted to a total of 128 student requests for solutions and 194 helper
responses.
         The 128 student requests came from 82-94 different students, and the 194 responses came from 109-
115 different helpers (since 13 students and 7 helpers used the shared user name "Anonymous"). All user names
referred to in this paper have been altered to protect the (online) identity of participants, but an effort was made
to use pseudonyms that still convey the user's persona.

The Analyses
All  responses   received  to  the   128  student  requests    for solutions     were  examined    for   quality  from   two
perspectives: cognitive research-based principles for worked examples, and student perception.

Research-based Quality
To assess the quality of the help received on Cramster in light of theory-based design principles for worked
examples, each helper response was assigned a rating from 0 to 5. Table 1 contains a description of some of the
features that differentiated helper solutions. A 0 was assigned to helper responses that were either absent (0NR),
were not a solution to the problem statement (0NS), or were mathematically inaccurate (0WR); a 5 was assigned
to responses that almost had a "textbook quality" feel to them, clearly and concisely laying out the solution
using steps, associated (sub)goals, labels, and, perhaps adding warnings or checks. Inter-rater agreement was
89% and all differences were resolved following discussion.

Table 1: Research-based quality rubric for solutions posted on Cramster.

          Rating       Features
              0NR      No response
          0   0NS      Response not representing solution to problem posed (e.g., solution to alternative problem
                       statement)
              0WR      Mathematically inaccurate (wrong) response
              1        Mathematically accurate response, but one that consists of a final answer only
              2        Accurate response that provides a sketch of the solution, or an incomplete worked solution
              3        Accurate response that closely resembles an instructor solution manual, containing some
                       steps, but few, if any, (sub)goals or explanations
              4        Accurate response that contains many steps and associated (sub)goals, but that is
                       somewhat hard to follow (such as using inconsistent notation), or that contains extraneous
                       steps (such as unnecessary conversions)
              5        Accurate response that contains steps, associated (sub)goals, labels, and, perhaps, warnings
                       or checks, with a clear and concise presentation style and format

Student-based Quality
Within 7 days of a response, students may rate the help on Cramster, as mentioned above. These ratings allow
students  to give the   helpers   feedback  and   provide  an  indication     of how   students  view    the quality  of the
responses. Because of the reformatting of the site, the original student ratings in the archives (whence the data
set came)    had  been   translated   to the  new   rating  system.       There  were    5  categories   reflecting  student
pronouncement    of   quality, or lack   thereof: Lifesaver (L),   Helpful     (H),   Needs Work   (NW)      (old Somewhat
Helpful), (NH) Not Helpful, and No Rating (NR).

© ISLS                                                                                                                    282
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                    Volume I: Long Papers

Results

Research-based Quality
Figure 1 contains the percentage of responses according to their quality as worked examples using the research-
based rubric. The quasi-bimodal distribution of the results tells the two sides of the story on the quality of the
responses students are receiving on Cramster.

                   Figure 1. Percentage of Responses According to Quality as Worked Example.

          The first part of the story is that students are receiving responses on Cramster, that the site is not just
providing students with final answers, and, that many solutions posted are at least the quality of an instructor
solution manual. Only 24 of the total 128 student requests in the data set, went unanswered (0NR). Although
this is a relatively high nonresponse rate compared with similarly structured mathematics help forums (van de
Sande     &   Leinhardt, 2007),    it is  still remarkable   since   Cramster  helpers  do   not necessarily   receive  any
compensation      (Karma    points)   or  commendation    (forum     status) for  their efforts. The  average    number    of
responses to requests that were answered was approximately 1.9 (194 responses for 104 requests).
          Furthermore, of the student queries that received responses, only approximately 7% of the responses
consisted of a final answer only (1), resembling what one typically finds in a "back of the book" answer section.
These  responses     are of absolutely    no  use as worked   examples    from   which  to  learn, and   violate Cramster's
posted anti-cheating policy at that time: "Copying solutions or posting unexplained final answers on the Q&A
Board promotes completion without comprehension, and that's something we don't support on this site" [italics
added]. This low percentage is definite cause for comfort since the site is not regulated, standing outside the
purview of formal educational institutions.
          Finally,   44%  of   the solutions    students are receiving on    Cramster   are the  quality of those  found   in
instructor solution manuals (3), or higher (4-5). These solutions, at the least, contain steps, and may also contain
associated goals and explanations. Students could presumably use these solutions as worked examples to learn
the material, much in the spirit of how they use examples that are provided in a textbook or other instruction
materials.    Figure  2  shows  a   high  quality  worked    solution  that  was  received   in  response   to the problem
statement: A 10-m ladder is leaning against a building. The bottom of the ladder is 5-m from the building. How
high   is the top of  the  ladder?    The helper,  Gondal,   includes  a  labeled diagram,   a  goal ("use  the  pythaorean
theorum"[sic]), an explanation ("right triangle"), and the solution broken down into steps. At the same time, this
solution   is not perfect;  it contains   several  spelling  errors, and, more   importantly,   does not  explain  why  the
negative solution value to the quadratic was not considered (e.g, because h is a length and therefore must be
nonnegative).   Despite   these    flaws, the   student, What08,   appreciated the  quality  of  the response,   giving it a
Lifesaver rating and commenting "thanks."

© ISLS                                                                                                                   283
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                              Volume I: Long Papers

             Figure 2. High Quality Worked Example Containing Steps, Explanations, and a Diagram.

          The second part of the story, and a part that is cause for some concern, is that students are receiving
incorrect information     on Cramster,  and   that many  of the responses they  receive  are not   usable as worked
examples. Indeed, 24% of the responses in the sample contained mathematically inaccurate statements (0WR).
Here,  I  note  that   accuracy    was coded   very  conservatively, and  captured   subtle  errors that  concerned
mathematical aspects of the argument (such as the failure to use parentheses consistently), in addition to more
flagrant transgressions (such as incorrectly factoring an expression). However, the justification for this decision
was that  the  students   who  receive  these responses  cannot be assumed  to  have the mathematical     experience
necessary to detect errors (especially subtle ones) in an argument, and may be using these responses as a model.
          Accuracy is the minimal criteria for being useful as a worked example. A number of responses also fell
short of providing students with the semblance of a worked example. Altogether 41% of the responses received
did not   meet  the   criteria for being  a passable  worked    example, either because  they  contained    incorrect
information (0WR), consisted only of the final answer (1), or, were in some way, incomplete (2).

Student-based Quality
Another metric for quality comes from the ratings given by student Cramster users to the responses they receive.
Table 2 shows the number of responses (containing solutions) by student ratings (Not Helpful, Needs Work,
Helpful, Lifesaver, No Rating) and the research-based quality rubric (0WR, 1-5).
          As the last row in Table 2 shows, students did generally rate helper responses. Although they may have
done so in order to maintain a high "respect score" (as discussed above), this score is completely independent of
the actual student rating (a "Not Helpful" affects the student's respect score the same as a "Lifesaver" rating).
Looking   at Table    2, we  see that, when   they give  them, students appear  generous in  their ratings. Of  these
responses  that received     ratings (n=163),  the  vast majority  (n=156)  received moderate    (Helpful)   to high
(Lifesaver) marks, and no responses received the lowest rating, Not Helpful.

© ISLS                                                                                                            284
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                            Volume I: Long Papers

Table 2: Student ratings and research-based ratings for the quality of responses containing solutions.

                      Not Helpful      Needs Work      Helpful        Lifesaver     No Rating      Total
          0WR              0               3              15              22             6           46
            1              0               2              7               6              1           16
            2              0               1              10              4              2           17
            3              0               1              27              22             2           52
            4              0               0              13              12             2           27
            5              0               0              7               11             0           18
          Total            0               7              79              77            13           176

         Of course, the question that begs to be asked here is whether the marks are deserved, according to some
independent and informed criteria, such as our quality rubric. The answer is that it appears that students are not
very critical of "bad" help, and that they also appreciate "good" help. Of the solutions that were mathematically
inaccurate (0WR), less than 7% (3 of 46) received poor marks. This trend also held for solutions that consisted
of final answers only (1), for which only 13% (2 of 16) received a rating of "Needs Work." Solutions that were
"good"  worked   examples    (4-5) were recognized as such,  receiving  no   poor marks  (0 of 45) and   equivalent
Helpful (n=20) and Lifesaver ratings (n=23). The upshot is that students give high marks to inaccurate responses
(55% received a Lifesaver rating, compared to 45% of the accurate responses).      Also, students tend to be more
prone to give higher ratings as the quality of the help increases.

An Example
Figure 3 shows an exchange in which an incorrect response received the highest rating possible and a correct
response received a lower, although still good, rating. It is not clear what order the two responses were received
in, since timing information, except for the date, is no longer published in the threads. The student, Chargem,
gave the problem statement, which included a specific method, namely completing the square, and received a
response from nzatisw58 that contained several quite serious mathematical errors. Indeed, the worked solution
makes   only  one true   statement (x^2+10x+1  =   0 can be  rewritten    as x^2+10x  =  -1). Chargem    responded
enthusiastically to this response, though, and, beyond giving it a "Lifesaver" rating, took the time to add an
enthusiastic and appreciative comment for the "detailed explanation." Another response, from Firth, provided
the correct solution (albeit with only one goal describing the first step for completing the square), but only
received a "Helpful"    rating without  comment.   Note, however,    that neither helper alluded  to a  conceptual
rationale for performing the steps that were included (e.g., a diagram illustrating the meaning of the terms).

Question:

Answers:

© ISLS                                                                                                           285
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                            Volume I: Long Papers

Figure 3. Question and Two Helper Responses: Incorrect one gets "Lifesaver." Correct response gets "Helpful."

Discussion
Thousands of students bring their problems to Cramster, presumably in the hopes of receiving a worked solution
in good  time  from   more experienced others. We   see evidence from  this project that students are generally
receiving worked solutions as opposed to final answers, and that many of these worked solutions provide at
least steps to follow. This is good news. On the other hand, many of the solutions also contain errors, some
more   serious than   others. Such worked solutions could  have  the opposite effect than  intended   by giving
unsuspecting and perhaps mathematically naïve students an incorrect example to follow as their guide. Based on
their own ratings, it appears that students do not discern these errors and simply appreciate the fact that they
have received assistance.
         Of course, students may be communicating with helpers off-line (e.g., through private messaging) for
clarification, and an observational methodology cannot capture this. Also, we cannot speak to the (ab)use of the

© ISLS                                                                                                          286
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                Volume I: Long Papers

responses as   worked   examples,    regardless  of their quality. Are students   using the  solutions they  receive as
problem   solving   models,   or  are   they passively    copying  them?   In the   former  case, students   would   be
experiencing the benefits of learning from worked-out examples, whereas, in the case of copying, students are
cheating and no learning is taking place. Finally, we have no evidence that providing worked examples in an
online help forum environment trumps alternative pedagogical practices (such as guided discovery) favored by
other learning paradigms. In sum, this project addressed how student's problems are being solved ­ the question
of whether students' problems are really being solved still awaits an answer.

References
Atkinson,   R. K.,    Derry, S. J.,  Renkl,  A.,  & Wortham,    D.  (2000).   Learning  from   examples:  Instructional
         principles from the worked examples research, Review of Educational Research, 70, 181-214.
Catrambone, R. (1995). Aiding subgoal learning: Effects on transfer. Journal of Educational Psychology, 87, 5-
         17.
Catrambone, R. (1998). The subgoal learning model: Creating better examples so that students can solve novel
         problems. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 127, 355-376.
Kalyuga, S., Chandler, P., Tuovinen, J., & Sweller, J. (2001). When problem solving is superior to studying
         worked examples. Applied Educational Psychology, 93, 579-588.
Karabenick,  S.  A.   (1998).  Help  seeking   as a  strategic resource.  In  S. A. Karabenick   (Ed.), Strategic help
         seeking: Implications for learning and teaching (pp. 1-11). Mahwah, NJ, Erlbaum.
Karabenick, S. A., & Newman, R. S. (Eds.). (2006). Help seeking in academic settings: Goals, groups, and
         contexts. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Mayer, R. E. (Ed). (2005). Cambridge Handbook of Multimedia Learning. New York: Cambridge University
         Press.
Mwangi, W., & Sweller, J. (1998). Learning to solve compare word problems: The effect of example format and
         generating self-explanations. Cognition and Instruction, 16, 173-199.
Nelson-Le    Gall, S. (1981).   Help-seeking:   An  understudied   problem-solving  skill in children.  Developmental
         Review, 1, 224-246.
Nelson-Le Gall, S. (1985). Help-seeking behavior in learning. Review of Research in Education, 12, 55-90.
Newman, R. S. (1994). Adaptive help seeking: A strategy of self-regulated learning. In D. H. Schunk & B. J.
         Zimmerman (Eds.), Self-regulation of learning and performance: Issues and educational applications
         (pp. 283-301). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Paas, F. G. W. C., & Van Merriënboer, J. J. G. (1993). The efficiency of instructional conditions: an approach to
         combine mental effort and performance measures. Human Factors, 35, 737-743.
Sweller, J.  (1989).  Cognitive   technology:    some procedures   for facilitating learning  and problem    solving in
         mathematics and science. Journal of Educational Psychology, 81, 457-466.
Sweller, J., & Cooper, G. A. (1985). The use of worked examples as substitute for problem solving in learning
         algebra. Cognition and Instruction, 2, 59-89.
Sweller, J., van   Merriënboer,   J. J. G.,  & Paas,  F.  G. W. C.  (1998).  Cognitive  architecture and  instructional
         design, Educational Psychology Review, 10(3), 251-296.
Tuovinen, J. E., & Sweller, J. (1999). A comparison of cognitive load associated with discovery learning and
         worked examples. Journal of Educational Psychology, 91, 334-341.
van de Sande, C. (2010, June). Free, open, online, mathematics help forums: The good, the bad, and the ugly. In
         K.  Gomez,    L.  Lyons,    &  J. Radinsky   (Eds.),  Learning  in  the Disciplines:  Proceedings   of the  9th
         International Conference of the Learning Sciences 2010 (Vol. I, pp. 643-650). Chicago, IL: ISLS.
van de   Sande,  C.   (in press). A  Description    and  Characterization  of Student   Activity in an  Open,   Online,
         Mathematics Help Forum, Educational Studies in Mathematics.
van de  Sande,  C.,   &   Leinhardt, G.  (2007).  Online  tutoring  in the  Calculus: Beyond   the  limit of the  limit.
         Éducation et Didactique, 1(2), 115-154.
van de Sande, C. & Leinhardt, G. (2008, June). The Good Samaritan effect: A lens for understanding patterns of
         participation. In P. A. Kirschner, F. Prins, V. Jonker & G. Kanselaar (Eds.), Proceedings of the 8th
         International Conference for the Learning Sciences 2008 (Vol. II, pp. 240-247). The Netherlands:ISLS.
van Merriënboer, J. J. G., Schuurman, J. G., De Croock, M. B. M., & Paas, F. G. W. C. (2002). Redirecting
         learners' attention during training: effects on cognitive load, transfer test performance and efficiency.
         Learning and Instruction, 12, 11-37.
Vygotsky,   L. S.,  (1978).  Mind    in society: The  development   of  higher   psychological processes.  Cambridge,
         Massachusetts, Harvard University Press.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by a grant from the Spencer Foundation (#201000107).

© ISLS                                                                                                               287
