CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                     Volume I: Long Papers

   Fostering Representational Competence through Argumentation
                             with Multi-Representational Displays
 Mike Stieff, Department of Chemistry, Learning Sciences Research Institute, University of Illinois, Chicago,
                                                     mstieff@uic.edu

          Abstract:   The   present  study  examines    how students    collaboratively    reason  about  scientific
          phenomena    by   coordinating   multiple  representations    presented    in  a  single  display  in   the
          Connected Chemistry modeling environment. A case study of two secondary students working
          together  to solve    a chemical    equilibrium  problem      illustrates how    students privilege    one
          representation,   yet problem    solve by  collaboratively    integrating  information    from   multiple
          representations.   Working    with   the environment,    individual    students    make   a  rapid   initial
          judgment about which displayed representation is most useful for a particular task and ignore
          information   presented   in  other  representations unless    their  peers   prompt    them to  use   that
          information.    Analyzed    individually,  each  student    would    appear   to   lack  representational
          competence, yet together the dyad demonstrates sophisticated coordination of representations.
          Using  these    observations,  the   study posits   that   an individual    student's   difficulties with
          coordinating representations can be mitigated by embedding multi-representational displays in
          collaborative activities that foster argumentation about representations.

Introduction
In many    science    domains,  particularly   chemistry,  teaching     and learning    makes    extensive   use  of   external
representations. In the classroom, students must often interpret and manipulate multiple representations of a
single  phenomenon     to   apprehend   elementary   concepts.   For    example,    any  given   chemical    reaction   can   be
represented  with   an energy     coordinate  diagram,  a  molecular    orbital  diagram   or   a reaction   mechanism    that
together  describe    the reaction.  Historically,  chemists  have    developed     many   representations   to   embed   vast
amounts of information in small diagrams and to make problem solving more efficient (Hoffmann & Laszlo,
1991). Indeed, the most successful problem solving strategies used by expert chemists employ simultaneous,
coordinated  use  of  several   representations.   Although unproblematic      for  experts,  the  wide   variety of   external
representations and their coordinated use has been a reported learning barrier for chemistry students for decades
(Johnstone,  1993).   To  address   students'  learning difficulties  with  multiple    representations   in chemistry,   new
computer-based     curricula  attempt   to  enhance   students'  interpretation     of  chemical    representations    through
simultaneous    displays  of multiple   representations   (Kozma,     Russell,  Jones,   Marx,    & Davis,   1996;     Stieff &
Wilensky, 2003; Wu, Krajcik, & Soloway, 2001). Although each learning environment is unique, all share a
common     goal of  making   explicit  the  information   embedded      in multiple  representations   concurrently     with   a
visual  display  of   submicroscopic    views   of  molecular   interactions.   Thus,    each   provides  "multiple,    linked
representations" to help students coordinate among representations (Kozma, et al., 1996, p. 41).
          Although    such   environments      are  based  on   the   assumption     that   the   simultaneous    display     of
representations  fosters   learning,  students  have reported   the   same    difficulties understanding     and  interpreting
representations in these environments that they report when using canonical static representations. For example,
in a study of the 4M:Chem learning environment Kozma and Russell (1997) reported that experts were able to
use the displays intuitively and efficiently, but students were unable to choose among or coordinate the given
representations to problem solve. Similarly, Wu et al. (2001) reported that students using the eChem modeling
environment were given to comparing the surface features of displayed representations instead of comparing the
embedded    conceptual    information.  Thus,   in  the early stages    of  chemistry   learning,   students appear    to lack
content  knowledge     that allows   them   to  make  inferences   from    the  wide    array of  chemical   representations
available.  Clearly,  the  capabilities of  novel   technologies   to   display  coordinated     multiple representations     is
impressive, yet the historical barriers to working with multiple representations persist in this medium.
          A close   examination    of  student  behavior  when   working      with  multiple  representations    offers   some
insight into the persistence of learning barriers in novel curricular environments. In a study of physics students,
diSessa  et al. (1991)    posited that students  maintain   many     ideas  about   the role  of  representations in   science
learning, which they termed "meta-representational competence". Namely, learning is heavily influenced by a
student's  "expertise  in  inventing,  evaluating  and  refining   a variety  of  representational    forms"   (diSessa   et  al,
1991,  p.  86). Although    this  expertise  is of  course  influenced     by domain     content  knowledge,     diSessa  and
colleagues have suggested that meta-representational competence is to some degree domain independent. Thus,
students may be more or less given to making correct inferences with given representations or generating their
own useful representations for problem solving. As such, simultaneous displays of multiple representations may
present challenges for students less competent in evaluating and manipulating scientific representations.

© ISLS                                                                                                                        288
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                   Volume I: Long Papers

         Despite     the reported   challenges  regarding     (meta)-representational    competence,    recent   work  has
revealed that students are quite capable of coordinating across multiple representations in computer displays to
problem solving effectively. Using eye tracking techniques and verbal protocols of chemistry student problem
solving with multi-representational displays, Stieff, Hegarty, and Deslongchamps (2011) illustrated that even
with   minimal   content  knowledge      chemistry students   are   able to select the   most effective   representation to
problem solve. Equally important, their results revealed that in cases where students do not verbally refer to
using multiple representations, their eye movement behavior suggests they attend to information presented in
multiple representations. The extent to which the students in their study made use of information in multiple
representations   remains   unclear,  however,   as    80%   of the  participants  relied primarily   on  the   information
presented in only one representation to justify their claims about chemical phenomena.
         While work such as this demonstrates that students are capable of coordinating across representations
in multi-representational displays, it fails to account for students' use of multiple representations in collaborative
settings. Outside of chemistry, researchers have shown that multi- representational environments can be highly
effective in supporting collaborative learning among students (Stahl, Koschmann, & Suthers, 2006; White &
Pea, in press). In particular, such work has shown that designed environments that allow students to construct
individual  representations   for collaborative    use   or  designs  that  assign  individual   representations  to group
members and require group coordination often result in highly effective learning and problem solving. Together,
these studies suggest that the challenges using multi-representational displays in the chemistry classroom can be
overcome with carefully designed learning environments.
         In this spirit, the present study analyzes representational competence displayed by a dyad using a multi-
representational display in the chemistry classroom. Using a case study approach, I attempt to merge prior work
in chemistry that centers on individual's working with multiple representations with work from other disciplines
that focuses on the coordination of personal representations across groups. Specifically, I aim to explore how
inquiry-based activities can encourage students to coordinate among representations using one shared multi-
representational  display.   The  results   illustrate how  individual   students  make   a rapid initial judgment   about
which   representation   is most  useful  for making     scientific claims  and   ignore  information  presented  in  other
representations unless prompted by peers to use that information. Using these observations, the study posits that
an individual    student's  difficulties with coordinating    representations   can  be  mitigated  by  embedding    multi-
representational displays in learning environments that include collaborative activities that foster argumentation.

Present Study
To examine representational competence with multi-representational displays, the present study analyzed six
pairs of students completing one activity using the Connected Chemistry learning environment (Stieff, 2005).
The activity discussed below included simulations programmed in the Netlogo modeling language (Wilensky,
1999).  Using    the simulation  in  the  classroom,    the dyads   completed   guided   inquiry activities in  which they
observed    molecular    interactions    to  learn  how     macro-level     concepts  and   relationships   emerge    from
submicroscopic interactions. Here, I present observations from one dyad learning about chemical equilibrium.

Context & Participants
The case study presented here was constructed from field observations of one implementation of a Connected
Chemistry   Unit  in  Shadylane   High    School.  Shadylane    High   is  located in  a middle-class   urban   community
serving a primarily Asian and Latino student body and was ranked in the 7th decile statewide at the time of the
study. Mr. Drake, who had worked in a chemistry-related industry for 20 years prior to teaching, had taught
chemistry for 13 years at the time of this study. He noted that he rarely used educational technology resources in
his classroom. Mr. Drake described the students in the case study, Jan and Sheila, as two "top achieving" and
"highly motivated" students. Individual interviews with Jan and Sheila after the classroom observations reported
here   indicated that both  students  self-identified   as  college-bound   and  highly  interested in science.  Although
neither student reported using computer activities frequently in the classroom, each had previously participated
in a Connected Chemistry implementation several months prior to the present study. Thus, they stated they were
familiar with the environment, and each had the sense that the computers were inherently helpful for learning
chemistry. As Sheila said, the simulations "let you see what is going on".
         During the three-day observation of Jan and Sheila working together on one laptop, the class completed
a series of worksheets      included in  the Chemical    Equilibrium     Unit. The  worksheets   required   the students to
observe simulations of four different chemical reactions and answer questions about different aspects of each
reaction. A primary learning objective of the unit aimed to support students' ability to distinguish reversible
reactions from irreversible reactions. Briefly, reversible reactions are reactions that involve the simultaneous
conversion of reactants into products and products back into reactants; irreversible reactions are reactions in
which the reactants convert into products, but products do not convert back into reactants. To that end, each
worksheet asked the students to observe both macroscopic plots and submicroscopic molecular interactions and
make claims about which two reactions are reversible and justify their claim with evidence from the display.

© ISLS                                                                                                                  289
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                              Volume I: Long Papers

The Chemical Equilibrium Simulation
Like   all Connected   Chemistry    simulations, the Chemical   Equilibrium simulation  (see Figure 1)  is      a multi-
representational display that includes three distinct representations that students are asked to coordinate. First,
the simulation contains a graphics window that displays a simulation of submicroscopic chemical interactions
using space-filling chemical representations. Second, the simulation includes a plotting window that displays
macro-level variables, such as concentration, using a graphical representation. Third, the simulation contains
symbolic representations of the chemical reactions displayed in the graphics window.

Figure 1. The Chemical Equilibrium #1 simulation includes a large graphics window that illustrates dynamic
molecule interactions and a plotting window that illustrates macroscopic changes in concentration resultant from
behavior in the graphics window. Symbolic representations are present in the legend and on the worksheets.

Coordinating Representations through Argumentation
Here,  I   discuss how   one  dyad   decided which   reactions  were reversible while  working on   the        Connected
Chemistry Chemical Equilibrium Unit during the first day of the 3-day unit. The exchanges between Jan and
Sheila reveal that each student privileges the information embedded in a unique representation on the display,
but together they coordinate across representations by arguing about the information in each representation. I
propose that the constraints of the activity to provide multiple pieces of evidence from the simulation to support
a claim fostered disagreement between Jan and Sheila about which representation has the "best" evidence. In
turn, this disagreement leads Jan and Sheila to coordinate their representations to justify their answers.
           Sheila and Jan begin the first activity immediately after watching the `Reaction 1' demonstration from
Mr. Drake. Previously, Mr. Drake had described Sheila and Jan as two of his most motivated students, which
was evident in their initial approach to the activity. The girls slowly read over the instructions independently and
then together begin to manipulate the simulation for `Reaction 2'. They note the activity asks them to record
observations both from the plotting window as well as the graphics window to decide which two of the four
reactions are reversible. From their first interaction with the simulation, Sheila appears to struggle interpreting
the interface and the relationship between the graphics window, reporting monitors and the plot. In contrast, Jan
rapidly reads information off the display. With Jan's support, Sheila learns to locate important information in
the display, and in turn, teaches Jan how to find hidden information by interacting with the display (1).

           Sheila:  (Reading  from   the worksheet.)  Reactants, what  do  we got?  What  is this? (Sheila
                    points to the graphics window.) (...) I can't even tell what this is. I think it's oxygen?
           Jan:     I think  it's N-O-2. (Jan looks  to where   Sheila is pointing, and then looks  at the
                    molecular representation key on the worksheet. She leans forward and looks closely
                    at the screen). Yes, it's N-O-2.
           Sheila:  Are you sure?
           Jan:     Yes.
           Sheila:  OK, so nitrogen is/
           Jan:     That's the reactant that we started with.
           Sheila:  I guess so. So, what do we have (..) just N-O-2?
           Jan:     I guess.
           Sheila:  Wait, should we start it? So, we start it and then this/ (She points to the graphics
                    window.)
           Jan:     (Jan reaches over and starts the simulation. The simulation proceeds illustrating the
                    reversible conversion of NO2 to N2O4.)

© ISLS                                                                                                                290
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                               Volume I: Long Papers

         Sheila:  What HAPPENED? Something happened!
         Jan:     (Speaking quickly.) It made N-2-O-4.
         Sheila:  Ohhh! OK!
         Jan:     (Jan records values onto her worksheet.) So K is .958.
         Sheila:  Huh?
         Jan:     K is .958.
         Sheila:  Wait. Where are you getting that? That's time? Can we change that?
         Jan:     I don't know why it's like that (She points to the monitor displaying the value of K). I
                  think it's/
         Sheila:  That's uh (...) OK. I am going to start it over again.
         Jan:     Let it go to 5 seconds.
         Sheila:  Ok, is this what we start out with?
         Jan:     Yeah, I think it's just...
         Sheila:  At this time (5 seconds), K is .95? (She points to the K monitor. The simulation runs
                  past the 5-second mark, and Jan reaches forward to stop it at 9 seconds.)
         Both:    AWW!
         Sheila:  I think it skipped.
         Jan:     Can you just type in 5?
         Sheila:  No, we have to get the concentration back from time zero. Ummm (...)
         Jan:     Do we have the concentrations for those? (...) I think you have to start it to see it?
         Sheila:  So the concentration is .95 of this? (She points to the K monitor).
         Jan:     No that is K, which is/
         Sheila:  Huh? What's K? I think K is the concentration of this (She points to the graphics
                  window).
         Jan:     No,   K  isn't concentration   (...) It's like the point of equilibrium  (...) It's like the
                  constant of equilibrium. It/
         Sheila:  (While Jan is explaining K, Sheila moves the pointer. When she moves the pointer
                  over the plotting window, concentration values for each substance are displayed.)
                  No, wait, look you can just go here. (She moves to a point on the plot were time is 5
                  seconds, and the value 38.3 appears, as in Figure 2a.) Time at 5 is 38.3. (They both
                  write down 38.3 as the concentration of NO2.) That's about as close as it gets.

         a                                                    b

 Figure 2. Screenshots of Reaction 1 at t = 9ms (a) and t = 275ms (b) When the Reaction Reaches Equilibrium.

         In the above transcript, Sheila displays some confusion over where to locate important information in
the interface. For example, Sheila appears unclear about what substance is represented by the graphics window
and the meaning of `K'. As she looks over the display, she mistakenly claims that the molecules in the graphics
window   are  oxygen   and that  the value   of K corresponds    to  the concentration of substances   in  the graphics
window. In contrast, Jan immediately uses the key provided on the activity worksheet to state the molecular
representation is NO2 and the value of K is not concentration, but the equilibrium constant. In fact, the only
information Jan cannot immediately locate in the display is the concentration. Gradually, Sheila comes to agree
with Jan's explanation of the display and each representation, and she begins to investigate the interface on her
own by moving the pointer over various windows. From her simple interaction, Jan discovers that she can locate
the concentration of substances in the graphics window by placing the pointer over the relevant plot (Figure 2a).
In this way, Sheila similarly supports Jan by helping her locate information necessary to complete the activity.
         This simple four-minute interchange between Jan and Sheila suggests that their cooperative exchange
allows them to come to understand each representation and feature of the display together. Although Sheila
struggles at first to interpret the graphics display and monitors, she does not exclusively rely on Jan to interpret

© ISLS                                                                                                              291
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                  Volume I: Long Papers

the simulation for her. Rather, with a small amount of guidance from Jan, she quickly apprehends the meaning
of various  elements    in the  display  and  in turn discovers a   feature of  the interface  that  allows  her    to locate
information that Jan was seeking. As the girls proceed to complete the task, however, it becomes apparent that
each   makes  a rapid   initial decision  about  which representation,  the  macroscopic    plot  or the  submicroscopic
graphics, is most useful for determining if the reaction is reversible. Despite agreement between the girls on
classifying the reaction as reversible, they at first ignore the evidence offered by the other.

         Sheila:    So, what is that (She points to the graphics window.)? N-O-2 is combining to form....
         Jan:       N-2-O-4 (She points to the trace of N2O4 displayed on the plot.)
         Sheila:    Was that in the first one though? Hmm (...) We don't really know/ So/ Do we have
                    any of the reactants in there? (She points to the graphics screen.) Yeah, there's still
                    reactants, N-O-2.
         Jan:       Well I think/ I don't/ we should let it run longer/ I want to see if (...) um (...) (The
                    girls are silent for ~10 seconds as they watch the simulation run.) Is it reversible?
         Sheila:    No/ look/   Yeah,   it's REVERSIBLE/     `cause  look   here (She   points to the  graphics
                    window.) there's still N-O-2.
         Jan:       I know, but look they are getting smaller though (She points to the plot of NO2, which
                    is gradually decreasing.). I don't think it's reversible (...) (After a few seconds, the
                    simulation reaches a steady state and the plots of NO2 and N2O4 stop changing.) Oh
                    wait/ Yeah, it's reversible. (She points to the constant concentrations plots.)
         Sheila:    (Writing on her worksheet.) Ok, so reversible. So, it's reversible and these little dudes
                    are/ (She points to the graphics window. Sheila notes the motion of the molecules on
                    her observation and Jan records a sketch of the plot of her worksheet.)

         As  Sheila   and  Jan   record  their observations  of `Reaction   2',  it becomes    evidence   that each    relies
primarily   on  one   representation to   support  the claim   that the simulated    reaction  is reversible.   Reasoning
primarily from the submicroscopic representations in the graphics window, Sheila argues that because she can
see that NO2 still exists in the graphics window, the reaction is reversible. Indeed, her reasoning is sound as all
of the NO2 would convert into N2O4 were the reaction irreversible. At first, Jan disagrees with Sheila and argues
that the reaction may be irreversible because the concentration of NO2 is decreasing over time. She ignores
Sheila's appeal to the submicroscopic representation and insists they allow the reaction to run longer. Sheila
urges Jan to "look here" at the graphics window to justify her claim that the reaction is reversible. Despite her
appeal, Jan  remains    focused   on the  changing  plot,  and only  agrees  that   the reaction  is reversible  when    the
concentrations become stable at equilibrium and the amount of NO2 stops decreasing. Ignoring Jan's appeal to
the plots, Sheila records her observations of the submicroscopic window by noting the behavior of the "little
dudes", while Jan draws a sketch of the final plot shown in Figure 2b.
         Now confident in their approach to the activity, the pair setup `Reaction 3' (Figure 3a). In contrast to
reaction two, `Reaction 3' is an irreversible reaction that illustrates the condensation of gaseous oxygen and
hydrogen to form liquid water. From their experience with `Reaction 2', they are able to quickly locate the
information in the display requested on the worksheet and rapidly fill in values. When deciding if the reaction is
reversible, the girls  disagree   using  information   from  different representations.  As Jan   and  Sheila   attempt   to
reconcile their disagreement over whether the reaction is reversible, they again show a bias toward using only
one  representation    in  the   display. Moreover,    each    challenges  the  other's  interpretation   of   her     chosen
representation to establish an additional warrant for their different claims.

         Jan:       So, it's forming  water/   basically   forming  water.  (She points  to the   plot of water
                    concentration.) So it must be irreversible if it's becoming constant (She traces the
                    constant value of water concentration on the plot with her finger.)
         Sheila:    No, that's forming water. (She points to the graphics window.)
         Jan:       I know, but must be irreversible if it's staying constant. (She points to the plot again.)
         Sheila:    So  then,   what  now     do we   put  for the  submicroscopic      observations?   Oh,    it's
                    REVERSIBLE.
         Jan:       (She points to the plots of H2 and O2 which are decreasing logarithmically.) Why do
                    these keep going down, when this one (She points to the plot of water.) is constant?
         Sheila:    I don't know (...) Let's keep going. (They watch as the simulation continues to run.)
         Jan:       OH, it's becoming more and more water, it's becoming denser? (She points to the
                    bottom of the graphics screen where the water molecules have condensed.
         Sheila:    Oh yeah. Well, look at that...
         Jan:       So, it's not/ it must be irreversible.

© ISLS                                                                                                                    292
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                 Volume I: Long Papers

         Sheila:  No, it is reversible. Look! (She waves her pen above toward the top of the graphics
                  window were two H2 and two O2 molecules can still be seen as in Figure 3b.)
         Jan:     But the/
         Sheila:  They   are   constant  down there  (She  points to the   plots  of H2 and   O2,  which   are
                  approaching 0 on the plot, and then she points again to molecules of hydrogen and
                  oxygen that can be seen in the graphics window.)
         Jan:     Probably not after a long time/ that (She points to the two hydrogen and two oxygen
                  molecules in the graphics window.) is just because of evaporation.
         Sheila:  Oooooohhhh (....) Wait/ is^ it reversible?>

           a                                                b

   Figure 3. Screenshots of Reaction 3 at t = 9ms (a) and t = 142ms (b) When the Reaction Is Near Completion.

         The above transcript illustrates how Jan again focuses on the constant concentration in the plot that
suggests the reaction is irreversible; Sheila again focuses on the presence of starting reactants in the graphics
window to justify her claim that the reaction is reversible. Interestingly, neither Jan nor Sheila appear confident
and express   confusion    over what they   are seeing. Namely,   Jan   cannot   reconcile her    observation   that the
concentration of the product (i.e., water) appears constant while the concentration of the reactants (i.e., hydrogen
and oxygen)   continues    to  decrease. Similarly, Sheila seems   uncertain  as  to  whether     the reaction  truly is
reversible given only a few molecules of reactants can be seen and more reactants do not seem to be forming as
in `Reaction  2'. The   girls'  confusion is warranted: the  reaction   is irreversible, but   they   have stopped   the
simulation before it has run to completion. Thus, a few molecules of hydrogen and oxygen have yet to randomly
collide to form water molecules and the graphics window shows them condensing into and evaporating out of
the liquid water. Complicating the issue is that the concentration of liquid water is indeed constant and remains
unchanging despite the formation of more water molecules as the reaction proceeds. Thus, the plot accurately
shows the product concentration remains constant while the reactant concentration continually decreases.
         Interestingly, the girls attempt to reinterpret each others chosen representation: Jan argues that Sheila's
remaining  reactants   are due  to "evaporation"  and  the reaction  is therefore    irreversible as  reactants are  not
forming; Sheila points out that the hydrogen and oxygen concentrations have become "constant down there" and
the reaction is therefore reversible because the concentration would otherwise decrease. As the pair continues to
disagree over whether the reaction is irreversible, they call another student, Maria, over to settle the dispute. As
the reaction continues, Sheila and Jan appear to `trade' representations to garner additional evidence.

         Jan:     (Calling over to Maria who is working with another student.) Did you say reversible
                  or irreversible because it's evaporating and then it goes back?
         Maria:   No, because it would have/ cause it would have broken apart again. (She comes over
                  to look at the screen.)
         Jan:     But if you wait long enough this is what happens to it/ (Jan starts the simulation and
                  traces   the  constant concentration  of water  in the   plot.) and   this. (She  points  to
                  graphics window and follows a hydrogen molecule as it travels across the screen.
                  Two hydrogen molecules and two oxygen molecules can be seen on the screen, all
                  others have reacted to form water, as in Figure 3b.)
         Maria:   Nah, those eventually go back down.
         Jan:     Yeah, but more come back up, you can see it. (She points to the graphics window.)
         Maria:   (In disbelief.) Really!?^
         Sheila:  Hmmm...that looks pretty straight or does that mean it's reaching zero? (She points
                  to the plot. Jan and Maria lean forward and stare intently at the graphics window.)
         Maria:   They will all go down eventually. (Sheila looks over at the graphics window as two
                  molecules dissolve into the water.)
         Sheila:  Ah... (Two molecules of oxygen evaporate out of the water.) NOPE! (All laugh.)

© ISLS                                                                                                               293
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                    Volume I: Long Papers

          Maria:   I  know^   it's IRREVERSIBLE!         (One  hydrogen    collides with  an  oxygen   to form  a
                   water molecule. One hydrogen molecule and one oxygen molecule remain dissolved
                   in the water and neither is discernable on the graphics screen.)
          All:     OOOOHHHHH!
          Sheila:  There they go!
          Maria:   YES! (The last hydrogen and oxygen molecules evaporate and become noticeable.)
          Jan:     LOOK! ARE they going back up?
          Maria:   Huh? But, maybe those are just/ (The molecules collide and form water.)
          Sheila:  Ok! There we go!
          Maria:   SEE!
          Jan:     Ok, it is irreversible.

          Jan  explicitly states the  problem   to   Maria:  the evidence  offered  by   each student,  from the   graphics
window    and  the plot,  is inconsistent.    Although Maria   is convinced    that the  reaction is irreversible, Jan and
Sheila do not agree; they decide to run the simulation longer to gather more evidence for each respective claim.
As the girls attempt to understand the reaction, an interesting shift in each student's source of evidence occurs.
Jan focuses on the behavior of the molecules in the graphics window, which Sheila noted earlier. In contrast,
Sheila focuses on the decreasing value of the hydrogen and oxygen traces on the plot, highlighted earlier by Jan.
As the simulation runs, Sheila correctly notes that the concentration of hydrogen and oxygen are close to zero
and not increasing; this is an important observation as it is strong evidence from the plot that the reaction is
irreversible.  Concurrently,  Jan   draws   attention  to the behavior     of the four   remaining reactant  molecules  to
determine whether they are indeed interconverting between reactant and product or simply evaporating. The
group's   careful  attention  to the  behavior    of the  molecules   allows   them   to observe  the  moment   when    the
hydrogen and oxygen molecules react to form (and remain) water molecules. In effect, each half of the pair was
able   to convince    the other  half   to attend  to  information    in a  different  representation   and  reconcile  her
observations to reach a consensus claim that the reaction is irreversible. Importantly, Sheila discredited Jan's
evidence from the plot, and Sheila's evidence from the graphics window was discredited by Jan. As a unit, the
dyad effectively and efficiently coordinated among the representations in the display to reach a conclusion.

Conclusion
The case study presented here offers two theoretical and methodological contributions to research on (meta)-
representational   competence      with    multi-representational    displays.  First,   Jan and   Sheila's  collaborative
coordination   across  representations     in the display   indicate  that representational   competence    should  not be
conceived   solely  as  a  characteristic  of  individual    students working     with multiple   representations. Rather,
coordination   across  representations  can    occur  through  collaborative   problem   solving  and  pairs or groups  of
students can display representational competence that might go unnoticed in studies that focus on an individual
student's behaviors alone. In the present work, the disagreements between Jan and Sheila led them to attend to
information in multiple representations and support a shared claim. This finding is consistent with other research
that has illustrated how groups coordinate representations (e.g., Stahl, et al., 2006; White & Pea, in press), and
offers that coordination     can occur  when    groups   are working   with   one shared  display  that  includes  multiple
representations. Thus, analyses of representational competence should include observations of students working
together with multi-representational displays and avoid hasty claims about an individual's competence.
          Second, each student's content knowledge and skill at interpreting representations can certainly provide
a partial explanation for the observations. It is important to note, however, that in contrast to prior research on
representational competence (e.g., Kozma & Russell, 1997; Russell, et al., 1997; Wu, et al., 2001), the students
here displayed some basic competence interpreting, evaluating and coordinating across representations. While
each   student certainly  displayed   a bias  for using   one representation   to  support   her claims,  each attended to
information present in other representations and attempted to reconcile conflicting interpretations. Of course, the
underlying reason for each student's preference is not clear from the present analysis; certainly, there is no
evidence that the bias is due to individual differences in media preference. Thus, as others have argued (e.g.,
Hammer, 1996; Stieff, et al., 2011), future research should focus on the competencies students bring with them
to the classroom as opposed to skills that students lack.
          Presently, the results of this study inform the design of activities using multi-representational displays.
Perhaps    the most    obvious   pedagogical      implication  is  that  curricular   materials   that incorporate  multi-
representational tools must include scaffolding to guide student attention to different representations. Indeed,
this scaffolding needed might be more elementary than helping students to coordinate multiple representations:
it must support students in attending to each displayed representation. As Sheila and Jan illustrate, individual
students display preferences for using information in specific representations; working in isolation, each would
need significant guidance in attending to non-preferred representations. However, the case illustrates that when
working together from the same display, students are able to coordinate across representations to problem solve

© ISLS                                                                                                                  294
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                     Volume I: Long Papers

successfully. As seen here, inquiry activities that encourage students to provide multiple pieces of evidence from
a multi-representational display to support their claims can foster representation coordination through planned
argumentation.    Simply   put,   the simultaneous   displays   of  multi-representations    do  not  afford  `discovery' of
relevant information, nor are students easily able to use one representation to explain another. By devoting more
attention in curricular materials to enhancing students' ability to attend to each displayed representation and
coordinate between them with their peers, such technologies may result in the improved student understanding
they are believed to promote in the science classroom.

Endnotes
(1) Transcription notations:  / interruption or self-interruption, (.) one  second pause, (italics) nonverbal actions, CAPS
     emphasis on word, ^ rising tone, > falling tone

References
diSessa,  A.   A.,    Hammer,     D.,  Sherin,  B.   L., &  Kolpakowski,        T.  (1991).   Inventing   graphing:    Meta-
         representational expertise in children. Journal of Mathematical Behavior, 10(2), 117-160.
Hammer,     D.  (1996). Misconceptions       or p-prims:   How     may   alternative perspectives    of cognitive  structure
         influence instructional perceptions and intentions? Journal of the Learning Sciences, 5(2), 97-127.
Hoffmann, R., & Laszlo, P. (1991). Representation in chemistry. Angewandte Chemie International Edition, 30,
         1-16.
Johnstone, A. H. (1993). The development of chemistry teaching. Journal of Chemical Education, 70(9), 701-
         705.
Kozma,   R.,   &  Russell,  J.  (1997). Multimedia     and understanding:     Expert   and   novice  responses  to different
         representations of chemical phenomena. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 34(9), 949-968.
Kozma, R., Russell, J., Jones, T., Marx, N., & Davis, J. (1996). The use of multiple, linked representations to
         facilitate   science   understanding.   In  S.  Vosniadou,      R. Glaser,  E.  De   Corte   &  H.   Mandl    (Eds.),
         International     perspectives      on  the   psychological       foundations    of  technology-based      learning
         environments (pp. 41-60). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Russell, J., Kozma, R., Jones, T., Wykof, J., Marx, N., & Davis, J. (1997). Use of simultaneous-synchronized
         macroscopic,    microscopic,    and    symbolic   representations    to enhance     the teaching   and learning  of
         chemical concepts. Journal of Chemical Education, 74(3), 330-334.
Stahl,  G., Koschmann,     T.,  &  Suthers,   D.  (2006).  Computer-supported       collaborative   learning: An   historical
         perspective. In R. K. Sawyer (Ed.), Cambridge handbook of the learning sciences (pp. pp. 409­426).
         Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Stieff, M. (2005). Connected Chemistry­A novel modeling environment for the chemistry classroom. Journal of
         Chemical Education, 82(3), 489-493.
Stieff, M.,   Hegarty,  M.,   &   Deslongchamps,     G.  (2011).   Coordinating    multiple   representations   in scientific
         problem      solving:  Evidence     from  concurrent      verbal   and  eye-tracking    protocols.  Cognition   and
         Instruction, 29(1), 123-145.
Stieff, M.,   &  Wilensky,     U. (2003).    Connected   Chemistry     -  Incorporating   interactive simulations   into  the
         chemistry classroom. Journal of Science Education and Technology, 12(3), 285-302.
White, T., & Pea, R. (in press). Distributed by design: On the promises and pitfalls of collaborative learning
         with multiple representations. Journal of the Learning Sciences.
Wilensky, U. (1999). NetLogo (Version 3.0) [Computer Program]. Evanston, IL: Center for Connected Learning
         and Computer Based Modeling, Northwestern University.
Wu,    H.-k.,  Krajcik,  J.   S., &    Soloway,    E.   (2001).    Promoting     conceptual   understanding   of   chemical
         representations: Students' use of a visualization tool in the classroom. Journal of Research in Science
         Teaching, 38(7), 821-842.

Acknowledgments
The author gratefully acknowledges the support of Michelle McCombs and Comfort Ateh with data collection,
which was supported by a grant from the Camille & Henry Dreyfus Foundation (SG-05-083). The Institute of
Education Sciences, U.S. Department of Education, through Grant R305A100992 to the University of Illinois,
Chicago,    supported  the  research   reported  here.  The opinions      expressed  are  those  of the author  and  do  not
represent views of the Institute or the U.S. Department of Education.

© ISLS                                                                                                                    295
