CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                          Volume I: Long Papers

The Role of Argumentation for Domain-Specific Knowledge Gains
 in Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning: A Meta-Analysis
 Christof Wecker, Frank Fischer, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München, Leopoldstr. 13, 80802 München,
                                                          Germany
                           Email: christof.wecker@psy.lmu.de, frank.fischer@psy.lmu.de

         Abstract:    The   meta-analysis     reported in   this paper   investigated    the  role  of  the quality   of
         argumentation     for   domain-specific     knowledge    gains     in computer-supported         collaborative
         learning settings. Given the scarcity of primary studies that report correlations between these
         two   variables,  a  meta-regression      approach    was   used    that   uses   interventions'   effects  on
         argumentation     to  predict  their  effects on   domain-specific       knowledge.     Effect   sizes for  17
         comparisons extracted from 12 studies were included in the analysis using a random-effects
         model. On average, the interventions have a small to moderate effect on argumentation. With
         respect to the relation of their effects on argumentation to their effects on domain-specific
         knowledge,     no  unequivocal     picture  emerges.    These  findings    call   into question  the   broadly
         shared   theoretical   assumption    that   argumentation      can  be   a mechanism      that   mediates  the
         effects  of   interventions   on     domain-specific    knowledge.       A  set   of   recommendations     for
         strengthening future research on the topic is presented.

Introduction
It is a broadly shared conviction of CSCL researchers that argumentation can be a powerful mechanism to foster
domain-specific knowledge (Andriessen, 2006; Osborne, 2010). Based on this assumption, a broad variety of
tools  and interventions   to  foster  argumentation     has  been    developed,     ranging    from   direct  instruction about
characteristics of good argumentation (e. g. Choresh, Mevarech & Frank, 2009; Nussbaum, Sinatra & Poliquin,
2008; Yeh, K. H. & She, 2010) to argumentation maps (e. g. Janssen, Erkens, Kirschner & Kanselaar, 2010;
Munneke, van Amelsvoort & Andriessen, 2003; van Drie, van Boxtel, Jaspers & Kanselaar, 2005; van Drie, van
Boxtel,  Erkens  &    Kanselaar,  2005;     Schwarz,   Neumann,      Gil, J.   &  Ilya,  2003)   and   from   different  kinds of
discussion seeds (Clark, D'Angelo & Menekse, 2009) to collaboration scripts (Kollar, Fischer & Slotta, 2007;
Stegmann, Weinberger & Fischer, 2007; Weinberger, Stegmann & Fischer, 2010). These tools have been used
for a while now in order to induce interactions among learners that are characterized by high argumentative
quality and to study the role of argumentation for the learning of domain-specific content. Although some of
these  studies employ    a  qualitative   methodology     and    thereby  provide     detailed  accounts    of  the mechanisms
involved in learning through argumentation, also a considerable number of quantitative studies on the topic have
been conducted.
         Therefore, it seems to be the right time now for integrating these findings using quantitative methods of
research synthesis in order to evaluate the evidence pertinent to the widespread convictions about the role of
argumentation   for   learning.  On  closer   inspection,   however,    many    of  the  studies  focus   only  on  some   of  the
variables that are relevant for the issue. For instance, sometimes only effects of an intervention on the quality of
argumentation   during   interaction   in   a collaborative  learning     phase   (e. g.   Munneke     et al., 2003)  or   on  the
acquisition of argumentation skills as measured by a posttest are measured and reported. Among the studies that
measure   both the    quality of argumentation       during collaboration    and    learning    outcomes   concerning    domain-
specific knowledge, only a small proportion either reports correlations between argumentation during learning
and domain-specific knowledge acquisition (e. g. Choresh et al., 2009) or employs similar analytical strategies
that allow for an assessment of the association between these two kinds of variables (e. g. Asterhan, 2008).
Often,  only   correlations   within  some    of the   several   experimental     conditions    are  reported   along    with  the
information that no significant correlation was found in the other conditions (e. g. van Drie et al.,2005a).
         This practice makes the conventional approach of integrating indicators of association between the two
variables  of  interest unfeasible.   As  a   sufficient number      of the  studies    in CSCL     research   report effects  of
interventions  on  both  measures     of  argumentation     and   measures     of   domain-specific    knowledge,     a  different
analytical approach is used in this meta-analysis: If the assumption about the role of argumentation for domain-
specific knowledge     acquisition  described    above   is true, interventions     that produce     strong positive  effects  on
argumentation should also produce strong positive effects on domain-specific knowledge, and interventions that
produce small or even negative effects on argumentation should produce small or negative effects on domain-
specific knowledge. Therefore, the technique of meta-regression is used in a somewhat unusual way to predict
interventions' effects on domain-specific knowledge on the basis of their effects on argumentation in order to
test the validity and generality of the importance of argumentation for domain-specific learning. This approach
presupposes    substantial  variation    in   effect sizes  with  respect      to both   variables.   Given     the diversity  of
argumentation    interventions   used    in   primary  studies,   it seems     likely that    effect sizes  are  actually  quite

© ISLS                                                                                                                         304
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                               Volume I: Long Papers

heterogeneous.    To  test whether  this  prerequisite is  fulfilled, in addition to  the  covariation of  effects  on
argumentation and domain-specific knowledge also the magnitude and variation of effects of the interventions
on these variables are scrutinized.

Research Questions
This meta-analysis addressed the following research questions:
          (1) What is the mean effect of argumentation interventions on argumentation, and are the effects of the
single argumentation interventions homogeneous? It is expected that on average the argumentation interventions
have   a positive effect on  argumentation.   As  the kinds  of argumentation   interventions  investigated  in CSCL
research are quite different, systematic variation of their effects on argumentation is expected.
          (2) What is the mean effect of argumentation interventions on domain-specific knowledge, and are the
effects  of  the   single  argumentation     interventions  homogeneous?     According     to  the  assumption     that
argumentation   mediates    intervention  effects on  domain-specific    knowledge,   on  average  the argumentation
interventions  should   have  a  positive  effect on  domain-specific    knowledge.   As  in  the case of  effects  on
argumentation,    systematic  variation   of  effects  on  domain-specific   knowledge     is expected   due    to  the
heterogeneity of argumentation interventions studied in CSCL research.
          (3) How are argumentation interventions' effects on argumentation related to their effects on domain-
specific  knowledge?    According  to the  theoretical assumptions    about the  role of argumentation   for domain-
specific knowledge acquisition, a moderate positive relation between effects on argumentation and effects on
domain-specific knowledge is to be expected.

Method

Selection of Studies

Criteria for Inclusion
The  purpose   of this meta-analysis  is  to provide  generalized information   about  the relation of the  quality of
argumentation during learning to domain-specific knowledge in a setting of computer-supported collaborative
learning. Therefore, the criteria for the inclusion of a study were the following:
          (1a) The quality of argumentation in collaboration during the learning phase or ­ as a proxy indicator
for this variable ­ the learners' acquired argumentation skills after the learning phase was measured.
          (1b) The    individual learners'   domain-specific knowledge     about  the content  discussed   during   the
learning phase was measured.
          (2) The study was conducted in a computer-supported collaborative learning setting.
          (3) At least one effect of the intervention under investigation on the quality of argumentation or on
argumentation skills on the one hand and at least one effect on individual domain-specific knowledge on the
other hand as well as their associated variances can be determined based on the information provided.

Search Strategies
The approach to locate the studies that fulfill these criteria comprised several complementary strategies. First,
the bibliographic  databases  ERIC    and  PsycINFO    were  searched.   The search   terms   "argument"  (truncated),
"learning" (truncated) and "CSCL" (or a conjunction of several synonyms of "collaboration" (truncated) and
"computer") were used conjunctively. These search terms were not limited to specific fields to warrant high
recall at the cost of lower precision. This yielded 370 publications many of which were either unrelated to the
topic or did not report empirical studies. Based on a thorough review of the abstracts of these publications, each
publication for which it could not be ruled out definitively that they might fulfill the criteria for inclusion were
selected for inspection. Second, relevant studies mentioned in the reference lists of studies and reviews retrieved
were also included in the set of studies for integration. Finally, the digital versions of the proceedings of recent
CSCL and ICLS conferences were searched electronically for occurrences of "argument" to yield further studies
on the topic that have not been published in journals yet.

Sample of Studies
The sample included in this meta-analysis comprises 12 studies. The integration of effect sizes ís based on data
from more than 1400 persons.

Coding of Variables
Two types of variables coded from the primary studies were included in this meta-analysis: Each study's effect
on argumentation and each study's effect on domain-specific knowledge. The types of intervention used in the
primary studies were also coded. As the focus of this paper is not on the effects specific or diverse kinds of

© ISLS                                                                                                              305
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                               Volume I: Long Papers

interventions on the association between argumentation and domain-specific knowledge gains, characteristics of
interventions and similar study features are not used in the analyses presented here.

Argumentation
All variables  in a   study  that were  either indicators of   specific aspects  of the quality  of  argumentation   in
collaboration during   the  learning  phase or indicators of   the learners'  acquired argumentation   skills after the
learning phase were selected for coding. The types of variables included comprised indicators of the number of
(specific types or components of) arguments as well as their argumentative or content-related quality on a micro
level of analysis and the number and quality of specific argumentative speech acts on a higher level of analysis.
If a study contained several types of measures of argumentation, the set of most proximal ones were selected.
For example, if both indicators of argumentation skill in a posttest and argumentative quality of contributions
during  the learning   phase were  reported,   only the latter were    included in the analysis. If indicators of both
argumentative strength and content-related accuracy of contributions during the learning phase were provided,
only the former were included. The rationale behind this approach was to use the best estimates available of the
effect of  an intervention   on   the argumentative   quality  of  contributions   during the learning  phase,  which
according to the theoretical assumptions should mediate an intervention's effect on domain-specific knowledge.
         For each of these variables, an effect size and its variance were computed from the descriptive statistics
(means, standard deviations and sample sizes of subgroups) provided in the study. If part of this information
was insufficient, either any kind of measure of effect size ­ if reported in the studies ­ was extracted directly
and transformed, if necessary, or the effect size was computed from the values of inferential test statistics.

Domain-specific Knowledge
All variables in a study that quantified individually attributable domain-specific knowledge due to the learning
experience  were  coded.    Individual  attribution  means that    (in one case)   conceptual change   diagnosed    for
individual  participants on  the  basis of  discourse data from    an  online discussion  was included,  whereas    the
domain-specific quality of essays written by groups could not be used as an indicator of individual domain-
specific knowledge. In the majority of cases this kind of data was extracted from posttests. Effect sizes were
determined as in the case of argumentation.

Calculation and Statistical Analysis of Effect Sizes

Effect Size Metric
As most of the studies report main effects from between-subjects experimental designs, the unbiased estimator d
of standardized mean differences suggested by Hedges and Olkin (1985, p. 81) was used for integrating the
study effects. If pretest data were available, posttest effect sizes were corrected by subtracting the corresponding
pretest effect size from the posttest effect size.

Statistically Dependent Effect Sizes
If for a study separate effect sizes could be determined for different subsamples (such as the different values of a
second factor in a 2x2 design that is not relevant in the present context), the data from all subsamples were
included as independent effect sizes (cf. Borenstein et al., 2009, p. 218 f.).
         Other studies (typically ones that use a one-factorial design) compared several treatment groups to a
common control group. In this case, effect sizes from the same study are correlated due to the values from the
common control group that enters the effect sizes of all experimental groups (Borenstein et al., 2009, p. 239-
241). One option to deal with this kind of dependency is to compute one common average effect size for the
different intervention groups and use only this single effect size for further integration. As the purpose of the
present meta-analysis is to determine the association between argumentation and domain-specific knowledge
gains on the study level and averaging across intervention types would blur relevant variation and covariation,
the effect sizes of the single comparisons from this type of study are used separately in the integration. We
regard the partial violation of assumptions of the statistical methods employed for integration as less severe than
the loss of important information we would have to suffer otherwise.
         Finally, most studies report findings for a whole set of indicators of the quality of argumentation, and
some also report findings for several scales of domain-specific knowledge or for multiple measurement time-
points using the same instruments. In these cases, the effect size indices from each comparison were aggregated
to yield one effect size for argumentation and one effect size for domain-specific knowledge per comparison. As
most studies do not report correlations between the different dependent measures, we ran all analyses reported
in this paper with three different global assumptions about the covariation among dependent measures (r = 0;
r = .3 and r = 1). There were no differences between the three variants in any of the analyses that would lead to
a different answer to any of our research questions. Therefore we consistently report only the results from the
analyses assuming independence of multiple measurements.

© ISLS                                                                                                              306
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                             Volume I: Long Papers

         These decisions resulted in the integration of 17 pairs of separate effect sizes for argumentation and for
domain-specific knowledge. They were calculated on the basis of 55 original effect sizes extracted from the
primary studies. For 11 comparisons we could extract effect sizes for argumentative quality of contributions,
whereas for 6 comparisons we had to rely on the more distal posttest measures of argumentation skill.

Method of Integration
The    primary studies   included  in this meta-analysis  investigated the effects of  a      very broad  array of
argumentation interventions that ranged from instruction about good argumentation to the use of different kinds
of discussion seeds and from argumentation maps to collaboration scripts. Therefore no unique common effect
size can be assumed for these studies. Accordingly, the random-effects approach for integrating the findings was
employed. The between-studies variance component was estimated using the method described by Raudenbush
(1994, p. 310 f.).

Results

Research Question 1: Effects of the Argumentation Interventions on Argumentation
The individual  effect  sizes for argumentation and their 90 % confidence   intervals as well    as their summary
effect are presented in figure 1.

                        Figure 1. Forest plot of the interventions' effects on argumentation.
The error bars indicate 90 % confidence intervals. "c" along with a number refers to multiple comparisons with
            a common control group, "ss" along with a number refers to independent sub-samples.

© ISLS                                                                                                           307
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                      Volume I: Long Papers

         A   small    to  moderate    average    effect size of   0.38   was  estimated,    SE = 0.11;   CI90% = [0.20; 0.56];
p < .01, one-tailed. The test for the homogeneity of the effects of the interventions on argumentation indicated
variation in the true effect sizes, QT(df = 16) = 58.99; p < .01; I2 = .73.
         We further conducted a moderator analysis comparing the group of effect sizes based on measures for
argumentative quality of contributions (d = 0.32; SE = 0.15; CI90% = [0.07; 0.57]; p = .02, one-tailed.) with the
group   based   on  the   more    distal posttest  measures    of argumentation      skill  (d = 0.46; SE = 0.16;   CI90% = [-
0.19; 0.73]; p < .01, one-tailed.). Effects from these two groups were homogeneous, QB(df = 1) = 0.40; p > .99.
         These   findings    provide   support   for the validity   of  our   approach:  First, because   there is  substantial
variation in effects on argumentation, which is required for detecting the association of interest, it is possible to
investigate the role of argumentation for domain-specific knowledge gains on the level of studies. Furthermore,
the inclusion   of  measures    of   post-treatment   argumentation     skill as   more  distal indicators of   argumentative
quality of contributions seems warranted given the homogeneity of effect sizes of both types. However, because
the focus of the present analysis is not on the effects of different kinds of intervention on argumentation, no
further attempt to explain the variance in effects on argumentation is made in the following.

Research Question 2: Effects of the Argumentation Interventions on Domain-Specific
Knowledge
On average, argumentation interventions have no effect on domain-specific knowledge, d = -0.04; SE = 0.14;
CI90% = [-0.28; 0.19];    p = .62, one-tailed.    However,    the   test for   the   homogeneity     of   the effects   of   the
interventions on domain-specific knowledge indicates variation in the true effect sizes, QT(df = 16) = 129.46;
p < .01; I2 =  .88. To    study   the role of argumentation     for  domain-specific     knowledge   gains,   this variation  is
further analyzed as a function of the interventions' effects on argumentation in the following.
         It  should    be noted,  however,    that in   one particular  study  large   negative  effects  on  domain-specific
knowledge were observed (van Drie et al., 2005a). These effects were more than two standard deviations lower
than the average effect size of the other studies in the sample, which means that they fulfil the frequently applied
criterion for the exclusion of outliers. If the three effect sizes are excluded from the analysis, the estimate of the
average  effect  size     on domain-specific      knowledge     changes   to   d = 0.17;    SE = 0.13;  CI90% = [-0.05; 0.39];
p = .10, one-tailed.   But   also without  these   three effect   sizes the   test for the  homogeneity   of  the  effects   still
indicates variation in the true effect sizes, QT(df = 16) = 84.74; p < .01; I2 = .85.

Research Question 3: Association between the Effects of the Argumentation
Interventions on Argumentation and their Effects on Domain-Specific Knowledge
A two-dimensional      forest  plot   (which  is a variant   of a scatterplot  with    some  additional   information)    of the
individual effects on argumentation and domain-specific knowledge is displayed in figure 2.
         To    determine   the  association   between    the interventions'    effects  on  argumentation     and  on  domain-
specific knowledge, a meta-regression with the effects on domain-specific knowledge as the criterion and the
effects on   argumentation    as  the  single  predictor  was   conducted.    A    positive estimate for  the unstandardized
regression coefficient was obtained, b = 0.58; SE = 0.31; CI90% = [0.06; 1.10];  = .44; p = .03, one-tailed. The
higher the effects of the interventions investigated in the primary studies on argumentation, the higher were also
their effects on domain-specific knowledge.
         If the three comparisons from the van Drie et al. (2005a) study are excluded as outliers on the domain-
specific knowledge dimension, however, an association of argumentation and domain-specific knowledge can
no longer be detected, b = -0.12; SE = 0.30; CI90% = [-0. 61; 0.37];  = -.12; p = .34, one-tailed.

Discussion
The results of this meta-analysis provide evidence that on average argumentation interventions developed in
CSCL    research   are   successful   with  respect   to their  most    proximal    goal of  enhancing    argumentation.     As
expected, these interventions do not share one common effect size. This is an advantage for the goal of the
present integration to investigate the role of argumentation for domain-specific knowledge acquisition on the
study   level, given   the   scarcity of   correlations  on  the  person    level  reported  in  primary   studies. However,
differential   effects of  different  types   of  interventions   on   argumentation    should  also   be investigated    meta-
analytically in the future.
         This   broad    variety  of  effects on  argumentation     is accompanied     by   an  average  zero effect   of these
interventions on domain-specific knowledge on the basis of, again, varying true effects. Even if the van Drie et
al. (2005a) study is removed as an outlier, no significant effect on domain-specific knowledge emerges. Given
the broad    consensus    among    CSCL     researchers   about   the   role  of   argumentation   for  learning,   it is quite
remarkable that on average argumentation interventions do not produce beneficial effects on domain-specific
knowledge acquisition.
         The   picture    becomes    even  more   obscure   when  considering      the relation between   argumentation      and
domain-specific knowledge: Only if the van Drie et al. (2005a) study is retained in the sample of studies are the

© ISLS                                                                                                                       308
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                    Volume I: Long Papers

effects of the interventions on argumentation positively related to their effects on domain-specific knowledge. If
this study  is removed    because  it qualifies as an   outlier with  respect  to  domain-specific    knowledge,  no such
relation can be detected. On inspection, however, the kinds of intervention investigated in this study do not
stand out from the ones used in other studies in the field in any obvious way.

 Figure 2. Two-dimensional forest plot of the interventions' effects on argumentation and individual domain-
                                                 specific knowledge.

         Effects on argumentation are displayed on the x-axis, effects on domain-specific knowledge on the y-
axis. Each dot represents the ("two-dimensional") effect size for domain-specific knowledge and argumentation
for one comparison from the primary studies. The size of each dot is proportional to the comparison's weight
according  to  the random    effects  model. 90 %   confidence    intervals  are  displayed   by  the horizontal  lines for
effects on  argumentation    and  by   vertical lines   for  effects  on domain-specific    knowledge.    The  continuous
diagonal    line   represents    the  equation     of    the  meta-regression      including   all    studies  (dknowl_i = ­
0.249 + 0.580 · darg_i), whereas the dotted line represents the meta-regression after exclusion of the van Drie et
al. (2005a) study (dknowl_i = 0.227 ­  0.120 · darg_i).
         Before discussing the consequences of these findings, potential limitations of this meta-analysis have to
be   taken into  account.   Its main  shortcoming     is its  reliance   on meta-regression    to  predict study-level   or
comparison-level effects on domain-specific knowledge on the basis of effects on argumentation instead of the
more common approach of integrating within-study correlations between argumentation and domain-specific
knowledge gains. However, apart from the fact that the latter is currently not feasible, the former approach
constitutes a stringent test of the assumption that argumentation fosters domain-specific knowledge acquisition.
While a correlation between effects of argumentation interventions on argumentation and effects on domain-
specific knowledge does not imply that argumentation quality and domain-specific knowledge acquisition are
correlated  on   the  level of  groups  or  individuals,    the lack  of  a correlation   on  the  level  of  experimental
comparisons    provides   some   indication  against    the  assumption   that    argumentation   fosters domain-specific
knowledge acquisition, at least as they were measured in the studies included in the analysis.
         What    can  the findings   from  this meta-analysis    tell us?   First of all, the body    of research that  has
addressed the role of argumentation for domain-specific knowledge acquisition in CSCL using a quantitative
methodology that allows for meta-analytic integration, is not abundant. Given this relative scarcity of evidence,
more caution with respect to general statements about the effects of argumentation on domain-specific learning
seems advisable (e. g. Osborne, 2010, p. 464 f.).

© ISLS                                                                                                                  309
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                 Volume I: Long Papers

         Furthermore, as this meta-analysis shows, the quantitative evidence amenable to integration currently
does not provide the compelling picture one would expect, given the dominating view in the field. Rather it
suggests reconsidering and even questioning cherished beliefs. It can be questioned, just to give an example,
that arguments are "better", i. e. more functional for domain-specific knowledge acquisition, if more parts of
them are mentioned explicitly, which is used as an indicator of argumentation quality in several coding schemes
(cf. Clark, Sampson, Erkens & Weinberger, 2007) some of which were applied in the studies in the present
meta-analysis. A more promising approach could be the analysis of argumentation quality based on a typology
of argument schemes that are appropriate for different types of claims (cf. Walton, Reed & Macagno, 2008)
because  this approach     links the formal  quality  of  arguments   closer to the  content. Another  assumption      that
might   be called    into  question  is  what might    be  called the    "collaborative   enrichment" assumption       that
argumentation    is   the joint  elaboration of content,   which  fosters    individual   knowledge  acquisition   (e. g..
Andriessen, 2006, p. 445). The mechanisms by which argumentation may sometimes provoke the dismissal of
deeply entrenched views and thereby advance understanding, might be slightly more intricate.
         Certainly the present meta-analysis does not force us to jettison the conviction that argumentation can
lead to domain-specific learning. It should persuade us, however, to develop more accurate accounts of both
argumentation   quality   and   the mechanisms    by  which  good  arguments     in  a discussion among   learners   may
influence the further progression of the discussion as well as the learners' cognitive processing and thereby lead
to understanding of the content. Therefore, we suggest that future research should address the following points
that are located on a theoretical level:
         (1)  As already     indicated, in general, more  thorough    theoretical accounts   of mechanisms    that might
explain beneficial effects of argumentation on domain-specific knowledge are needed.
         (2) Based on such assumptions, a comprehensive taxonomy of any relevant aspects of the amount and
quality of argumentation could be developed that allows comparing and integrating studies investigating the
same aspects of argumentation. Such a taxonomy could differentiate, among other things, the occurrence or
number of different types of arguments, their average or aggregated tenability and relevance, the breadth and
depth of topics covered in the discussion (Munneke et al., 2003) or the occurrence of specific argumentative
speech acts.
         In terms of methodology, based on our experiences, we urge researchers in the field to consider the
following points when reporting empirical research about the relation of argumentation and learning in CSCL:
         (3) Fine-grained analyses of patterns of argumentation and their relation to learning as they are often
found in qualitative studies of the same topic should be translated into quantitative indicators that allow for
integration and thereby an assessment of the generality of the findings. Sample size is not so much of an issue in
this respect, as evidenced by a study by Wiley and Bailey (2006) with only 8 participants: This study could be
integrated in   this  meta-analysis   because   the analyses were     quantified  and   all necessary information      was
reported. This recommendation has the goal to make the often more informative and more valid analyses of
argumentation during collaboration typically found in qualitative studies (instead of the more distal acquisition
of argumentation skills as measured by posttests) accessible to integration.
         (4) Furthermore, it deserves mention that all statistics necessary to compute effect sizes need to be
reported in publications. As a general rule, descriptive statistics (including standard deviations and subsample
sizes) should be provided. Exact p-values and effect sizes should be presented (cf. APA, 2001, p. 138 f.), even
in the case of insignificant effects, to allow for unbiased integration. If several measures for the same general
variable are used in a primary study, they often need to be collapsed in a meta-analytical integration. This is
strongly facilitated if the intercorrelations among the separated indicators are known. Therefore it is desirable
that correlation matrices for sets of cognate indicators are presented, as they can often be found in research
using  multi-dimensional      questionnaires. Furthermore,   a    more   thorough    practice of  reporting   indices   of
intercoder objectivity and reliability would allow for corrections for the attenuation of relationships between
variables  that is  due   to error  variance in measurements.     Most   importantly,   these indicators should    not  be
averaged across variables, but reported separately for each individual variable used in the statistical analyses (cf.
De Wewer, Schellens, Valcke & Van Keer, 2006, p. 11).
         (5) As a complement to the current meta-regression approach it is still desirable to integrate findings
about  person-level   covariation   between   argumentation  and  domain-specific      knowledge  acquisition.   For   this
purpose,  correlation  coefficients  are   needed that quantify   the association   between   argumentation   during   the
learning  phase  and   domain-specific     knowledge   as measured    in post-tests.   To avoid over-estimation    of  the
importance of argumentation for learning, the calculation and presentation of partial correlations controlling for
individual motivational      and cognitive   learning  prerequisites  such   as general   cognitive abilities or ­   as a
minimum requirement ­ domain-specific prior knowledge on the basis of the whole sample rather than specific
experimental conditions should become a common standard.
         We believe that if these suggestions are picked up in future research, we will soon know more about
the role of argumentation for computer-supported collaborative learning than we know now.

© ISLS                                                                                                                 310
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                 Volume I: Long Papers

References
References marked by an asterisk (*) indicate studies that were included in the meta-analysis.
Andriessen, J. (2006). Arguing to learn. In R. K. Sawyer (Hrsg.), Cambridge handbook of the Learning Sciences
         (pp. 443-459). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
American     Psychological   Association    (APA).    (2003). Publication   manual    of the  American    Psychological
         Association (5th ed.). Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
Asterhan,   C. S. C.  (2008).   Processes  of  argumentation   and  explanation  in  conceptual   change:  Results from
         protocol analyses of peer-to-peer dialogue. In ISLS (Ed.), International perspectives in the Learning
         Sciences:    Cre8ing   a   learning world.   Proceedings   of the Eighth    International Conference    for the
         Learning Sciences - ICLS 2008 (vol. 1, pp. 60-67). ISLS.
Borenstein,  M.,  Hedges,    L. V.,  Higgins,   J. P. T. & Rothstein,  H.  R.  (2009).   Introduction to  meta-analysis.
         Chichester: Wiley.
*Clark, D. B., D'Angelo, C. M. & Menekse, M. (2009). Initial structuring of online discussions to improve
         learning    and argumentation:    Incorporating  students' own    explanations  as  seed  comments  versus   an
         augmented-preset approach to seeding discussions. Journal of Science Education and Technology, 18,
         321-333.
Clark,  D.,  Sampson,    V., Erkens,   G.  &  Weinberger,  A.  (2007).  Analytic  frameworks    for   assessing dialogic
         argumentation in online learning environments. Educational Psychology Review, 19, 343-374.
*Choresh, C., Mevarech, Z. R. & Frank, M. (2009). Developing argumentation ability as a way to promote
         technological literacy. International Journal of Educational Research, 48, 225-234.
De Wever,    B.,  Schellens,    T., Valcke,  M.    &  Van  Keer,   H.  (2006). Content   analysis  schemes   to analyze
         transcripts of online asynchronous discussion groups: a review. Computers & Education, 46, 6-28.
Hedges, L. V. & Olkin, I. (1985). Statistical methods for meta-analysis. San Diego: Academic Press.
*Janssen, J., Erkens, G., Kirschner, P. A. & Kanselaar, G. (2010). Effects of representational guidance during
         computer-supported collaborative learning. Instructional Science, 38, 59-88.
*Joung, S. & Keller, J. M. (2004). The effects of high-structure cooperative versus low-structure collaborative
         design of [sic!] decision change, critical thinking, and interaction pattern during online debates. Paper
         presented    at the Association   for  Educational   Communications    and   Technology,   27th,  Chicago,  IL,
         October 19-23, 2004.
*Kollar, I., Fischer, F. & Slotta, J. D. (2007). Internal and external scripts in computer-supported collaborative
         inquiry learning. Learning and Instruction, 17(6), 708-721.
Munneke,     L.,  van    Amelsvoort,    M.   &  Andriessen,    J. (2003).  The   role    of diagrams   in  collaborative
         argumentation-based learning. International Journal of Educational Research, 39, 113-131.
*Nussbaum, M. E., Sinatra, G. M. & Poliquin, A. (2008). Role of epistemic beliefs and scientific argumentation
         in science learning. International Journal of Science Education, 30(15), 1977-1999.
Osborne, J. (2010). Arguing to learn in science: The role of collaborative, critical discourse. Science, 328, 463-
         466.
Raudenbush, S. W. (1994). Random effects models. In H. Cooper & L. V. Hedges (Eds.), The handbook of
         research synthesis (pp. 301-321). New York: Russell Sage.
Schwarz, B. B., Neumann, Y., Gil, J. & Ilya, M. (2003). Construction of Collective and Individual Knowledge
         in Argumentative Activity. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 12(2), 219-256.
*Seethaler, S. & Linn, M. (2004). Genetically modified food in perspective: an inquiry-based curriculum to help
         middle school students make sense of tradeoffs. International Journal of Science Education, 26(14),
         1765-1785.
*Stegmann, K., Weinberger, A. & Fischer, F. (2007). Facilitating argumentative knowledge construction with
         computer-supported collaboration scripts. International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative
         Learning, 4(2), 421-447.
*van   Drie, J., van  Boxtel, C.,   Jaspers, J. &   Kanselaar, G.  (2005a).   Effects of  representational guidance  on
         domain specific reasoning in CSCL. Computers in Human Behavior, 21, 572-602.
*van   Drie, J., van  Boxtel, C.,   Erkens,  G. &   Kanselaar, G.   (2005b).  Using   representational tools to support
         historical   reasoning     in computer-supported     collaborative    learning. Technology,    Pedagogy     and
         Education, 14(1), 25-41.
Walton, D., Reed, C. & Macagno, F. (2008). Argumentation schemes. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
*Weinberger,     A.,  Stegmann,    K.  &  Fischer,  F. (2010). Learning    to  argue  online: Scripted   groups surpass
         individuals (unscripted groups do not). Computers in Human Behavior, 26, 506-515.
*Wiley, J. & Bailey, J. (2006). Effects of Collaboration and Argumentation on Learning From Web Pages. In A.
         M.    O'Donnell,  C.   E.  Hmelo-Silver    &  G.  Erkens  (Eds.), Collaborative     Learning, Reasoning,    and
         Technology (pp. 296-321). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
*Yeh, K. H. & She, H. C. (2010). On-line synchronous scientific argumentation learning: Nurturing students'
         argumentation ability and conceptual change in science context. Computers & Education, 55, 586-602.

© ISLS                                                                                                               311
