CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                     Volume I: Long Papers

 Technology and Dialogic Space: Lessons from History and from
                            the `Argunaut' and `Metafora' Projects
                                Rupert Wegerif, Yang Yang, University of Exeter, UK
                                Email: r.b.wegerif@exeter.ac.uk, y.yang@exeter.ac.uk

          Abstract:   In  this  theory   paper   we   define  dialogic  space  and  outline   its  importance   to
          computer supported collaborative learning. We argue that dialogic space is a complex concept
          combining     transcendental   and   empirical   aspects to   account  for    the situated opening    of
          opportunities for creative understanding in the tension between different perspectives. Despite
          this complexity dialogic space can be operationalized in concrete designs for learning. Some
          general principles are developed through a review of the literature on the indirect relationship
          between   communications       technologies  and   dialogic  space.  The  EC   funded    Argunaut    and
          Metafora projects to design online dialogic education environments are then used to illustrate
          more specific affordances of online design for a dialogic pedagogy.

Introduction
An account of dialogic education giving a central role to dialogic space as opposed to socio-cultural accounts
that focus on mediation by cognitive tools was put forward by Wegerif in the first issue of the International
Journal of   Computer    Supported    Collaborative   Learning  (Wegerif,   2006).  The  concept    of dialogic  space   was
then elaborated in a book in the CSCL series, entitled Dialogic Education and Technology: Expanding the Space
of Learning (Wegerif, 2007). The notion of dialogic space put forward in these two publications has proved of
value for some empirical investigations, in particular several studies of Interactive Whiteboards (IWBs) in the
UK have found the notion of dialogic space useful for theorizing the impact that this technology can have in
classrooms (Mercer, Warwick, Kershner, Kleine Staarman, 2010: Scott,               Ametller, Mortimer,      and Emberton,
2010:  Hennessey,     S. In press).   Others,  however,  have   expressed   concerns    about  the  abstract   nature of  the
concept asking how it can be operationalised and concerns that it does not give an adequate account of the
active  role  that    artefacts   in supporting     learning through   educational    dialogues   (Hakkarainen,    personal
communication, Jerusalem, 2008). This paper is a response to these concerns. In it we outline exactly how being
drawn   into  dialogic   space    is related  to learning    to think,  how    the concept    of  dialogic   space    can be
operationalised in designs for CSCL and the affordances of designs with technology for supporting a pedagogy
based upon the central notion of dialogic space. Although this paper is essentially a theory paper we also draw
upon examples from two large funded projects in which designs for dialogic education with technology have
been developed: the current Metafora project (www.metafora-project.org)             funded by EC Framework 7 and the
recently completed Argunaut project (www.argunaut.org) funded by EC Framework 6.

Dialogic Space and Education
Dialogic space is the space of possibilities that opens up when two or more incommensurate perspectives are
held   together in  the  creative tension  of  a dialogue.   We  use   the term `incommensurate'       in this definition  to
emphasize the importance and the ineluctability of the dialogic gap. In real dialogues we speak from different
embodied perspectives on the world and this difference cannot be simply resolved into unity because I cannot
become    you   and you  cannot   become   me.   As   Bakhtin   points out on  many   occasions   this difference  is  not a
`problem' but is constitutive of the flow of meaning in dialogues.
          In analyzing   why    some  groups   were   able to solve  problems   and   other  groups  were   not in primary
schools it was argued that a key difference was the extent to which the way in which the children talked together
opened up a shared space of reflection which allowed creative solutions to emerge (Wegerif, 2005). Because
unsuccessful    groups   tended   to  identify   with narrow    images   of  a  bounded     self in  opposition  to   others
(disputational talk) or an image of the group itself as a harmonious entity (cumulative talk, from Mercer 2000) it
was initially argued that the more successful talk involved an identification with the space of dialogue (Wegerif
and Mercer, 1997). More recently it has been argued that this notion of identification with dialogue improving
thinking is better understood in terms of a developing dialogue with the infinite other (Wegerif, 2010, p80). The
idea is that while in a dialogue we might start just trying to persuade the other person, in doing so we inevitably
listen to our own arguments as if from an outside point of view.            This is the witness position, or the `third'
position, that  Bakhtin   writes  is generated   by  every   dialogue  and  refers to as the  `superaddressee'   (Bakhtin,
1986). Bakhtin argues that words in dialogues are not just aimed at specific others they also become aimed at a
sort of otherness in general.   By following Bakhtin's logic the argument can be taken further towards a notion of
dialogue with the infinite other or the idea of the outside. The argument is one of infinite regress.              1) Every
dialogue generates a `witness' position. 2) This witness position might appear to have a location but if you try to
pin  down    this witness position    in order   to dialogue  with  it you  will   find that another   witness  position   is

© ISLS                                                                                                                    312
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                         Volume I: Long Papers

automatically generated. 3) Because it can never be grasped, because it always runs away from us when we try
to catch it, dialogue   with the   witness   position  leads on     to dialogue     with the  infinite other. This    analysis of
infinity implicit   in dialogues enables us to understand more clearly how children learn to reason. First they are
called to explain themselves in dialogues with specific others. In the act of doing so, they become drawn into a
dialogue with a third position that every dialogue generates, the position of the witness or super-addressee.
While this might initially take a specific cultural form, such as the embodied norms of the community, every
such fixed notion of the super-addressee can also be questioned leading to the idea of dialogue with the infinite
other.  The  infinite other is not,   of course,  some    kind   of `thing'  but    more  like a  constant   call to  go beyond
prejudices and assumptions in order to see one's situation as if from the outside. Another way of putting this is
that being drawn into dialogue with the infinite other is about acquiring a passion for truth (Wegerif, 2010, p81).
         The significance of dialogic space for education can be understood through contrasting it to Vygotsky's
notion of the Zone of Proximal Development or ZPD. With the ZPD Vygotsky introduced a particular version
of the idea of a dialogic space into education. Through mutual attunement in the ZPD adults bring children to
see things from their point of view thus leading children to reinterpret their initial spontaneous concepts through
the more developed already existing `scientific' concepts of the culture embodied in signs (Vygotsky, 1978).
Vygotsky and his followers tend to present learning to think solely in terms to the internalization or personal
appropriation of cultural tools such as signs through the medium of dialogue in the form of the ZPD. So for
example Vygotsky claims that children learn to think logically through formal schooling, which leads them to
personally internalize the categorizing practices of school science using cultural mediating means such as tables
in text books etc. While dialogue in the ZPD is crucial for this vision of education this dialogue is assumed to
take  a rather limited  and  asymmetrical        form. Vygotsky's      account   is a  good   account  of   how   children  learn
bounded areas of thought such as, for example, how they may learn to use specific concept words appropriately
or how they may learn to use an abacus to solve mathematics problems. However, it does not account well for
how children might learn to think in an open-ended critical and creative way. To do this we simply need to
augment   the  Vygotskian   account   of    learning with  the   understanding      that children  do  not  only  internalize  or
personally   appropriate   cultural   tools  such  as   logical  tables     and  concept    words,   they   also  internalize  or
appropriate the dialogic space through which such signs are able to mean in the first place. Learning to think for
oneself is learning to carry around a space of dialogue through which anything and everything can be questioned
and seen in a new way.
         So a concept of dialogic space is essential for understanding education into thinking and creativity but
what exactly is dialogic space? Clearly it is not visible or tangible in a direct empirical manner. Looking from
the outside we may see people apparently in dialogue but we cannot directly see the dialogic space of possible
meanings that opens up within the dialogue. From the outside we can say that dialogues are situated in space
and time, in culture and in history, but from the inside they escape situation. The virtual landscape of the inside
of the dialogue might well refer to the past and the future as well to places at a distance. The meaning of the
cultural and historical context we construct in order to situate dialogues is always itself a matter for dispute
within dialogues. If, as Bakhtin argues, meaning is only possible in the context of a dialogic gap then it follows
that dialogic space is a transcendental concept. Transcendental, as Kant defined the term, means a pre-condition
for experience rather than an object encountered within experience. We all have experience of meanings in
dialogues and those experiences imply a prior opening of dialogic space that makes them possible. The notion
of the infinite other outlined earlier suggests that, contrary to sociocultural orthodoxy, there is an important
aspect of all dialogues that is universal, unsituated and atemporal. Viewed from the outside all dialogues are
different but experienced from the inside they all share something in common which is the infinite potential to
be drawn    into  self-questioning  and     reflection which   we   referred     to as the  idea  that the   infinite other is  a
potentially emerging voice within all dialogues. Bakhtin developed the notion of `Great Time', a time and space
in which all voices can communicate with each other, to explain how it was that he, for example, a 20th century
Russian, could enter into constructive dialogue with, for example, the voice of Socrates, a Greek from the 5th
Century BCE. However great the differences in culture and history it seems that creative dialogic engagement is
always possible and this is so because there is something infinite at the heart of dialogue.
         If  dialogic  space   has  a transcendental      aspect it also    has  an  empirical    aspect.   Classroom    research
described   in Wegerif  (2007)   shows      that dialogic spaces    can   be opened      up where    they did not  exist  before
through the simple procedure of interrupting children's engagement with an interactive game in order to ask
them open questions that lead them to predict and reflect. This opening of dialogic space is not directly visible
but it is easy to deduce (or, more strictly speaking, to abduce) from the visible indicators such as transcripts of
talk.  Merleau-Ponty   (1968)  uses   the   phrase   `the invisibles   of   this world'  for  forms    like dialogic  space that
cannot be directly seen but are not unknowable transcendentals because they have a direct effect on the visible
world   such   that   they can  easily   be   seen   behind  it.    Dialogic     space   then  is quasi-transcendental,     it is
transcendental but also empirical in that it can be opened, widened and deepened in ways that are indirectly
measurable   empirically.   One  way     to conceptualise   this is    that dialogic   space  is  an opening   within  a  highly
structured surface of an underlying space of possibilities. Depending on the context that opening could be more

© ISLS                                                                                                                         313
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                               Volume I: Long Papers

or less limited. All dialogues increase the degrees of freedom of thought to some extent, all also have the infinite
potential for new meaning described above through the mechanism of the infinite other, however, in practice
most dialogues remain relatively bounded to a limited range of alternatives within a clear cultural context.

A Brief History of Communications Technology and Dialogic Space
There is an interesting strand of literature on the intellectual affordances of communications media which can
help us understand the relationship between technology, dialogic space and education. In the following very
brief review of this literature we will look at what has been claimed for the impact of oral dialogue, written
media and the internet on thinking in order to illuminate how dialogic space is shaped by technology and to
approach a preliminary understanding of some of the possible pedagogical affordances of new communications
media.
          Socrates  notes  in  the Phaedrus  that the living word    of face-to-face   dialogues has   the potential for
stimulating understanding in others in a chain that is endless and so produced `immortality'. He contrasts this
living word of dialogue to the dead words of writing that are just like shadows or ghosts because they are not
inhabited  and  cannot    answer   back. Many   have  noted that face   to face dialogue  assumes    a certain `mutual
attunement' between participants (e.g Rommetveit, 1992). Utterances in dialogues do not stand alone but they
respond to previous utterances and they are designed to influence the person addressed. In a dialogue, in other
words, the other (understood here as the addressee), is not simply outside me but appears on the inside of me
shaping my utterances from within even as they form. Even to engage in dialogue I need to be able to see
myself to some extent from the other's point of view. Socrate's account of the intellectual power of the living
word remains valid today and is a rebuke to those who claim that our thinking is essentially mediated by our
technology. If this were true then our thinking would be obviously superior to that of the pre-literate Socrates
(as reported to us by his literate student Plato) but in fact this is not the case. However, Socrates shows a certain
naivety as to the impact and limitations of the spoken word as a medium of dialogue. The limitations of oracy as
a medium of thought have been brought out by others in more established literate cultures.
          In oral cultures words are only found in the ephemeral context of face-to-face speech. By the time I
have grasped the import of my interlocutor's words they have vanished and I cannot turn back to re-examine
them. This means that words, and the ideas they carry, are inevitably closely bound up with time and place.
Some have argued, for example, that without literacy there are no universal abstract concepts (e.g Ong, 1982;
Olson, 1994: Goody, 1977). Writing, it is argued, enabled ways of thinking that were not possible with face-to-
face dialogue alone. One example is the way in which the `religions of the book' could disembed themselves
from   a  physical context  to cross seas  and  mountains   and  claim  adherents   in different cultures.  They could
separate  their truth  from places  because  it was   contained  in words   and  so it became    transportable (Goody,
1977).   The Christian  Bible  and  the  Koran  are  known   as `the word   of  God'.  The spread  of  Buddhism    also
depended in the writing down of the Pali Canon and its transportation over mountains and seas to new lands.
          As we noted above, Socrates, an oral thinker, is reported as criticizing writing precisely for taking the
idea of truth away from the living context of words in face to face dialogues and claiming truth for what he
referred to as the dead words of writing (Plato, 2006). In the Christian Holy Bible there is an interesting passage
that appears to state that the writing is now closed and anyone adding a word to it will be cursed (The Bible:
Revelation 22:18-9). If so then this is indicative of a new idea of truth that arrives with writing. Truth here is
perhaps being seen as a closed finished thing of universal relevance separate from a context of utterance.
          Of course literacy did not suddenly take over nor did it ever completely replace oracy, but at a certain
point, according to Toulmin, it seems to have become the dominant medium for our self-understanding of the
nature of thought. Toulmin investigates the nature of `modernity' and finds it in a shift from respecting dialogic
modes of thought to respecting only written modes of thought. Before 1600, he writes, both rhetoric and logic
were   seen  as  legitimate   modes   of  philosophy  (Toulmin,     1992,  p30). He    contrasts  Montaigne's    highly
contextualised and dialogic brand of philosophy to the abstract universal certainty sought after by Descartes.
After Descartes there was a shift from seeing truth in terms of utterances in dialogues in situations to seeing
truth  in terms  of   propositions and   proofs that were   unsituated  and  universal  (1992,   p31). In  other words
modernity can be characterised by `monologicality', the assumption that there is only one true perspective or
voice, which in turn is an effect of the dominance of written modes of reasoning over oral modes.
          Harold   Innis, the  Toronto   based  communication    theorist  who  inspired  Marshall   McLuhan,    draws
attention to the requirement of empires to have portable written communications. He locates the development of
the technology of writing the struggle of empires to impose a uniform, written, law. Writing enabled empires
since the very idea of empire is to be able to write the law code at the centre and spread the same law uniformly
out to all the provinces (Innis, 1950, p30). The first written law code, that of Hammurabi (2123-2083 BC),
served the purpose of centralising power. Innes's detailed accounts show how communications technologies
such as paper and print, even horses and ships carrying papyrus scrolls, were all essential to empires and shaped
the nature of those empires.

© ISLS                                                                                                               314
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                   Volume I: Long Papers

          Television and Radio, although electronic media, shared the same one to many nature of print media
and  so   were easily   seen   by Adorno    and  Horkheimer     (Horkheimer    and    Adorno,   1972)   as continuing   the
imperialistic  tendencies   of print.   The internet, however,    is very  different, especially  the so-called  Web    2.0
iteration of  the internet.  The  internet  facilitates participation  and  the  same    kind  of two-way   or  multi-way
dialogue found in face to face talk but it also supports the communication over distance found in writing.
          If orality and literacy impacted on ways of understanding thinking then what impact will the internet
have?  It is too  early to  say.  While  oracy  and   literacy have   had millennia   to shape  collective  cognition,  the
widespread use of the internet is still just beginning. One possible impact noted by Gabi Salomon some years
back (1992) as the `butterfly effect' and recently made into a best-seller by Nicholas Carr, `The Shallows: What
the Internet is doing to our brains' (Carr, 2010), is to make us all more superficial and distracted. Whereas
reading books takes commitment and can lead to depth understanding, use of the internet encourages browsing
nuggets of pre-processed information condemning us to superficiality, or so the argument goes. This analysis
fits reasonably well with those who argue that the rise of the internet marks the end of the modern self, said to
be individual and autonomous. Mark Poster, for example, argues that:

          Electronic culture promotes the individual as an unstable identity, as a continuous process of
          multiple identity formation and raises the question of a social form beyond the modern, the
          possibility of a post-modern society (1995, p398)

          The claim that new communications technology will usher in a post-modern or post-structuralist reality
of fragmented, and multiple identities sounds a bit negative but there is a more positive sounding corollary.          The
other side of the break-down of the authority of the author is individuals becoming more open to dialogue with
others and with otherness. If we accept Toulmin's account that a focus on print has had a monologic effect,
turning `utterances' in dialogues into `propositions' in proofs; is seems possible then that the internet can restore
us to a more participatory and dialogic way of understanding thinking. However, while the internet supports
dialogue this is different from the oracy that preceded literacy, for one thing this is no longer a dialogue limited
to a physically located community but a dialogue without any necessary spatial limits. David Barton tells an
interesting story of how the way he saw the hills near his home was subtly altered after he received comments
on his  photographs     of those  hills from  correspondents    in Germany     and Japan  via   the Web    2.0  photograph
sharing site, Flickr (see Lee and Barton, 2011). Ong has argued that practices around writing and reading books
led to the formation of a sense of an individual inner autonomous space that contrasted to the more collective
identity of selves in oral societies and enabled critical thinking leading to political change. It seems plausible
that some    forms   of blogging   promote    similar kinds    of  `inner space' capable   of   standing   back  from  and
criticizing tradition, but in a collective form without the sense of individual autonomy.
          One clear lesson that can be learnt from the literature about the impact of modes of communication on
thinking and society is that mentality is not just a causal effect of the technology. Ong brings out how one way
of writing and reading can cement communal solidarity, the reading aloud of a manuscript such as the bible
which was common in the middle ages (Ong, 1982, p117), whilst another way of writing and reading, silent and
solitary writing and reading of books, can support the formation of a separate autonomous inner self able to
stand back from the culture around it (Ong, 1982, p129). The message we can take from this is that the apparent
fragmentation and superficiality induced by internet use according to Carr and others is not an inevitable effect
of the  internet  but a possible  consequence    of one  way   of  using  this new    technology.  Just as the  previously
dominant   media   of   communication,    oracy  and  literacy,   can be  a part of   cultural practices   that have   quite
different effects on thinking, so then can the internet. This analysis suggests a possible role for educational
research as determining what are the pedagogical affordances and dangers of the internet and how it can best be
integrated into the practice of education.

Argunaut and Design for Dialogic Space
The history of communications technology gives us some clues as to how different technologies afford different
possibilities of thought. Writing things down may have led to the delusion of unsituated and ahistorical truth but
it also enabled deeper reflection because ideas perdured over time and so could be returned to as artefacts to be
re-animated by new perspectives and collectively developed. In other words writing, in the form of journals for
example, supported a wider and deeper dialogue on scientific issues than oracy alone could manage. However
an aura of quasi-religious closed truth still hangs around printed scientific texts making drawing students into
the practice of science as dialogue difficult.
          New    communication     technologies  and    tools  offer  many  new  affordances    for  dialogue.   Computer
mediated dialogues expand the `space' of dialogue by spatialising time so that many can `talk' in parallel and
their different voices can be represented by spatial differences in an interface. Normally this different way of
doing  dialogue   is  represented in  a  kind of traditional   playscript with  one   utterance after another   listed in a

© ISLS                                                                                                                  315
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                  Volume I: Long Papers

temporal sequence. This linear list is a kind of metaphor for the progression of moments in time. Even this
arrangement however makes it easy to lose the context of the argument. The Knowledge Forum is an early
example of an interface that shifts the dialogue representation from this linear form, one utterance after another,
form to a more visual arrangement on a plane more like a concept map. The same move is made by Digalo, an
online dialogue environment developed by the EC funded Dunes project and used as part of the                    Argunaut
project) relies on argument maps.
          The  Argunaut    system    developed   during  the  project  uses  the  graphical  e-discussion   environments
Digalo   (dito.ais.fraunhofer.de/digalo/)   and  FreeStyler   (www.collide.info/software)    for  students, along  with a
Moderators    Interface   (MI)   for teachers,   which   includes   a range   of  awareness     indicators and  tools  for
intervention  designed    to make    the  task  of moderation  easier.   As  well as   providing  awareness   of   relative
participation, types of messages and the relationships between people through social network diagrams, we also
sought to provide awareness indicators for the quality of the discussion. Using this system we were able to
investigate the hypothesis that the spatialized reasoning of dynamic concept maps supported creative reasoning.
(Wegerif, McLaren et al, 2010) We investigated the impact dynamic concept mapping on creativity using a
coding   for creativity  based   on  a pattern-matching   algorithm   combined    with  stimulated  recall  interviews  of
participants. Through the interviews we found that the non-linear nature of the maps with multiple ideas co-
present  stimulated   creativity. Our   findings   were that: 1) the  emergence    of  new  perspectives   in a graphical
dialogue map can be coded for using an intuitive interpretation of the construction of meaning in a dialogue in a
way    which  can be    recognized   reliably   by a machine   algorithm;    2) that  the trigger events   leading to  the
emergence of new perspectives are most commonly open questions and disagreements and 3) that the spatial
representation of messages in a graphically mediated synchronous dialogue offers a pedagogical affordance for
creativity. This research supports the view that some normative ideas of argument, even those informed by the
idea of dialogue such as the dialectic progression from thesis and antithesis towards a synthesis, have been
shaped by the linear text form of writing that is always moving towards the conclusion at the bottom of the
page.  Dynamic    multi-user     concept  mapping    on  the  other hand  also   supports   thinking  but   has a  greater
affordance for the creative emergence of unanticipated new ideas that comes from the co-presence of multiple
perspectives without any possibility of overcoming one by another or any sense of the need to move together
towards the bottom-line.

Metafora and the Use of Tools to Represent Voices
The  follow-up    Metafora   project   is investigating  the  combination    of using   induction  into online  mediated
dialogic  space as    a way  of  teaching  general   thinking and   creativity. The   three year  project, funded  by  the
European Commission, is developing new theories and pedagogies to increase learners' awareness of learning
together, where children aged 12-16 explore authentic science challenges with classmates. The challenges are
based around science topic themes, which are key issues of 21st century science curriculum, requiring children
to develop   general    thinking strategies of  new  knowledge    age.   To  exploit  collaboration  and   discussion, the
challenges will be ill-defined and allow different points of views and priorities.
          Metafora promotes dialogic learning in three domains: 1) learning to learn together (L2L2); 2) learning
to argue and 3) learning about specific mathematics and science concepts. For the learning to learn together
component we have developed and trialed an iconic language standing for different activities and emotional
attitudes to help the   students, working    in  groups of 5  to 10,  to plan   their learning. Using a  planning  space,
students iteratively model their own learning activities and reflect upon them.         We are investigating if working
with   these planning   and  reflection   tools in the  planning space   raises awareness    of the stages  and  attitudes
implicit in successful group shared enquiry over time thus help scaffold novices in L2L2 towards becoming
experts.
          The  model    of learning    to learn together (L2L2)     requires that students   become   aware   of  the  key
variables in successful learning together and learn how to use them. This is like learning to recognize and use a
new language. From the literature we propose that some of the key variables include staging or sequencing
activities and different types of dialogue. But for young children to learn effective dialogue it is necessary for
them to become more aware of the way in which they talk or interact which includes becoming aware of and
consciously regulating their emotional attitudes to each other and to the topic.
          From a dialogic perspective cognition cannot be divorced from affect because cognition is an emergent
property of dialogues, and dialogues are defined not by the exchange of signs, something which could be quite
emotionally neutral, but by the intersubjective space of relationship. Relationships always have emotional tone.
One of the main reason children and young people fail to learn to learn together in groups is because they fail to
recognize and take responsibility for the impacts of their emotions and attitudes towards each other and towards
the task. In designing icons to help them become aware of and take responsibility for their attitudes we realized
that we were using tools in an interesting way. Some socio-cultural literature has suggested that cultural voices
become appropriated by individuals to be used as cognitive tools. In Metafora we are designing tools that evoke

© ISLS                                                                                                                 316
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                               Volume I: Long Papers

voices. Our icons are representations of attitudes such as being critical, playful, visionary, ethical and so on,
which the users have to inhabit in order to speak with the voice of that attitude.

Discussion: the Pedagogical Affordances of CSCL for Dialogic Education
Dialogic education combines teaching through dialogue with teaching for dialogue. As well as learning specific
facts  and   specific skills, dialogic  education  draws  learners  into dialogue.   Dialogic education    at both  the
individual and collective level seeks to draw learners from what Bakhtin called `narrow time', a concern only
with the local and the short-term, to what he called `Great Time', the dialogue of all times and all cultures. In
classrooms this can be seen in moving children from the structured surface of physical time and space in which
things happen but without reflection or the possibility of change towards the opening, widening, deepening and
heightening of dialogic spaces. A key mechanism for heightening the dialogue is that of taking the perspective
of the superaddressee or witness in order to reflect on what has been said or claimed. This mechanism within
dialogues can shift participants from trying to persuade specific others to trying to understand in general.
          If dialogic  space  is  the main   medium  of  education  and  learning to think  then  what  is the role of
technology? The answer is that communications technology opens and shapes different kinds of dialogic spaces
with   different affordances   for thought   and for education.  Our  brief accounts  of  oracy   and literacy offered
arguments that the medium of communication does make a difference to the possibilities of thought and to the
direction of education.   It is as if the medium itself becomes a key voice in the dialogue. These accounts also
suggested that while technology does offer a framework of constraints and affordances its actual impact on
thought and on education will depend on how it is used or how it is embedded in cultural practices. This point is
particularly  important  in   understanding  the   potential impact of  the internet age  as  the internet is  not one
technology   but  many   bundled   up   together offering a  great variety of  different possible uses. The   potential
dangers  of  the internet for  the quality   of thought have  been  pointed out  but reflection  on the nature  of  the
internet shows that it also had affordances to support a dialogic education, opening new spaces for dialogue,
widening them by introducing diverse voices, deepening dialogue through the provision of continuity in the
form of malleable artifacts that allow reflection and analysis and also heightening the dialogue in the direction
of dialogue with the infinite other through the reflection that occurs in dialogue across difference.
          Design-based research in developing the Argunaut and Metafora systems illustrates how designs for
technology can shape dialogic space in a way that has an impact on the type and quality of thinking and so on
the possibilities of education for thinking. The research described with Argunaut demonstrated the simple point
that the way in which we shape the space within which people communicate has an impact on their thinking. In
this case dynamic concept-mapping was shown to support the creative emergence of new ideas through the
juxtaposition of multiple perspectives on a single topic. The provisional work-in-progress report from Metafora
suggested the significance of designing for voices and for the emotional colors of dialogic space. This represents
a shift in   pedagogical  design   principle from  using  voices as tools  for thinking  to using tools as  voices  for
thinking.
          In conclusion then we are arguing that:
     ·    dialogic space is an opening of reflection and possible new perspectives around a dialogic gap;
     ·    dialogic analysis helps us to understand education for thinking as shifting orientations and         drawing
          learners from dialogue with specific others towards dialogue with the infinite other;
     ·    communications media have different constraints and affordances in relation to dialogic space;
     ·    the design of communications media and spaces offers affordances for different kinds of thinking and
          so for different kinds of education into thinking;
     ·    artefacts can act like voices in a dialogue supporting continuity, reflection and cumulative
          development;
     ·    analysis only in terms of tools and `construction' can miss the point that education, amongst other
          things, is about helping new participants in dialogue acquire their own unique voice
     ·    in a project to teach learning how to learn together we are exploring what happens when we embody
          key dialogic orientations in icons which then serve as tools to support the acquiring of voices

References
Bakhtin, M. (1981). Discourse in the Novel. In M. M. Bakhtin. The dialogic Imagination. Four essays by M. M.
          Bakhtin. Austin: University of Texas Press, pp. 259-422.
Bakhtin, M. (1986) Speech Genres and Other Late Essays. Austin:University of Texas.
Carr, N. (2010) The Shallows: What the Internet is Doing to Our Brains; New York, NY: W. W. Norton & Co.,
Goody, J. (1977) The domestication of the savage mind. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Hennessey,   S.  (in  press)  The  role of digital artefacts on the interactive whiteboard   in supporting  classroom
          dialogue. Journal of Computer Assisted Learning.
Horkheimer, M and Adorno.        T (1972). Dialectic of Enlightenment. New York: Seabury.

© ISLS                                                                                                              317
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                Volume I: Long Papers

Innis, H. (1950) Empire and Communications. Oxford: Clarendon Press
Lee,   C. &  D.   Barton    (2011) Constructing    Glocal  Identities through    Multilingual Writing   Practices on
          Flickr.com. International Multilingualism Research Journal,     5(1), 39-59.
Mercer, N, Warwick, P, Kershner, R, Kleine Staarman, J (2010) Can the interactive whiteboard help to provide
          `dialogic space' for children's collaborative activity?. Language and Education ()
Mercer, N. (2000). Words and Minds: How We Use Language to Think Together. London: Routledge.
Merleau-Ponty, M. (1968). The Visible and the Invisible (Edited by Claude Lefort and
Olson, D. (1994) The World on Paper. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Ong, W. J., 1982, Orality and Literacy: The Technologizing of The Word. Methuen, London.
Plato,     (2006)       The    Phaedrus.       Translated     by      Benjamin     Jowett.     Online.     Available
          http://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/p/plato/p71phs/phaedrus.html (accessed 1st August 2008)
Poster, M. (1995) The Second Media Age Oxford: Blackwell
Rommetveit,    R. (1992).   Outlines  of a  dialogically based social-cognitive  approach  to human    cognition  and
          communication. In A. Wold (Ed.). The dialogical alternative: towards a theory of language and mind
          (pp. 19- 45). Oslo: Scandanavian Press.
Salomon,   G.  (1992).   New  information   technologies   in  education. In M.    C. Alkin   (Ed.), Encyclopedia  of
          educational research (6th Ed.) (pp. 892-903). New York: Macmillan
Scott, P., Ametller, J., Mortimer, E., & Emberton, J. (2010). Teaching and learning disciplinary knowledge:
          Developing    the dialogic  space for an answer   when  there   isn't even  a question. Chapter  14. In K.
          Littleton   & C.  Howe   (Eds.),  Educational   Dialogues:   Understanding     and  Promoting   Productive
          interaction. Abingdon, Oxon: Routledge.
Toulmin, S. (1990) Cosmopolis: The Hidden Agenda of Modernity. New York: Free Press.
translated by Alphonso Lingis). Evanston, Il: Northwestern University Press.
Vygotsky,   L. S. (1978).   Mind   in Society: The Development   of   Higher Psychological    Processes. Cambridge,
          MA: Harvard University Press.
Wegerif, R (2007) Dialogic, Education and Technology: Expanding the Space of Learning. NY and Berlin:
          Springer.
Wegerif,  R  (2010)   Mindexpanding:     teaching for thinking and  creativity  in primary  education.  Buckingham:
          Open University Press.
Wegerif, R. (2005) Reason and creativity in classroom dialogues.Language and Education 19(3), 223-238
Wegerif, R. (2006). A dialogic understanding of the relationship between CSCL and teaching thinking skills.
          International Journal of Computer Supported Collaborative Learning 1(1), 143-157.
Wegerif, R., McLaren, B. M., Chamrada, M., Scheuer, O., Mansour, N., Miksátko, J., et al. (2010). Exploring
          creative thinking in graphically mediated synchronous dialogues. Computers & Education, 54(3), 613-
          621.

© ISLS                                                                                                             318
