CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                   Volume I: Long Papers

       Questioning and the Quality of Knowledge Ideas in a CSCL
               Context: A Study on Two Age-groups of Students
               Ming Lai, Nancy Law, The University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam Road, Hong Kong
                                    Email: minglai@hkucc.hku.hk, nlaw@hku.hk

          Abstract: This paper aims to study the relationship between the type of questions posted and
          the quality of knowledge ideas expressed in a CSCL context. Previous studies suggest that this
          relationship may    be  different for  different  age-groups.  This   study  was  conducted   with   two
          classes  of students--at   grades  6   and  10   respectively. The   discourse   was analyzed    at both
          thread-  and individual-student-   levels.   It was  found  that  for the sixth-grade   students,   those
          who  asked   better   questions   also   expressed   better knowledge     ideas. For   the  tenth-grade
          students, such a relationship at the individual-student-level was not found. Nonetheless, at the
          thread-level, there is a positive correlation between the presence of better questions and more
          developed knowledge ideas in the tenth-grade students' online discourse, but not in the sixth-
          grade students'. The results suggest further discourse characteristics in addition to questioning
          to be related to the quality of knowledge ideas expressed.

Introduction
The relationship between questioning and inquiry has been articulated since the time of ancient Greeks. Socrates
illustrates how to use questions to seek for knowledge. Aristotle suggests that the kinds of questions we ask are
directly related to the knowledge we can get and he is the first person to develop a classification for different
kinds of questions (Dillon, 1984). In the context of computer-supported collaborative learning (CSCL), students
can conduct collaborative inquiry in a technology-mediated environment. It is important for them to generate
questions  and  to    build their inquiry   on  these  questions  (Scardamalia     &  Bereiter,  1991).    The pedagogical
approach  of   knowledge     building  emphasizes     students'  collective responsibility  for  the  advancement     of the
community's    knowledge      (Scardamalia,  2002).    Its  implementation   in   schools  is usually integrated    with   an
asynchronous    online   platform,  the  Knowledge      Forum®    (KF),    which   is specifically   designed  to   create a
knowledge building environment for students to make their ideas explicit so that everyone can contribute to the
continual  improvement       of ideas   (Scardamalia,     2002). Student's     self-generated  questions   are  considered
especially important in knowledge building as it emphasizes the epistemic agency of students (Scardamalia,
2002; Zhang, Scardamalia, Lamon, Messina, & Reeve, 2007). On the other hand, students can articulate their
"knowledge     ideas"  (Hakkarainen,    2003)   in the  process  of   inquiry,  which  can  be   intuitive ideas, scientific
theories, or   the information    they gathered.   Based    on  these knowledge     ideas, students  can   generate  further
questions  so  that   their inquiry can be  carried   forward    (Hakarainen,   2003). Hence,    during  the   course of   an
inquiry, there will be a number of questions as well as knowledge ideas generated by students. Although there
are case studies reporting that by formulating better questions, students can articulate better knowledge ideas,
less research is conducted to examine the relationship between questioning and the quality of knowledge ideas
quantitatively. In two previous studies in which a student was taken as the unit of analysis, some contradictory
results on the above relationship were found (Hakkarainen, Lipponen, & Jarvela, 2002; Lee, Chan, & van Aalst,
2006). Nonetheless, to capture a complete inquiry, a discussion thread seems to be more appropriate as the unit
of analysis for examining the relationship between questioning and knowledge ideas. This paper aims to study
the relationship at both thread- and individual-student- levels. As suggested by previous studies, the relationship
might be different for different age-groups (Hakkarainen et al., 2002; Lee et al., 2006), a total of two age-groups
of students are examined in this study.

Literature Review
In traditional  classrooms,     questions   are  usually   asked  by    teachers.  The structure   of initiation-response-
evaluation (IRE, Mehan, 1979) depicts the patterns often found in classroom discourse, in which the teacher
initiates a question; the students respond; and then the teacher evaluates the responses. The number of questions
students asked in classroom settings is low (Graesser & Person, 1994). On the other hand, there are studies
reporting that students' questioning is beneficial to their text comprehension and learning (e.g., King, 1990;
Palincsar & Brown, 1984); it is also found that even elementary students are capable of generating questions of
high   quality (Hakkarainen,      2003; Scardamalia       & Bereiter,   1991).    Compared    to  an  ordinary  classroom,
collaborative inquiry pedagogical designs allow students to generate questions for further inquiry more easily.
In CSCL studies, the analysis of discourse related to questions is often found (e.g., Hakkarainen, 2003; Hmelo-
Silver, 2003; Zhang et al., 2007).
          To analyze the questions generated by students, it is necessary to classify different types of questions
that can  be   found  in educational    settings.  In the  past  years,  different classification frameworks    have   been
developed  (e.g.,   Dillon,  1984;  Grasser,    1994;  King    & Rosenshine,    1993).  For   example,   in   analyzing  the
questions students asked in interactions related to a task of text comprehension, King and Rosenshine (1993)

© ISLS                                                                                                                     33
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                   Volume I: Long Papers

differentiated  the   following  question  types  in  order of  increasing    quality,  1)  fact  questions; 2)  definition
questions; and 3) integration questions targeting the integration of ideas or information. In their study, King and
Rosenshine (1993) also investigated the effect of training students to ask questions with the help of question
stems.  They    found that compared   to   the control group,   students   in  the training condition  asked  more   high-
quality questions and the knowledge they constructed was also of higher quality (see also King, 1994).
           Students' questions are also classified in the literature on knowledge building, and the classification is
based  on   their epistemological    nature--whether    they    target factual  or   explanatory    knowledge.   Questions
seeking explanations are more productive from the perspective of knowledge building as they are related to a
deeper level of understanding compared to fact-seeking ones (Hakkarainen, 2003; Lee et al., 2006; Zhang et al.,
2007). In addition to the questions asked, students can articulate knowledge ideas in the process of inquiry,
which can be responses to questions, intuitive theories, and scientific information (Hakkarainen, 2003). In the
literature on   knowledge   building, the  quality of  knowledge    ideas   is examined    according   to  their "levels of
explanation" (e.g., Hakkaranen, 2003; Lee et al., 2006; Zhang et al., 2007). The rationale is again based on the
epistemological nature of knowledge, in which explanation is more illustrative of deep understanding compared
to factual  knowledge.   A  total of  four levels  of explanation   are   classified in Zhang    et al.'s (2007)  study: 1)
unelaborated facts; 2) elaborated facts; 3) unelaborated explanations; and 4) elaborated explanations, indicating
an increase in quality. Fact refers to the description of terms, phenomena, or experiences, while explanation
refers to reasons, relationships, or mechanisms. In addition to this differentiation of fact and explanation, Zhang
et al. (2007) takes into consideration how elaborated the knowledge ideas are.
           Both students' questions and their knowledge ideas are important elements in the process of inquiry, as
questions may lead to the articulation of knowledge ideas, and the articulation of knowledge ideas may lead to
further research questions. Through continuous iterations of these cycles, students' collective knowledge can be
advanced. Case studies have been reported to describe how elementary students can engage in these iterated
cycles to advance their inquiry (Hakkarainen, 2003; Zhang et al., 2007). Although case studies are helpful to
illustrate how    students may   deepen   their inquiry by   questioning    and    putting  forward  knowledge    ideas,  a
correlation analysis may be a more cogent way of investigating the relationship between levels of questions and
levels of explanations. Hakkarainen et al. (2002) analyzed this relationship among three classrooms of fourth-
grade and fifth-grade students, finding a positive correlation. However, the unit of analysis they employed was a
student,   thus more    accurately,  the correlation   implied  that   a  student   generating    a higher   proportion  of
explanation-seeking questions was also the one who has a higher level of explanation expressed. In another
study  with  a  sample  of ninth-grade   students, Lee  et  al. (2006)    found that the   correlation between    levels of
question and levels of explanation was not significant. Nonetheless, both of these studies employed a student as
the unit of analysis. Although a thread seems to be more appropriate to capture a complete inquiry as it contains
a series of related notes, in the literature on knowledge building, no research has been attempted to examine the
relationship between questioning and levels of explanation quantitatively with a thread as the analytic unit. In
this study, both a thread and a student are taken as the units of analysis respectively to examine the relationship
between the types of questions and the quality of knowledge ideas.

Method

Research Context
The data analyzed in this study were part of the "Learning Community Project" (LCP), which was launched to
promote knowledge building and support its implementation in secondary and primary schools in Hong Kong.
As  previous    studies suggest, the  relationship between   levels    of questions  and   levels of explanation   may   be
different for different age groups (Hakkarainen et al., 2002; Lee et al., 2006), a total of two databases, one
primary and one secondary, were analyzed to see if different patterns were found. Previous studies suggested
that a long period of inquiry is needed for productive knowledge building discourse to emerge (e.g., Zhang et
al., 2007), these two databases had the longest period of inquiry among all databases at the time the analysis was
conducted. Students of both grades had a period of about six weeks to conduct their inquiry.
           The first database contains the discourse of a class of 41 tenth-grade students in a secondary school;
they formed six groups inquiring on topics of Water Quality, Plastics, and Ideal Vehicle. The students and their
teacher were both new to knowledge building. The second database composed of the discourse of a class of 44
sixth-grade students in a primary school, who formed seven groups to inquire on topics of Global Warming,
Energy Crisis, and Species Extinction. Two teachers were involved in the facilitation of knowledge building in
the second database. One of them and about one fourth of the students had the experience of participating in
knowledge building activities in the previous year. The other teacher and the remaining students were new to
this pedagogical approach.

Knowledge Forum®
Throughout the process of inquiry, students had to engage in discussions on Knowledge Forum® (KF), which is
an asynchronous     online platform   specifically designed  to  facilitate   knowledge    building  (Scardamalia,  2003).
Students can contribute their questions and ideas in the form of notes, and other students could respond and

© ISLS                                                                                                                   34
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                              Volume I: Long Papers

further improve the ideas by writing build-on notes. In writing a note, students may use "scaffolds", which are
meta-cognitive prompts in the form of word cues such as "New information", "New idea", and "My theory", so
that they can better identify the nature of their note content (e.g., "New information" or "New idea"), or identify
a knowledge gap (e.g. "I need to understand"). Notes and their build-on notes were linked physically in the form
of build-on threads. Thus within a thread, there were a series of related notes.

Levels of Questions and Levels of Explanation
The online discourse collected in this study is analysed to identify, for each note, the quality of questions asked
and the level of explanation of knowledge ideas expressed (where relevant). "Explanation-seeking questions"
refer to those targeting at explanations, while "fact-seeking questions" are those targeting at factual information
(Hakkarainen, 2003). In addition to these two categories, there were questions targeting at simple clarifications,
hence a third category, "simple clarification", was included. Such a differentiation was adopted in a recent study
conduct by van Aalst (2009). Presented in table 1 are examples of these three levels of questions taken from
students' notes collected in this study.

Table 1: Examples of the three levels of questions generated by students.

Levels of Questions          Examples
Explanation-seeking          "How UV (ultra violet) works to improve water quality?"
Fact-seeking                 "Which country is using solar energy to move the car?"
Simple clarification         "Can you put up some picture, to let us know what red panda looks like?"

          In parallel  to  the classification  of levels of questions,   students'  non-question-asking  notes    were
analyzed  according    to  levels of  explanation of their knowledge    ideas. The  analysis involves two steps:      1)
determining whether a knowledge idea is articulated in a note; and 2) if a knowledge idea is articulated, what its
level of explanation is. To be qualified as a "knowledge idea", some knowledge contents have to be expressed in
a note. The following are examples of notes with no knowledge idea articulated: "I agree", "We can have a
further discussion on this topic". Notes containing simply copy-and-paste contents, information of websites, or
pictures copied from elsewhere were also considered as having no knowledge ideas expressed.
          For notes with knowledge ideas expressed, the coding scheme developed by Zhang et al. (2007) was
employed to identify their levels of explanation. Presented in table 2 are examples of notes coded at these four
levels in this study.

Table 2: Examples of the four categories of levels of explanation.

Categories                   Examples
Elaborated explanation       "UV (Ultra Violet) is a light wave which has more energy than the visible light.
                             Its wave length is shorter so that every time it contains more energy. This
                             energy can change the nature of the bacteria so the bacteria die."
Unelaborated                 "UV (Ultra Violet) is a light. It is a kind of waves and it is not a matter. It does
explanation                  not remain in the water."
Elaborated fact              "Fossil fuel is composed of three kinds of elements: gas, oil, or coal. Fossil fuel
                             energy is a nonrenewable type of energy, that means, it would disappear if we
                             use it all or if we waste it, we wouldn't get it again. Fossil fuels are the remains
                             of ancient plant and animal life found in earth, rock, and clay. Fossil fuels are
                             mined by people for use as an energy source."
Unelaborated fact            "In fossil fuel, there are coal and oil."

          To conduct the quantitative analysis, the coding of the level of explanation was converted to a numeric
score according to the procedure in Zhang et al.'s (2007) study: "elaborated explanation" was assigned with a
score  of "4",  "unelaborated     explanation" as "3", "elaborated fact"   as  "2", and "unelaborated fact"    as  "1",
indicating a decrease in quality. Notes with no knowledge ideas expressed were not assigned with any score.
The "average level of explanation" of a build-on thread was calculated by averaging the levels of explanation of
the notes within the thread. On the other hand, the "average level of explanation" of a student was calculated by
averaging the levels of explanation of the notes contributed by the student.
          Similarly, for questions generated by students, an explanation-seeking question was assigned a score of
"3", a fact-seeking question "2", and a simple clarification question "1", indicating a decrease in quality. The
"average  level of    questions"  of a thread was  calculated by averaging  the  scores of questions  generated    in a
thread. Similarly,    the "average   level of questions" of a  student  was calculated  by averaging  the scores      of
questions contributed by the student. While the quality of questioning was captured by the "average level of
questions", a quantitative measure was also included in this study. The "questioning density" of a thread was
calculated by dividing the number of notes with questions asked divided by the total number of notes within the

© ISLS                                                                                                                35
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                               Volume I: Long Papers

thread--it is hence the proportion of notes in a thread containing questions. Similarly, the "questioning density"
of a   student was    calculated by dividing  the  number   of  notes with questions  by  the total number   of notes
contributed by the student; it was a quantity measure of how many questions were asked by a student with
respect to the total number of notes he/she created.

Results

Descriptive Analysis: Levels of Questions and Levels of Explanation
A total of 620 and 630 discussion notes were generated by the tenth-grade and sixth-grade students respectively,
which resulted in a total of 76 and 69 build-on threads respectively. Among the notes created, a total of 231 and
132  questions   were   identified  in the discussion   of  the tenth-grade   and sixth-grade students  respectively,
suggesting  that  the  tenth-graders   tended   to ask more    questions compared   to the sixth-graders.  All  these
questions were analyzed on their levels of questioning. Presented in table 3 are the numbers and percentages of
questions classified at different levels. Nearly half of the questions of both grades of students were classified as
explanation-seeking. Only a low percentage of their questions were simple clarifications (Tenth-grade: 15.6%;
Sixth-grade: 20.5%). The tenth-graders had about 40% of their questions classified as fact-seeking, while that
for the sixth-graders was about 30%. Hence although the two grades of students differed in the numbers of
questions asked, the proportions of levels of questions were quite similar.

Table 3: Numbers and percentages of questions in different levels of questions.

Grade                                                   Levels of Questions
                                 Simple clarification       Fact-seeking      Explanation-seeking        Total
Tenth          Number                      36                   92                    103                 231
               %                         15.6                   39.8                 44.6                 100
Sixth          Number                      27                   41                     64                 132
               %                         20.5                   31.1                 48.5                 100

         On the other hand, a total of 430 and 425 notes of the tenth-grade and sixth-grade students respectively
were found to contain knowledge ideas, and these were analyzed for their levels of explanation. Table 4 presents
the distribution of levels of explanation of the notes with knowledge ideas. It can be seen that for both grades,
slightly more than half of their notes with knowledge ideas were classified as unelaborated facts (Fact-Unelab.).
17% and 16.9% of the notes with knowledge ideas of the tenth-grade and sixth-grade students respectively were
elaborated facts (Fact-Elab.). The tenth-grade students had 27.9% (20+7.9) of their notes with knowledge ideas
classified as  explanatory,  which     could  either be unelaborated   explanations  (Expl.-Unelab.)   or elaborated
explanations (Expl.-Elab,), comprising a total of 120 notes. For the sixth-grade students, 28.7% (19.1+9.6) of
their notes with knowledge ideas were classified as explanatory, which comprised a total of 122 notes.

Table 4: Distribution of notes with knowledge ideas in different levels of explanation.

Grade                                                  Levels of Explanation
                                           Factual                            Explanatory
                                 Fact-Unelab.      Fact-Elab.      Expl.-Unelab.      Expl.-Elab.        Total
Tenth          Number               237                73                86                31             430
               %                    55.1               17                20               7.9             100
Sixth          Number               231                72                81                41             425
               %                    54.4               16.9              19.1             9.6             100

Correlation Analysis

Correlation with a Thread as the Unit of Analysis
Previous   literature on knowledge     building found  that short threads  are less illustrative of a deeper level of
understanding (Zhang et al., 2007). In this study, there were threads with only a small number of notes; they are
deemed to be too short to illustrate how questioning and levels of explanation are related within a thread. Hence
only threads with six notes or more are included in the analysis in this section. A total of 45 (59.2% out of 76)
and 38 (55.1% out of 69) build-on threads of tenth-grade and sixth-grade students respectively were with six
notes or more, and they were included in the correlation analysis. The correlation results are summarized as in
table 5. For the tenth-grade students, the average level of explanation of a thread was significantly correlated to
the average level of question (r=.448, p<.01) but not questioning density of a thread, suggesting that the quality
rather than quantity of questions was related to the level of explanation of a thread for the tenth-graders. For the

© ISLS                                                                                                              36
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                  Volume I: Long Papers

sixth-grade students, neither the average level of questions nor questioning density was significantly related to
the average level of explanation of a thread.

Table 5: Relationship between levels of explanation and questioning with a thread as the analytic unit.

Grade                                                          Average Levels of             Questioning Density
                                                                   Questions
Tenth (n=45)       Average Level of Explanation                      .448**                         .026
                   Average Level of Questions                                                       .161
Sixth (n=38)       Average Level of Explanation                        .295                         -.245
                   Average Level of Questions                                                       .284
                   *: p<.05; **: p<.01

Correlation with a Student as the Unit of Analysis
If a student is taken as the unit of analysis rather than a thread, a contrasting correlation pattern was found. As
summarized in table 6, no significant correlations between the average level of explanation of a student and the
average level of questions or questioning density were found for the tenth-graders. On the contrary, the average
level of explanation of a student was positively correlated to the average level of questions for the sixth-graders.
Such findings were in fact consistent with previous research that levels of questions were found to be related to
levels of explanation for primary grade but not secondary grade students if a student was taken as the unit of
analysis (Hakkarainen et al., 2002; Lee et al., 2006).

Table 6: Relationship between levels of explanation and questioning with a student as the analytic unit.

Grade                                                          Average Levels of             Questioning Density
                                                                   Questions
Tenth (n=41)       Average Level of Explanation                      -.174                          -.167
                   Average Level of Questions                                                        .2
Sixth (n=44)       Average Level of Explanation                      .425*                          .054
                   Average Level of Questions                                                       .074
                   *: p<.05

Case Studies
In order to make sense of the above findings in the context of this study, two case studies are presented in this
section. The first case is a sixth-grade student who is among the highest in both the level of questions and the
level of explanation expressed. The second case is a thread of the tenth-grade students, which illustrates how
questioning   might   deepen    the level of explanation in a  thread; it also   illustrates that students asking better
question might not be the ones who contributed notes with higher levels of explanation.

Sixth-grade Students
Tommy (fake name) was a sixth-grade student. He has written a total of 21 notes, distributed among eleven
threads. Of the notes he has written, nine contained explanatory knowledge ideas (unelaborated or elaborated
explanation)  and  a   total of  five   questions were  asked, of  which    four were explanation-seeking     ones. His
explanation-seeking questions distributed among three threads, yet they did not seem to be helpful to advance
the inquiry in those threads. For example, in the thread of "Ground heat energy", in response to the articulation
that not all places are suitable for this form of energy, Tommy asked the question, "But how come New Zealand
can do it?" The question was not addressed by other students at all. In the thread of "Solar energy", although
Tommy     did not  ask any   questions,   he contributed two   notes with   unelaborated and   elaborated  explanations
respectively, as illustrated in the contents of notes taken from this thread presented in table 7. In this thread,
students were arguing on whether solar energy is useful. In the first note written by Tommy (Note#A4), it was
said that solar energy is not that useful because there may be rainy days. Then a student opposed to this point by
articulating that the weather of Hong Kong, the place they live in, is usually hot. In the remaining notes, Tommy
tried  to clarify whether    it is  the hot  weather or  sunlight that generates   solar energy.   Explanatory-seeking
questions were also found in this thread (Note#A13 & A14), but they received no responses.

Table 7: Contents of notes taken from the thread of "Solar energy" of the sixth-grade students.

Note#     Student                                    Note Content                                       Coding
A1        G6_1         Solar energy is good because1.All countries have sun 2.Solar energy           Fact-Unelab.
                       does not need too much space.
A2        G6_2         I agree your own opinion, cause it won't need a lot of space and              Fact-Unelab.
                       everywhere got sunshine.

© ISLS                                                                                                                 37
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                Volume I: Long Papers

A3       G6_3          I agree too because it use less energy.                                       Fact-Unelab.
A4       Tommy         I don't think solar energy is good because when there are some                Fact-Elab.
                       continuous rainy days in a week, the day time might not be long
                       enough to produce energy, so if we rely on the solar energy, it
                       might cause no electricity for us to use in summer.
A5       G6_4          I think it is not a good point. Because Hong Kong is always very hot.        Fact-Unelab.
A6       Tommy         There might be hot days, but I'm not sure that there is sunlight.           Expl.-Unelab.
                       Solar energy needs sunlight.
A7       G6_2          I'm sure that everyday might be sunlight, unless there's bad weather,         Fact-Elab.
                       like typhoon, raining heavily and also storm......
A8       G6_3          I think the solar energy machine can get the energy and use for more        Expl.-Unelab.
                       than one day.
A9       G6_4          Hong Kong is a very hot place.                                               Fact-Unelab.
A10      G6_3          Hong Kong is not EVERYDAY hot. Sometimes, HK can be cold                     Fact-Unelab.
A11      Tommy         Hot doesn't mean that there is enough sunlight, you need                      Expl.-Elab.
                       sunlight to heat up the solar panels. Just like today, although it is
                       hot, there is no sunlight. While in Arctic, there are some extreme
                       situations, like 10 days have sunlight, and 10 days NO sunlight.
A12      G6_4          Solar energy can help to solve problems for people around the world.         Fact-Unelab.
                       In some places, people do not use electric or gas cookers.
A13      G6_1          How can the sun help them cook?                                               Quest.-Expl.
A14      G6_3          What is the way of fixing the solar panels if the panels are out of           Quest.-Expl.
                       order? It is a very big problem. We will have no energy to use!!!

Tenth-grade Students
In the thread of the sixth-grade students presented in the last section, questioning seemed to play a limited role
in the advancement of knowledge. For the tenth-grade students, as suggested by the correlation results, there
seemed to be a positive relationship between levels of questions and levels of explanation of a thread. Table 8
presents the note contents written in the thread of "Substance of fuels". The thread began with a fact-seeking
question of "What is the chemical substance in fossil fuel?" It received an unelaborated factual response that
fossil fuel contains coal and oil. Then the students went on with the inquiry on other substances which can be
sources of fuel such as LPG (Liquefied Petroleum Gas) and water. The proposal led to the request for explaining
how water can be a kind of fuel, which resulted in the inquiry on the mechanism of fuel cells, in which liquid
hydrogen is used for generating electricity with water as the byproduct (Note#B11). In the last few notes, the
students inquired on whether the output of a fuel cell is strong enough.
         Throughout    this thread, a series of questions      were generated to drive   the inquiry forward, and  the
discourse changed from factual (Note#B1 to B3) to explanatory (Note#B4 to B11). A total of eight questions
were found in this thread. Although the students did not start their inquiry with an explanation-seeking question,
two questions of this type were generated in the process of inquiry, leading to the explanatory exploration of
how water can be a source of fuel and the mechanism of fuel cell. It can also be observed from this thread that
the students who contributed notes with unelaborated or elaborated explanations (G10_3. G10_6, G10_2) are
not the same as those who asked explanation-seeking questions (G10_4, G10_1) or other types of questions
(G10_5, G10_7). Such a finding is in line with the previous result that there was no significant correlation
between levels of questions and levels of explanation at an individual level for the tenth-grade students.

Table 8: Contents of notes taken from the thread of "Substance of fuels" of the tenth-grade students.

Note#    Student                                  Note Content                                        Coding
B1       G10_1         What is the chemical substance in fossil fuel?                                Quest.-Fact
B2       G10_2         In fossil fuel, there are coal and oil.                                      Fact-Unelab.
B3       G10_3         To protect the environment, I think using LPG is better............. Also,   Fact-Unelab.
                       some Japanese scientist tries to use water to be fuel.........
B4       G10_4         Water..? Is it really possible?                                               Quest.-Expl.
B5       G10_3         Water is formed by hydrogen and oxygen. They could be a kind of             Expl.-Unelab.
                       good fuel.
B6       G10_5         How????                                                                       Quest.-Sim.
B7       G10_6         Decompose water, form hydrogen and oxygen, then burn both of                Expl.-Unelab.
                       them.
B8       G10_1         Burning hydrogen and oxygen can supply such great energy for the              Quest.-Expl.
                       car to move?
B9       G10_4         I think it is the problem of the amount you use only...                      Fact-Unelab.

© ISLS                                                                                                               38
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                  Volume I: Long Papers

B10      G10_6         Of course is enough! Hydrogen burn in air and oxygen support                  Expl.-Unelab.
                       combustion. So they can provide that much energy.
B11      G10_2         Fuel cells have been developed which convert hydrogen directly into             Expl.-Elab.
                       electricity. This is attractive since the only byproduct is water. There
                       are still significant problems since carbon dioxide is typically
                       produced by use of electricity, which is mostly produced from fossil
                       fuels.
B12      G10_1         Sorry, what is fuel cell? Is it a kind of fuel that very common to use          Quest.-Fact
                       in car?
B13      G10_7         Fuel cell: An electrochemical cell in which the energy of a reaction          Copy & Paste
                       between a fuel, such as liquid hydrogen, and an oxidant, such as
                       liquid oxygen.... source:
                       http://dictionary.reference.com/search?q=fuel%20cell
B14      G10_2         Here is the picture of the fuel cell running process:                         Fact.-Unelab.
                       http://www.newmango.com/info_fuel.html From the picture, we
                       know that the Natural gas + air -> DC POWER and Water+ Heat.
B15      G10_7         How about the output of the cell? Will it be strong?                            Quest.-Fact
B16      G10_2         I am sorry I do not understand what means strong?                               Quest._Sim.
B17      G10_7         I mean will the current be strong enough?                                       Quest.-Fact
B18      G10_2         Yes, the fuel cell can provide enough energy to the car.                      Fact.-Unelab.

Discussion
This paper examines the relationship between levels of questions and levels of explanation at both a thread level
and an individual level. At a thread level, a positive correlation was found for the tenth-grade but not the sixth-
grade students. An opposite pattern was found at an individual level, in which a positive correlation was found
for the sixth-grade but not the tenth-grade students. The latter finding is in fact compatible to previous studies
that a positive correlation at an individual level was found for primary grade but not secondary grade students
(Hakkarainen et al., 2002; Lee et al., 2006).
         If the results of the sixth-grade and tenth-grade students are considered together, there appears to be a
developmental difference between younger and older students. For the younger students (sixth-grade), those
who ask good questions are the ones with high-level explanations expressed. For the older ones (tenth-grade),
the ability to ask good questions appears to have developed independently of the ability to construct high-level
explanations. Nonetheless, in a build-on thread of the tenth-graders, there were good questions asked by some
students and high-level explanations constructed by other students, resulting in a positive correlation between
levels of questions and levels of explanation of a thread. On the contrary, in the discussion of the sixth-grade
students, good questions were found in some threads and yet the students addressing them were not able to
construct high-level explanations; while in other threads, although good questions were not found, there were
notes with high-level explanations.
          In  the context    of CSCL     or collaborative   learning  more     generally, students   usually   engage  in
collaborative inquiry, and it is important for good questions to be generated and high-level knowledge ideas
expressed. More studies are needed to explore whether such a developmental difference really exists, whether it
is related to students' ability or their willingness to ask questions and express ideas, whether such a difference is
hindering or  facilitative to  collaborative   learning, and  whether  it can  be weakened      or strengthened  through
suitable pedagogical designs.
         In  previous   studies on   knowledge    building  in which   the  participants  were   mainly   primary   grade
students (e.g.,  Hakkarainen,   2003;   Hakkarainen   et al.,  2002; Zhang  et  al., 2007),  it was  reported  that even
elementary   students  were   capable   of asking questions    of good  quality  and  to  build  their inquiry  on  these
questions. While the sixth-grade students in this study seemed to be less able to advance their inquiry through
questioning.  The  case  study  also   suggested  that   even  some  good   questions   were asked   by   the sixth-grade
students, they were not addressed by the others. One possible reason is that the teachers and students were
relatively new to the pedagogical approach of knowledge building. In previous studies, it was mentioned that
the teacher played an important role in the facilitation of knowledge building (Hakkarainen, 2003; Zhang et al.,
2007). It seemed that more facilitation from the teachers is needed in helping younger students to formulate
better questions, address the questions that were not responded to, and further their inquiry through questioning.
However,   as suggested    by   the thread  of "Solar  energy"    presented in  the  case study,   although   questioning
seemed to play a limited role, some discourse progresses were observed with respect to the oppositions and
counter-oppositions put forward by the students, arguing on whether solar energy is useful and whether it can be
applied in the context of Hong Kong.
         In  the  literature on  knowledge     building, it is reported   that knowledge    building   is different from
argumentation    because   the  latter focuses on persuasion    and  the  winning    of arguments    rather   than shared
understanding and progress (Scardamalia & Bereiter, 2006). However, in more recent studies, argumentation is

© ISLS                                                                                                                  39
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                    Volume I: Long Papers

mainly regarded as a form of discourse found in social contexts when people expound and explore diverse or
contradictory ideas (Andriessen, 2006; Leitao, 2000). Rather than focusing on who wins an argument, analytic
frameworks are developed to examine how students interact with one another in the presence of opposite ideas
(Erduran,   Simon,    & Osborne,   2004;   Leitao,  2000; Pontecorvo    &  Girardet,    1993).  These frameworks      might
provide valuable insights on how progress can be made through discourse. Although the case study of the tenth-
grade students suggested that they were more capable to construct explanations to questions raised by other
students, and in fact a significant correlation was found between levels of questions and levels of explanation of
a thread for the tenth-grade students, the percentage of variance that can be explained for is about 20% (square
of .448), further studies are needed to examine other discourse characteristics such as argumentative interactions
that are related to the deepening of explanation within a thread.

References
Andriessen,    J. (2006).  Arguing   to learn.  In  R. K. Sawyer    (Ed.), The    Cambridge     handbook  of  the  learning
         sciences (pp. 443-460). NY: Cambridge University Press.
Bereiter, C. (2002). Education and mind in the knowledge age. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Dillon, J. T. (1984). The classification of research questions. Review of Educational Research, 54(3), 327-361.
Erduran,  S.,  Simon,   S., &   Osborne,   J.  (2004).   TAPping   into   argumentation:   Developments       in the  use  of
         Toulmin's Argument Pattern in studying science discourse. Science Education, 88(6), 915-933.
Graesser,   A. C.,  &   Person, N.  K.  (1994). Question    asking  during    tutoring. American    Educational   Research
         Journal, 31, 104-137.
Hakkarainen,    K.  (2003). Progressive    inquiry  in a  computer-supported      biology class. Journal  of   Research    in
         Science Teaching, 40(10), 1072-1088.
Hakkarainen,      K., Lipponen,   L.,  &   Jarvela, S.   (2002). Epistemology      of   inquiry  and computer-supported
         collaborative learning. In T. Koschmann, R. Hall, & N. Miyake (Eds.), CSCL II: Carrying forward the
         conversation (pp. 129-156). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Hakkarainen,      K., &   Sintonen,   M.   (2002).  The   interrogative   model    of   inquiry  and computer-supported
         collaborative learning. Science & Education, 11, 25-43.
Hmelo-Silver, C. E. (2003). Analyzing collaborative knowledge construction: Multiple methods for integrated
         understanding. Computers & Education, 41, 397-420.
King,  A.  (1990).    Enhancing  peer   interaction and   learning  in the classroom     through  reciprocal  questioning.
         American Educational Research Journal, 27, 664-687.
King, A. (1994). Guiding knowledge construction in the classroom: Effects of teaching children how to question
         and how to explain. American Educational Research Journal, 31, 338-368.
King,  A.,  &     Rosenshine,   B. (1993).    Effects  of guided   cooperative     questioning   on  children    knowledge
         construction. Journal of Experimental Education, 61, 127-148.
Lee, E. Y. C., Chan, C. K. K., & van Aalst, J. (2006). Student assessment of collaborative learning in a CSCL
         environment. International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 1(1), 57-87.
Leitao, S. (2000). The potential of argument in knowledge building. Human Development, 43, 332-360.
Mehan,   H.    (1979).  Learning    lessons:   Social  organization    in  the  classroom.    Cambridge,   MA:     Harvard
         University Press.
Pontecorvo, C., & Girardet, H. (1993). Arguing and reasoning in understanding historical topics. Cognition &
         Instruction, 11, 365-395.
Scardamalia,   M.   (2002). Collective    cognitive responsibility  for   the advancement    of  knowledge.   In  B.  Smith
         (Ed.), Liberal education in a knowledge society (pp. 67-98). Chicago: Open Court.
Scardamalia, M. (2003). Knowledge building environments: Extending the limits of the possible in education
         and   knowledge    work.   In  A. DiStefano,    K. E.   Rudestam,    &  R. Silverman    (Eds.), Encyclopedia      of
         distributed learning (pp. 269-272). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Scardamalia,    M.,   & Bereiter,  C.   (1991). Higher    levels of agency     for  children  in knowledge       building: A
         challenge for the design of new knowledge media. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 1(1), 37-68.
Scardamalia,    M.,   & Bereiter,  C.  (2006).  Knowledge     building:   theory,  pedagogy,    and technology.    In R.   K.
         Sawyer     (Ed.),  The  Cambridge     handbook   of  the  learning    sciences  (pp.   97-118). NY:     Cambridge
         University Press.
Stahl,  G., Koschmann,      T.,  Suthers,  D.   (2006).   Computer-supported       collaborative    learning: A   historical
         perspective. In R. K. Sawyer (ed.), The Cambridge handbook of the learning sciences (pp.409-426).
         NY: Cambridge University Press.
van Aalst,   J.   (2009).  Distinguishing  knowledge-sharing,      knowledge-construction,       and  knowledge-creation
         discourses. International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 4, 259-287.
Zhang,  J., Scardamalia,    M.,   Lamon,   M.,  Messina,    R.,  &  Reeve,    R.  (2007). Socio-cognitive     dynamics     of
         knowledge      building  in  the  work  of   9-  and 10-year-olds.    Educational    Technology   Research     and
         Development, 55, 117-145.

© ISLS                                                                                                                     40
