CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                    Volume I: Long Papers

Mind the Gap: Differences between the Aspirational and the Actual
                           in an Online Community of Learners
         Karen Brennan, MIT Media Lab, 77 Massachusetts Ave, E14-445C, Cambridge, MA, 02139,
                                                kbrennan@media.mit.edu

         Abstract:    This  paper   explores    the differences    between  the  aspirational   (what    designers
         desire) and   the  actual   (what participants    do)  in an   online learning  community       of young
         people, using   the  Scratch   website   as   a case  study. Interviews    with members      of the MIT
         Scratch Team and two years of ethnographic observation of the site inform the discussion of
         these differences. The paper presents four tensions that arise between the aspirations for this
         community of learners and the realities of actual participation: (1) enabling exploration of the
         personal vs. pitfalls of the personal, (2) fostering meaningful interactions with others vs. lack
         of respect,   (3) supporting    diverse    creative   expression vs.  conflicts  in interests,   and  (4)
         encouraging a sense of group belonging vs. seeking attention.

Scratch: An Online "Community" of Learners
Scratch (http://scratch.mit.edu) is a programming environment that makes it easy to create interactive media
(including  stories,   games,    and   simulations)    and   share those   creations  online.   Scratch     follows   in  the
constructionist tradition ­ an approach to learning that is grounded in the belief that the most effective learning
experiences grow out of the active construction of all types of things, including the construction of computer
programs (Kafai & Resnick, 1996; Papert, 1991). The Logo programming environment (developed by Seymour
Papert and a team of researchers at MIT in the 1960s) is a significant predecessor to Scratch and has been a
major influence on its development. One of the ways in which Scratch has extended the Logo work is in its
insistence on the social aspects of learning, most obviously through the creation of the Scratch website.
         The Scratch website, launched in May 2007, has become extremely active, with more than 650,000
registered members     sharing,  discussing,    and remixing   one  another's  Scratch   projects  (Resnick  et  al., 2009).
Each day, members (mostly ages 8 to 16) upload approximately 1500 new Scratch projects to the website ­ on
average, a new project every minute. The collection of projects is incredibly diverse: interactive newsletters,
science  simulations,   virtual  tours,  animated    dance    contests, step-by-step   tutorials,  and   many    others,  all
programmed with the Scratch environment and its graphical programming blocks.
         Inspired by Papert's Mindstorms, the website draws on the samba school model, where people of all
ages come together with shared goals, to support each other's learning and collaborate on endeavors that are
more substantial than could be achieved individually (Papert, 1993). More broadly, theories about communities
of practice and situated learning have provided ways of thinking about how community settings can support the
learning of a  practice  ­  by   providing    learners  access  to others and   opportunities   to explore   the activities,
artifacts, and ideals of the practice (Brown, Collins, & Duguid, 1989; Lave & Wenger, 1991). Accordingly, in
addition to enabling people to upload their projects, the site was designed with features typical of community-
based  content-creation    sites like  Flickr and   YouTube.    Members    can  leave  comments    on    projects, annotate
projects with tags, indicate admiration of projects by clicking the Love It link, and bookmark others' projects in
a list of favorites. Members can also mark other members as friends, create galleries or collections of projects
with others, and participate in discussion forums. Each member has a profile page that displays their alias and
country, as well as their contributions and interactions ­ lists of projects, favorites, friends, and galleries.
         When asked to describe our work, I usually share a mostly unproblematic narrative about the Scratch
website, which   we   call the   Scratch online   community.    This  narrative, at least superficially,    seems  to  make
appropriate use of the term community ­ over the past three years, hundreds of thousands of young people from
around the world have joined and have created more than 1.4 million interactive stories, games, and animations.
As designers,    we    use community     to     express  what   we   desire for  ­   and    from   ­  participants    in  the
technology/environment     we    have  designed,    and  I less  frequently discuss   the ways     in which    the  label of
community might be a mismatch for the activities we observe on the site.
         This mismatch of language ­ the aspirational use of words to create feelings, thoughts, and actions that
do not yet (or may never) exist ­ is obviously not particular to Scratch. It is a side effect of the main activities of
designers:  bringing   possibility to  reality, bringing   the aspirational to  the actual.  In this  paper, I explore    the
difference between the aspirational and the actual in the design of online communities, using the Scratch online
community as a case study with designer perspectives and participant observations. What are we thinking about
when we say community? What should the word community indicate about the design? How are our intentions
supported   or undermined    by    the design?   How     are the   design and   our intentions   taken   up,  appropriated,
subverted, and transformed by members?

© ISLS                                                                                                                    342
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                      Volume I: Long Papers

          To explore these questions, I conducted interviews with a subset of the MIT Scratch Team known as
metamods, a sub-group of four people (including myself) that focuses on issues that take place on the Scratch
website.  The   metamods     meet   weekly    to discuss   technical  extensions   (e.g.  designing   features   that limit the
impact of spammers) and social extensions (e.g. designing new themed activities for members) to the site, as
well as to discuss significant events that have taken place on the site over the week. These interviews and two
years  of ethnographic     observation    of  the  Scratch   website   were   coded   to  form  the  basis  of   the  following
discussion that   explores   the gap   between     the aspirational  and  the  actual  in the design   of the  Scratch   online
community.

What Does (or Should) the Word "Community" Indicate?
Community is a complicated word ­ and is made more complex in its translation to the virtual (Bruckman,
2006; Feenberg & Barney, 2004; Rheingold, 2000; Smith & Kollock, 1999). Rather than start with definitions
of community from sociology, psychology, or other disciplines, I started the interviews by exploring individual
understandings    of  this word.    One metamod        described   community   as  something    that  needs   to be   explicitly
acknowledged by its members:

          People, a place (either virtual or physical), and a sense of belonging by those people who
          claim to be part of the community. I think people have to be aware, or even explicitly say, that
          they are part of a community, in order for that community to exist. (Metamod #2)

Another   described   community     as  a set   of relationships    and collaborations,   emphasizing     the interconnection
between people:

          It's a space where you create relationships and collaborate on different aspects having to do
          with our lives. To me it is a bunch of people, who are generally in a similar space, who get to
          have space, time to talk about whatever is relevant and real. They get to perform a lot of
          different roles for each other ­ confidante, friend, therapist. (Metamod #3)

Whereas    this   framed   community      as    activities   supporting   relationships,   another    metamod     emphasized
relationships (or interactions) supporting activities:

          I think about a group of people who share something. What range of things might they be
          sharing? Something where they either share some activities together, some values together,
          some    goals together.   I guess   I  would    typically think it's a collection   of people   that   have
          various forms of interactions in support of those shared goals, activities, or values. (Metamod
          #1)

          The  metamods'     individual   framings     of  community    overlap  along    (although   differently  emphasize)
several   dimensions    ­  individual,  interaction,      sharing,  group  ­   which   leads  to  a   working    definition  of
community: people who intentionally gather together and interact to pursue shared goals and interests. When
asked how this definition of community changes online, metamods talked about how the overall framing and
dimensions are the same, but are hindered by communication barriers. It is harder to form intimate interactions,
to collaborate as seamlessly, and to express as much as quickly in an environment that lacks non-verbal cues, is
asynchronously     mediated,    and   relies primarily    on text   and images.    The   nature  of  online   community     also
provides benefits ­ connecting with people at a distance and connecting with a much larger, (hopefully) more
diverse group of people.
          But how do the goals of Scratch and the Scratch website connect with these ideas about community?
The overarching constructionist goal of enabling people to have meaningful learning experiences through acts
of construction   ­   and, as   extended  by    Scratch,   situated in  explicitly social  environments     ­  can   be  further
articulated into four sub-goals or aspirations: (1) enabling exploration of the personal, (2) fostering meaningful
interactions   with  others, (3)  supporting     diverse  creative  expression,    and (4)  encouraging     a sense   of group
belonging. I now discuss each of the aspirations, describing ­ with vignettes and interview excerpts ­ the ways
in which the actual deviates from the aspirational.

Aspiration: Enabling Exploration of the Personal / Actual: Pitfalls of the Personal
Computational     creation   has  long  been     perceived   as  the  domain    of a   select   few,  based   on  gender    and
epistemological approach (Turkle & Papert, 1990). Scratch aims to broaden the demographic of computational
creators, both through technical aspects of the programming environment (e.g. drag-and-drop puzzle-piece-like
programming       elements  that are   well-suited     to a  bricoleur  or  tinkering    approach)   and  through     particular
approaches     to pedagogical     design     (e.g. recommending        and  modeling      activities such   as   collaborative
storytelling). Thus,    instead  of designing    activities  exclusively  framed   and    focused   on implementing      certain

© ISLS                                                                                                                      343
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                     Volume I: Long Papers

algorithms or using particular computational concepts such as variables, we encourage young people to work on
projects (and suggest that educators design activities) that connect to these concepts via personal interests. For
example, creating a project that is an interactive representation of your name or a project about a place you have
always wanted to visit or a project about an issue that is important to you. The community should be a place
where the personal is explored ­ but there are pitfalls in exploring the personal online.
          Eagle3522 is a 14-year-old girl who creates a Scratch project about the problems that she is currently
experiencing in her life. She writes about how she hopes the act of creation will be cathartic, "I've had a lot on
my mind lately, and that's why I made this to kind of try to get it off of my mind." In the project, she shares
fights with her mother, information about her famously incarcerated father, and her depressive thoughts. She
receives a mix of supportive and critical comments on her project. She quickly deletes her project, so that it is
not visible to the community.
          Jacky is a 10-year-old girl who loves ferrets. She creates a series of projects about her favorite animal
and  the  series becomes     wildly  popular  within  the Scratch    community.    She   misbehaves    and is blocked   from
accessing  the   site for a  brief period of   time. When   she     returns, she  decides that  she no  longer   wants to be
defined exclusively by her ferret projects and she deletes all of them, hoping to reimagine her representation and
participation.
          SonestaMiku is a 14-year-old girl who is active on Scratch, as well as on other media creation sites.
She  is careful  not  to  share  too  much   personal information      on Scratch,   but reveals more   about  her personal
interests ­ and personal life ­ on these other sites. A friend on Scratch is slighted by SonestaMiku. The friend
creates  a Scratch    project that   reveals SonestaMiku's   personal     information  and   shares it  on the Scratch   site.
SonestaMiku is furious about this violation and demands that the friend's account be permanently blocked.
          All three creators in these vignettes used media creation to express their interests and to share and
perform aspects of their identities. But all three were forced to confront key questions. What types of personal
things are suitable for public consumption? With Eagle3522, the intimate sharing of troubled family life and
depressive thoughts became too public. How does public consumption change what is personal? With Jacky, the
heightened status and visibility of her personal interest was taken on by the community in a way that completely
defined her and left her unable to negotiate her self-representation. Who owns the personal? With SonestaMiku,
the imaginary border around the personal was crossed, and was used against her as a form of sanctioning.
          From the metamods perspective, the public-personal is full of contradiction. Exploring the personal is a
valuable context for developing as a computational creator, but raises questions about safety ­ both emotional
safety (e.g. the vulnerability of sharing personal problems) and physical safety (e.g. the vulnerability of sharing
geographic   or  contact   information).  In   addition to  these   questions,   there are   questions  about  development.
Sharing   personal    creations  publicly in  an archive  leaves    an important   trace  or record of  one's  interests and
development, but a possibly limiting self-representation. One metamod described this tension, that in our desire
to maintain a complete archive we might be losing something valuable:

          We haven't thought about obsolescence, that things need to die. There's some use to having
          things fade away ­ and become the humus that we then plant new seeds in. (Metamod #3)

          Connecting    to   and sharing  the  personal  in an   online   archive is complicated.   The  personal  becomes
public and is never forgotten ­ the desire for representation is impinged upon by visibility.

Aspiration: Fostering Meaningful Interactions with Others / Actual: Lack of Respect
Creativity is a social process (Sawyer, 2006). It resides not solely in the individual, but through interaction with
others. This is a significant reason why the Scratch website is inspired by models of online social networking
and  community    sites,  not   just models   of repositories    or archives.  Some    features of  the site were  designed
explicitly to foster interactions between members. For instance, comments are used to give feedback to others,
friending is used to keep track of what others are doing, and forums are used to give and get help with projects.
Other features have been unexpectedly appropriated by members for interactions. For instance, the location field
is used to give status updates (in a Twitter-inspired fashion) instead of geographic position, and galleries are
used   as  dedicated   chat   spaces  where   members     flirt. But   as with   any interactions   between   people,  these
interactions are not always positive or respectful.
          Suziescape9     is 17-year-old  girl who    has been    creating   animations  with  Scratch  for  more  than  two
years.  She is   thoughtful   in her creations   and her  interactions    with others. Her   work   is appreciated by  other
community    members,     but   positive attention is accompanied      by    some negative   attention. After  a particularly
thoughtless set of comments, she decides to stop creating projects, which she sees as attracting attention from
people she describes as "trolls."
          Greg is a teacher who is introducing Scratch to students at his school. He helps them create accounts on
the Scratch site and reminds them that shared artifacts are publicly visible. One of his students posts a comment
on a stranger's Scratch project, calling it "stupid." The stranger returns the insult, using expletives to describe

© ISLS                                                                                                                    344
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                         Volume I: Long Papers

the student's project. The student is very upset by the exchange. Other teachers find out about it and confront
Greg about putting students at risk. Greg feels terrible about what has happened. He sees great benefit in sharing
one's work with others online, but the episode has "tarnished" the reputation of the Scratch online community at
his school. The students continue to create projects, but no longer share them online.
          LiveVictor is a 15-year-old boy who enjoys antagonizing Scratchers whose projects appear on the front
page   of Scratch. With      one Scratcher,   he  acts   as a  spammer,     leaving  numerous      gibberish  comments   on her
projects to distract her from other, more productive, comments. With another, he causes panic by pretending to
have medical expertise, convincing her that a minor medical issue indicates major future medical problems.
After several months of problematic participation, he decides to leave Scratch and makes a project about his
departure. In it, he apologizes quite sincerely to those he has harassed and been disrespectful toward. He asks
his victims for forgiveness and they accept his apology, and he parts on good terms.
          These vignettes illustrate the different reactions members have toward disrespectful interactions. Some
are alienated  from    their  creative   practices,  either   entirely   like Suziescape9      or  partially like  Greg and  his
students. Others accept disrespectful interactions as part of socially-situated creative practices, and learn how to
strike back, to just ignore, or ­ as in the case of LiveVictor's targets ­ eventually make reparation.
          Problematic interactions between members are always a topic of conversation at metamod meetings.
One metamod, who deals with complaints from community members and also manages moderators who deal
with reports, is particularly focused on ways of responding to disrespectful interactions. He views one of his
most significant contributions as creating a safe space where creative practices can flourish:

          I've seen   that   one of  the important   things    I do  is  to create  safety, in  a  sense. I  think that
          community is an emergent phenomenon ­ it's something that creates itself. You give people
          the right kind of context, and they start to create new ideas, and share them, and grow them.
          But that starts to break down when something becomes unsafe, when people feel threatened or
          they feel attacked. They contract into this posture that's very defensive, basically, and there's
          less of the sharing, growth, and interesting phenomena that I like to see happen. So, I do that
          by removing threats or really disrespectful content. (Metamod #3)

          Another  metamod       acknowledged       that there   was more     that could   be  done in  a proactive  fashion to
encourage community-appropriate interactions ­ rather than re-establishing a sense of safety after a negative
interaction occurs between members:

          There   are  people    who    don't  show,     in my   mind,   appropriate     respect   for others   in the
          community. It's not that it's set up in a way that there's necessarily as high a level of respect
          among people in the community that I would think would be ideal. And one could imagine
          certain  communities       do  more    to support    that  level  of respect.    Everything   from   certain
          initiation routines and rituals that help people get a better understanding of the values of the
          community, which I don't think there's a lot of in the Scratch community. (Metamod #1)

          For example, it is currently quite easy to join the community. An applicant fills out a simple form,
specifying a username, password, birth date, email, gender, and country. There is no other text on the page that
indicates what the individual can do with the account or what expectations exist regarding participation. Those
expectations are shared in the Scratch community Terms of Use, which are accessible as a link at the bottom of
the page, wedged between "Download | Donate | Privacy Policy" and "Copyright Policy | Contact Us." The
Terms of Use (http://info.scratch.mit.edu/Terms_of_use) are expressed as six expectations: (1) Be respectful, (2)
Offer constructive comments, (3) Give credit, (4) Be honest, (5) Keep personal information private, and (6)
Help   keep the   site friendly.     Important   (perhaps   even  commonsense)       ideas,    but members    are  usually only
exposed to the terms after the terms have already been violated.
          Routines    and    rituals to  clarify expectations     about  participation     would   help   new  members    better
understand this new environment ­ and clear communication of expectations seems even more important in an
online space where communication is already challenging (as described earlier). Many come to online spaces
with an exaggerated sense of invincibility afforded by anonymity, often behaving in disrespectful ways that they
would   not in  real   life. Thus,   feelings  of   safety  within   the existing   community      are impinged    upon  by the
anonymity of the not-yet-enculturated individual.

Aspiration: Supporting Diverse Creative Expression / Actual: Conflicts in Interests
When describing the aspirations of Scratch, we frequently use the metaphor of a room (Resnick & Silverman,
2005). We want Scratch to have a low floor ­ it should be very easy for anyone to get started creating things
with Scratch. We also want Scratch to have a high ceiling ­ people should be able to create projects of arbitrary
complexity and not be limited by the easy beginnings. Finally, we want Scratch to have wide walls ­ people
should  be  able  to  create  a  wide   range  of   projects,  from  adventure     stories  to role-playing   games  to  science

© ISLS                                                                                                                       345
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                 Volume I: Long Papers

simulations, not  just  a single   type  or genre of  project. While  we   see  members    experimenting  with   different
genres of projects, many members tend to focus on a particular genre, which varies most obviously according to
gender and age.
         Dvora160 is 14-year-old boy who is opposed to (what he perceives as) the superficiality of animation
or other aesthetically-focused projects. He and others are adamant about the primacy of programming in Scratch
and argue that technically-sophisticated projects should be valued most highly in the community. He creates a
protest project, encouraging people to boycott all animation projects and calling for a return to a programming
focus.
         Ashleigh_Jaguar is a 16-year-old girl who is a passionate animal rights activist. She creates a Scratch
project that includes graphic photos of animals being mutilated in product and drug testing. She posts the project
and encourages others to support her in the animal rights cause. A young Scratcher views the graphic content
and is scared. His parents contact the Scratch Team, which then removes the content, explaining that the content
was too intense for the broad Scratcher age range. She defiantly re-posts the project, stating that the truth of
animal testing is too important for the Scratch Team to ignore or suppress.
         Zaw is a 15-year-old boy who disdains Scratch's core values of personal expression and computational
creation. He wants to destroy the Scratch community. He decides to recruit members to join an army that will
systematically  drive   people    away   from  Scratch.  Members      of the  army   are   encouraged to  post   negative
comments on people's projects until the creators leave Scratch. His negative attitude and scare tactics incite
members   who   care   about   the  Scratch  community   and   its core  values.   Zaw is  eventually banned    from the
community, but his army's presence lingers through old comments on projects, occasionally causing panic in
those who fear the return of Zaw.
         Members are passionate about their genres, interests, and goals. But sometimes their interests are seen
as being at odds with others' interests and modes of expressing those interests. As the size of the community
increases, these conflicts also increase. There are more people with similar interests with whom a member can
align her or himself. There are also more people with perceived opposing interests that a member can align
against, as  with   Dvora160    versus   the  animators. These   conflicts   of genre  preferences and    issues of age-
appropriateness   (as  with    Ashleigh_Jaguar)    can   be  handled  through    moderator   mediation    and  respectful
interactions between involved parties. The case of Zaw is somewhat unique, in that he fundamentally rejects the
overarching goals of Scratch. One metamod described the difference between these two different conflicts:

         The community is not homogeneous. There are shared values and shared goals, but it doesn't
         mean that everyone has exactly the same goals or exactly the same values or exactly the same
         interests.   Ideally, I'd  like to  see the  values as  more    consistent  and   more  homogeneous.
         Whereas the interests would vary and there would be greater diversity, there should be more
         openness, with many different pathways for interests or styles of work. (Metamod #1)

         But this assumes that one is even able to identify interests that are shared (or not) by others. All of the
metamods described the difficulty that the size of the Scratch website presents to members, both new and old.
One metamod described how he saw the inability to find one's interests reflected in the archive as contributing
to negative feelings:

         The challenge is that you can point to this place and say who we are, but it's really hard to
         look at it from outside. In Scratch, it's really hard because you have to either search or ­ there
         aren't the right affordances. I feel that's a problem with most large archives, online archives.
         There aren't the right tools yet to see everything and organize it and zoom in and zoom out. I
         think it makes people feel overwhelmed and makes them feel less powerful. (Metamod #2)

         In either case, the value of diversity is impinged upon by either a desire to protect one's sense of ­ or
lack of inclusion in ­ identification with others.

Aspiration: Encouraging a Sense of Group Belonging / Actual: Seeking Attention
Collaboration  enables    people   to construct  ideas and  artifacts greater   than they  could achieve  independently
(Koschmann,    1996;    Rogoff    &   Lave,   1984).  There  are   numerous     capacities that  contribute to   effective
collaboration, including   communication      and   perspective-taking   capacities. Collaboration  occurs   in  different
configurations and with different aims. In Scratch, we see people collaborate in pairs, small groups, and large
groups ­ with both top-down and more diffuse management styles. These configurations support all aspects of
an iterative design    process    ­ from    imagining  projects, through   creation,  playing,   sharing, and   reflection
(Resnick, 2007). In a fundamental way, the entire Scratch community is a large collaborative experience, with
people   exchanging    ideas   to  contribute to  a  collective  progression    as computational   creators,  expressing
themselves creatively through media artifacts. But this general sense of belonging to the larger social sphere is

© ISLS                                                                                                                346
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                    Volume I: Long Papers

sometimes    undermined    by   the position   and  progression   of  the  individual  ­  the ways    in which   the  we is
undermined by the me.
         Puppet is an 11-year-old boy who has grown savvy (and somewhat cynical) about tactics that Scratch
members use to become famous on the Scratch site. He creates a project about how to become famous, which he
describes as partly ironic and partly accurate. He recommends spamming members' projects, creating projects
that declare a dramatic and abrupt departure, and establishing memes that will be broadly appealing to others
and popular in the community. Other Scratchers don't notice ­ or choose to ignore ­ the ironic intention of the
project and post comments about which of the approaches (and suggestions for other approaches) have worked
for them.
         The_Destroyer is a 12-year-old boy who threatens to take down the Scratch community server and
members'     computers    with  a  virus  that  he has  written.  He    writes  threatening   messages   to  others  in the
community on the forums and encourages them to acknowledge his amazing powers. SNYgames is a Scratcher
who    rushes to   the community's     defense,    and courageously     announces    that he  will  confront    and  defeat
The_Destroyer. The drama between SNYgames and The_Destroyer escalates, causing much anxiety in other
Scratch members. A moderator defuses the situation by publicly exposing SNYgames as The_Destroyer, and
kindly asks that SNYgames cease the dramatic impersonation.
         HiddenComet      is a  14-year-old  girl  who  shares  her  experiences   of  having diabetes   with  the  Scratch
community. There is an outpouring of support and concern for her in the face of this life-threatening condition.
Another member of the community, Chattydeign, shortly announces that she too has diabetes and is on the verge
of death. It is revealed, however, that Chattydeign is deceiving community members to gain attention. Members
create projects about the deception and harshly criticize Chattydeign for attempting to falsely gain sympathy and
status.
         Attention is important ­ Scratch community members want to be recognized for their contributions. A
metamod described a lack of attention as obviously demotivating:

         When    you   don't   get  any   feedback  for  what   you    create, that  undermines    the   sense  of
         community because you feel like nobody is listening to you. There's no difference between
         you being by yourself, doing what you were doing before and doing it now in this space.
         (Metamod #2)

         He went on to explain how the size of the community can contribute to further demotivation, if one is
unable to ever imagine oneself as making a major contribution:

         The fact that we have libraries with tons of amazing books makes me less likely to feel that
         I'm going to be a great writer. There are all these amazing people. I'm just going to write a
         paper ­ I'm never going to be the next Shakespeare or someone like that. I feel that, in the
         same way, it could detract from people feeling like they could make a big contribution. As the
         site grows, you feel smaller. (Metamod #2)

         But  a  need  for   attention is fundamentally     in conflict with   a sense of  community.     Attention  is not
equally distributed across members, and there is only so much attention available. These conditions lead to
members becoming problematically tactical with the community's attention, as demonstrated by the vignettes
about   Puppet,  The_Destroyer/SNYgames,         and   Chattydeign.    The   metamods   group  regularly    discusses   (and
designs) ways of productively responding to the desire for attention, in ways that benefit both the individual and
the community.     From   featuring    projects with   less visibility  to promoting   the  value   of   collaboration, our
responses are centered on cultivating awareness of others ­ a me-we, self-social progression:

         They're at this stage, "It's me! What can I get?" and that's the appropriate moral development
         that they    should be   at. But at   the same  time,  I want    to provide   some   sort of  scaffolded
         question that leads them to think ­ "What is the entire effect on the community?" ­ so they
         can acknowledge that what they're participating in is a real thing. It's often moving people,
         helping moving people from a totally self-focused view to a slightly larger view. Whatever
         slightly larger means to them. (Metamod #3)

But is it a Community?
These   four  gaps between    the  aspirational and  the  actual  demonstrate    a common     problem:   it is increasingly
difficult to connect with others ­ and multiple factors amplify this difficulty. The size of the site is a problem,
not simply    because  there are   many   people   participating, but  because   there is a lack   of satisfying   ways for
representing  or accessing    that  large number    of people.  The    public, anonymous,     and  reduced   expression  of
interactions  on   the  site is   another  problem   that   continually    impacts  people's   ability   to form   intimate
relationships with    one another.    The natural  tension  between    the self  and  the social   challenges  connections

© ISLS                                                                                                                   347
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                      Volume I: Long Papers

between     people, from  desires    for  fame    to fears  of loneliness.   Finally, there is  the difficulty of exclusively
valuing problem-free connections or relationships with others. While some may be alienated by conflict, it can
simultaneously   unite    others. Drama,        nemeses, and   hardship  can  all serve  to connect   people,  even   if at  the
expense of others.
         Despite these gaps between the aspirational and the actual, is the Scratch website a community? This is
not a preoccupation with the word community, but rather with whether or not we (as metamods, as the Scratch
Team) are satisfied with the ways in which the website represents our aspirations. Is it a community in the way
we desire it to be a community? I asked each of the metamods whether they felt the Scratch site is a community.
One described how, although he saw many ways in which interactions between members could be improved, he
saw relationships being formed as an indicator of community:

         Yes,  I'd    say that Scratch       is a community.    And    the evidence   of this   has to do   with  the
         cultivation of long-term relationships, which does occur a lot on the Scratch website and the
         expression of ­ what's the word? for brotherly love? agape ­ that "you and I we're sort of
         similar." There's that kind of acknowledgement. (Metamod #3)

         Although generally not concerned with the use of the word community, another metamod adopted a
similar  litmus-test  approach    to    the  Scratch-website-as-community       question.   His  focus was   on   activity  and
values:

         I  tend to   think of    it as  a   community.     I don't  focus   so much    on  what  the  definition of
         community should be. But I see the Scratch community as both sharing some activities ­ of
         creating these particular types of artifacts with this particular tool. But I'd also like to see it as
         a  community     that shares    certain    values  ­ the  values  of personal   expression,  collaboration.
         (Metamod #1)

         Consistent with his initial definition of community, one metamod talked about the subjective nature of
the Scratch   community,    that     it  "is more    of  a  personal decision."   When    I asked   directly whether     it is a
community for him, he described how our differentiated status as designers complicates the relationship:

         For me? No. I guess it's hard. Because the position we have ­ it's like the mayor of a city,
         who I guess is part of the community, but you have a different position. I don't feel like I'm
         part of the kids. It seems like there is some distinction there, by the way the kids relate to the
         Scratch Team members. They know they are different from us. For me, I do recognize it as a
         community, and I feel part of it insofar as my role as Scratch Team member. My experiences
         are probably different from those who are "real users" of the community. (Metamod #2)

         Our role is obviously complicated. We are designers ­ participants with intention and power. But what
does   this difference  imply     about  the    relationship  between   the   designers  and  the   non-designers?  All     three
metamods    adopted   different   perspectives     on   the significance  or  importance   of the designers  in  defining   and
driving community processes. One viewed active participation and community cultivation by the Scratch Team
as important, but acknowledged that competing interests between designers and other members may result in
tension:

         There can sometimes be a tension between being a designer ­ of having certain types of goals
         and values that you see as important for the community ­ but then also wanting to support the
         desires    and goals  of    the community      members.    Sometimes     there can be  a conflict  between
         what some people in the community see as the values and goals of the community. That can
         be a challenge. (Metamod #1)

         Another described definition and participation as a joint responsibility of designers and other members.
Members     should  feel  a responsibility      for  making    the community,     but that  the making   is  overseen    by  the
designers:

         It's more that this community is yours, and if you want to do something different, I encourage
         you to do that. As long as it's positive and helpful. (Metamod #3)

         Finally,   one   described     authentic    participation  as emerging    from   ownership,   and   wished   that   the
members could be given more autonomy over their community:

         I feel that one thing we could do to make it more of a community is to have the ability for
         people to decide what are the things where they can participate for the benefit of community

© ISLS                                                                                                                       348
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                Volume I: Long Papers

         and let them select those things and let them do those things. So you see the Scratch Team as
         external to the community processes? Yes. (Metamod #2)

Mind the Gap: Reflections and Suggestions
This work began with a question about using the word community to describe the Scratch website. The process
of coding  ethnographic     observations  of the  community     and interviews with    the community's  stewards    has
helped me think about this question ­ and has provoked new questions. Although I knew at the beginning that
community is a complex and multifaceted word, having the opportunity to unpack some of that complexity in
conversation with other metamods was quite valuable. While we share general conceptions of what the word
community means, it is obvious that we value different aspects of what community represents.
         The newly-provoked questions do not stem from a definitional preoccupation. They emerge from an
acknowledgement       that design  of technological infrastructure  is insufficient to support  the aspirational ­  the
goals of the Scratch project and of constructionism more generally. It is not enough to stand by and simply
observe what happens with (or to) the site, to assume that our existing design is sufficient in and of itself, and
that members will not take up and reimagine the space in conflicting ways. de Certeau (1984) cautioned against
making this assumption:

         It is nonetheless implicit in the "producers'" claim to "inform" the population, that is, to "give
         form" to social practices. ... To assume that is to misunderstand the act of "consumption."
         This misunderstanding assumes that "assimilating" necessarily means "becoming similar to"
         what one absorbs, and not "making something similar" to what one is, making it one's own,
         appropriating or reappropriating it. (p. 166)

         We need to be actively contributing to, participating in, and negotiating the interactions and activities
on the site to support our goals. We must constantly struggle to recognize and to mind the gap between the
aspirational and the actual in the online community. Yes ­ community is subjectively defined. Yes ­ community
is subjectively experienced. But that does not mean that we should refrain from influencing its development. As
designers, we should continually ask if it is moving toward the actual to which we aspire.

References
Brown,   J.S., Collins, A.,  &   Duguid,  P. (1989). Situated    cognition and the  culture  of learning. Educational
         Researcher, 18(1), 32-42.
Bruckman,    A.  (2006).   Learning   in  online communities.    In K.  Sawyer (Ed.),  Cambridge    Handbook     of the
         Learning Sciences (pp. 461-472). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
de Certeau, M. (1984). The practice of everyday life. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Feenberg, A., & Barney, D. (Eds.) (2004). Community in the digital age: Philosophy and practice. Oxford:
         Rowman & Littlefield.
Kafai, Y.B., & Resnick, M. (Eds.) (1996). Constructionism in practice: Designing, thinking, and learning in a
         digital world. New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Koschmann, T. (1996). CSCL: Theory and practice of an emerging paradigm. New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Lave, J., & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning: Legitimate peripheral participation. Cambridge: Cambridge
         University Press.
Papert, S. (1991). Situating constructionism. In S. Papert & I. Harel (Eds.), Constructionism. Cambridge, MA:
         MIT Press.
Papert, S. (1993). Mindstorms: Children, computers, and powerful ideas (2nd ed.). New York: Basic Books.
Rheingold, H. (2000). The virtual community: Homesteading on the electronic frontier. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Resnick, M. (2007). All I really need to know (about creative thinking) I learned (by studying how children
         learn) in kindergarten. Proceedings of ACM Creativity & Cognition conference, Washington DC, June
         2007.
Resnick,  M.,    Maloney,    J., Monroy-Hernandez,    A.,    Rusk,  N., Eastmond,    E.,   Brennan, K.,   Millner,  A.,
         Rosenbaum,     E.,  Silver,  J., Silverman,  B.,   &   Kafai,  Y. (2009).   Scratch:   Programming  for    all.
         Communications of the ACM, 52(11), 60-67.
Resnick, M., & Silverman, B. (2005). Some reflections on designing construction kits for kids. Proceedings of
         IDC conference, Boulder, CO, June 2005.
Rogoff,  B.,   & Lave,  J.  (1984). Everyday     cognition: its development in social  context.  Cambridge:  Harvard
         University Press.
Sawyer, K. (2006). Explaining creativity: The science of human innovation. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Smith, M.A., & Kollock, P. (Eds.) (1999). Communities in cyberspace. New York: Routledge.
Turkle, S., & Papert, S. (1990). Epistemological pluralism: Styles and voices within the computer culture. Signs,
         16(1), 128-157.

© ISLS                                                                                                              349
