CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                             Volume I: Long Papers

Supporting Collaborative Learning in Recitation Sections Using an
                                    Ambient Awareness Tool
   Hamed S. Alavi, Pierre Dillenbourg, Swiss Federal Institute of Technology, 1015 Lausanne, Switzerland
                             Email: Hamed.alavi@epfl.ch, pierre.dillenbourg@epfl.ch

          Abstract: We study the effect of an ambient awareness tool, named Lantern, on the quantity
          and structure of collaboration in recitation sections (i.e. when students work in small teams on
          the exercise sets with the help of teaching assistants). Lantern is an interactive lamp that with
          colors, intensity of light and blinking represents a piece of information. In a Lantern-equipped
          recitation section, every team is provided with one Lantern which shows the current status of
          that team: the exercise they are working on, if they called the teaching assistants for help, and
          since when. The results show that (1) Lantern increases intra-team collaboration while teams
          are waiting    for teaching   assistants  and   (2) it  increases  the  diversity  of  inter-team
          communication, that is, each team communicates with a larger number of other teams, and
          there are fewer teams who never communicate with others.

Introduction
In university teaching, recitation sections are sessions in which students solve pre-assigned problems while one
or more teaching assistants (TA) provide support by answering questions. These sessions supplement lectures
by providing   an  informal  learning atmosphere    that  allows collaboration  among   students and supports  it by
supervision from the TAs. Consequently, the efficiency of a recitation section highly depends on the level and
structure of collaboration among students as well as the effectiveness of TA supervision. In order to get insight
on the efficiency of the recitation sections, we observed and videotaped 12 recitation sessions in our school. The
analysis on the recorded data showed some problems. For example, (1) students spend a considerable amount of
time and cognitive effort to catch the attention of TAs when they need help, (2) they usually have a limited
circle of friends with whom they collaborate, and (3) in many cases, when choosing which team to assist, the
TAs fail to notice or respond to more pressing requests.
          We believe that many of the shortcomings are due to a lack of awareness information both on the part
of the TA and among the students themselves. We thus proposed an awareness tool, called Lantern, which gives
information on the status of students: who is working on what exercise, who has asked for help and since when.
In our previous work we have shown that Lantern can improve the efficiency of interaction between students
and TAs (Alavi, Dillenbourg, & Kaplan, 2009). We were also interested to find out whether informing students
about the status of the others would encourage a higher level and more complex structure of collaboration. This
paper focuses on answering the question of how does Lantern affect collaboration in recitation sections? For
instance, from our previous study we know that, when using Lantern, students are much more productive while
waiting for the TA. An interesting question is whether Lantern also increases collaboration in this waiting time.
          Our  comparative   analysis on   six Lantern-equipped    and six  regular recitation  sections shows    that
Lantern increases the intra-team collaboration when students are waiting for TA. Moreover, Lantern changes the
structure of inter-team communication, such that each team communicate with a larger number of other teams
and that there are fewer teams who never communicate with others. Please note that we intentionally avoid
referring to  the interactions taking place  among   groups   as collaboration. On  the other  hand, the joint effort
within a team to solve exercises validates the criteria of collaborative learning (Dillenbourg, 1999).
          The  reminder  of  this paper is organized   as follows. First we  explain the  recitation sections  as the
context of this work. The next section describes our tool Lantern. Then we explain our past experiment along
with a summary of its results followed by the new research questions. We answer the questions, through an
experiment    described in the next  section   as well as the analyses   on the collected data.  We  summarize    the
relevant research and finally draw some conclusion.

Context: Recitation Section
In general, the recitation section is a complement to the lecture session as a university pedagogical practice.
Students work on their assignments, individually or in small groups. Depending on the demand of the class, a
number of teaching assistants are present to give help, hints or in some cases public explanation. When they
need help, students raise their hand and wait for the TA.
          In particular, the recitation sections we studied shared the following properties:
 Attending the class was not mandatory for the students.

© ISLS                                                                                                            350
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                              Volume I: Long Papers

                              Figure 1. Structure of Interactions in Recitation Sections.

 20-35 students attended each session, working individually or in small groups of at most 6.
 Figure  1  shows     the structure of collaboration in a recitation room. Teams sat closely  and went  through the
 exercises together. They had limited interactions with some of their neighbors. In a session, there are 3-5
 completely disconnected clusters of teams.
 1-3 TAs ran each session.
 Each session lasted about 2 hours, while students were allowed to leave earlier.
 3-8 exercises were assigned for each session.
 The exercises were usually theoretical in that they only involved pen and paper.

Tool: Lantern
Lantern, shown in Figure 2, is a small and portable lamp which consists of five pairs of Light-Emitting Diodes
(LEDs) installed in a column and covered by a blurry plastic cylinder. A microprocessor controls the LEDs.
Each team is provided with a Lantern, which makes use of a very simple visual grammar to show the status of
that team:
 Color: The color of the team's Lantern indicates the exercise they are currently working on.
 Intensity of light: It grows up with     time on the five floors of LEDS and  specifies the time that has been spent
 on the current exercise.
 Blinking: It indicates that the team is calling the TA for help.
 Frequency    of blinking:    The   rate of blinking increases with  time, showing for how   long the team has been
 waiting for the TA.
         Users can interact with Lantern by turning it to choose an exercise and by pressing on it to call for help.
Each lantern records all user interactions, which can be downloaded through a USB connection for analysis.

                                                 Figure 2. Lantern.

© ISLS                                                                                                            351
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                             Volume I: Long Papers

Past Observations
We started by conducting a field study in which we watched and videotaped three recitation classes for four
consecutive weeks. The analyses on this observation led to the idea of Lantern. To evaluate the first prototype of
Lantern, we set up an experiment in which Lantern was used in two courses through four weeks of recitation.
The main result was that the productivity of students, while waiting for the TA, improved remarkably. The
details of the field study and the first experiment along with the analyses and results are reported in our previous
work (Alavi et al., 2009). In the following, we recall the concept of while-waiting productivity and use it to
explain our new research questions.

While-waiting Productivity
According   to  our   observations, in the control condition, when  teams  have   to wait for the TA,  they spend a
considerable   amount    of time  chasing  the TA,  i.e. trying to catch her attention.   We  defined while-waiting
productivity as the fraction of the waiting time that is not spent on the chasing. We use this parameter as an
indicator of the teams' efficiency during this waiting time. In the first experiment, students had 94% while-
waiting productivity when they used Lantern and 38% when they did not (Alavi et al., 2009).
          Note that the waiting time can be considerably long, (depending on the number of demands and the
number of TAs). Table 1 shows how long, in average, a team had to wait for the TA over a session, in the field
study and the first experiment. Furthermore, the performance of students during the waiting time is of special
interest, since this  is usually  a  high  value period  when   students are challenged   with and  focused  on the
exercises.

Table 1: Waiting time in actual recitation sections.

                                               Field study      First experiment (with Lantern)
                Avg waiting time (min)         21               16
                Max waiting time (min)         36               27
                Avg session length (min)       98               87

Research Questions
A while-waiting productivity of 94% means that students use 6% of their waiting time chasing the TA. An
interesting question is what do students do during this 94%? Specifically, do they collaborate and what is the
influence of Lantern on that?
          We believed that, Lantern can encourage both intra-team collaboration and inter-team communication,
especially when students are waiting for TA. If members of a team need help while trying to solve a problem
together, they can press on Lantern and continue the collaboration, whereas without Lantern, they usually stop
the collaboration and start chasing the TA to get her attention. On the other hand, if a team waiting for help on
an exercise  realizes  that their   neighbors have already  solved  that exercise may   ask  from that team, which
triggers inter-team communication. We thus, posed the following questions:
 Q1. Does Lantern increase intra-team collaboration while the team is waiting for TA?
 Q2. Does Lantern increase intra-team collaboration while the team is NOT waiting for TA?
 Q3. Does Lantern increase inter-team communication while the teams are waiting for TA?
 Q4. Does Lantern increase inter-team communication while the teams are NOT waiting for TA?
          We were also interested to evaluate the effect of Lantern on the structure of inter-team communication
in the classroom level (Figure 1):
 Q5. How does Lantern affect the structure of communication        among teams?
          To answer the above questions, we designed an experiment which is explained in the next section.

Recent Experiment
Third-year  students   of   computer   and telecommunication    sciences are observed   during six  regular and six
Lantern-equipped recitation sections. Table 2 shows the basic parameters of the sections.

Table 2: Observed sessions in the control and Lantern conditions.

                Condition         # sessions       # students        #teams            team size
                Control           6                23-34             12-14             1.7-2.4
                Lantern           6                20-29             10-13             1.8-2.2

© ISLS                                                                                                            352
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                             Volume I: Long Papers

Data Collection
One observer (the first author of this paper) tried to note every interesting event, especially the collaboration
among students which are mostly recognizable as verbal interactions and certain body postures. Considering the
small  size of the classrooms,   it was not a problem to  distinguish the topic of the   conversations (relevant or
irrelevant to the course material). More precisely, the observer, with a one-minute precision, registered whether
each student is (1) working individually, (2) collaborating with a teammate, (3) communicating with another
team, or (4) not engaged in the exercise set (e.g. Table 3).

Table 3: The work status of the students.

                      time       Student 1   student2   student3    ...             student34
                      min1       4           4          4                           4
                      min2       1           1          1                           4
                      min3       1           2          2                           1
                      ...
                      min120     4           4          3                           3

           In addition, from the data logged by Lantern we know about the status of each team: when they start
and finish an exercise, when they call for, and receive help. Altogether, the following data is collected from each
session:
1. When a student starts collaborating with another member of her team and when they finish the collaboration.
2. When a student starts communicating with another team and when they finish the communication.
3. When a team calls for help, when the TA arrives to give help, and when the TA leaves the team.
           The collected data also can be represented by the status of students, as visualized in Figure 3.   For
example in this figure, the student starts collaborating with her teammates at time t1. At time t2 her team calls
for help and starts waiting for the TA who arrives at t4. Meanwhile she stops the collaboration at t3. The TA
leaves the team at t5 and she goes back to the problem solving mode.

                              Figure 3. Status of a Student during a Recitation Section.

           At the end of the experiment, the students and the teaching assistants completed a questionnaire about
their experience with Lantern. We will refer to the responses when we try to explain some of our findings in the
next sections.

Analysis
In this section, we analyze the influence of Lantern on intra-team collaboration and inter-team communication.
We consider six Lantern-equipped recitation sections and compare them to six regular sessions as the control
condition.

Intra-team Collaboration
We define four parameters for each session:
         ,      is the percentage of the Waiting time each student spent on intra-team collaboration, averaged in
 the session, in the Control and Lantern conditions respectively.
         ,      is the percentage of the Problem solving time each student spent on intra-team collaboration,
 averaged in the session, in the Control and Lantern conditions respectively.

© ISLS                                                                                                           353
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                Volume I: Long Papers

         Note that, in our analysis, we exclude the time intervals when the team is receiving help (like t4 to t5 in
Figure 3). This is because interaction among students is highly influenced by the presence of the TA, while
receiving help.
         We start by comparing              against           . For the  case of collaboration that begins  before   the
waiting period and lasts through it (for example, the first collaboration in Figure 3), the second part (t2 to t3)
counts   in  the           values.   An    unpaired     t-test  shows    a  significant  improvement    with   Lantern
(                                                           ): positive answer to question Q1.
         One    may   explain this   improvement      as  the   direct effect of the  improvement    in while-waiting
productivity. In order to test that, we modify the measures as follows:
                                                            and
         In which          is the average while-waiting productivity of the session. An unpaired t-test shows that
       is still significantly higher than         (                                                     ).
         We       found        no         significant       difference        between                 and
(                                                       ), meaning that Lantern has no significant effect on the intra-
team collaboration when the team is not waiting: negative answer to question Q2.
         We were also interested to know if students collaborate more when they are waiting than when they are
in problem solving mode, in either of the conditions. To do that we compare               to      , and        to
using a paired t-test. Interestingly enough, we found out that, in the control condition, students collaborate less
than usual when they are waiting (                                                           ), whereas in the Lantern
condition students collaborate more when waiting (                                                            ).
         Figure 4 summarizes the result of the above comparisons.

                             Figure 4. Intra-team Collaboration across the Conditions.
                                (PC:         , WC:           , PL:         , WL:      )

Inter-team Communication
This   section analyzes  the  effect of   Lantern   on  inter-team  communication     in terms of the duration   of  the
interactions as well as their structure.

Duration
Our analyses show that Lantern does not significantly increase the duration of inter-team communication either
while  the  communicating    teams   are  waiting   for the TA   or while  they  are doing  problem  solving: negative
answer to questions Q3 and Q4.

Structure
In order to quantify the effect of Lantern on the structure of inter-team communication, we define the following
interrelated parameters, for a session:
  Diversity of  Communication:    is the  total number    of  pairs of teams  which  communicate  at  least once  in the
  session. In Figure 5 each link between two teams indicates an inter-team communication. In this figure the
  Diversity of Communication is 6.

© ISLS                                                                                                               354
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                            Volume I: Long Papers

                           Figure 5. Inter-team Communication in Recitation Sections.

 Number     of  Communicating      Teams:   is  the total number   of teams   who   were  involved  in inter-team
 communication at least once. In Figure 5 there are 8 Communicating Teams.
 Number     of Clusters: a Cluster  consists of a set of  teams such that, each team in the Cluster communicates
 with at least one other team of the same Cluster, and there exist no communication between two teams of two
 different Clusters. In Figure 5 the number of Clusters is 4. In an interpretation that considers teams as sources
 of knowledge, a recitation section with fewer clusters provides a better platform for the flow of knowledge.
         Each parameter is averaged over the number of teams in the sessions and analyzed using an unpaired t-
test. The results show significant increase in all the parameters. As a sample, the result of the t-test on the
Diversity of Communication is (                                                     ), summarized in Figure 6.

                              Figure 6. Diversity of Communication across Condition.

Summary of Results and Discussion
Lantern increased intra-team collaboration while the team is waiting for the TA. This can be explained by the
combination    of two  facts: (1) according  to the questionnaire, before  pressing on Lantern the  team members
agree that they need help, which itself initiates a discussion, and (2) this discussion can last through the waiting
time, since no effort to catch the TAs' attention is needed. The quantity of the improvement, comparing to the
total time one student interact with her teammates in the control condition in average, is 22.1%. Moreover, it has
been shown that, with Lantern, students do more intra-team collaboration when they are waiting for the TA than
when they are doing problem solving. We conclude that, when students are waiting for the TA there is a high
potential for collaboration, which is lost in chasing the TA when Lantern is not used. As a consequence, the
waiting time does not always need to be shortened:     in some cases, using an awareness tool rather than adding
new teaching assistants would maintain longer waiting times that become fertile grounds for collaboration to
take place.
         Lantern did not increase the duration of inter-team communication. However, it has been shown that
Lantern has effect on the structure of inter-team communication. More precisely, when Lantern is used each
team communicates with a larger number of other teams (higher Diversity), (2) there are fewer teams who never

© ISLS                                                                                                           355
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                   Volume I: Long Papers

communicate (more Communicating Teams), and (3) the knowledge of one team can be spread over a larger
part of the class (fewer Clusters). We explain this set of effects as the direct consequence of the main objective
of Lantern: adding to the knowledge of students about other teams. The more students know about a specific
team the more they are likely to interact with that team.

Related Work
In this section, we    position our work   among   the  relevant  research  from   three   different fields: (1) Computer
Supported Collaborative Learning (CSCL) research on tools for regulating teams' interactions, (2) the Computer
Supported Cooperative Work (CSCW) research on awareness tools and (3) the work of ambient interface and
reality-based interaction in Human-Computer Interaction (HCI).
          In CSCL, Soller et al. (2005) provided a framework that categorizes collaborative learning supporting
systems   into   three  classes: (1)    mirroring systems,     which    display    raw indicators    to collaborators     (2)
metacognitive    tools, which   monitor   the  interactions,  process   the collected  data  and  represent     the state of
interaction via a set of high-level indicators (3) coaching systems, which offer advice based on an interpretation
of those indicators. We make use of this framework to compare our work against the others. Lantern fits in the
first category as they mirror the state of student groups to the groups themselves and to the TAs without any
pre-processing.
          Chen   (2006)   designed    a tool, called  Assistant,  which     monitors   the collaboration,    visualizes   the
processed  data  and   provides  advice  to the teacher.   It can also  learn   from teacher's  feedback     to improve   its
performance. Assistant should be put in the third category of Soller's framework (coaching systems). Moreover,
Assistant is tailored for the context of distance collaborative learning, while Lantern is designed for co-present
settings.
          Avouris   et  al. (2004)  developed   a collaboration    environment     called  Synergo,     for collocated   and
distance  learning.   Synergo   monitors  the activity, makes   analyses    and visualizes  quantitative    parameters   like
density of interaction, symmetry of partner's activity etc. It also provides teachers with useful information to
manage the interactions that occur in the classroom. Synergo fits in the middle category (metacognitive tools).
          Our work is also different than Chen's and Avouris' in terms of the level of interaction it considers.
While Assistant and Synergo are mostly centered on interactions within one group, we are looking at the higher
level, i.e. interaction between several groups and TAs as well as the interactions among groups.
          In CSCW,     there have  been   many  efforts aiming    for providing    awareness   information.   They    can be
categorized in three dimensions:
1. The temporal nature, i.e, if the information is given and used at the same time and context as it is collected
   (synchronous     (Beaudouin-Lafon     &    Karsenty,  1992;    Ishii et  al. 1994;     Shen  &    Sun,   2002))    or  not
   (asynchronous (Manohar & Prakash, 1994))
2. The  type  of provided    awareness    information   which   can   be  about    workspace   (Fitzpatrick   et al., 1999;
   Fitzpatrick et al., 2002;  Fuchs et al., 1995; Ishii et al., 1994) or presence (Shen & Sun, 2002; Tang & Rura,
   1994), and activities of participants in the cooperative work.
3. The context, including the users, task and the structure of interaction among participants (e.g. conferencing
   (Shen & Sun, 2002), and distance learning).
          Lantern   gives   real-time   information, on    students'  activity  in a collocated   collaborative     learning
context.
          Finally, in HCI, the seminal idea of ambient interface is to extend classical user interfaces (display,
keyboard, mouse) to the whole environment. In contrast to the works described above, the primary concern of
ambient display applications is the subtle embedding of information in our surroundings, while capturing and
processing information is of a minor concern. The effectiveness of ambient interfaces for providing awareness
information has been shown in many cases (Heiner et al. 1999; Pederson & Sokoler, 1997). In line with those
works, we have proposed Lantern as a tool that embeds awareness information into the recitation classrooms,
and evaluated its capability to support collaborative learning.

Conclusion
This paper analyzes the influence of Lantern on the collaboration in recitation sections. We show that, Lantern
increases the intra-team collaboration taking place while the team is waiting for the TA. Lantern also has effect
on the    structure of  inter-team  communication       in the recitation   sections   in  such a way     that,  each  team
communicates with a larger number of other teams and that there are fewer teams who never communicate with
others.

© ISLS                                                                                                                    356
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                        Volume I: Long Papers

References
Alavi, H. S., Dillenbourg, P., and Kaplan, F. (2009). Distributed Awareness for Class Orchestration. In Proceedings of the
          4th  European    Conference      on   Technology    Enhanced    Learning:  Learning    in  the  Synergy   of  Multiple
          Disciplines (Nice, France, September 29 - October 02, 2009). U. Cress, V. Dimitrova, and M. Specht, Eds. Lecture
          Notes In Computer Science, vol. 5794. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg, 211-225.
Avouris, N., Margaritis M., and Komis V. (2004). Modelling interaction during small-group synchronous problem solving
          activities: The  Synergo     approach,  2nd Int.   Workshop on  Designing   Computational   Models   of  Collaborative
          Learning Interaction, ITS 2004, 7th Conf. on Intelligent Tutoring Systems, Maceio, Brazil, 2004, 13­18.
Beaudouin-Lafon,      M. and   Karsenty,   A.    (1992).  Transparency   and  awareness    in a   real-time groupware   system.
          In Proceedings   of  the  5th  Annual   ACM    Symposium   on  User   interface Software  and  Technology (Monteray,
          California, United States, November 15 - 18, 1992). UIST '92. ACM, New York, NY, 171-180.
Bickmore, T. and Schulman, D. (2007). Practical approaches to comforting users with relational agents. In CHI '07 Extended
          Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems (San Jose, CA, USA, April 28 - May 03, 2007). CHI '07.
          ACM, New York, NY, 2291-2296.
Chen, W. (2006). Supporting teachers' intervention in collaborative knowledge building. J. Netw. Comput. Appl. 29, 2 (Apr.
          2006), 200-215.
Cramer, H. S., Evers, V., van Someren, M. W., and Wielinga, B. J. (2009). Awareness, training and trust in interaction with
          adaptive spam    filters. In Proceedings   of  the 27th international Conference    on Human   Factors  in Computing
          Systems(Boston, MA, USA, April 04 - 09, 2009). CHI '09. ACM, New York, NY, 909-912.
Cramer, H., Evers, V., Ramlal, S., Someren, M., Rutledge, L., Stash, N., Aroyo, L., and Wielinga, B. (2008). The effects of
          transparency on trust in and acceptance of a content-based art recommender. User Modeling and User-Adapted
          Interaction18, 5 (Nov. 2008), 455-496.
Dillenbourg, P. (1999). Introduction; What do you mean by Collaborative Learning? In P. Dillenbourg (Ed.) Collaborative
          Learning. Cognitive and Computational Approaches, (pp. 1-19). Oxford, UK: Elsevier Science.
Fitzpatrick, G., Kaplan, S., Mansfield, T., David, A., and Segall, B. (2002). Supporting Public Availability and Accessibility
          with Elvin: Experiences and Reflections. Comput. Supported Coop. Work 11, 3 (Nov. 2002), 447-474.
Fitzpatrick, G., Mansfield, T., Kaplan, S., Arnold, D., Phelps, T., and Segall, B. (1999). Augmenting the workaday world
          with Elvin. In Proceedings of the Sixth Conference on European Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative
          Work (Copenhagen, Denmark, September 12 - 16, 1999).
Fuchs, L., Pankoke-Babatz, U., and Prinz, W. (1995). Supporting cooperative awareness with local event mechanisms: the
          groupdesk system. In Proceedings of the Fourth Conference on European Conference on Computer-Supported
          Cooperative Work (Stockholm, Sweden, September 10 - 14, 1995).
Heiner, J. M.,  Hudson,   S.   E.,  and  Tanaka,  K.  (1999).  The  information  percolator:  ambient information  display in a
          decorative   object. In Proceedings     of  the  12th Annual   ACM    Symposium     on User   interface Software and
          Technology (Asheville, North Carolina, United States, November 07 - 10, 1999). UIST '99. ACM, New York, NY,
          141-148.
Ishii, H., Kobayashi, M., and Arita, K. (1994). Iterative design of seamless collaboration media. Commun. ACM 37, 8 (Aug.
          1994), 83-97.
Jacob, R. J., Girouard, A., Hirshfield, L. M., Horn, M. S., Shaer, O., Solovey, E. T., and Zigelbaum, J. (2008). Reality-based
          interaction: a framework for post-WIMP interfaces. In Proceeding of the Twenty-Sixth Annual SIGCHI Conference
          on Human Factors in Computing Systems (Florence, Italy, April 05 - 10, 2008). CHI '08. ACM, New York, NY,
          201-210.
Lee, S. and Lee, W. (2009). Exploring effectiveness of physical metaphor in interaction design. In Proceedings of the 27th
          international Conference Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems (Boston, MA, USA, April
          04 - 09, 2009). CHI '09. ACM, New York, NY, 4363-4368.
Manohar, N. R. and Prakash, A. (1994). Replay by Re-execution: A Paradigm for Asynchronous Collaboration via Record
          and Replay of Interactive Multimedia Sessions. SIGOIS Bull. 15, 2 (Dec. 1994), 32-34.
Pedersen,  E. R. and     Sokoler,   T. (1997). AROMA:      abstract representation of presence   supporting  mutual  awareness.
          InProceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (Atlanta, Georgia, United
          States, March 22 - 27, 1997). S. Pemberton, Ed. CHI '97. ACM, New York, NY, 51-58.
Shen, H. and Sun, C. (2002). Flexible notification for collaborative systems. In Proceedings of the 2002 ACM Conference on
          Computer Supported Cooperative Work (New Orleans, Louisiana, USA, November 16 - 20, 2002). CSCW '02.
          ACM, New York, NY, 77-86.
Soller, A., Martínez, A., Jermann, P., and Muehlenbrock, M. (2005). From Mirroring to Guiding: A Review of State of the
          Art Technology for Supporting Collaborative Learning. Int. J. Artif. Intell. Ed. 15, 4 (Dec. 2005), 261-290.
Tang, J. C. and Rua, M. (1994). Montage: providing teleproximity for distributed groups. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI
          Conference   on  Human       Factors in Computing     Systems: Celebrating  interdependence (Boston,    Massachusetts,
          United States, April 24 - 28, 1994). B. Adelson, S. Dumais, and J. Olson, Eds. CHI '94. ACM, New York, NY, 37-
          43.

© ISLS                                                                                                                      357
