CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                       Volume I: Long Papers

           Missing Something? Authority in Collaborative Learning
 Iris Howley, Elijah Mayfield, Carolyn P. Rosé, Carnegie Mellon University, 5000 Forbes Ave. Pittsburgh, PA
                       Email: ihowley@cs.cmu.edu, emayfiel@cs.cmu.edu, cprose@cs.cmu.edu

           Abstract:   Past   research   in   individual learning settings  has  shown   that   student  dispositions
           such as   self-efficacy     are  predictive   of learning  and  other   beneficial   outcomes,    but the
           relationship   is  less   clear  in a  collaborative   learning   environment.    This   paper  explores
           authoritativeness of stance within a conversation as a social factor influencing learning and
           related  to self-efficacy    in  a computer-supported     collaborative   learning   setting. Our results
           indicate that   this  authoritativeness    measure   predicts   learning, where    an individual's    self-
           efficacy does not, and that student and partner authoritativeness predicts group self-efficacy.
           Further  research     is required   to better    determine  the relationship   between    conversational
           authoritativeness, individual dispositions, and learning.

Introduction
Research in individual learning settings connected with popular dispositional constructshas demonstrated that
intrinsic motivation, mastery-learning oriented goals, and high self-efficacy are predictive of learning as well as
positive traits such as persistence (Sheldon & Kasser, 1995; Harackiewicz et al, 2002; Coutinho & Newman,
2008).    However, this leaves open the question of what happens when an additional student is added to the
learning activity, and we then have a collaborative learning task. Will self-efficacy still predict learning and
behavior in this collaborative setting? Or does the absence of considered social factors in these dispositional
constructs dilute their predictive value in the face of social comparison, social identity, positioning, and other
factors introduced by a collaborative setting?
           At the same time that the introduction of a learning partner introduces complications that may interfere
with   the predictive     value  of  motivational   assessments   largely  optimized    for  use within   individual   learning
settings,  the  advantage     is that  the social interaction   makes  self-concepts    visible through   linguistic strategies
speakers   employ      to position     themselves   within  their groups.    Thus,   as  an   important   part   of  our work
investigating the applicability of constructs such as self-efficacy within a group learning setting, we develop a
behavioral measure in the form of a categorical coding scheme through which we can quantify the relative level
of authoritativeness of stance between the collaborative partners.          In this paper we apply this coding scheme to
conversational data by hand, although in the long term, our hope is to be able to automate its application by
means of machine learning technology as has been used in prior work on collaborative learning process analysis
(Rosé et al., 2008; Mayfield & Rosé, 2011).            In this paper we explore the relationship between this proposed
behavioral measure of authoritativeness and dispositional attributes such as self-efficacy. If behavioral measures
of authoritativeness      (or some     other  automated   coding  scheme)    can be  used    to  predict student  learning   or
persistence, and if these measures can be automated, then the Computer-Supported Learning (CSCL) research
community      could   leverage     some   of the benefits   of individual  disposition  research,   automatically     assessed
through    chat contributions,      in naturalistic   collaborative learning  environments.      For example,    if  we  could
automatically measure self-efficacy through chat behavior, we may not need to use self-report questionnaires.
Self-report questionnaires, while useful in a research atmosphere, are not as plausible in more natural CSCL
environments where there may not be an experimenter, or even a permanent instructor.
           In the remainder of this paper, we begin by outlining the prior research on assessment of dispositional
attitudes.  Next, we introduce our operationalization of "authoritativeness" as a behavioral measure capturing
one factor that may exist on the social dimension of collaborative learning. We use our measure of authority in
knowledge along with self-efficacy to examine learning in a collaborative context as a reanalysis of a dataset
from   an  earlier  computer      supported    collaborative  learning study  (Ai    et al., 2010).     We  conclude    with a
discussion of our current directions and future work.

Prior Work
Much   prior   work    has examined     the   effects of dispositional attributes  on   learning  in individual  contexts.   In
general,   measures    of  intrinsic   motivation have   been   associated with  a   variety of  positive  implications.  For
example, studies have shown that students pursuing intrinsic goals are not only intrinsically motivated, but also
portray behaviors enhancing their well-being (Sheldon & Kasser, 1995). Both the pursuit of intrinsic or extrinsic
goals and the possession of autonomous or external motives have independent effects on well-being (Sheldon et
al., 2004). Additional research based upon help seeking and achievement goal theory (Eccles & Wigfield, 2002;
Dweck, 1986; Nicholls, 1984; Harackiewicz et al., 2002) shows that an intrinsic goal-orientation reduces help
seeking avoidance and increases the likelihood of more optimal help seeking strategies (Newman, 1990; Ryan
&  Pintrich,   1997).  Self-efficacy    is  a strong  predictor of  learning and   motivation    in individual environments

© ISLS                                                                                                                      366
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                     Volume I: Long Papers

(Zimmerman, 1999), which strongly suggests it may have invaluable potential for collaborative environments.
In this paper we will focus on Bandura's (1977) theory of self-efficacy in a thermodynamics collaborative task.
Academic   self-efficacy    is a  student's  perceptions    of her   academic    capabilities, interpreted  from   previous
mastery experience, vicarious experience, verbal and social persuasions, and emotional and physiological states.
Self-efficacy beliefs contribute to the choices students make, as well as their persistence and effort expended.
         Despite    this  substantial body   of  positive   results,   these   constructs  would  seem   logically to  have
implications within collaborative learning settings as they have been demonstrated to have in individual learning
settings, but little work has investigated how these traits influence behaviors within those social contexts. When
these  dispositions   are examined    in collaborative   settings, the  picture  is  far  more complex.    These measures
sometimes continue to predict learning, but often predict something else at the same time. For example, Darnon
et  al (2006) shows    that differing    achievement   goal  orientations    result in different approaches    to mediating
conflict through    epistemic   regulation   for mastery-oriented      students    and   through relational regulation  for
performance-oriented      students.  However,   beyond   this, little  work    has  been  done to unite  self-efficacy with
collaborative learning. One explanation for the murkiness of the relationship between individual dispositions
and collaborative learning is that two students collaborating together is more than just two individuals with a
common task. The same discussion that produces the cognitive conflict leading to learning (Piaget, 1985) adds a
dynamic social dimension to the learning activity that may introduce other factors that interfere with the causal
relationship between individual dispositions and learning.
         For group situations, collective efficacy has been proposed as an alternative. According to Bandura
(1997), collective efficacy is several individuals' combined perception of the group's capabilities to perform
given  tasks. As    an example    of its application,  Wang    & Lin    (2007)  examine    self-efficacy in a  collaborative
learning task, where they incorporate collective efficacy to determine how the self-efficacy configuration of
three-person  groups     predicts collective efficacy    and usage     of high-level   cognitive  skills during   discussion.
While Wang & Lin (2007)'s results suggest a relationship between homogenous collective efficacy, high-level
cognitive skills, and group performance, the results are less clear for heterogeneous self-efficacy groups.
         In this paper, we propose a conversational analysis framework for encapsulating the social positioning
dimension of collaborative tasks, with the goal of eventually automating the process of identifying instances of
social shift. We introduce an abbreviated framework for identifying authority in dialogue, which we later use to
examine social positioning.

The Authoritativeness Framework
It is reasonable to believe that the social interactions that occur during a collaborative task influence learning
and the effect that dispositional attributes have on learning. So, in addition to examining traditional dispositions
(in this study,  self-efficacy)   via    self-report, we propose     a  framework    for  looking  at authoritativeness  of
knowledge presentation.     In short, an authoritative presentation of knowledge is one that is presented without
seeking external validation for the knowledge.
         The   Authoritativeness     Framework    we    introduce    in   this paper   is rooted  in  Martin's  Negotiation
Framework (Martin, 1992), from the systemic functional linguistics community. This work highlights the moves
that are made in a dialogue as they reflect the authoritativeness with which those moves were made, and gives
structure to exchanges back and forth between participants. Previous work has studied the complexity of, for
instance, the difference between authority to alter the direction of a conversation and authority to contribute new
information to a conversation (Martin, 2000). In its use within the systemic functional linguistics community, it
has been used as a way to distinguish between classrooms where the reasoning of the teacher is at center stage
from those where student reasoning is the focus (Veel, 1999).             It has also been used to investigate subtleties
about distribution of power in juvenile trials (Martin et al., 2008), in keeping with the emphasis in the systemic
functional linguistics community for using analysis of language to support social justice. We are interested in
this framework because of its descriptiveness for social interactions, and how it boils down the intricacies of
power management within an interaction to a few simple codes, making it easy to track shifts in positioning
over time.
         While the Negotiation framework as formulated by Martin is highly descriptive for sociolinguists, and
has been widely used by Martin himself as well as by other sociolinguistics, it is difficult to replicate reliably
from the previously published formulations, as this was not a methodological goal of the original researchers.
This makes its immediate use for quantitative analysis difficult without introducing threats to internal validity.
To  remedy    this, we    have worked    iteratively  on a  coding     manual   that incorporates  the   insights from that
framework that are relevant to our task and makes them precise and concrete enough to be reproducible. Our
inter-rater agreement for this coding has achieved a Cohen's Kappa of 0.78. A full treatment of the details of our
development process is beyond the scope of this paper, but is discussed more in depth in Howley et al (2011).
We would like to acknowledge that we developed this Authoritativeness Framework through consultation with
experts from a variety of backgrounds (sociolinguists, computational linguistics, computer scientists, interaction
analysts, learning scientists, sociocultural and education researchers, etc).

© ISLS                                                                                                                   367
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                             Volume I: Long Papers

         Our formulation of the Authoritativeness framework is comprised of two dimensions with six and three
codes, respectively, and incorporates structural and pragmatic knowledge of language based on the Negotiation
framework. To simplify our analysis for this paper, we will focus on two moves in particular. The first is K1, or
'primary knower', and the second is K2, or 'secondary knower'. A 'primary knower' move includes a statement of
fact, an opinion, or an answer to a factual question, such as 'yes' or 'no'. It only counts as `primary knower' if it
is not presented in such a way as to elicit an evaluation from another participant in the discussion.  Conversely,
a 'secondary knower' move includes statements where the speaker is not positioned as authoritative on the topic
at hand, such as asking a question eliciting information, or presenting information in a context where evaluation
is the expected response or formulated in such a way as to elicit feedback. A brief overview of the codes from
our Authoritativeness framework is shown in Figure 1.

          Code        Meaning                   Example
          K1          Primary Knower            "This is the end."
          K2          Secondary Knower          "Is this the end?" and "This is the end, right?"
          A1          Primary Actor             "I'm going to the end."
          A2          Secondary Actor           "Go to the end."
          ch          Challenge                 "I don't have an end marked."
          o           Other                     "So..."
             Figure 1.    An Overview of the Codes Included in our Authoritativeness Framework.

         There is no    strict form-function relationship between  these codes   and the text  being analyzed. The
simplest example of this is a line such as 'yeah', which could be authoritative in response to a question or could
be non-authoritative response to someone else's evaluation. Additionally, factual statements where the speaker
is uncertain of their correctness and is looking for approval from a listener would be coded as a K2 move, even
though it is structurally similar to most K1 moves. The roles that speakers take through these codes can shift
rapidly within a  conversation,   and are dynamic,  being   heavily based on    the context of what  has happened
leading up to an utterance, and how that utterance is responded to by other participants.

  Figure 2. An Example Analysis Using Martin & Rose's (2003) Negotiation System, Labeled as Authority.

         For example, looking at Figure 2, we will see that the roles of primary and secondary speakers is highly
volatile and does not appear to carry any particular lasting significance with respect to status distribution within
the conversation. Rather than signify any persistent difference in status distribution between the two students in
Figure 2, this frequent shifting in speech roles serves to underscore the equal footing between the two students
despite the fact that Student2 is clearly more knowledgeable. Furthermore, speech roles are meaningful even
where transitory in that they signify which speakers are treated as the source and recipient respectively of the
information or goods and services being exchanged.    Thus, it allows us to ask not only which speakers are cast
as authoritative within an interaction, but authoritative with respect to what.

© ISLS                                                                                                           368
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                    Volume I: Long Papers

         We   can  examine     the working  dynamics     of group  members    and  compare   what   group     behaviors  are
visible in teams with different compositions of authoritativeness and learning gain. Groups where both students
are highly authoritative share characteristics. Their exchanges largely consist of statements of fact or proposals
for answers   to questions     from   the tutor. Both    students appear   to understand   the   concepts     that they  are
discussing, and they often come to similar conclusions. Thus, there is little debate before coming to a consensus.
         Figure 3 is an example of a group in which both students are highly authoritative. The only secondary
knower   (K2) move,    line  2, is  a proposal   for an  answer   to the  tutor, albeit one  that is phrased    to  ask  for
evaluation from the other student. The rest of the moves are assertions. While there is a disagreement between
lines 1 and 2, the justification of each student's stance are given as factual statements (at lines 3 and 5), and the
consensus is phrased by each student as if they are authorizing the final decision (lines 7 and 8).

           Figure 3. A Sample of Discussion from Two Students with High Authoritativeness Ratios.

         In other common situations, however, the authoritativeness of the two students is very distinct, with
one student taking on an authoritative tone and the other being much more submissive. This usually comes in
the form of one student asking `permission' when suggesting new ideas, and the other student making a habit of
affirming those questions and giving new information as primary knower (K1) moves.

         Figure 4. A Chat Example between Two Students with Unequal Amounts of Authoritativeness.

         Above, in Figure 4, is an exchange with an unequal ratio of authority, a common pattern. Despite the
fact that both students are proposing new ideas, one student repeatedly phrases them without authority (lines 2,
6, and 10). In this case, since the more authoritative student disagrees with these proposals (lines 4 and 7), the
tone of the student becomes less authoritative over time. Meanwhile, the more authoritative student has taken on
a tutor-like role, confirming or rejecting suggestions from the less authoritative student as seen on line 11.
         Figure  5    shows  a sample   discussion   from   two students  with   learning losses  (i.e., negative  learning
outcomes). In this    chat  log there were  very    few  exchanges   of authoritative   statements,  and  this example      is
exemplary  of the     other authoritative exchanges   through   the  rest of  the discussion. Notice     that many    of the
contributions are responses submitted to be evaluated, often denoted by question marks and coded as secondary
knower statements. The two primary knower statements on lines 5 and 8 are either uncertain evaluations of the
other  student's authoritative   contribution,   or  are very brief. Similar   to Figure  4, we   also   see  here  a trend
throughout the design activity where Student3 performed more primary knower statements than his partner. We
performed  analyses    similar  to (and   including) the  examples   above in  order  to  explore authoritativeness      as a
social factor affecting learning in collaborative settings.

© ISLS                                                                                                                   369
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                Volume I: Long Papers

         Figure 5. A Sample of Discussion between Two Students with Poor Learning Gains, Coded for
                                                  Authoritativeness.

Methods
The data we analyze in this paper was collected as part of a research study in which alternative forms of support
for online learning were contrasted in a mechanical engineering course.           106 undergraduate students from a
thermodynamics     class at   Carnegie  Mellon  University participated in   the  study  by   attending one  of six  lab
sessions, in which time was strictly controlled. Students were given software training and practice (60 minutes),
a pre-questionnaire and pre-test (10 minutes), the experimental manipulation (40 minutes), and then the post-test
and  post-questionnaire   (15  minutes). The  experimental  design   activity consisted   of  randomizing   students to
pairs, and then assigning each partner to design either an eco-friendly power plant or a power- proficient power
plant. Opposing goals were used to encourage discussion and negotiation amongst partners. In all conditions, a
tutor agent participated with the students in the chat in order to offer support.    The entire lab session took place
in a single computer     lab, in which  the researchers ensured  that partners   did  not sit next to  each other.  The
experimental   manipulation    took  place  during an   online collaborative   design   discussion  and    consisted of
modifying tutor behaviors only.      In all other respects, the student experience in all conditions was the same.
Results of the experimental manipulation are not discussed in this paper as they have been published separately
(Ai et al., 2010).

Software
Students used Cyclepad (Kumar et al, 2007), a computer software simulator that allows users to implement
thermodynamics design ideas via a graphical interface. Specifically, students must consider trade-offs between
power   output and    environmental  friendliness in designing a Rankine     cycle,  which   is a type  of heat engine.
Essentially, students use Cyclepad to design simulated power plants.
         Pairs of   students  used   ConcertChat  (Stahl, 2006), collaboration    software    enabling  communication
through  a  chat window     (similar to instant messaging)  and  a whiteboard     for sharing   graphical  information.
ConcertChat has its origins in explicit referencing research, as discussed in Muehlpfordt & Wessner (2005) and
Pfister & Muehlpfordt (2002).

Experimental Design
The experimental manipulation was a 3X3 between-subjects design. Each student pair was randomly assigned to
one of nine conditions. The first independent variable contrasted 3 social conditions (High, Low, and None)
where tutoring agents presented differing amounts of social behavior within the chat environment. Our dialogue
agent  exhibited   three different types  of socio-emotional   behavior   in  the chat  window:    showing   solidarity,
tension release, and agreeing.    The frequency of social behavior in our socially capable tutors was determined
by a percentage of tutor turns that can be social prompts; specifically, the threshold parameter was 15% in the
Low social tutor condition and 30% in the High social tutor. There was no social behavior in the Non-social
condition.  The task related behavior of the tutor was the same in all three of these conditions.       Only the social
aspects of the tutor's behavior changed.
         For the second three-level independent variable, we designed 3 conditions in which the dialogue agent
showed   goal  alignment    either with  the  Green  goal  students,  the Power     goal  students,  or  neither.  This
manipulation affected only the manner in which task related contributions were made in the conversation, but
content was held constant.     In this way, students could be in one of three different conditions in relation to the
tutor agent, namely: Match (where the student's goal orientation condition matched the alignment of the tutor),
Mismatch (where the student's condition is the opposite of the goal alignment exhibited by the tutor), or Neutral
(where the tutor showed no bias). In all cases, the tutor presented the same task information. The only difference
between conditions was the bias exhibited.      For example, where the Green biased tutor might say "What is bad

© ISLS                                                                                                               370
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                             Volume I: Long Papers

about increasing the heat input to the cycle is that it increases the heat rejected to the environment," the neutral
tutor would say "Increasing heat input to the cycle increases the heat rejected to the environment."

Outcome Measures
As outcome measures, we examined:
     ·   Learning     gains between the   Pre- and Post-  test. 35 isomorphic  multiple   choice  and short answer
         questions were used to test analytical and conceptual knowledge of Rankine cycles.
     ·   The pre-questionnaire consisted of a brief scale for measuring mastery related beliefs (said to predict
         self-efficacy), and an alternate version of a self-efficacy question as shown in Figure 6. We combined
         the mean response of these four questions to form a self-efficacy scale.
     ·   The post-questionnaire was a measure of students' perceptions of task success, and assessment of the
         quality of the interaction with their partner and with the agent.
     ·   We also analyzed conversational behavior in the chat logs, with respect to their green and power biased
         statements.
     ·   Conversational behavior was also analyzed with our Authoritativeness Framework.

                Q10     I have always had a natural talent for engineering-related subjects.
                Q11     I received good grades in my high school math classes.
                Q12     I have always done well on science course assignments.
                Q13     I am certain I will have completed the "Thermodynamics 1" course well.
            Figure 6.   Sample Pre-questionnaire Items Measuring Self-efficacy and Mastery Beliefs.

Results
Main effects of data from this study were originally reported and discussed in depth in Ai et al (2010), so here
we will discuss new findings related to the self-efficacy pre-questionnaire and authoritativeness analysis. The
main   effects from   the original analysis can  be quickly summarized     as follows:   with the two  independent
variables (i.e., social manipulation and tutor goal map), the objective section of the pretest as covariate, and lab
session as a random variable, there was a significant effect of Social Manipulation (F(2,94) = 5.27, p < .01) on
learning where the Low Social condition was significantly better than the other two, with an effect size of .83
standard deviations in both cases. Other results related to post-questionnaire data and goal-biased conversational
data are reported in Ai et al (2010).
         Throughout this new analysis, "authoritative ratio" refers to the total number of primary knowing (i.e.,
K1) statements, over the total number of authoritativeness statements (i.e., K1+K2). Additionally, our results
related to authoritativeness did not show statistically significant differences between conditions, and as such, we
are not including tutor behavior in our analysis.

Learning Outcomes
The first dimension of our analysis involves examining learning outcomes and how various factors affected
student learning. Posttest scores were regressed on the pretest and self-efficacy, but the relationship between
self-efficacy and posttest was not significant. In short, individual self-efficacy does not seem to predict learning
in this experiment. We can combine authoritativeness ratio and partner-ratio to predict group self-efficacy (the
mean of both partner's self-efficacy), and we find a marginal effect of group self-efficacy on learning (F(1, 103)
= 3.29, p = 0.073*).
         It is important to note that group self-efficacy can be an important factor to consider. Wang & Lin
(2007) found that individual student self-efficacy predicted collective efficacy, and collective efficacy predicted
use of high-level cognitive skills in discussion, as well as group performance. In this study we are not currently
looking at the usage of high-level cognitive skills in discussion, but we are curious about what other outcomes
group self-efficacy may predict.
         Looking at our other factor of interest, a linear regression analysis finds that authoritativeness ratio has
a significant effect on learning (F(1, 103) = 4.58 , p = .0347**), explaining 41% of the variance (R2 = .41) or
3% of   the variance   beyond  what   is explained by the pretest. Where   self-efficacy does not predict learning,
authoritativeness appears to do so.

Self-Efficacy Beliefs and Authoritativeness
Since authoritativeness predicted performance and self-efficacy unexpectedly did not, it is not surprising that
individual self-efficacy is not correlated with authoritativeness by itself. However, when we look at group self-
efficacy we find a significant relationship (F(1, 103) = 8.60, p = 0.0041**) which explains 12% of the variance.
So, despite authoritativeness and individual self-efficacy not being related on an individual level, when both

© ISLS                                                                                                           371
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                 Volume I: Long Papers

partners'  authoritativeness ratios are   included  in an analysis,  authoritativeness  can  predict  the group's   self-
efficacy, which may be more important in a collaborative setting.

Self-Efficacy Beliefs and Goal-Biased Conversation
In  our originally  published   analysis, we  investigated  how   our experimental    manipulation    affected  the goal
related bias displayed by students in their conversational behavior.       For this analysis, we measure the bias of a
student utterance towards the "green goal" or the "power goal" by applying a topic discovery model on our
dialogues (Paul & Girju, 2009). Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) models have been widely used to discover
topics on large collections of unannotated data by modeling the word distributions represented in the data (Blei
et al, 2003).  We are using LDA models for the purpose of modeling how users are interacting with each other.
For each utterance, we compute a score to represent to which degree the utterance displays a bias towards the
green or power goals. When referring to the score for a student's bias towards his own goal, we will affix the
word "self." So, if we want to know the average score towards the green goal, for a student who was assigned
the green  (i.e., environmentally   friendly)  power   plant, then   we will   look at her  Self-Average    goal-biased
conversation score.
          Looking at partner's authoritativeness ratio along with one's own authoritativeness ratio, we find that
partner's authoritativeness ratio predicts the Self-Average goal-bias, F(1, 103) = 4.47, p = 0.0369**, but it only
accounts for 4% of the variance (R2 = .4), so this relationship is not particularly informative.      Nevertheless, it is
interesting that we find evidence that suggests that speakers may respond to the authoritativeness with which
their  partner is positioned by  exaggerating  the  distinction  between   his or her  goal affiliation and  his   or her
partner's. Further supporting the interpretation that a student's positioning is sensitive to the positioning of her
or  her partner,  we  find a negative   correlation between   the student's   authoritativeness ratio   and that   of the
partner, R(106) = -.27, p = .0053**.

Conclusion
We have seen with this set of data that authoritativeness predicts student learning from a collaborative activity
better than self-efficacy. Additionally, both partners' authoritativeness predicts their group self-efficacy (even
though   individual   authoritativeness does  not   predict individual  self-efficacy). We   also   see a   relationship
between partner authoritativeness and how a student presents him or herself, both in terms of the extent to which
topic affiliation is emphasized as well as personal authoritativeness.     Whereas in studies of individual learning
self-efficacy predicts learning, in this collaborative learning setting we find that there is a relationship between
authoritativeness and self-efficacy, and authoritativeness and learning, but not self-efficacy and learning. These
findings suggest that we cannot always rely on disposition research originating in individual settings to predict
the same outcomes in collaborative learning settings. Other research on collaborative learning shows that these
individual dispositions can predict other behaviors, such as method of conflict resolution, but our results suggest
that authoritativeness may be a new disposition that is related to self-efficacy and that can predict learning in
collaborative settings. While dispositions are typically considered to have personal causality, the authors believe
authoritativeness to be influenced both by personal causes and situational causes to some extent.
          This research reveals a considerable amount of potential for explaining collaborative learning through
student dispositions and social behaviors. Future work will involve looking closer at the relationship between
authoritativeness   and   other dispositions  used  to  predict  learning,  such  as   achievement    goal  orientation.
Additionally, knowing what authoritative combinations of partners produces the best learning gains could also
be beneficial for the research community. It would also be necessary to explore how generalizable the effect of
authoritativeness is, and if it is applicable to other domains or even learning tasks that are not project-based.
Further work is also necessary to automate the process of assessing authoritativeness. If authoritativeness can be
measured   automatically   via  computer,  it will  have  additional  benefits beyond   dispositional   factors that  are
measured through self-report.
          In  conclusion,  this paper shows    that authoritativeness   is an  influential factor  in discussion-based
collaborative learning tasks that predicts learning and is related to a group's self-efficacy. Further research is
required   to  refine the  measurement    of  authoritativeness,  and explore   exactly    how  it is related   to  other
dispositions. The end goal is to better understand the factors that influence learning in collaborative settings so
that they may be automatically assessed in real world settings.

References
Ai, H., Kumar, R., Nagasunder, A., Rosé, C. P. (2010). Exploring the effectiveness of social capabilities and
          goal alignment in computer supported collaborative learning, Intelligent Tutoring Systems conference
          (ITS 2010).
Bandura, A. (1977). Self-Efficacy: Toward a unifying theory of behavioral change, Psychological Review, 84,
          191-215.
Bandura, A. (1997). Self-efficacy: The exercise of control. New York: Freeman.

© ISLS                                                                                                                372
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                 Volume I: Long Papers

Blei, D. Ng, A., and Jordan, M. (2003). Latent dirichlet allocation. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 3.
Coutinho, S.A. & Neuman, G. (2008). A model of metacognition, achievement goal orientation, learning style
          and self-efficacy,   Learning Environments Research, 11, 131-151.
Darnon, C., Muller, D., Schrager, S. M., Pannuzzo, N., & Butera, F. (2006). Mastery and performance goals
          predict epistemic and relational conflict regulation. Journal of Educational Psychology, 98, 766­776.
Dweck, C.S. (1986). Motivational processes affecting learning, American Psychologist, 41,1040-1048.
Eccles, J.S. & A. Wigfield, (2002). Motivational beliefs, values, and goals, Annual Review of Psychology, 53,
          109-132.
Harackiewicz, J.M., Pintrich, P.R., Barron, K.E. & A. J. Elliot (2002), Revision of achievement goal theory:
          necessary and illuminating. Journal of Educational Psychology, 94, 638-645.
Howley, I., Mayfield, E., & Rosé, C. (2011). Linguistic Analysis Methods for Studying Small Groups. Invited
          Book Chapter to Appear in International Handbook of Collaborative Learning.
Kumar,   R.,  Rosé,   C. P., Wang,   Y.   C., Joshi, M.,  and  Robinson,  A.  (2007).  Tutorial  Dialogue    as Adaptive
          Collaborative Learning Support. Proceedings of Artificial Intelligence in Education.
Martin, J. (1992). English Text: System and structure. Amsterdam: Benjamins.
Martin,  J. (2000).   Factoring out  Exchange:   Types    of Structure.  M  Coulthard,  J Cotterill and  F   Rock   [Eds.]
          Working with Dialogue. Tubingen: Niemeyer. 19-40.
Martin, J. R., & Rose, D. (2003). Working with Discourse: Meaning Beyond the Clause. Continuum
Martin, J.R., Zappavigna, M., & Dwyer, P. (2008). Negotiating Shame: exchange and genre structure in youth
          justice conferencing. European Systemic Functional Linguistics Conference.
Mayfield, E. & Rosé, C. P. (2011). Recognizing Authority in Dialogue with an Integer Linear Programming
          Constrained    Model,   in Proceedings     of the  Annual  Meeting   of the  Association  for  Computational
          Linguistics.
Muehlpfordt, M., & Wessner, M. (2005). Explicit Referencing in Chat Supports              Collaborative Learning. In T.
          Koschmann,     D.  D. Suthers,   and T.-W.    Chan,  editors, Computer   Supported     Collaborative  Learning
          2005. The Next 10 Years! (CSCL 2005), Mahwah, NJ, 2005. Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Newman, R. S. (1990). Children's help-seeking in the classroom: The role of motivational factors and attitudes.
          Journal of Educational Psychology, 82(1), 71-80.
Nicholls, J.G. (1984). Achievement motivation: Conceptions of ability, subjective experience, task choice, and
          performance. Psychological Review, 91, 328-346.
Paul,  M.,  and Girju,   R.  (2009). Cross-Cultural   Analysis  of  Blogs  and  Forums  with   Mixed-Collection     Topic
          Models Export. In Proceedings of the 2009 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
          Processing.
Pfister, H.R., & Muehlpfordt, M. (2002). Supporting Discourse in a Synchronous Learning Environment: The
          Learning Protocol Approach. In G. Stahl, editor, Proceedings of CSCL 2002, pp 581­589, Hillsdale,
          2002. Erlbaum.
Piaget, J.  (1985).   The equilibrium   of cognitive    structures: the central problem    of intellectual development,
          Chicago University Press.
Ryan,   A.  M., &    Pintrich, P. R.  (1997).  "Should   I  ask for  help?"  The  role of  motivation and    attitudes in
          adolescents' help seeking in math class. Journal of Educational Psychology, 89(2), 329-341).
Sheldon,   K. M.,   &  Kasser,  T.   (1995).  Coherence    and  congruence:  Two   aspects of    personality integration.
          Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 68(3), 531-543.
Sheldon, K. M., Ryan, R. M., Deci, E. L., & Kasser, T. (2004). The independent effects of goal contents and
          motives   on   well-being: It's both  what    you pursue  and  why   you pursue  it.   Personality and    Social
          Psychology Bulletin, 30, 475-486.
Stahl, G. (2006). Analyzing and designing the group cognitive experience. International Journal of Cooperative
          Information Systems (IJCIS).
Veel,  R.   (1999).   Language,   Knowledge,    and  Authority   in  School  Mathematics,     in Francis   Christie (Ed.)
          Pedagogy and the Shaping of Consciousness: Linguistics and Social Processes, Continuum.
Wang,   S.  &   Lin,  S. (2007).  The  effects  of   group  composition   of self-efficacy and   collective  efficacy  on
          computer-supported collaborative learning, Computers in Human Behavior, 23(5), 2256-2268.
Zimmerman, B. J. (1999). Self-efficacy: An essential motive to learn. Contemporary Educational Psychology,
          25, 82-91.

Acknowledgments
This   work  was  supported    by the  Pittsburgh    Science of Learning    Center (#SBE   0836012)     and  a  Graduate
Training Grant from the Department of Education (#R305B040063).

© ISLS                                                                                                                 373
