CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                    Volume I: Long Papers

       Fostering Social Navigation and Elaboration of Controversial
          Topics with Preference-Inconsistent Recommendations
           Christina Schwind, Jürgen Buder, Friedrich W. Hesse, Knowledge Media Research Center, Konrad-
                                     Adenauer-Str. 40, 72072 Tübingen, Germany
                      Email: c.schwind@iwm-kmrc.de, j.buder@iwm-kmrc.de, f.hesse@iwm-kmrc.de

          Abstract:    Critical  thinking    requires   knowledge   about   the  diversity   of    viewpoints   on
          controversial   issues. However,     the   diversity  of perspectives   often    remains   unexploited:
          Learners prefer preference-consistent over preference-inconsistent information, a phenomenon
          called  confirmation   bias.  Two   lab experiments    were   designed  to  test whether   technologies
          such as  recommender      systems   can   be used  to overcome    this bias.  The  role  of preference-
          inconsistent recommendations was explored by comparing their influence to a condition with
          preference-consistent recommendations and to a control condition without recommendations.
          In Study 1, preference-inconsistent recommendations led to a reduction of confirmation bias
          and  to  an  attenuation   of preferences.    In Study   2, we  found   that   preference-inconsistent
          recommendations stimulated balanced recall and divergent thinking. Together these studies
          showed   that   preference-inconsistent      recommendations    can    foster  social   navigation  and
          elaboration. In conclusion, future research and practical implications are discussed.

Introduction
Controversies and debates on political or health related issues can be characterized as ongoing deliberations
among stakeholders with widely diverse perspectives. On the basis of these perspectives, individuals are able to
form   an opinion  and    to back   up  this  opinion   with arguments.  Thus,   learning    is a  central part of  opinion
formation and can help the individual to make an informed decision. The WWW is a perfect backdrop for this
kind of learning as a multitude of opinions is publicly available: Whether it is through information portals on
controversial issues, or through the exchange on forums, social networks, or other channels, information spaces
can be characterized by an accumulation of a vast amount of differing opinions.

Why Information Search May Be Biased
However,   the availability   of  different  opinions   remains unexploited:  When      learners   only have a  vague  idea
about a controversial issue, they inform themselves about the facts, arguments, or explanations. When doing so,
they often fail to take dissenting information into account which is referred to as selective exposure (Knobloch-
Westerwick    &   Meng,   2010)   or confirmation    bias  (Jonas, Schulz-Hardt,   Frey,   &    Thelen, 2001).  Festinger's
(1957) dissonance theory provides the basis for this effect: Individuals try to avoid dissonance and therefore
prefer information which supports their own position. Consequently, knowledge acquisition is typically biased
in  favor of  the  learner's previously   held  expectations.   This  biased knowledge       acquisition leads  to  learners
adhering to their position, even though considering others and their perspectives is a necessary first step for
critical thinking (Stanovich & West, 1997). Therefore confirmation bias is likely to be a hindrance to critical
thinking (West, Toplak, & Stanovich, 2008).

Why We Can Use Technology to Overcome Confirmation Bias
The  question  arises  if and   how  we   can  use   technology  to   overcome   this  bias. One   possible  solution is to
emphasize preference-inconsistent information by the use of recommender systems, as they are optimized for
making specific information salient. Recommender systems can be classified as a collaborative technology for
filtering information:    Users   express    social judgments    explicitly by   rating    stimuli or   implicitly by their
navigational behavior. Out of these social judgments, each user receives personalized recommendations that are
matched    to  the user's    profile stored   by    the system     (Konstan  &   Riedl,    2003).   Community-generated
recommendations may act as an information signpost influencing individual navigation and item selection. If
this is the case, it is called social navigation (Dieberger, Dourish, Höök, Resnick, & Wexelblat, 2000).
          In many ways, the principles of recommender systems are very much in line with principles that play
an important role in the learning sciences. First, constructivist approaches often stress the importance of moving
from   teacher-centered   to  learner-centered    education  (Bransford,  Brown,     &  Cooking,    1999).  Recommender
systems fit into this philosophy, as the recommendations do originate from the collective of other peers. Second,
aptitude-treatment interaction expresses the idea of adapting information to the needs and abilities of learners
(Cronbach & Snow, 1977). This is addressed by personalized recommender systems in which recommendations
are specifically   tailored  to the  learner. Finally,  learners   need some  form    of   scaffolding  (Vygotsky,   1978).
Recommender systems provide information to learners on how to allocate their cognitive capacity. They can
help to identify the resources that really matter and thereby create a zone of proximal development.

© ISLS                                                                                                                   374
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                       Volume I: Long Papers

          However,    some     features    of recommender         systems  can    be  detrimental     to  learning.  Classical
recommender    systems    provide   mainly    preference-consistent    recommendations,      as  this method     appears to be
promising  in fields   of taste   and  consumption.      But in   doing  so,   classical recommender      systems  violate  the
educational claim of multiperspectivity and informational diversity (De Wit & Greer, 2008; Spiro & Jehng,
1990). Therefore it would seem to be useful to recommend preference-inconsistent arguments for educational
purposes.

Why Preference-inconsistent Recommendations May Help
Educational   literature  states  that one  of the   learning goals    is to   think decontextualized     without the  biasing
influence of  prior   preferences   and   opinions.  Learners     should  elaborate  on   controversial   topics and  evaluate
arguments regardless of whether they tend towards the advantages or disadvantages of a specific topic. This
form of unbiased reasoning is referred to as critical thinking (Stanovich, & West, 1997). Facing preference-
inconsistency  or disagreement      is  considered   to  stimulate    critical thinking   (e.g., Buchs,   Butera,  Mugny,   &
Darnon, 2004; Johnson & Johnson, 2009). The basis of this approach is Piaget's (1950) theorizing that internal
conflicts are necessary     to stimulate   cognitive   development.     The    uncertainty  which  results   from   conflicting
situations leads to epistemic curiosity (Berlyne, 1960), which is a main trigger for further information search
and for an interest in an understanding of other perspectives. Doise and Mugny (1984) stressed that constructive
conflicts are best initiated by the direct confrontation with the opinion of others. Further, social psychology
hints at other potentials of conflicts, for instance in the literature on the influence of minorities (Nemeth, 2003).
Participants confronted with authentic dissent from a minority show increased searching for information, deep
elaboration, creative problem solutions, and thus divergent thinking (Nemeth, Connell, Rogers, & Brown, 2001;
Nemeth, & Rogers, 1996; Nemeth, & Wachtler, 1983). From research on the influence of minorities, it is known
that these effects can lead to informational influence and to changes in attitudes (Wood, Lundgren, Ouellette,
Busceme, & Blackstone, 1994).
          The question    remains    whether   conflicting   information     must originate   from    direct interaction  with
another person or whether a preference-inconsistent recommendation originating from a computer system may
also stimulate conflict and foster deeper elaboration. One indication that computer-based recommendations can
be efficient substitutes relates to the notion that human social categories are ascribed to recommender systems
(McNee, Riedl, & Konstan, 2006). However, empirical clarification is needed to investigate whether or not the
"recommender personality" is sufficient to stimulate socio-cognitive conflict.
          The present    research    attempted    to clarify  whether     preference-inconsistent     recommendations      can
stimulate  conflict   and   thus   affect  social navigation      and  elaboration.   We    did  not  address    the technical
specifications of a recommender system, but rather explored the psychological impact of recommendations. In
two lab experiments, we manipulated the type of social navigation tool by providing recommendations that were
either consistent or inconsistent to the participants' prior preferences. These two conditions were compared to a
control condition without any recommendation.

Hypotheses
Conflict can lead to epistemic curiosity and therefore trigger further information search and higher interest in
understanding  an     opposite    perspective  (Buchs    et  al., 2004).  Preference-inconsistent     recommendations       are
conceptualized  as    stimulating    conflict  and   therefore    motivate     learners  to search    for more    inconsistent
information resources.
          Hypothesis   1. Therefore,    it was  hypothesized      that participants  will   show  natural   confirmation   bias
when   no recommendation       is  given.  Preference-consistent    recommendations       will   enhance  confirmation   bias,
whereas preference-inconsistent recommendations will reduce confirmation bias. (Study 1 & Study 2)
          Hypothesis 2. It was predicted that the difference in confirmation bias will have its equivalent in the
adaptation of subjects' preferences: Participants' preferences will be strengthened in the post-preference when
no recommendation is given. Preference-consistent recommendations will also strengthen preferences, whereas
preference-inconsistent recommendations will weaken preferences. (Study 1)
          Hypothesis     3.    It  was     expected    that   participants     confronted    with     preference-inconsistent
recommendations are more likely to experience dissent. Therefore they will (3a) recall more arguments and (3b)
show   a more balanced    recall   than   participants   confronted with   preference-consistent     or  no  recommendation.
(Study 2)
          Hypothesis   4.   Based   on  the   literature on  minority    dissent, it  was   also  expected   that participants
confronted with preference-inconsistent recommendations will (4a) generate more arguments in general as well
as (4b) more novel arguments than participants confronted with preference-consistent or no recommendation.
(Study 2)

© ISLS                                                                                                                      375
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                                                                                 Volume I: Long Papers

Study 1
The first study   was    conducted              as an online            experiment                 and   investigated      the              impact              of recommendations    on
information selection and preference adaptation.

Method

Participants
One hundred twenty-five subjects participated in the experiment. They were recruited via an academic e-mail-
list and compensated by the participation in a lottery. Based on manipulation check data, four subjects were
excluded from the analysis. Ultimately, data of 121 subjects (M = 25.28, SD = 6.05; 92 female) were included in
the analysis.  In order     to             prevent high             levels of prior             knowledge,          students               of medicine               or   pharmacy   were
excluded from participation. The majority of participants (90.8 %) judged their prior knowledge of the subject
matter to be very poor, poor, or average.

Materials
The materials of the online study comprised a number of screens. One screen contained a short introductory text
about the controversial topic of neuro-enhancement, referring to the facilitation of cognitive abilities through
training  or through   medication.              The   main            screen  of               the experiment       consisted               of    a bogus            list of  Web  search
results. The list was composed of eight written arguments, four of them supporting and four of them opposing
neuro-enhancement. The arguments consisted of a headline followed by two explanatory sentences. An example
of  an argument   supporting                neuro-enhancement               is: "Minimizing                       risks at the             workplace:               Neuro-enhancement
should be embraced particularly in professional fields in which human failure is likely to lead to detrimental
outcomes (e.g. air traffic controllers, surgeons, or military personnel)." An example of an argument opposing
neuro-enhancement is: "Striving for undesirable perfectionism: The era of lovable little quirks might be over
quite soon. Research is looking for ways to make us perfect. We don't need that." The arguments were tested in
an online survey (N = 48) to balance them for credibility, persuasiveness, comprehensibility, originality, and
strength. Although       the   headlines            were              marked    as              hyperlinks,        participants               could              not access    additional
information.   One    of the   arguments             was             highlighted               by  an   orange-colored                     frame  surrounding              the text. This
argument represented the recommendation. The caption above the frame stated: "The following information is
recommended to you." (see Figure 1). The order of the arguments and the serial position of the recommendation
were randomized across participants in order to minimize content and order effects.

                                         The following information is recommended to you:
                                         ·  Enhancement of creative powers: If certain well-known artists had not taken neuro-stimulating drugs such
                                            as alcohol, absinth or marijuana, many great works of art and music would be missing today. >>

                                         ·  Maximizing existing potentials: Neuro-enhancers improve our ability to concentrate by stimulating neuro-
                                            transmitters in the brain. They do not improve intelligence; they only make perfect use of existing powers. >>
                                         ·  Striving for undesirable perfectionism: The era of lovable little quirks might be over quite soon. Research is
                                            looking for ways to make us perfect. We don't need that. >>
                                         ·  No fairness: Performance enhancement in sports is generally regarded as unfair. Neuro-enhancers introduce
                                            the same inequalities for cognitive capacities. >>
                                         ·  Leveling out of advantages: Neuro-enhancement only gives a competitive edge as long as the substances
                                            aren't available to everybody. With easy access for everybody, the benefits will level out. >>
                                         ·  Pervasiveness of natural stimulants: Caffeine, alcohol, and chocolate also affect the mind and contribute to
                                            self-improvement. These stimulants are accepted in modern society. >>
                                         ·  Persistence of effects: The experiences that people have under the influence of neuro-enhancers can
                                            forever change their personality, even if the enhancers themselves have no immediate side effects. >>
                                         ·  Minimizing risks at the workplace: Neuro-enhancement should be embraced particularly in professional
                                            fields in which human failure is likely to lead to detrimental outcomes (e.g. air traffic controllers, surgeons, or
                                            military personnel). >>

    Figure 1. Screenshot of the Experimental Conditions with Recommendation (Translated from German).

Design
The  experiment   is  based                on a one factorial            design  with               three   conditions      (control                condition             vs. preference-
consistent vs. preference-inconsistent). In the control condition (CC), no argument was recommended to the
participants. In the first experimental condition (ECcon), an argument was recommended that was consistent with
the participant's pre-preference for or against neuro-enhancement. In the second experimental condition (ECinc),
an  argument   was    recommended                that was             inconsistent              with    the participant's                  preference.             The    preference data
showed    that 70.2 %    of  the            participants            were   against             neuro-enhancement.           This              preference             ratio    was equally
distributed over the three conditions (F(2,118) < 1, p = .727, ² = .00).

Procedure
The scenario was adapted from Jonas et al. (2001) and structured into three phases: First, subjects read the
introductory   passage    on               neuro-enhancement,               and  subsequently                     indicated                their    pre-preference             on  neuro-
enhancement. In the second phase, the list of eight arguments was presented with four arguments in favor of and

© ISLS                                                                                                                                                                                 376
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                                       Volume I: Long Papers

four   arguments against   neuro-enhancement.     This  phase    varied depending   on                      the   condition,   mimicking  the
personalization part of recommender systems. In the control condition, no recommendation was given. In the
consistent  experimental     condition,  subjects received    a  preference-consistent                        recommendation,     and in  the
inconsistent experimental condition, subjects received a preference-inconsistent recommendation. Subjects were
asked to select exactly one of the eight arguments that they would like to read more about by clicking on an
adjacent  box.  In the   third phase,  participants were    asked  to  indicate their post-preference.                       The   preference
adaptation scales contained one item on a 6-point bipolar continuum. The preference indication was represented
by a word pair ranging from opposing (-2.5) to endorsing (+2.5) neuro-enhancement. Afterwards, participants
were asked to fill out two items for the manipulation check and to provide demographic details (age, gender).

Measures
In the first study, we focused on information selection and preference adaptation.
          Manipulation check. Manipulation check consisted of two questions. Participants had to decide if the
recommended argument was for or against neuro-enhancement on a dichotomous item and they were asked to
indicate on a 5-point Likert scale whether the recommended argument matched their own position absolutely
(+2) or not at all (-2).
          Information    selection.   Information   selection    was    measured   for                        testing   the  impact   of  the
recommendations on confirmation bias. The measurement expressed the likelihood of selecting a preference-
consistent over a preference-inconsistent argument.
          Preference   adaptation.   The adaptation  of    preferences  was calculated                      as the   difference   between the
absolute value of the post-preference and the absolute value of the pre-preference. In this way, it was possible to
differentiate whether subjects' preferences were weakened or strengthened.

Results
Information selection was tested with 2-tests, whereas preference adaptation was analyzed using analysis of
variance (ANOVA).
          Manipulation check. The first question asked whether the recommended argument was for or against
neuro-enhancement.       For the    second question,  ECcon   subjects   were   excluded                       if    they indicated  that the
recommended argument did not match their pre-preference (i.e. a value less than or equal to zero). Contrary,
ECinc subjects were excluded if they indicated that the recommended argument did match their pre-preference
(i.e. a value greater than or equal to zero). Participants were included in the analysis only if the answers to both
questions were correct. Following this rule, the analysis comprised 40 CC subjects, 41 ECcon subjects, and 40
ECinc subjects.
          Information selection. In Hypothesis 1, a confirmation bias was predicted in the control condition, an
enhancement of confirmation bias in the preference-consistent condition, and a reduction of confirmation bias in
the preference-inconsistent condition. To test this prediction, we computed an overall 2-test with the factors
condition (CC vs. ECcon vs. ECinc) and information selection (consistent vs. inconsistent). The analysis revealed
a marginally significant effect, 20,95 (2) = 3.51, p = .087, d = 0.35. By testing the three conditions separately, a
significant effect occurred    for  CC  (20,95 (1) = 8.10, p = .002, d = 1.01)  as well                     as  for   ECcon (20,95 (1) = 10.76,
p < .001, d = 1.19).   For   ECinc, no confirmation  bias   could  be  detected (20,95                      (1) < 1, p = .343, d = 0.30); see
Figure 2. This effect occurred although the acceptance rates of the recommendations (the likelihood that the
recommended argument was selected) differed between the two experimental conditions: preference-consistent
recommendations were accepted by 42 % of subjects, whereas preference-inconsistent recommendations were
accepted by 20 % of subjects.

                                                                                        consistent argument

                                                                                        inconsistent argument

                         Figure 2. Selection Frequencies in the Three Conditions (Study 1).

          Preference adaptation. We expected a weakening of post-preference vs. pre-preference in the condition
with preference-inconsistent recommendation and a strengthening in the other two conditions (Hypothesis 2).
The analysis of the adaptation of participants' preferences for the three conditions yielded the expected main
effect,  F(2,118) = 3.66,    p = .029,   ² = .06.   Participants   in   the  condition                        with    preference-inconsistent
recommendation     indicated   a more   moderate  view;    their preference became    weaker                         (M =  -0.30, SD  = 0.65).

© ISLS                                                                                                                                     377
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                              Volume I: Long Papers

Participants in the control condition (M = 0.00, SD = 0.59) as well as those in the condition with preference-
consistent recommendations (M = 0.05, SD = 0.64) did not change their preference. Pairwise comparisons using
simple  contrasts revealed   that  ECinc subjects had   stronger preference weakening    compared    to CC   subjects
(p = .014), while there was no effect for ECcon subjects compared to CC subjects (p = .720).

Discussion
Study 1 provides first evidence for the impact of recommendations on information selection and preference
adaptation. As  expected     in  Hypothesis  1, CC   subjects showed  confirmation    bias by choosing   preference-
consistent over preference-inconsistent arguments. In ECcon, the confirmation bias was also present; however,
we could not find the expected enhancement of the bias. In ECinc, the expected reduction of confirmation bias
occurred. These effects in information selection had their equivalent in preference adaptation (Hypothesis 2):
CC subjects as well as ECcon subjects did not adapt their preferences. However, ECinc led to a more moderate
view of the controversial topic of neuro-enhancement. Based on Study 1, it is not clear whether or not these
changes in information selection and preference adaptation were accompanied by deeper elaboration. In order to
measure the impact of recommendations on elaboration, we conducted the follow-up Study 2.

Study 2
The second study was conducted as a lab experiment. Two goals were pursued in this study: First, we wanted to
replicate our  findings   concerning  the   impact   of  recommendations  on  information    selection. Second,  we
investigated the impact of recommendations on free recall and on the generation of opinion statements.

Method

Participants
One hundred one students from a German university participated in the experiment. They were recruited via an
academic e-mail-list and compensated by either payment or course credit. Twelve subjects were excluded from
the analysis either because of failing the experimental manipulation check or because of their medical related
field of study. Therefore, data of 89 subjects (M = 23.15, SD = 3.11; 62 female) were included in the analysis.
The majority of participants (84.3 %) judged their prior knowledge about the subject matter to be very poor,
poor, or average.

Material
The simulated website with search results used in the first study as well as the application domain of neuro-
enhancement remained the same.

Design
The experiment again was based on a one factorial design with the three conditions (CC vs. ECcon vs. ECinc).
The pre-preference data showed that 82 % of the participants were against neuro-enhancement. This preference
ratio was equally distributed over the three conditions (F(2,86) < 1, p = .781, ² = .00).

Procedure
The procedure remained the same as in Study 1 except for the third phase including measuring the dependent
variables. As in the first study, subjects were asked to select exactly one argument that they would like to read
more about by clicking on an adjacent box. In the third phase, participants were asked for free recall of the eight
arguments on the simulated website. This free recall test was followed by an opinion statement: participants
were asked to state their opinion and to justify it by writing an essay. They were explicitly instructed that they
did not have to use all information they could remember (in contrast to the free recall task) and that they could
use new and self-created arguments respectively. Afterwards, participants were asked to fill out two items for
the manipulation check and to provide demographic details (age, gender).

Measures
In the second study, we focused on free recall and on the generation of opinion statements. The measures for
manipulation check and information selection remained the same as in the first study (see above). Therefore we
will describe  here   only   the new measures    for elaboration, namely,   free recall and   generation of  opinion
statements.
          Free recall.  First,  we counted  the  overall number   of arguments   recalled. Second,  we  calculated a
balancing index [(argumentsconsistent recalled/argumentsinconsistent recalled) ­ 1] to find out which arguments were
recalled. A score     around zero  indicated a  balanced  recall which  means    that participants recalled an equal
number of preference-consistent and preference-inconsistent arguments. A score above zero indicated a biased

© ISLS                                                                                                            378
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                                     Volume I: Long Papers

recall for  preference-consistent    arguments,    and   a score   below   zero indicated                      a biased recall    in favor  of
preference-inconsistent arguments.
         Opinion statement. For opinion statement, the overall number of arguments generated per participant
was counted. Further, we were interested in the percentage of novel arguments generated in the essay. For the
analyses, a coding schema suggested by Cacioppo, Harkins, and Petty (1981) was used. Accordingly, arguments
were   coded as  0    = "external"   when    they were   part  of the arguments    on  the                     search result website,   or  as
1 = "internal" when the arguments were not mentioned before and thus generated by the participants. All 89
essays were coded by two raters. The interrater reliability Cohen's Kappa was  = .88 which indicates an
almost perfect strength of agreement.

Results
Information selection was tested with 2-tests, whereas elaboration measures were analyzed using ANOVAs.
         Manipulation check. Following a criterion set for the first study (inclusion into the analysis only if both
answers were correct), the analysis comprised 30 CC subjects, 29 ECcon subjects, and 30 ECinc subjects.
         Information    selection.   In this study,   we attempted    to replicate the findings                    of  the  first experiment
concerning information selection (Hypothesis 1). Therefore, we computed an overall 2-test with the factors
condition (CC vs. ECcon vs. ECinc) and information selection (consistent vs. inconsistent). The analysis yielded
the expected effect, 20,95 (2) = 3.99, p = .068, d = 0.43. We also found the same pattern as in the first experiment
for the three conditions separately: a significant effect occurred for CC (20,95 (1) = 6.53, p = .011, d = 1.06) as
well as for ECcon (20,95 (1) = 4.17, p = .041, d = 0.82). For ECinc, no such effect occurred (20,95 (1) < 1, p = .999,
d = 0.00);  see Figure   3. This effect  occurred     although the  acceptance  rates  of                    the recommendations       differed
between  the  two  experimental      conditions:  Preference-consistent    recommendations                       were   selected   for further
information from 24 % of subjects, whereas preference-inconsistent recommendations were selected for further
information from 10 % of subjects.

                                                                                         consistent argument

                                                                                         inconsistent argument

                          Figure 3. Selection Frequencies in the Three Conditions (Study 2).

         It was   predicted   that   information     selection is  related  to  information                      processing  such    that less
confirmation bias results in deeper elaboration. Therefore, we expected free recall (Hypothesis 3a and 3b) and
opinion statement (Hypotheses 4a and 4b) to be best in ECinc. In order to test the hypotheses, one-factorial
ANOVAs      with condition    (CC    vs. ECcon    vs. ECinc)   as the independent    variable                    and  different   elaboration
measures as dependent variables were conducted.
         Free recall. The analysis of number of arguments recalled revealed no difference between the three
conditions  (F(2,86)    < 1, p = .623,   ² = .00).    CC   subjects  recalled  M = 4.33   (SD = 1.09)                     arguments,    ECcon
subjects M = 4.00 (SD = 1.75) arguments, and ECinc subjects M = 4.03 (SD = 1.45) arguments. The analysis of
the recall balancing index yielded the expected highly significant main effect, F(2,81) = 5.03, p = .009, ² = .04:
Subjects in  the control    condition   (M   = 0.61,  SD = 1.07)   as well  as  those  in                    the condition   with    consistent
recommendation (M = 0.26, SD = 0.64) recalled the arguments biased towards preference-consistency, whereas
subjects in the condition with inconsistent recommendation showed a balanced recall (M = -0.06, SD = 0.67).
Pairwise  comparisons     using  simple   contrasts   revealed  that  ECinc subjects  showed                      stronger  recall   balancing
compared to CC subjects (p = .002), while there was no significant effect for ECcon subjects compared to CC
subjects (p = .128).
         Opinion   statement.    The    analysis  of  number   of  arguments    generated                    revealed   a  significant  effect
between the three conditions (F(2,86) = 3.13, p = .049, ² = .01). CC subjects generated M = 2.97 (SD = 1.19)
arguments, ECcon subjects M = 2.97 (SD = 1.40) arguments, and ECinc subjects M = 3.77 (SD = 1.66) arguments.
The analysis of the source of arguments yielded the expected highly significant main effect, F(2,86) = 7.11,
p = .001, ² = .06: Participants in the control condition (M = 1.10, SD = 0.92) as well as those in the condition
with consistent recommendation (M = 1.34, SD = 1.17) showed less internal argument generation compared to
the condition   with    inconsistent recommendation      (M = 2.30,   SD = 1.69).  Pairwise                      comparisons   using   simple
contrasts revealed that ECinc subjects showed stronger internal argument generation compared to CC subjects
(p = .001), while there was no significant effect for ECcon subjects compared to CC subjects (p = .472).

© ISLS                                                                                                                                     379
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                        Volume I: Long Papers

Discussion
In Study 2, it was possible to replicate our findings for the impact of a recommendation on confirmation bias
and   to extend   them in  several  ways.  In  line  with   Hypothesis   1,  both  studies    demonstrated   that    CC subjects
showed a confirmation bias. Confirmation bias remained stable for ECcon subjects and was reduced or even
prevented for ECinc subjects. It is worth noting that both studies revealed the same effect pattern concerning
information selection, although the data collection (online and lab) as well as subjects' compensation (lottery
and payment) differed. As the effect occurred in both studies, albeit in different contextual settings, it appears to
be  a  robust finding. Study   2  found  that  ECinc  stimulated   balanced    recall, whereas   CC      and ECcon   resulted  in
biased    recall towards   preference-consistent    arguments      (Hypothesis    3b). However,      the  overall    number    of
arguments recalled revealed no difference between the three conditions (Hypothesis 3a). In addition, Study 2
demonstrated that ECinc stimulated increased argument generation compared to CC and ECcon (Hypothesis 4a).
Furthermore, ECinc subjects generated more novel arguments compared to CC and ECcon subjects (Hypothesis
4b). This internal argument generation can be interpreted as divergent thinking processes stimulated by ECinc.

General Discussion
The current research demonstrated that preference-inconsistent recommendations can foster social navigation
and elaboration of controversial topics. Both studies showed that preference-inconsistent recommendations have
an  effect on    information   selection and   thus  can  help  to   overcome    confirmation    bias.   This   effect  was not
associated with a high acceptance rate of preference-inconsistent recommendations: Participants did not select
the recommended argument; they selected a different argument from the recommended perspective instead. This
rejection could have resulted from psychological reactance (Miron & Brehm, 2006), as reactance is known to
stimulate resistance when people perceive their freedom of choice to be restricted. Alternatively, the design of
the  recommendation       used in  the  studies  could   have   led   to banner   blindness    (Benway     &    Lane,   1998), a
phenomenon in which emphasized information is ignored. Further research is needed to ascertain which factors
contribute  to   the  low  acceptance    rate of  recommendations        and  how  an     enhancement     could   be  achieved.
Furthermore,     we  could   not find  empirical  evidence     for our   hypothesis    that   classical, preference-consistent
recommendations       lead to  an  enhanced    confirmation     bias.   Therefore, the    implementation     of  recommender
systems   for learning    does not  appear    to have  debilitating   effects  on  informational    diversity    above   natural
confirmation bias. Consequently, it might be worthwhile to strive for wider application of recommender systems
in educational contexts.
          This   claim is  supported    by our   findings   on  further  points.  Study     1 demonstrated      that preference-
inconsistent recommendations weaken participants' preferences; participants formed a more moderate view on
the  controversial    topic.  Study 2   demonstrated     the   impact    of  preference-inconsistent     recommendation       on
elaboration.  Participants    showed   a balanced    recall  by remembering       arguments     from  both   perspectives   and
divergent  thinking   by   generating   more  novel   arguments.     This   difference  between     preference-consistent     vs.
preference-inconsistent      recommendations     might   result   from   the  difference    in the  perceived    recommender
personality.  Taking   the    research  of  minority  dissent   into    account,  participants   might    have   assumed    that
preference-inconsistent    recommendations       stemmed    from   a  minority   and   thus   leading to  divergent     thinking.
Further studies should include an investigation of the perceived "humanization" of a recommender system.
          Although    our  studies  were   conducted     in a  non-collaborative      context,  we   believe    that  they have
implications for CSCL. For instance, exposure to preference-inconsistent opinions is regarded as an important
element of collaborative learning. Our findings implicate that exposure to dissenting information might not be
enough to stimulate unbiased reasoning and critical thinking. This can be concluded from the fact that in all
three  conditions    preference-inconsistent     arguments   were   available  to  the    learners. However,     only   when   a
preference-inconsistent argument was made salient, did the corresponding opinion have the persuasive power to
influence  navigation     and  elaboration.   Whether    visual salience     suffices  or   whether learners    attribute  some
authority to a recommendation requires further empirical investigation. However, it appears evident that without
computer-supported salience, preference-inconsistent arguments can hardly unfold their beneficial effects.
          Another    relevant  dimension   for   further research    is  the difference   between   debate    and    controversy
(Johnson   &     Johnson,  1979). Preference-consistent      recommendations       highlight   arguments     which    match the
learners'  preferences.   Therefore   consistent  recommendations        might trigger    a debate  mode     of processing  and
lead   to differentiation    processes.  On   the  other    hand,  preference-inconsistent      recommendations         highlight
arguments which do not match the learners' preferences, but since they are denoted as a recommendation, they
might be viewed more positively. This might trigger a controversy mode of processing and lead to integration
processes.
          This paper provides experimental evidence that in opinion formation contexts learners will only accept
a challenge when the challenging information is recommended. In this regard, it can be said that preference-
inconsistent     recommender     systems   create   a zone     of  proximal    development.      If  properly    implemented,
recommender      systems   have   the  potential  to  become    powerful     tools supporting    learners    on  their  way    to
becoming critical thinkers and informed decision makers.

© ISLS                                                                                                                        380
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                Volume I: Long Papers

References
Benway, J. P., & Lane, D. M. (1998). Banner blindness: the irony of attention grabbing on the World Wide
         Web. Proceedings of the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society 42nd Annual Meeting. Chicago, IL.
Berlyne, D. E. (1960). Conflict, arousal, and curiosity. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Bransford, J. D., Brown, A., & Cooking, R. (Eds.) (1999). How people learn: Brain, mind, experience, and
         school. Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
Buchs, C., Butera, F., Mugny, G., & Darnon, C. (2004). Conflict elaborations and cognitive outcomes. Theory
         into Practice, 43(1), 23-30.
Cacioppo, J. T., Harkins, S. G., & Petty, R. E. (1981). The nature of attitudes and cognitive responses and their
         relationships to behavior. In R. E. Petty, T. M. Ostrom, & T. C. Brock (Eds.), Cognitive responses in
         persuasion (pp. 217-235). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Cronbach, L., & Snow, R. (1977). Aptitudes and instructional methods: A handbook of research on interactions.
         New York: Irvington Publishers.
Dennis, A. R., & Valacich, J. S. (1999). Rethinking media richness: Towards a theory of media synchronicity.
         Proceedings of the 32nd Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences. Los Alamitos, CA.
De Wit, F. R. C., & Greer, L. L. (2008). The black-box deciphered: A meta-analysis of team diversity, conflict,
         and team performance. Academy of Management Best Paper Proceedings. Anaheim, CA.
Dieberger, A., Dourish, P., Höök, K., Resnick, P., & Wexelblat, A. (2000). Social navigation: Techniques for
         building more usable systems. interactions, 7(6), 36-45.
Doise, W., & Mugny, G. (1984). The social development of the intellect. Oxford: Pergamon Press.
Festinger, L. (1957). A theory of cognitive dissonance. New York: Row Peterson.
Johnson,  D. W.,   &   Johnson,   R.  T. (1979).  Conflict in the    classroom: Controversy  and   learning. Review  of
         Educational Research, 49(1), 51-69.
Johnson, D. W., & Johnson, R. T. (2009). Energizing learning: The instructional power of conflict. Educational
         Researcher, 38(1), 37-51.
Jonas, E., Schulz-Hardt, S., Frey, D., & Thelen, N. (2001). Confirmation bias in sequential information search
         after preliminary decisions: An expansion of dissonance theoretical research on selective exposure to
         information. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 80(4), 557-571.
Knobloch-Westerwick, S., & Meng, J. (2009). Looking the other way: Selective exposure to attitude-consistent
         and counterattitudinal political information. Communication Research, 36(3), 426-448.
Konstan,  J. A.,  &   Riedl,  J. (2003).  Collaborative   filtering: Supporting  social navigation  in large, crowded
         infospaces.   In K.  Höök,   D.  Benyon,  A.  J. Munro   (Eds.),  Designing information   spaces:   The social
         navigation approach (pp. 43-81). London: Springer.
McNee,   S.  M.,  Riedl,  J., &  Konstan,  J. A.  (2006).  Making    recommendations    better: An analytic  model  for
         human-recommender          interaction. Proceedings   of    the ACM     Conference  on   Human    Factors   in
         Computing Systems. Montreal, Canada.
Miron, A. M., & Brehm, J. W. (2006). Reactance theory ­ 40 years later. Zeitschrift für Sozialpsychologie,
         37(1), 9-18.
Nemeth, C. J. (2003). Minority dissent and its `hidden' benefits. New Review of Social Psychology, 2, 11-21.
Nemeth, C. J., Connell, J. B., Rogers, J. D., & Brown, K. S. (2001). Improving decision making by means of
         dissent. Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 31(1), 48-58.
Nemeth,   C.  J., &    Rogers,   J. (1996). Dissent   and  the search    for information.  British Journal    of Social
         Psychology, 35, 67-76.
Nemeth, C. J., & Wachtler, J. (1983). Creative problem solving as a result of majority vs minority influence.
         European Journal of Social Psychology, 13(1), 45-55.
Piaget, J. (1950). The psychology of intelligence. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Spiro, R. J., & Jehng, J. C. (1990). Cognitive flexibility and hypertext: Theory and technology for the nonlinear
         and multidimensional traversal of complex subject matter. In D. Nix, & R. J. Spiro (Eds.), Cognition,
         education, and multimedia: Exploring ideas in high technology (pp. 163-205). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence
         Erlbaum Associates.
Stanovich, K. E., & West, R. F. (1997). Reasoning independently of prior belief and individual differences in
         actively open-minded thinking. Journal of Educational Psychology, 89(2), 342-357.
West, R. F., Toplak, M. E., & Stanovich, K. E. (2008). Heuristics and biases as measures of critical thinking:
         Associations    with  cognitive  ability  and thinking  dispositions.   Journal of Educational  Psychology,
         100(4), 930-941.
Wood, W., Lundgren, S., Ouellette, J. A., Busceme, S., & Blackstone, T. (1994). Minority influence: a meta-
         analytic review of social influence processes. Psychological Bulletin, 115(3), 323-345.
Vygotsky, L. S. (1978). In M. Cole, V. John-Steiner, S. Scribner, & E. Souberman (Eds. & Trans.), Mind in
         society:  the  development    of higher   psychological     processes. Cambridge,  MA:    Harvard   University
         Press.

© ISLS                                                                                                               381
