CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                             Volume I: Long Papers

Adaptable Scripting in Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning
                      to Foster Knowledge and Skill Acquisition
 Xinghua Wang, Ingo Kollar, Karsten Stegmann, Frank Fischer, Ludwig-Maximilians-University of Munich,
                                     Leopoldstr. 13, 80802 Munich (Germany)
          Email: wang.xinghua@psy.lmu.de, ingo.kollar@psy.lmu.de, karsten.stegmann@psy.lmu.de,
                                             frank.fischer@psy.lmu.de

         Abstract: Collaboration scripts have repeatedly been implemented in CSCL with the aim of
         improving    individual acquisition of domain-specific  knowledge    and  domain-general   skills.
         However, it is a delicate compromise between taking the "freedom from" (i.e., constraining
         the learners' efforts to self-regulate their learning) and providing the "freedom to" learners
         (i.e., enabling them to collaborate on a higher level) when implementing CSCL scripts. The
         study reported here aimed to answer the question whether adaptable scripting would be an
         effective approach to realize flexibility in scripted CSCL. 54 university students participated
         in this study which compared three experimental conditions (unscripted CSCL, CSCL with a
         non-adaptable script, CSCL with an adaptable script). Results showed that the adaptable script
         improved individual knowledge and skill acquisition compared to the other two conditions.

Collaboration Scripts to Support CSCL
To support individual knowledge acquisition in CSCL, group interactions, such as asking thoughtful questions
(King, 2007), exchanging arguments (Kuhn, Shaw, & Felton, 1997), and engaging in exposing and reconciling
cognitive discrepancies (Roschelle, 1992), have been shown to be effective. Yet, research has demonstrated that
such processes do not generally occur spontaneously (e.g., Hewitt, 2005). Therefore, process-related scaffolding
approaches have been developed to help learners perform more high-level, productive collaborative activities
than without support. Collaboration scripts, as an example of such an instructional approach, have repeatedly
been demonstrated to improve CSCL with respect to learners' knowledge acquisition, since they facilitate high-
level  collaboration  processes  by specifying, sequencing  and distributing  learning activities and roles  among
learners in a small group (Kollar, Fischer, & Hesse, 2006). For instance, Weinberger, Ertl, Fischer and Mandl
(2005) used a social collaboration script, which distributed the roles of case analyst and constructive critic and
sequenced   sub-activities  through  first case  analysis, critique, reply to  critique  to final  analysis  in an
asynchronous CSCL environment and found that it fostered a variety of high-level online discussion processes
and led to higher levels of domain-specific knowledge acquisition than unstructured CSCL.
         Usually, collaboration scripts not only aim to foster the acquisition of domain-specific knowledge, but
at the same time also domain-general skills (Wecker & Fischer, 2007). From an instructional point of view,
focusing on learners' skill acquisition helps answer the question whether the effects of collaboration scripts
extend beyond the learning situation in which they were provided, by promoting the capabilities of learners to
collaborate in a fruitful way. By using collaboration scripts, the script itself may be internalized so that learners
can become self-regulated in their use of it, since according to Vygotskian thinking, the actions of the roles and
any verbal prompts can be internalized as inner speech so that learners can apply their acquired knowledge to
self-prompt actions in similar situations (Rogoff, 1990). The empirical study presented below investigated the
effects of script support on both learners' acquisition of domain-specific knowledge and their acquisition of
domain-general skills; and more specifically the possible advantage of adaptable scripting in CSCL.

Adaptable Scripting to Foster Knowledge and Skill Acquisition
Although empirical evidence on the positive effects of classical CSCL scripts on individual knowledge and skill
acquisition is ample, scripting approaches have also been criticized for being coercive and not allowing students
to self-regulate their learning (Diziol, Walker, Rummel, & Koedinger, 2010). On the one hand, it often seems
necessary to provide learners with scripts that impose some structure to enable them to engage in productive
interaction. On the other hand, learners may be given too little freedom in scripted CSCL for deeper learning to
occur (Rummel & Spada, 2005). Over the years, some efforts towards more open and less restrictive forms of
CSCL scripts have been made to optimize the success of the scripting approach. In order to meet individual
learners' needs for instructional support and their needs for freedom within a CSCL environment, adaptable
instruction is a promising approach which may improve the fit between learner and learning environment. A
learning environment is called `adaptable' when users (i.e. teachers or students) can adjust external support to
meet the learners' self- or other-perceived needs (Leutner, 2009). In the field of CSCL, there is a conceptual
analysis of the notion   of "flexibility", which  deals with the concern   of  coercive scripting  (Dillenbourg  &
Tchounikine, 2007).    There, adaptable scripting  was  argued  theoretically as a promising  approach  to   realize
flexibility. Whether the argument empirically holds true is one of the questions addressed in the study presented

© ISLS                                                                                                           382
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                             Volume I: Long Papers

in this paper. Of course, there are reasons to expect this: by increasing learners' opportunities for self-regulation,
adaptable  scripting   might be  beneficial for learners' knowledge   acquisition, since self-regulation   has been
regarded as an influential factor in learning, especially in skill acquisition (Zimmerman, 2008).

Research Questions and Hypotheses
This   study aimed    to answer the question to what  extent an adaptable script   can facilitate (1) the individual
acquisition of domain-specific knowledge and (2) the individual acquisition of domain-general skills compared
to a non-adaptable script and unscripted collaboration in a CSCL environment. We expected that learning by aid
of an adaptable script would lead to higher levels of domain-specific knowledge and domain-general skills than
a non-adaptable script, which in turn was expected to lead to better results than unstructured CSCL.
         Besides the potential advantage of adaptable scripting on learning outcomes, we were also interested in
its effects on learning processes: Therefore, we asked (3) how learners in the adaptable script condition adapted
the script compared to the non-adaptable script condition; and (4) how the adaptation in turn affected their script
adherence. We expected that learners in the adaptable script condition would do more self-planning and use less
support provided by the script than learners in the non-adaptable script condition. The adaptation, yet, would not
diminish their script adherence, compared to the non-adaptable script condition.

Method

Participants and Design
To answer these research questions, a one-factorial pre-post test design with three experimental conditions was
used.  The   independent   variable was the  kind  of instructional support. In the  unscripted   CSCL    condition,
students collaborated in an asynchronous CSCL environment without an external script. In the non-adaptable
script condition, students were guided by a continuous, non-adaptable script, while students who learned in the
adaptable script condition could adapt the script to their self-perceived needs (see below for more details). 54
students of Educational Sciences from the Ludwig-Maximilians-University of Munich participated in this study
as part of a course assignment. They were randomly assigned to small groups of three, and each group was
randomly assigned to one of the three experimental conditions (see Table 1).

Table 1:   Design of the experimental study.

Unscripted collaboration               Non-adaptable script                  Adaptable script
n = 18 students                        n = 18 students                       n = 18 students
(6 triads)                             (6 triads)                            (6 triads)

Task, Setting and Learning Environment
The students' task was to analyze three authentic educational problem cases on the basis of Weiner's (1985)
attribution theory. Discussions were led in a web-based CSCL environment, which was a revised version of the
CASSIS environment (see Figure 1; Stegmann, et al., 2007). CASSIS is an asynchronous discussion board in
which three participants can post messages that, apart from the experimenters, only the members of the learning
group could read. The participants were logged in with code names in an effort to warrant anonymity.

© ISLS                                                                                                           383
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                             Volume I: Long Papers

 Figure 1. Screenshot of the learning environment CASSIS. Upper left: description of the task (analyze three
  problem cases with the help of the according theory). Middle left: timer (how much time left for the current
task). Lower left: orientation map depicting which case the learner is working on. Upper right: case information.
         Lower right: discussion board where learners can type in messages (including script prompts).

Procedure and Experimental Conditions
The experiment spanned five phases. (1) Pre-test and individual learning: firstly, the participants of the study
filled out questionnaires (demographic information and intrinsic motivation) and secondly they read two four-
page   theory sheets,  one about  Mayer's (2001)  Cognitive Theory  of Multimedia       Learning and the  other one
about Weiner's (1985) Attribution Theory. The third step in the pre-test phase, which was the assessment of
prior  knowledge  on   collaboration (see below), took place immediately  before the       CSCL  session,  when the
participants were arranged appropriately in the laboratory room.
         (2) Training: after pre-test and individual learning, students were guided to a 44-minute training phase,
which helped them get a first experience on how to handle the learning environment and how the collaboration
script worked. During this phase, students in all three conditions analyzed three problem cases dealing with
multimedia    design  against the background of   Mayer's Cognitive Theory  of Multimedia        Learning, with the
support of a collaboration script, which assigned two different roles (role A: analyst for one of the three cases
and role B: constructive critic for the other two cases) to individual learners in a small group. Role A (analyst)
took over the responsibility for the preliminary and concluding analysis on one case and responding to criticism
from the learning partners. In the role of constructive critics (role B), learners were required to criticize their
partners' analyses of the two other cases. These activities were supported by interaction-oriented prompts (e.g.,
"We have not reached consensus concerning these aspects:"), which were automatically inserted into the critics'
messages and into the analyst's replies in order to help learners take over their roles successfully (Weinberger et
al., 2005). In addition, there was a time limit for each sub-step students had to take.
         (3) Chat: after a short break, students were guided to apply Weiner's attribution theory to three new
problem cases. There was a chat before group work on analyzing the three cases, within which participants were
asked to reflect upon their group discussion during training phase and plan for the coming one. In addition,
students in the adaptable scripted condition were provided with opportunities to choose the role (analyst or critic)
they would like to play for analyses of each problem case.
         (4) Treatment: after 4 minutes of chatting, students were guided back to the same forum as they worked
with   during the training  phase. In the 70-minute  experimental  phase, students      in the unscripted  condition

© ISLS                                                                                                            384
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                    Volume I: Long Papers

collaboratively worked on the case analyses without support of external scripts, but the strategies that had been
discussed during chat could be used. Students in the non-adaptable script condition learned with the same script
as they did during training. Here students could use the strategies that they discussed about only within the
boundaries of the script. For students who learned in the adaptable script condition, the collaboration script in
the experimental phase was adaptable. "Adaptability" was operationalized by providing learners with control
over whether they would like to use the interaction-oriented prompts and the time they would like to spend on
each case (time for the whole experimental phase kept the same as that in the other two conditions). Moreover,
distribution of responsibilities for case analyses in the adaptable script condition was not determined by the
script, but was based on their group decision during chat.
         (5) Post-test: the experimental phase was followed by an individual post-test on students' knowledge
acquisition on attribution theory, in which students were supposed to analyze a new problem case related to
attribution theory, and a collaborative post-test on students' acquisition of collaboration skills, in which students
were supposed to engage in an unstructured discussion about the post-test case (see below).

Dependent and Control Variables
Dependent variables were individual students' acquisition of domain-specific knowledge (on attribution theory)
and individual students' acquisition of domain-general skills (collaboration skills). Domain-specific knowledge
acquisition was assessed by an in-depth analysis of the individual analyses of a new problem case related to
attribution  theory   during  the post-test  phase. Two   coders   independently    first  segmented   10%    of individual
analyses of the case into meaningful pieces of messages (Chi, 1997). Inter-rater agreement on segmentation was
94%, amounting to a Cohen's Kappa of  = .88. The remaining 90 % of the material were then coded by the
trained coders individually (the same procedure was applied to all the discourse analyses below). Secondly, each
of the  resulting segments    was  coded    with the help  of a  coding  system     assessing   the quality  of  knowledge
construction (developed by Weinberger & Fischer, 2006). This system differentiated between utterances that
represented the "construction of problem space" (e.g., "The student in the case thought that she failed in an
exam   because  of    low ability."),  the "construction  of conceptual  space"     (e.g., "Internal  stable  attribution of
failure has negative effects on learning motivation.") and the "construction of relations between conceptual and
problem space" (e.g., "The student is attributing internally stable when she took ability as the reason of her
failure."). Inter-rater agreement on coding was 94%, amounting to a Cohen's Kappa of  = .73. For the current
analyses, only the frequency of segments coded as "construction of relations between conceptual and problem
space"  were   included,  since   this category  can be  considered   as representing      the highest level  of quality  of
knowledge construction.
         Students'    acquisition  of  domain-general    collaboration   skills was  measured      by  a performance    test,
which was based on the unstructured group discussion about the post-test case. Individual contributions to the
group discussion were first segmented into pieces of messages the same way as it was done for segmenting the
individual analyses of the post-test case. Second, each of the resulting segments was assessed with respect to the
application of collaboration skills that were introduced by the collaboration script. More specifically, the coding
scheme differentiated whether a contribution represented "task specification" (e.g., "I suggest that we read and
summarize our analyses in the discussion thread."), "role distribution" (e.g., "I am not sure with your point of
view that external attribution is positive.") or "sequencing" (e.g., "We should first work on our own analyses.").
The inter-rater agreement regarding coding on collaboration skills was 87%, and the inter-rater reliability was
Cohen's  = .71. The occurrence of these utterances was counted and the resulting sum scores were used as an
indicator of individual acquisition of domain-general collaboration skills.
         Beyond    these  outcome     measures,  we  also used  three process    measures      as dependent   variables.  To
measure how learners in the adaptable script condition made use of the adaptability during their learning,             their
self-planning   and   use  of  prompts     were  coded.  Self-planning   was    coded   with   the  coding   scheme    from
Zimmerman      (2008).   An  utterance  was   coded  as self-planning when      the learners   set goals  and did strategic
planning  in  terms   of task coordination,   time  management   etc. Since     planning   mainly   takes place  before   the
learning process, only learners' discussion during chat, which took place before the treatment phase, was coded
in the current study. The inter-rater agreement regarding coding on learners' self-planning was 96 %, and the
inter-rater  reliability was  Cohen's       = .85.  The  indicator of learners'     use of  prompts    during   their online
discussion was the percentage of prompts used by learners to prompts provided by the script. Script adherence
as a   third process  variable was     measured  by  counting if a specific  sub-activity      pre-described  by the   script
showed up during the online discussion within a group. The script in the current study pre-described 8 sub-
activities: first analysis, first critique from learning partner 1, first critique from partner 2, response to partner 1,
response to partner 2, second critique from partner 1, second critique from partner 2, and final analysis.
         As control variables, students' prior knowledge on collaboration was assessed individually during pre-
test by an open format knowledge test. The test asked learners to describe how they would organize their group
work imaging they were going to work in triads in an asynchronous discussion board ­ the CSCL scenario used
in the current study; and more specifically which steps they would take and why. Students' responses were

© ISLS                                                                                                                    385
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                       Volume I: Long Papers

assessed with the same coding scheme that was used to assess the performance test on individual acquisition
collaboration skills during post-test. The inter-rater agreement regarding coding on learners' prior knowledge on
collaboration    was  87   %, and   the inter-rater reliability was  Cohen's       =   .71. Furthermore,       students' initial
motivation    was   assessed  after  training by  the   motivation  scale   from Prenzel     et    al. (1993).  This  intrinsic
motivation    scale included   five  items (e.g., "During   the learning  session,   I experienced      myself   as curious  or
inquisitive.") with Cronbach's  = .85 in the reported study.

Results

Preliminary Analyses
Before performing statistical analyses related to our research questions, we checked whether the learners in the
three experimental conditions were comparable with respect to prior knowledge and initial motivation. On none
of these measures, we found significant differences in the pre-test (for prior knowledge on collaboration: F(2,51)
= 0.11; n.s.; for initial motivation: F(2,51) = 0.76; n.s.). However, to avoid biases of effects of our treatment on
the post test measures, we used these pre-test measures as control variables in all of the following analyses.

Individual Knowledge and Skill Acquisition
Descriptively,    with  respect  to  domain-specific    knowledge   acquisition,   students     who    had   learned with    the
adaptable script outperformed students from the other conditions (see table 2). An ANCOVA with the kind of
instructional support as independent variable, group id as a random factor nested in treatment, the point scores
on the individual knowledge test as dependent variable, prior knowledge on collaboration and initial motivation
as control variables however indicated a non-significant effect for the kind of instructional support (F(2,15) =
3.30;  n.s.). The   effect of group   on individual  acquisition  of domain-specific      knowledge      was   not  significant
(F(15,35) = 0.60; n.s.). From Post-hoc-tests (LSD), it was found that students who had learned with the adaptable
script slightly   outperformed    students   from   the non-adaptable    script  condition      (p =   .08). Students    in  the
unscripted condition also performed slightly better than those from the non-adaptable scripted condition (p =
.11).

Table 2: Descriptive values for individual knowledge and skill acquisition.

                                 Unscripted             Non-adaptable         Adaptable script          Total
                                 M (SD)                 script                M (SD)
                                                        M (SD)
        Knowledge
        acquisition on           7.86 (4.82)            5.58 (3.75)           8.12 (3.39)               7.19 (4.12)
        attribution theory
        Acquisition ofcollaboration skills1.02 (1.49)   2.23 (1.59)           2.92 (2.16)               2.06 (1.91)

         Paralleling   the  results  on  knowledge   acquisition  on   attribution theory,   with      respect to individuals'
acquisition   of  domain-general     collaboration  skills, the descriptive  values    depicted    in   Table  2  showed    that
students who had learned with the adaptable script outperformed students from the other two conditions. An
ANCOVA with the kind of instructional support as independent variable, group id as a random factor nested in
treatment, individual acquisition of collaboration skills as dependent variable, prior knowledge on collaboration
and   initial motivation   as control   variables indicated  a  significant effect of  the  kind    of  instructional support
(F(2,15) = 3.75; p < .05). The effect of group on individual skill acquisition was not significant (F(15,34) = 1.57;
n.s.). From Post-hoc-tests (LSD), it was found that students' acquisition of collaboration skills in the unscripted
condition was substantially lower than in the adaptable script condition (p < .01) and slightly lower than in the
non-adaptable condition (p = .06). There was no statistically significant difference between the non-adaptable
and the adaptable script condition (p = .16).

Learners' Use of Adaptability
To  answer    the third  research   question  about learners'   use of adaptability    in   the adaptable    script  condition,
compared to the non-adaptable script condition, descriptive values about learners' self-planning and their use of
prompts were depicted in Table 3. Descriptively, data in table 3 showed that in the adaptable script condition,
students did more self-planning and used less prompts than in the non-adaptable condition.
         An    ANOVA       with  the kind  of  instructional   support (non-adaptable       script vs.   adaptable   script) as
independent    variable,   group id  as  a random   factor  nested  in treatment,    students'     self-planning  during    chat
(frequency) as dependent variable indicated a significant effect of the kind of instructional support (F(1,10) =
21.72; p < .01). The effect of group on learners' self-planning was not significant (F(10,24) = 1.38; n.s.). Since the

© ISLS                                                                                                                       386
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                              Volume I: Long Papers

use of prompts was calculated on group level, the procedure that AN(C)OVA with group id as a random factor
nested in treatment was not applied. An ANOVA with the kind of instructional support (non-adaptable script vs.
adaptable script) as independent variable, group use of prompts (percentage) as dependent variable indicated a
significant effect of the kind of instructional support (F(1,10) = 4.95; p < .05).

Table 3: Learners' use of adaptability.

                                                  Non-adaptable script           Adaptable script
                                                  M (SD)                         M (SD)
                 Self-planning                    1.39 (1.33)                    3.72 (1.36)
                 Use of prompts                   0.31 (0.15)                    0.14 (0.12)

Script Adherence
As students in the adaptable script condition were provided with opportunities to switch off the prompts, it ran
the risk that they did not follow the scripts well. Analyses of script adherence answered the question how well
students in each condition performed the eight sub-activities (first analysis, first critique from learning partner 1,
first critique from partner 2, response to partner 1, response to partner 2, second critique from partner 1, second
critique from   partner   2, and   final analysis)   pre-described   by  the scripts. Figure  2 showed            that groups  in   the
adaptable script condition engaged overall less in the activities specified by the script than those in the non-
adaptable script condition, especially with respect to sub-activity 2 (first critique from learning partner 1) and 3
(first critique from learning partner 2).

                        1 ,2

                          1

                        0 ,8
                                                                                          n o n -a d a p ta b le
                        0 ,6
                                                                                          a d a p ta b le -
                        0 ,4

                        0 ,2

                          0
                                 1     2       3     4     5     6     7      8

                  Figure 2. Script Adherence in Non-adaptable and Adaptable Script Condition.

         An  ANOVA        with   the kind    of  instructional  support  as  independent    variable        and    script adhenrence
(percentage) as dependent variable indicated a significant effect of the kind of instructional support (F(1,10) =
7.33; p < .05).

Discussion
In order to benefit from collaboration, students need to interact in productive ways. Collaboration scripts, as a
process-related  instructional     approach,     aim at  inducing  productive   interaction  in collaborative            learning  and
therefore  may  improve      learning    outcomes.    However,   there  are  contradictory   findings            about the  effects of
collaboration scripts on individual learning outcomes. Many studies (e.g., Kollar et al., 2007) found positive
results of CSCL scripts on individual knowledge acquisition, while a few others also (e.g., Weinberger et al.,
2005)  found   negative   effects.   Against     the background    of related   literature, negative        script   effects  may   be
interpreted as caused by too high degree of coercion (Diziol et al., 2010). How to implement flexible scripts and
thus to  maximize     the effectiveness     of  the  scripting  approach has    recently  drawn  more            and more   attention.
Therefore, we aimed to answer the question whether adaptable scripting is a promising approach to reduce the
coercion of scripts without losing the benefit from the process-related support provided by scripts.
         With respect to individual acquisition of domain-specific knowledge, the collaboration script used in
the current study  had    slightly  negative     effects compared  to   the  unscripted  CSCL   condition.           However,   when
learners  were  provided     with  opportunities     to  reduce  the  structure  imposed    by  the         collaboration   script  by
adapting  some   parts  of   the script  according     to their perceived   needs,  i.e. in the adaptable            script condition,
individual  knowledge      acquisition      was  enhanced    when    compared    to   the   non-adaptable          script   condition.
Regarding   individual    acquisition    of domain-general     collaboration  skills, the   collaboration         script  had slightly

© ISLS                                                                                                                              387
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                       Volume I: Long Papers

positive effect compared to the unscripted condition. When the script was adaptable, however, individual skill
acquisition was substantially enhanced when compared to the unscripted condition. This supports the notion of
Dillenbourg and Tchounikine (2007), who argued that "scripts must be flexible" (p.6). The adaptable script in
the current study structured the collaboration by specifying and sequencing sub-activities, but left it modifiable
to the students, for instance, to choose different roles and switch the prompts on and off. As shown in the results,
students  in  the adaptable    script  condition     benefited  from   their use    of  adaptability   with  respect   to their
acquisition of both domain-specific knowledge and domain-general skills. Adaptable scripting is therefore a
promising approach to realize "flexibility" in scripted CSCL.
         Beyond the "flexibility" perspective, positive effects of the adaptable scripting approach on individual
learning outcomes may also be explained from the perspective of self-regulated learning (SRL). In line with
related research, self-regulation is a significant predictor of students' academic outcomes, since self-regulated
students would cognitively and motivationally engage in setting learning goals, using learning strategies and
self-monitoring (Zimmerman, 2008). Further analyses of the learning process, which are currently under way,
are required to confirm the extent to which the positive effects of adaptable scripting could be explained from
the SRL point. For instance, we are interested to find out to what extent adaptability increases SRL, which has
been linked to learning outcomes in CSCL (Dillenbourg, Järvelä, & Fischer, 2009; Hadwin, Oschige, Gress, &
Winne, 2010).
         Regarding the adaptation process, results showed that learners in the adaptable script condition did use
the adaptability: they did more self-planning before online discussion and switched more prompts off during
online discussion, compared to the non-adaptable script condition. As a consequence of adaptation, however,
groups in the adaptable script condition engaged less in a script-like discussion process than groups in the non-
adaptable script condition. Nevertheless, the overall decrease of script adherence caused by learners' adaptation
of the script did not result in learners' losing the benefit from scripts. More data-sets and further analyses are
required  to  distinguish  effective  adaptation     groups from   non-effective    ones     to examine  the prerequisite    for
successful adaptation in scripted CSCL.
         Limitations.     The reported   study   has  some  limitations. Firstly,   the   sample  size was   relatively small.
Statistics were done with 54 participants, 18 in each experimental condition. The relatively small sample size
leads to constraints concerning statistical power. Therefore, the interpretation of the results should be made with
caution. In  order  to enlarge    the statistical  power  of this  study, we    are  currently    continuing data  collection.
Secondly,  it is  surprising  that -  although   the  same  collaboration    script was   implemented    both   in the  current
study and a previous one (Weinberger et al., 2005), we found a slightly negative effect of the collaboration
script on individual   acquisition    of domain-specific    knowledge,    whereas    the  previous    study  found  a  positive
effect of this script on individual acquisition of domain-specific knowledge compared to unscripted CSCL. One
main   difference between     the  previous   study  and the   current one   is that   in the   previous study   there was   no
training phase preceding the CSCL session, whereas in the current study, there was a 44-min training phase in
advance.  A   possible    explanation for   this missing effect  could   be  that the   training  phase  led to  some   sort of
internalization  of   the script so   that  learners in the unscripted   condition     still used  parts of  the script in   the
treatment phase. Another explanation from a motivational point of view would be the argument from Oehl and
Pfister (2008), which states that scripts implemented in a relatively long term may elicit reactance responses.
Possibly, further analyses on the learning processes provide evidence for or against these explanations.
         Implications for future research and practice. Despite the limitations discussed above, the adaptable
script in the current study is a practical example of realizing flexibility in scripted CSCL, but not the only way.
Further  ways   how   to  implement   flexibility  in scripted  CSCL   may    be  differentially   successful.   For example,
another line of research on flexible instruction is research on "adaptivity" (as opposed to adaptability realized in
our study). An ongoing research (Mu, Stegmann, Mayfield, Rosé, & Fischer, 2010) which aims at realizing
automatic  adaptation     through   natural  language   processing   (NLP)    technique      may   provide  evidence    for  the
success of a different operationalization of flexibility in scripted CSCL.          Flexible instruction, not only in CSCL,
but also in other learning environments (e.g., classroom) is an issue that should be investigated in future studies.
Finally, the  current  study  showed     that  learners in  the adaptable    script condition     benefited overall   from   the
adaptability. Nevertheless,    it  is still an   open question  whether   some      students    take more   advantage   out  of
adaptability than others do. Future studies may look for individual learning prerequisites that may moderate the
positive effects of adaptability on knowledge acquisition, like, for instance, individual learning style.

References
Chi, M. T. H. (1997). Quantifying qualitative analyses of verbal data: A practical guide. Journal of the Learning
         Sciences, 6(3), 271-315.
Dillenbourg,  P.  &   Tchounikine,    P.   (2007). Flexibility  in macro-scripts    for   computer-supported     collaborative
         learning. Journal of Computer Assisted Learning, 23, 1-13.

© ISLS                                                                                                                       388
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                               Volume I: Long Papers

Dillenbourg, P., Järvelä, S. & Fischer, F. (2009). The evolution of research on computer-supported collaborative
         learning: from design to orchestration. In N. Balacheff, S. Ludvigsen, T. de Jong, A. Lazonder, & S.
         Barnes (Eds.), Technology-enhanced learning: principles and products. New York: Springer.
Diziol, Walker, Rummel, & Koedinger (2010). Using intelligent tutor technology to implement adaptive support
         for student collaboration. Educational Psychology Review, 22(1), 89-102.
Hadwin, A. F., Oschige, M., Gress, C. L. Z., & Winne, P. H. (2010). Innovative ways for using gStudy to
         orchestrate and research social aspects of self-regulated learning. Computer in Human Behavior, 26,
         806-814.
Hewitt, J. (2005). Toward an understanding of how threads die in asynchronous computer conferences. The
         Journal of the Learning Sciences, 14(4), 567-589.
King, A. (2007). Scripting collaborative learning processes: A cognitive perspective. In F. Fischer, I. Kollar, H.
         Mendl,    &   J. M.   Haake.    (Eds.) Scripting   computer-supported  collaborative   learning: Cognitive,
         computational and educational perspectives (pp.13-37). New York, Springer.
Kollar,  I., Fischer,  F.  &   Hesse, F.W.   (2006).  Collaboration  scripts - a   conceptual analysis. Educational
         Psychology Review, 18(2), 159-185.
Kollar, I., Fischer, F., & Slotta, J. D. (2007). Internal and external scripts in computer-supported collaborative
         inquiry learning. Learning and Instruction, 17,708-721.
Kuhn, D., Shaw, V., & Felton, M. (1997). Effects of dyadic interaction on argumentative reasoning. Cognition
         and Instruction, 15, 287-315.
Leutner, D. (2009). Adaptivität und Adaptierbarkeit multimedialer Lehr- und Informationssysteme [Adaptivity
         and   adaptability  in multimedia   learning and   information  systems]. In L. J. Issing, P. Klimsa (Eds).
         Online-Lernen: Handbuch für Wissenschaft und Praxis(pp.115-124). München: Oldenbourg.
Mayer, R. E. (2001). Multimedia learning. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Mu, J., Stegmann, K., Mayfield, E., Rosé, C., & Fischer, F. (2010, submitted). Framework for the development
         of classification schemes for automatic classifications of online discussions.
Oehl, M. & Pfister, H. R. (2008). Knowledge acquisition and problem solving in CSCL with learning protocols:
         Effects of different scripting strategies. In C. Bonk, M. M. Lee, & T. Reynolds (Eds.), Proceedings of
         world conference on E-learning in corporate, government, healthcare, and higher education 2008 (pp.
         3040-3045). Chesapeake, VA: AACE.
Prenzel,  M.,  Eitel,  F.,  Holzbach,    R., Schoenhein,    R.-J. &  Schweiberer,   L.  (1993).  Lernmotivation    im
         studentischen    Unterricht  in der Chirurgie   [Learning motivation  in  university-level surgery courses].
         Zeitschrift für Pädagogische Psychologie, 7, 125-137.
Raudenbush, S.W., Bryk, A.S. (2006). Hierarchical Linear Models: Applications and Data Analysis Methods.
         Sage Publications, Inc.
Rogoff,  B.  (1990).  Apprenticeship    in thinking: Cognitive  development  in  social context. New   York: Oxford
         University Press.
Roschelle, J. (1992). Learning by collaboration: Convergent conceptual change. The Journal of the Learning
         Sciences, 2, 235-276.
Rummel, N., Spada, H. (2005). Learning to collaborate: an instructional approach to promoting collaborative
         problem solving in computer-mediated settings. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 14 (2), 201-224.
Stegmann, K., Kollar, I., Zottmann, J., Gijlers, H., de Jong, T., Dillenbourg, P., Slotta, J. D., & Fischer, F.
         (2007).   Towards     the convergence   of  CSCL    and  inquiry learning: Scripting  collaborative inquiry
         learning. In C.Chinn, G. Erkens & S. Puntambekar (Eds.), Mice, minds, and society. Proceedings of the
         CSCL 2007. Computer Supported Collaborative Learning (pp. 829-830). Rutgers, The State University
         of New Jersey, New Brunswick, NJ, USA: International Society of the Learning Sciences.
Wecker,  C.,  &  Fischer,   F.  (2007).  Fading  scripts in computer-supported  collaborative learning:  The  role of
         distributed monitoring.     In C.Chinn, G. Erkens & S. Puntambekar (Eds.), Mice, minds, and society.
         Proceedings of the CSCL 2007. Computer Supported Collaborative Learning (pp. 764-772). Rutgers,
         The State University of New Jersey, New Brunswick, NJ, USA: International Society of the Learning
         Sciences.
Weinberger, A., Ertl, B., Fischer, F., & Mandl, H. (2005). Epistemic and social scripts in computer-supported
         collaborative learning. Instructional Science, 33 (1), 1-30.
Weinberger,    A., &   Fischer,  F. (2006).  A   framework   to  analyze  argumentative  knowledge   construction  in
         computer-supported collaborative learning. Computers & Education, 46, 71-95.
Weiner, B. (1985). An attributional theory of achievement motivation and emotion. Psychological Review, 92,
         548-573.
Zimmerman, B. J. (2008). Investigating self-regulation and motivation: Historical background, methodological
         developents, and future prospects. American Educational Research Journal, 45(1), 166-183.

© ISLS                                                                                                             389
