CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                    Volume I: Long Papers

Explaining the Effects of Continuous and Faded Scripts on Online
        Search Skills: The Role of Collaborative Strategy Practice
Christof Wecker, Ingo Kollar, Frank Fischer, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München, Leopoldstr. 13, 80802
                                                    München, Germany
            Email: christof.wecker@psy.lmu.de, ingo.kollar@psy.lmu.de, frank.fischer@psy.lmu.de

         Abstract:      It has   been  shown  that  continuous      and faded  collaboration   scripts can   foster
         important    components      of scientific literacy  such   as online search  skills. The  present  paper
         studies the effects of these types of scripts on learners' practice of the strategy suggested by
         the script, as well as the relation of the learners' and their learning partners' practice of the
         strategy to the development of online search skills. Data from a four-week field study with
         129 ninth-grade students in three conditions (no script, continuous script and faded script)
         were   analyzed.     Findings   indicate positive   effects of both   scripts compared  to  unsupported
         collaboration on the practice of the strategy. Learners' own, but not their learning partners'
         practice of    the   strategy  predicted  their  development    of  online search  skills. These   results
         indicate  that    neither  mere    exposure   to   the  script  nor observation    of  learning  partners
         performing the strategy explain the effects of scripts on learning outcomes.

Prior Research on Collaboration Scripts
In recent years, collaboration scripts have become a main focus of research on computer-supported collaborative
learning. Collaboration scripts are socio-cognitive scaffolds that specify activities, sequence them and distribute
them among different roles taken over by members of a small group of learners, with the aim to help students
advance their domain-specific knowledge about the topic of collaboration and domain-general skills such as the
ones that also belong to scientific literacy (Kollar, Fischer & Hesse, 2006). Several studies have demonstrated
positive effects of scripts on learning (e.g., De Wever, Van Keer, Schellens, & Valcke, 2009; Kollar, Fischer &
Slotta, 2007;   Rummel,       &   Spada,  2005;     Slof,   Erkens,  Kirschner, Jaspers   &    Janssen,  2010;    Stegmann,
Weinberger & Fischer, 2007; Weinberger, Stegmann & Fischer, 2010).
         Some studies of support for collaborating learners other than collaboration scripts have been conducted
in field settings (e. g. Hmelo-Silver, 2006; Walker, Rummel & Koedinger, 2009). However, most research on
effects of computer-supported small-group collaboration scripts on learning outcomes is done in the laboratory
so far. Some lab studies demonstrated beneficial effects of different kinds of collaboration scripts on domain-
general  skills such    as  argumentation    skills during   online  discussions    in a problem-based    learning  context
(Stegmann et al., 2007). In a further study in the context of web-based inquiry learning, a collaboration script
that was designed to help students formulate well-grounded arguments, counterarguments and integrations and
implemented at specific points of a WISE curriculum unit helped students develop higher levels of the domain-
general skill of argumentation, but did not help them reach higher levels of domain-specific knowledge when
compared with less structured collaboration (Kollar et al., 2007). Moreover, it appeared that during the learning
process the collaboration script only raised argumentation quality as long as it was present. As soon as the script
was "switched off", learners relapsed into their previous argumentation style. In other words, development of
robust  argumentation      skill hardly  occurred,  which   may   be explained  by   a  rather short learning time   of  120
minutes.
         To    investigate  whether    computer-supported     collaboration  scripts   produce  more   robust effects when
longer learning phases are studied, we conducted a larger field study in an inquiry curriculum unit in Biology
(Wecker, Kollar, Fischer & Prechtl, 2010). One of the main purposes of Science Education is to prepare all
students for their role as responsible citizens including participation in societal debates that involve scientific
issues, which   requires    both  fundamental     knowledge   about   important  scientific principles   and  the ability to
gather and evaluate more specific and recent information that goes beyond what can ever be learned in school.
Therefore we selected domain-specific knowledge from Biology and online search skills as the two targeted
learning outcomes of our intervention. The curriculum unit was implemented in regular class periods led by the
classes' Biology teachers. It comprised seven lessons about Genetic Engineering and lasted about four weeks. A
collaboration script for collaborative online search was compared to unscripted collaboration in an experimental
design and produced substantial positive effects with respect to the two learning outcomes (Wecker, Kollar et
al., 2010). In particular with respect to online search skills, this effect could in principle be due to mere exposure
to the prompts included in the collaboration script during the test session rather than their application during
collaborative learning. In this paper we present further analyses based on data from this study to clarify the
mechanisms behind the beneficial effect of a collaboration script on online search skills. It was assumed that it
is the  actual practice    of the  strategy suggested    by  the collaboration  script  rather than  mere exposure    to  the
prompts  that   fulfils this  role or  observation  of    a learning partner   performing  the  strategy. If  the effects of

© ISLS                                                                                                                    390
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                    Volume I: Long Papers

collaboration scripts on online search skills are mainly due to mere exposure to the prompts contained in the
script,  the amount    of practice of  the strategy by  the learners  themselves     should  be  unrelated   to their online
search skills in the posttest. If learners develop online search skills mainly because they observe their learning
partners  perform  the    strategy suggested   by the script,  the   amount  of  the   learners' partners'  practice  of  the
strategy should be related to their own online search skills in the posttest. These potential explanations for script
effects are tested by means of the analyses presented in this paper.
          A further goal of the study was to investigate the effect of a faded collaboration script compared to the
more "classical" continuous one. Fading is the gradual removal of support as learners become more proficient
and can take over control of increasing parts of the activity to be learned. Thereby learners get the opportunity to
practice not only the details of the execution, but also their regulation. Hence, fading is considered as part and
parcel   of  scaffolding  (Pea,  2004;   Puntambekar   &   Hübscher,   2005;   Wood,    Bruner   &   Ross,   1976).   So far,
research on the effects of fading of scaffolds in general is sparse, and the results are mixed. In one of two
experiments,    Leutner   (2000)   found   evidence   for  beneficial  effects   of  fading, whereas    in   the other   one
performance    decreased   in  the process  of fading.  In  another  study  a marginally    significant  positive  effect of
fading was found with respect to only one of several aspects of knowledge about the principles of scientific
explanations (McNeill, Lizotte, Krajicik & Marx, 2006).
          Transferring the concept of "fading" to research on collaboration scripts, Wecker and Fischer (2007;
2010) could show in an empirical study in a computer-supported collaborative learning context that the fading
of an    instructional script  alone  had  no  positive   effect on  learning.   If it was   combined    with   "distributed
monitoring"   (cf. King,   1998),  i. e. when  the  learning  partner  was  asked   to monitor   whether    his or her   peer
complied with the strategy induced by the script, however, a significant positive effect on students' strategy
knowledge in comparison to a continuous script was found. Just like the study by Kollar et al. (2007), however,
this study was conducted as a lab experiment with a rather short learning time.
          In our field experiment in Biology lessons, we investigated whether a faded collaboration script had a
positive effect on the acquisition of online search skills when implemented over a more extended time frame in
a  field setting.  The    script contained  meta-cognitive   aspects   such   as monitoring      of the learning   partner's
performance as part of the script itself that were faded along with the whole script, accordingly. A positive
effect of the faded collaboration script compared to unscripted collaboration was in fact found with respect to
domain-general online search skills, but not with respect to domain-specific knowledge. However, the fading of
the collaboration brought no additional effect beyond that of a continuous collaboration script with respect to
online search skills (Wecker, Kollar et al., 2010). In the present paper we investigate whether this finding can be
explained by the learners` practice of the strategy during the fading of the collaboration script.

Research Questions
(1) How are students' and their learning partners' practice of the strategy suggested by the script in the context
of collaborative inquiry learning in the classroom related to their acquisition of domain-specific knowledge and
online search skills?
          We hypothesized that the learners' own practice of the strategy during collaborative learning is more
strongly related to the acquisition of online search skills than their learning' partners practice of the strategy.
          (2) What are the effects of continuous and faded small-group collaboration scripts for collaborative
online   search on    students'  practice  of the strategy  in   the context  of collaborative      inquiry learning  in  the
classroom?
          We   expected   that   both a  continuous and   a faded    collaboration  script have  a  positive  effect  on  the
practice of the strategy. We did not expect a difference between these two types of scripts in this respect.

Method

Participants and Design
Participants in this study were 129 students from six ninth-grade classes from three urban high schools. Their
average age was 14.7 years (SD = 0.67); 60 of them were female, 69 were male. Data from the students were
only collected if their parents had agreed individually that their child was included in the data collection.
          A one-factorial quasi-experimental design with three experimental conditions differing in the type of
instructional support for collaborative online search was implemented with the classes as the units of random
assignment (see table 1). One condition without collaboration script, one with a continuous collaboration script,
and one with a faded collaboration script were compared.

© ISLS                                                                                                                    391
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                  Volume I: Long Papers

Table 1: Design of the study.

                                             Type of instructional support
       No collaboration script             Continuous collaboration script            Faded collaboration script
          N = 36 students                           N = 46 students                          N = 47 students
           from 2 classes                           from 2 classes                            from 2 classes

Instructional Setting and Procedure
The study was conducted in an inquiry-based curriculum unit that spanned seven regular biology lessons, which
were preceded and followed by a test session, respectively. The students' task was to arrive at a decision about
whether they supported or rejected the genetic modification of plants for the purpose of food production. The
lessons were led by the classes' regular biology teachers.
         After a short introduction to relevant background domain knowledge from Genetics, the students in all
three conditions received the same introduction to the strategy of online search. Lessons two through seven
consisted of   three  consecutive   learning cycles about  three  different topical   aspects of   the discussion about
Genetic  engineering     of plants: one on  economic,  one  on  ecological, and  one   on   health aspects.  Each cycle
comprised three consecutive steps. First, students in dyads collaboratively browsed through an online library in
order to gather background information about Genetics and Genetic Engineering relevant to the current aspect
of the  discussion.   In the second  step, student  dyads  conducted collaborative    online  searches  to  elaborate or
modify their initial argument concerning the current aspect of the discussion. In these phases of collaborative
online search, the independent variable was manipulated (see below). In the third step, students exchanged their
arguments in a plenary discussion based on the findings from their collaborative online searches.
         The online library was implemented as a module in the Web-Based Inquiry Environment (WISE; Slotta
&  Linn,  2009).  The    students   in each  dyad  sat next  to each other   in  front   of their  two  computers   and
communicated face-to-face, but each student had a laptop computer with a mouse for him- or herself. During the
collaborative online search phases, the browsers of the students in each dyad were connected via a software tool
called S-COL (Wecker, Stegmann et al., 2010). This allowed for collaborative Internet browsing, i.e., during
their online searches, both learning partners from each dyad always saw the same web pages, no matter who of
them clicked on a link or used the navigation functions of their browser.

Independent Variables

No Collaboration Script
The students in the condition without a collaboration script received no support for their collaborative activities
beyond an introduction by their teacher to the strategy of online search at the beginning of the curriculum unit.
This information was equivalent to the information presented in the prompts of the collaboration scripts in the
other two conditions.

Continuous Collaboration Script
This   script was targeted   at improving    collaborative online search.   That  is, it was  directed   at the specific
activities required to perform a successful online search, and it divided these activities among two learners in
order to induce interaction concerning crucial aspects of the skill to be acquired (Dillenbourg & Jermann, 2007).
It was implemented as follows: In addition to connecting the computers of the two partners of a dyad, the S-
COL software tool described above was used in the two experimental conditions to display particular prompts
on the basis of the type of website the students were accessing at any time (Google start page, Google hit list,
any other web site). In each dyad there were two roles (A and B) that switched after returning to Google, which
they were required to use for their searches, from any other web page encountered during the search activities.
The collaboration script was implemented as complementary text prompts in the scaffolding areas of S-COL in
the browsers of both group members (left part of the screen in figure 1). The script contained support for five ­
partly iterative ­ steps of collaborative online search: (1) the formulation of an initial argument and a sketch of
the information needed, (2) the selection of search terms, (3) the evaluation of the hit list, (4) the localization of
relevant  information    on  a web   page, and (5)  a  written  formulation of  the   final elaborated   argument.  For
example,  during  the    second  stage, the  selection of  search terms,  learner A   was   prompted    to  perform   the
activities to suggest a set of search terms and discuss them with B, while B had the task to perform the activities
to first recall the information they had decided to look for, and comment on A's suggestions for the search terms
with respect to their likelihood of yielding suitable as well as inappropriate hits.

© ISLS                                                                                                                392
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                              Volume I: Long Papers

Faded Collaboration Script
In the condition with the faded collaboration script the same prompts as in the condition with the continuous
collaboration script were used to support collaborative online search, but they were continuously removed, the
more online searches the dyad performed. The general fading scheme was that after a series of four external web
sites had been accessed, the prompts described above became more unspecific: Initially, the scaffolding area of
S-COL contained both the names of the individual activities as well as explanatory text. At the second fading
stage, only the names of the activities were displayed. At the final stage, only headings for the actual steps were
displayed. In each of the three cycles of the curricular unit, the degree of support initially reverted to a slightly
higher level before it was further reduced according to the scheme just described.

         Figure 1. Part of the Continuous Collaboration Script Presented along with a Google Hit List.

Data Sources and Dependent Variables

Practice of the Strategy
Screen-and-audio      capturing software   was used  to record    both the learners' utterances during face-to-face
collaboration in front of their computers and their activities on their computers. To deal with the vast amount of
data, a time sample of 10 minutes from the beginning of the second step of each of the three inquiry cycles, i. e.
the online-search,    was selected for  in-depth analysis from    each dyad. The whole  online-search  phases   from
which these three 10 minutes time samples were drawn lasted for 45, 30 and 30 minutes, respectively.
         To arrive at an indicator of the practice of the strategy suggested by the script, the occurrence of the
activities suggested   by the   script was coded separately   for both  members  of  each  dyad for segments  of 10
seconds of length on the basis of the learners' as well as their partners' activities on their computers. A coding
scheme   with separate,   mutually  exclusive  codes for  all activities suggested by  the collaboration script was
applied to the segments of both learners in a dyad. That is, for each time segment, the coders identified for each
of the two learners which activities he or she predominantly performed during this segment.
         Because all time samples were drawn from the same stage of the online-search phases in each cycle,
namely the beginning of the online-search phases, a subset of activities suggested by the script can be identified
that are most appropriate in this early phase. These are the activities subsumed under the step "formulation of an

© ISLS                                                                                                            393
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                 Volume I: Long Papers

initial argument and sketch of the information needed" (cf. the description of the stages in the section on the
continuous collaboration script above). Therefore, the proportion of time spent on the activities belonging to this
step was used as an indicator for the extent to which the learners performed the strategy.
         The screen-audio-recordings were analyzed by three independent coders who were evenly distributed
across the three conditions. A subsample of 11% of the data was coded by all three coders to determine their
agreement, which was acceptable (Coders 1 and 2: 70% agreement; Cohen's  = .67; Coders 1 and 3: 68%
agreement; Cohen's  = .64; Coders 2 and 3: 91% agreement; Cohen's  = .89).
         Based on these codings, the practice of the strategy was operationalized as the frequency of segments
within the first ten minutes of each online search phase, in which one of the activities subsumed under the first
step of the script was performed, relative to the total length of the time interval included in the analysis. The
reliability of  this variable as calculated  over  single  variables   indicating the relative frequency  of  the single
activities subsumed under the first step of the script was good (Cronbach's  = .82).

Online Search Skills
In the tests measuring online search skills, students were asked to describe in as much detail as possible how
they would use the Internet to form a position about a specific sample issue without actually doing so. The
answers were pre-structured by means of a two-column table with eight rows. The students were instructed to
describe the single steps involved in the search in the left hand-column and the evaluative criteria to be applied
in combination    with  these   specific steps  in the   right-hand column.  Pre-   and  posttest were   coded  for the
occurrence   of  each  individual   element  of  a general  ideal  solution that  contained the   steps  that were  also
triggered in the collaboration script as well as the evaluative criteria suggested in the script. Each student's
responses were analyzed by one of two coders who were blind to condition. The proportions coded by each of
them were equal across the three experimental conditions. An overall scale for online search skills was formed
by counting the coded occurrences of steps and evaluative criteria. Separate scales for knowledge about single
steps and knowledge about evaluation criteria were also formed.
         For the assessment of inter-coder agreement, the two coders analyzed 15 % of the data from the pretest
and 25 % of the data from the posttest independently of each other. For all participants included in this sample
the values of the overall scale as well as the two subscales were calculated from the codings of both coders.
Intra-class correlations for single measures amounted to ICC = .83 for the overall scale of online search skills in
the posttest (ICC = .51 in the pretest), ICC = .82 for knowledge about single steps and ICC = .67 for knowledge
about evaluative criteria.

Statistical Analysis
The significance level was set to 5 % for all analyses.

Results

Research Question 1: Relations between Students' and Their Learning Partners'
Practice of the Strategy Suggested by the Script and Their Acquisition of Online
Search Skills
The learners' practice of the strategy suggested by the script was significantly related to the overall scale of
online search skills from the posttest, r(N = 129) = .27; p < .01 (one-sided), the subscale for knowledge about
single  steps  required to  perform   a  successful online  search,    r(N = 129) = .20; p = .01  (one-sided),  and the
subscale for knowledge about evaluation criteria, r(N = 129) = .30; p < .01 (one-sided). The same holds for their
learning partners' practice of the strategy suggested by the script and its relation to the learners' score on the
overall scale of online search skills from the posttest, r(N = 129) = .26; p < .01 (one-sided), the subscale for
knowledge about single steps required to perform a successful online search, r(N = 129) = .21; p < .01 (one-
sided), and the subscale for knowledge about evaluation criteria, r(N = 129) = .26; p < .01 (one-sided). Three
regression analyses for the overall scale for online search skills and its two subscales in the posttest as criterion
variables with learners' and their learning partners' practice of the strategy suggested by the script as predictors
were   conducted,    while also  controlling for   prior online  search skills. They  showed    that the learners'  own
practice of the strategy suggested by the script significantly predicts two of the learning outcomes (online search
skills:  = .25; p = .02; knowledge about single steps:  = .19; p = .09; knowledge about evaluation criteria:
 = .27; p = .02), while their learning partners' practice of the strategy suggested by the script does not (online
search  skills:  = .01;    p = .90; knowledge   about    single steps:  = .00;  p = .99; knowledge    about   evaluation
criteria:  = .04; p = .76).

© ISLS                                                                                                               394
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                 Volume I: Long Papers

Research Question 2: Effects of Continuous and Faded Small-Group Collaboration
Scripts on Students' Practice of the Strategy
While students in the condition without a collaboration script engaged in activities subsumed under the first step
of the script 3.0 % (SD = 0.04) of the time during the first ten minutes of each online search phase, students in
the condition with a continuous script performed these activities in 7.3 % (SD = 0.06) of the time and students in
the condition with a faded script in 7.2 % (SD = 0.08). That is, the average time spent on activities related to the
formulation of an initial argument and the sketch of the information needed within the first ten minutes of online
search was doubled to more then 40 seconds by the use of one of the two collaboration scripts. An analysis of
variance with the students' practice of the strategy suggested by the script as the dependent variable and the
kind of instructional support and classes nested within the three kinds of instructional support as independent
variables revealed a significant medium-size main effect of the type of instructional support, F(2; 122) = 6.89;
p < .01; partial 2 = .10.
         Planned comparisons revealed significant effects of large size between the condition with continuous
collaboration script and the condition with no collaboration script, F(1; 77) = 15.44; p < .001; partial 2 = .17,
and of medium to large size between the condition with faded collaboration script and the condition with no
collaboration script, F(1; 78) = 10.41; p < .01; partial 2 = .12. However, no significant difference was found
between the condition with the faded collaboration script and the condition with the continuous collaboration
script, F(1; 88) < 1; n. s.

Discussion
This field experiment provides evidence that collaboration scripts can foster learning activities that lead to the
development of online search skills, which have to be regarded as an important component of scientific literacy.
The results indicate in particular that the collaboration script approach (Kollar et al., 2006) could successfully be
transferred to structure web-based collaborative inquiry learning in real secondary school classrooms. Typically
in laboratory studies the degrees of adherence to the prompts of collaboration scripts (i. e. the proportion of
prompts that are responded to appropriately) are as high as about 70 % (Stegmann et al., 2007, p. 434) or 90 %
(Wecker & Fischer, 2010). We currently do not have comparable numbers for the present study, but the share of
the learners' activities that corresponded to parts of the strategy suggested by the script was below 10 %. This
finding particularly highlights the importance of structuring collaboration in educational fields of practice.
         It could also be shown that the practice of the strategy suggested by the script during collaborative
learning is related   to the development    of online  search skills. It is conceivable    that effects of  collaboration
scripts on online search skills are mainly due to mere exposure to the prompts contained in the script. If this
were the case, the amount of practice of the strategy by the learners themselves should be rather unrelated to
their online search skills in the posttest. Furthermore it is possible that learners acquire online search skills also
because they observe their learning partners perform the strategy suggested by the script. If this explanation
were correct, the amount of the learners' partners' practice of the strategy should be related to their own online
search skills in the posttest. What we do find, however, is ­ contrary to the first assumption ­ that the learners'
own practice of the strategy is correlated with their online search skills in the posttest, and that ­ contrary to the
second assumption ­ the learners' own practice of the strategy significantly predicts online search skills in a
multiple regression analysis with the learners' and their partners' practice of the strategy as predictor variables,
whereas  the  learning   partners' practice  of the strategy  does  not.   This constitutes  evidence   that   in fact the
learners' own practice might play the central role for the development of online search skills, and not just the
exposure   to the prompts    of  the script or the observation   of a   partner performing   the  strategy.  It does   not,
however, constitute definitive evidence that the learning partner does not play a role as a model because the
insignificant regression    coefficient for the learning  partners'   practice  of the  strategy could   also   be due  to
multicollinearity. This issue should be picked up in future research.
         Taken together, the pattern of results presented in this paper offers an explanation why a continuous
and a faded collaboration script both have a positive effect on the development of online search skills, while
there is no difference between the two script types in this respect. The development of online search skills is
correlated  with  the  learners' practice of the strategy suggested     by  the script, and the  pattern of   the  scripts'
effects on the practice of the strategy precisely mirrors the effects on online search skills (Wecker et al., 2010).
This suggests the explanation that the two types of scripts affect the development of online search skills via their
effects on the practice of the strategy contained in the script.
         With  respect   to  the effectiveness  of the fading  of   the collaboration   script, however,   some    aspects
require further discussion. The domain-general skills of online search can apparently be positively affected by a
faded  collaboration   script compared    to  unscripted collaboration.    However,     no additional   effect  of fading
compared to a continuous collaboration script could be demonstrated. Although some aspects of distributed
monitoring (Wecker & Fischer, 2007) were integrated in the collaboration script used in this study (e. g. asking
learner B to keep an eye on the sketch of the information the group is currently trying to find), this may be not

© ISLS                                                                                                                 395
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                  Volume I: Long Papers

sufficient under field conditions, in particular if prompts for these metacognitive aspects are faded along with
the other parts of the script. A functional equivalent for distributed monitoring that should be explored in future
research  may   be    feedback  by  a teacher   pointing   towards    the  dependency    of success  and   failure in    the
collaborative task on the adherence to the collaboration script (cf. Schunk & Rice, 1993). Another difference
between   the  present  study  and   the laboratory   study  by  Wecker    and  Fischer  (2007)   was    the fact that   the
collaboration  script  embodied    a  collaborative   strategy  (of collaborative    online search)  that    learners were
expected to acquire as an individual strategy (of individual online search). Therefore, successful development of
the corresponding     domain-general  skill on   an individual   level requires  the  integration of components       of the
strategy that are distributed over learners in a collaborative situation, which could be difficult without phases of
individual practice   (cf. Anderson   &  Lebiere,   1998).  Accordingly,    the successful  development      of a domain-
general skill previously practiced collaboratively may require phases of individualization of the corresponding
strategy.  This  can   be   regarded  as  another   dimension      of  fading:  Besides   withdrawing     technologically
implemented prompts of a collaboration script, fading may also be constituted by a gradual shift from higher
social levels (e.g., dyads) to the individual, which may be closer to the original ideas about scaffolding and
fading (Wood, Bruner, & Ross, 1976; Pea, 2004). An example of such an approach that contains fading across
social levels is reciprocal teaching (Palincsar & Brown, 1984), but to our knowledge, this aspect of fading has
not been systematically varied in an experimental study so far.
          In sum, it is still an issue for future research on collaboration scripts to explore under which conditions
fading can help learners internalize a collaboration script and yield a positive effect in addition to the effect of
collaboration  scripts  themselves.   Candidates   for these conditions    could  be  approaches  to  embedding    small-
group  collaborative   learning in   the overall   instructional   setting on  different social   levels (Dillenbourg      &
Jermann, 2007; Tabak, 2004), i. e. classroom scripts. Another study from the same project has shown that a
classroom script involving phases of small-group collaboration combined with modelling on the plenary level
can foster online  search   skills without  the  need  to  permanently     structure small-group  collaboration   (Kollar,
Wecker, Langer & Fischer, 2011). It is an open question how such a classroom script interacts with the fading
of a small-group collaboration script.
          The  present  paper   extends  our understanding      of  collaboration scripts   by  providing    evidence    that
computer-supported collaboration scripts can be effective also in real-world settings and in interventions with an
extended timeframe, and that similar mechanisms as the ones identified in laboratory studies can explain this
(Kollar et al., 2007; Stegmann et al., 2007). Computer-supported collaboration scripts have been shown to be
effective means to foster important components of scientific literacy such as online search skills. Apparently by
means of computer-based collaboration scripts it is possible to create a zone of proximal development involving
the learning partner as well as technology and thereby help learners build up domain-general skills supported by
the external collaboration script (Carmien, Fischer, Fischer & Kollar, 2007; Pea, 2004; Wood et al.; 1976).

References
Anderson, J. R. & Lebiere, C. (1998). The atomic components of thought. Mahwah: Erlbaum.
Carmien,   S., Fischer, F.,  Fischer, G.  &  Kollar,   I. (2007).  The  interplay of   internal and  external   scripts  - a
          distributed cognition perspective. In F. Fischer, H. Mandl, J. M. Haake & I. Kollar (Hrsg.), Scripting
          computer    supported    communication      of  knowledge:      Cognitive,  computational      and  educational
          perspectives (S. 303-326). New York: Springer.
De Wever, B., Van Keer, H., Schellens, T., & Valcke, M. (2009). Structuring asynchronous discussion groups:
          The  impact   of role assignment   and    self-assessment   on   students' levels of  knowledge    construction
          through social negotiation. Journal of Computer Assisted Learning, 25, 177­188.
Dillenbourg, P. & Jerman, P. (2007). Designing integrative scripts. In F. Fischer, H. Mandl, J. M. Haake & I.
          Kollar (Eds.), Scripting computer supported communication of knowledge: Cognitive, computational
          and educational perspectives (pp. 275-301). New York: Springer.
Hmelo-Silver, C. E. (2006). Design principles for scaffolding technology-based inquiry. In A. M. O'Donnell, C.
          E. Hmelo-Silver & G. Erkens (Eds.), Collaborative learning, reasoning, and technology (pp. 147­170).
          Mahwah: Erlbaum.
King, A. (1998). Transactive peer tutoring: Distributing cognition and metacognition. Educational Psychology
          Review, 10, 57-74.
Kollar, I., Fischer, F., & Hesse, F. W. (2006). Computer-supported collaboration scripts - a conceptual analysis.
          Educational Psychology Review, 18(2), 159-185.
Kollar, I., Fischer, F. & Slotta, J.D. (2007). Internal and external scripts in computer-supported collaborative
          inquiry learning. Learning and Instruction, 17, 708-721.
Kollar, I., Wecker, C., Langer, S. & Fischer, F. (2011, July). Orchestrating Web-Based Collaborative Inquiry
          Learning with Small Group and Classroom Scripts. Paper presented at the CSCL 2011 "Connecting
          computer-supported collaborative learning to policy and practice", Hong Kong, 4th. ­ 8th July 2011.
Leutner,  D.   (2000). Double-fading     support -  a  training approach    to complex   software   systems.    Journal    of

© ISLS                                                                                                                   396
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                  Volume I: Long Papers

         Computer Assisted Learning, 16, 347-357.
McNeill, K. L., Lizotte, D. J., Krajcik, J. & Marx, R. W. (2006). Supporting students' construction of scientific
         explanations by fading scaffolds in instructional materials. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 15(2),
         153-191.
Palincsar, A. S. & Brown, A. L. (1984). Reciprocal Teaching of comprehension-fostering and comprehension-
         monitoring activities. Cognition and Instruction, 1(2), 117-175.
Pea, R.  (2004).    The social  and   technological  dimensions   of   scaffolding  and related theoretical  concepts   for
         learning, education, and human activity. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 13(3), 423-451.
Puntambekar, S., & Hübscher, R. (2005). Tools for scaffolding students in a complex environment: What have
         we gained and what have we missed? Educational Psychologist, 40 (1), 1-12.
Rummel, N., & Spada, H. (2005). Learning to collaborate: An instructional approach to promoting collaborative
         problem solving in computer-mediated settings. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 14(2), 201­241.
Schunk,    D.  H. &   Rice,  J. M.  (1993). Strategy  fading    and progress   feedback:   Effects on self-effeicacy  and
         comprehension among students receiving remedial reading services. The Journal of Special Education,
         27(3), 257-276.
Slof, B., Erkens, G., Kirschner, P. A., Jaspers, J. G. M., & Janssen, J. (2010). Guiding students' online complex
         learning-task behavior through representational scripting. Computers in Human Behavior, 26(5), 927­
         939.
Slotta, J. D.   &   Linn, M.    C. (2009).  WISE  Science:   Web-based      inquiry in the classroom.    New  York,   NY:
         Teachers College Press.
Stegmann, K., Weinberger, A. & Fischer, F. (2007). Facilitating argumentative knowledge construction with
         computer-supported collaboration scripts. International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative
         Learning, 2(4), 421-447.
Tabak, I. (2004). Synergy: A complement to emerging patterns of distributed scaffolding. The Journal of the
         Learning Sciences, 13(3), 305-335.
Walker,  E.,   Rummel,    N. &     Koedinger,  K. (2009).  Integrating   collaboration  and intelligent  tutoring data  in
         evaluation of a reciprocal peer tutoring environment. Research and Practice in Technology Enhanced
         Learning, 4(3), 221-251.
Wecker,    C.  &  Fischer,  F.  (2007).  Fading scripts  in  computer-supported     collaborative  learning: The  role  of
         distributed monitoring. In C. Chinn, G. Erkens & S. Puntambekar (Eds.), Proceedings of the CSCL
         2007. Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey, New Brunswick, New Jersey, USA, July 16th ­ July
         21st, 2007 (pp. 763-771). International Society of the Learning Sciences.
Wecker,    C., &  Fischer,   F. (2010).  Fading   instructional scripts: preventing   relapses into novice   strategies by
         distributed   monitoring.    In K. Gomez,    L. Lyons,  &   J.  Radinsky   (Eds.) Learning   in the Disciplines:
         Proceedings of the 9th International Conference of the Learning Sciences (ICLS 2010) - Volume 1,
         Full Papers. International Society of the Learning Sciences: Chicago IL.
Wecker,    C., Kollar,  I., Fischer,  F. &  Prechtl,  H. (2010).  Fostering    online  search  competence    and  domain-
         specific knowledge in inquiry classrooms: effects of continuous and fading collaboration scripts. In K.
         Gomez,     L.  Lyons,     &  J. Radinsky   (Eds.)   Learning    in the Disciplines:    Proceedings   of  the   9th
         International Conference of the Learning Sciences (ICLS 2010) - Volume 1, Full Papers (pp. 810-817).
         International Society of the Learning Sciences: Chicago IL.
Wecker, C., Stegmann, K., Bernstein, F., Huber, M. J., Kalus, G., Rathmeyer, S., Kollar, I. & Fischer, F. (2010).
         S-COL: A Copernican turn for the development of flexibly reusable collaboration scripts. International
         Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 5(3), 321-343.
Weinberger, A., Ertl, B., Fischer, F. & Mandl, H. (2005). Epistemic and social scripts in computer-supported
         collaborative learning. Instructional Science, 33(1), 1-30.
Weinberger,     A., Stegmann,      K. &  Fischer,  F. (2010).   Learning    to argue   online:  Scripted groups   surpass
         individuals (unscripted groups do not). Computers in Human Behavior, 26, 506-515.
Wood,   D.  J., Bruner,   J. S.  &   Ross,  G. (1976).   The role   of tutoring in  problem-solving.  Journal    of Child
         Psychology and Psychiatry, 17, 89-100.

Acknowledgments
This Research was supported by a grant from the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG).

© ISLS                                                                                                                  397
