CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                    Volume I: Long Papers

           Conversational Strategies that Support Idea Generation
                                         Productivity in Groups
   Rohit Kumar, Language Technologies Institute, Carnegie Mellon University, 5000 Forbes Ave, Pittsburgh,
                                               PA, rohitk@andrew.cmu.edu
       Jack L. Beuth, Department of Mechanical Engineering, Carnegie Mellon University, 5000 Forbes Ave,
                                        Pittsburgh, PA, beuth@andrew.cmu.edu
         Carolyn P. Rosé, Language Technologies Institute, Carnegie Mellon University, 5000 Forbes Ave,
                                         Pittsburgh, PA, cp3a@andrew.cmu.edu

         Abstract: Our recent work has shown that conversational tutors that use social interaction
         strategies can achieve significant learning improvement through better management of student
         attention. In continuation with this line of investigation, this paper presents an experiment that
         measures     the separate  and  joint  effects of the    nature  and style of automatically   generated
         interventions. We investigate aspects of designing intervention prompts from two different
         angles: first in terms of the addition of socially oriented turns over and above the instructional
         turns required to keep the students on track, and second in terms of the style of presentation of
         the tutor's instructional turns. We see positive effects of both manipulations, but on different
         outcome metrics. Thus, we conclude that the two directions can be productively combined
         into    a single socially  enhanced    feedback   approach,    which  contributes   to the  literature on
         dynamic forms of support for collaborative learning.

Introduction
Inquiry  as   an approach    to learning   is popular in  many    areas  of instruction, but  particularly in   science  and
engineering instruction. Idea generation is of central importance in the inquiry process, and some prior work
shows an important connection between idea generation productivity and learning in a scientific inquiry task
(Wang et al., 2007). Notice that the goal for students here is not to select and then apply a known procedure for
solving  a problem.   In  contrast, the  main   purpose   here is  to let students  actively and  creatively    generate the
candidate problem solving steps/options by themselves. Beyond offering students the opportunity to generate
possible  solutions   to  problems,   these   tasks offer students  the   opportunity  to weigh   and  balance   trade-offs
between   alternative  solutions  proposed     by themselves   and  their   team mates.   Thus,  these problems    draw   on
student creativity and offer opportunities for students to develop their social skills and creative problem solving
skills at the same time.
         While idea generation in groups is purported to be more effective than idea generation for individuals,
it is a well known problem that when groups engage in idea generation together, a phenomenon referred to as
process loss occurs. In particular, it has been repeatedly demonstrated that a group that is interacting while
doing idea generation together may not always perform better than a collection of non-interacting individuals
whose    contributions   are simply   pooled   afterwards  (i.e., nominal   groups), both  in   terms of the  quantity   and
quality of unique ideas, and in fact may sometimes perform significantly worse (Hill, 1982; Diehl & Stroebe,
1987; Nijstad & Stroebe, 2006). Often inquiry learning tasks are done collaboratively in the classroom. To the
extent that process losses that affect productivity in idea generation may lead to corresponding reductions in
learning, the issue of process losses in group idea generation is an important issue to investigate. Nevertheless,
learning   in idea  generation   tasks  may    arise from  multiple   different  mechanisms,     not  only from    the  idea
generation process per se. For example, while evaluative statements may inhibit productivity in idea generation,
it is a form of transactivity in collaborative discourse, which shows that group members are attending to one
another's contributions and making explicit links between their contributions and those that came before, which
is associated with learning (Joshi & Rosé, 2007). Supporting such behavior has been shown in other work to
support  learning   (Weinberger    et al., 2005).   Thus, the  mere   existence  of  process  losses  does not   lead  us to
conclude hastily that collaborative idea generation is ill advised from an instructional standpoint. Rather we
seek to find support that can enable students to benefit from the interaction without incurring the negative side-
effects.
         Tutorial dialogue agents have been effective as an interactive form of support for collaborative learning
including collaborative problem solving (Kumar et al., 2007a), collaborative design (Kumar & Rosé, 2011) and
collaborative idea generation (Wang et al., 2007), leading to substantial improvements in learning sometimes
greater than a standard deviation effect size (Kumar et al., 2007b). However, despite the effective support that
automated tutors offer to students learning in groups, it has been reported that groups of students often ignore
and abuse the tutor, unlike the case where students are individually tutored (Kumar et. al., 2007b, Bhatt et. al.,
2004). We reason that the presence of other students in collaborative learning scenarios causes the tutors to
compete for the attention of the students. Since the tutors do not participate in social interaction during the

© ISLS                                                                                                                    398
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                 Volume I: Long Papers

formative phase of the group, they are pushed to the periphery of the learning group and have to struggle to
make themselves be heard. In our earlier work (Chaudhuri et. al., 2008, 2009), we have explored the use of
interaction tactics that can help the tutor grab the conversational floor before presenting its instructional content
to the students. On the other hand, empirical research in the area of small group communication suggests that
leaders in small groups perform optimal levels of task related and socio-emotional interaction with the group
members to maintain a non-peripheral position in the group (Bales, 1958). Existing research on conversational
tutors has largely focused on presenting only task related information, i.e., lessons and instructions in the case of
tutors. In  this paper   we  report observations  from  a study  in  our continuing   investigation on  the effects that
conversational agents in general can achieve if they are equipped with social conversational skills. Recent work
explores   how   social  strategies employed    by   conversational  agents  results in greater  effectiveness  of  their
support (Kumar et al., 2010; Ai et al., 2010).
           Wang et al. (2007) demonstrated that automatically generated intervention prompts increased both idea
generation productivity and learning, but did not fully compensate for the loss incurred by the group. In this
paper, we focus specifically on the design of the prompts, carefully manipulating both its nature and its style in
order   to fine  tune it for increased  effectiveness. Our   results point to a specific  design   inspired by work  on
analysis   of  social positioning   from the    systemic  functional   linguistics community     as  being  particularly
promising for enhancing idea generation productivity. Furthermore, the analysis of the connection between idea
generation and learning in our data suggests that the relationship may be more complex than what was indicated
by the prior Wang et al. study, which raises interesting questions for future work. We conclude by outlining our
next steps, which build upon these results.

Designing Conversational Strategies
Theoretical   and  empirical  study  of group    interaction processes   has been  of interest  in the  communications
research community since the 1950's. McGrath (1984) reviews various theories that address the functions of
group interaction processes. Among these, Robert F. Bales (1950) proposed that two fundamental processes
operate within groups, i.e., instrumental (task related) vs. expressive (socio-emotional). Over attention on one of
these processes causes lapses on the other. Hence, interaction shifts between these two in order to keep the
group functional. Participations in the interaction balance their positioning among the task leader and social
leader roles through the use of these two types of interaction processes.
           In the case   of  conversational  tutors,  the task   related interactions   include common      aspects like
instructing students about the task, delivering appropriate interventions in suitable form and providing feedback.
Work in the area of affective computing and its application to tutorial dialog has focused on identification of
students' emotional states (D'Mello et. al., 2005) and using those to improve choice of task related behavior by
tutors. However,    there   has been  only  limited  study   of expressive   (socio-emotional)  aspects  of  the tutor's
conversations with learning groups (Kumar et al., 2010; Ai et al., 2010). Those studies demonstrate positive
impacts of social strategies when conversational agents offer support to students learning in groups.
           In our  current   work,   we  independently      manipulate   two  different  factors   that influence   how
conversational agents deliver intervention prompts to students. One dimension is identical to that investigated in
prior work (Kumar et al., 2010), which is based on Bales' IPA, and discussed in the next section. This factor
determines whether or not certain social prompts are delivered to students in addition to task related prompts.
The    second   dimension    determines  the    form of the   tutor's prompts.  We    apply the    distinction between
heteroglossic contributions and monoglossic contributions from Martin & White's Engagement system (Martin
& White, 2005), where a heteroglossic assertion is made in such a way as to acknowledge the possibility of
alternative perspectives and a monoglossic assertion is one that speaks matter-of-factly "as the voice of God",
without such an acknowledgement. This distinction is discussed in greater detail below.

Social Behaviors Motivated by Bales' IPA
We have used the interaction process analysis (IPA) schema developed by Bales (1950) to identify the social
behaviors that tutors can employ. Our choice of interaction categories from IPA is based on the appropriateness
of the unit of analysis on which IPA is applied, i.e., individual utterances, since the tutor's behavior is realized
typically one utterance at a time. IPA identifies three positive socio-emotional interaction categories: showing
solidarity, precipitating tension release, and agreeing. We have mapped these categories to eleven practically
implementable     conversational    strategies, which   are  distinguishable  from   each other    and  are relevant  to
interactive situation employed in our experiment. This mapping is shown in Table 1.
           Most of these strategies are realized as prompts triggered at appropriate moments during the interaction
by manually developed rules. For example, strategy 1e is triggered when one or more students in the group are
found to be inactive for over 5 minutes. In this event, the tutor chooses to raise the status of the inactive students
by eliciting contributions from them through a prompt like: Do you have any suggestions Mike?

© ISLS                                                                                                               399
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                 Volume I: Long Papers

Table 1: Social Interaction Strategies based on three of Bales' Socio-Emotional Interaction categories.
            1. Showing Solidarity: Raises other's status, gives help, reward
            1a. Do Introductions: Introduce and ask names of all participants
            1b. Be Protective & Nurturing: Discourage teasing
            1c. Give Reassurance: When student is discontent, asking for help
            1d. Complement / Praise: To acknowledge student contributions
            1e. Encourage: When group or members are inactive
            1f. Conclude Socially
            2. Precipitating Tension Release: Jokes, laughs, shows satisfaction
            2a. Expression of feeling better: After periods of tension, work pressure
            2b. Be cheerful
            2c. Express enthusiasm, elation, satisfaction: On completing significant task steps
            3. Agreeing: Shows passive acceptance, understands, concurs, complies
            3a. Show attention: To student ideas as encouragement
            3b. Show comprehension / approval: To student opinions and orientations

Prompt Variations Based on Martin and White's Engagement System
In Martin and White's (2005) specification of what counts as heteroglossic, three requirements must be met:
First, some propositional content must be being asserted in some form, although it may be done in such a way as
to communicate extreme uncertainty. All of the examples in Table 2 assert something, so they all meet this
requirement.   However, questions that are framed in such a way as the reader believes the speaker was asking an
honest question, for which no specific answer seems to be presupposed do not count as heteroglossic. Rather
than asserting something, questions request information.        Interjections, like "Yay", that cannot be interpreted as
ellipsis, and thus have no propositional content are not considered heteroglossic, however, fixed expressions like
"no", and "yes" that implicitly assert the propositional content of the yes/no question they are a response to do
count  as expressing   propositional   content.  For   example,   if someone  asks  "Can ease   of use be   increased  by
increasing the length of the wrench handle?" and if I say, "Yes.", then what I am asserting is "Ease of use can be
increased by   increasing   the length of the   wrench   handle."     The context makes  it clear  what   I am asserting
through ellipsis.     Other forms of   ellipsis (e.g., "titanium"    in response to "Which  type   of metal  would    you
choose?") and do-anaphora (i.e., "I did." In response to "Did you select a material for the wrench?") similarly
also count as having propositional content.

Table 2: Examples of Heteroglossic and Monoglossic variations of the tutor's instructional turns.

       Original/Neutral         Think about how we can improve this?
       Heteroglossic            I suggest that you think about how to improve this
       Monoglossic              Think about how to improve this
       Original/Neutral         Maybe we can use a safer material this time!
       Heteroglossic            Using a safer material would be strongly advisable!
       Monoglossic              Use a safer material this time!

       Original/Neutral         We keep a factor of safety to avoid reaching yield stress.
       Heteroglossic            It would make sense to keep a factor of safety to avoid reaching yield stress.
       Monoglossic              Keep a factor of safety to avoid reaching yield stress.

          Second, an   awareness   must   be    made   visible to the   presence of alternative perspectives   than   that
represented by the propositional content of an utterance. This distinction is illustrated through three examples
that appear  in Table   2.   In  each  case  we   see  a monoglossic     and  heteroglossic version   for each    of three
propositions.  In particular, bald claims, even if they are biased, do not acknowledge alternative perspectives.
For example, "Titanium is the obviously superior choice" is undoubtedly subjective, but it is not heteroglossic.
It doesn't show any awareness that someone else might disagree. If a speaker goes on, however, to give reasons
to defend  the  statement,  then  that speaker   is showing    awareness   of other perspectives.  These    cases will be
caught by the third requirement, which is that in order to count as heteroglossic, the acknowledgement of other
perspectives must be expressed grammatically (e.g., through a model auxiliary like "might") or paraphrastically
(e.g., "I think") within the articulation of that propositional content. If it is implicit or signaled through the

© ISLS                                                                                                                 400
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                  Volume I: Long Papers

discourse structure, then that is not enough to count strictly as heteroglossic in the Martin and White sense,
although they would acknowledge it as heteroglossic "in spirit".
          The Engagement system begins with the distinction between heteroglossia and monoglossia, which we
have just discussed. Once we have determined that an utterance counts as heteroglossic, we can then further
subdivide  it into  utterances  that Contract    the positions  or  perspectives   that are  treated  as viable   within a
conversation,  or   conversely,   ones  that Expand     the   scope of  what    is treated  as viable.   Either   way,   an
acknowledgement is made that more than one way of looking at the world is at play. Utterances that contract
that scope, such as making an absolute assertion that leaves no room for questioning, or out right rejecting a
position, are typically seen as taking a more authoritative stance than ones that expand the options, such as
making a suggestion. This notion of levels of authoritativeness is one important component of expressing the
positioning of the speaker in relation to the propositional content. However, it also says something about where
the speaker positions himself in relation to the audience. Taking an authoritative stance casts the other speaker
into a less authoritative stance. Furthermore, when this system is again further subdivided, we see other options
for positioning.  For  example,   what  is referred  to as  a Distancing move,     in  which the   source of   authority is
ascribed to a third party, allows an authoritative statement to be made, which may contract options, but does not
interfere with the    positioning between  the  speaker  and  the   audience. The   speaker  remains   committed    to the
authoritative proposition, but is not responsible for it.

Implementation of Conversational Agents
The interaction between the students and tutor in the experiment presented in this paper is situated in a freshmen
engineering course. In this course college students learn about basic mechanical engineering concepts like force,
moment,   stress,  etc. The   students  interact  with  an    automated  tutor  as  part  of a  computer-aided      design
competition where the students are asked to design a better wrench with consideration to ease of use, safety and
material cost. Students could interact with each other and the tutor using a text-based chat room that includes a
shared whiteboard (Stahl, 2006; Kumar & Rosé, 2011).

Table 3: Excerpt of a tutor providing a lesson to a team of four students.

    Speaker    Contribution
64  Tutor      Intuitively, if you wanted to make the wrench easier to use, would you make it longer or shorter?
67  S5         Longer
70  Tutor      That's right. A longer wrench is better.
72  Tutor      Why is a longer wrench easier to use though! Let's look at the concept of Moment.
73  Tutor      When you use a wrench to turn a bolt, do you want a higher or lower moment?
74  S16        Higher

          The task of the tutor is to provide lessons on the underlying theoretical concepts while the students
work through a worksheet to explore various design choices. An excerpt of a lesson on the concept about the
relationship between the length of a wrench and its ease of use is shown in Table 3 above. Besides performing
its task related functions,  the  tutor also employs    the social  interaction strategies  listed in Table    1. We have
implemented    this   tutor using  the  Basilica  architecture. Details  about     the inner workings    of  the   Basilica
architecture are described in a separate publication (Kumar & Rosé, 2011).

          Figure 1. Basilica Component Network for Avis, the Freshmen Mechanical Engineering Tutor.

          Using   the  Basilica   architecture, conversational   agents  are  modeled     as a  network    of  behavioral
components. Each component implements a behavior that could be a combination of perception, thought and
action. There are three types of components: actors (actuators / performers), filters (perceptors / annotators /
coordinators)  and    memories.   Each   component    can   generate events    carrying  signals   and   data. Connected

© ISLS                                                                                                                  401
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                   Volume I: Long Papers

components can receive and process the events and generate further events. This architecture allows a developer
to build agents by adding behavioral components incrementally. Since each component is only loosely coupled
to a small number of other components, it provides the flexibility to easily change a single behavior. Also, it
allows components to be reused between agent/tutor implementations for different tasks.
          The tutor agent developed for the freshmen mechanical engineering learning domain is comprised of
22 Basilica components: four actors, sixteen filters and two memories. The tutor uses a gender neutral name
Avis. Figure 1 below shows a simplified depiction of the component network of Avis. Actor components are
shown     as ovals  and   filter components      are shown  as  rectangles. Arrows   depict    connections  and  possible
directions of event flow.
          Three of the actor and filter components correspond to three observable behaviors of the tutor, i.e.,
Introducing, Prompting/Hinting and Tutoring about concepts. Most of the other filters (depicted as fa, fb, fc, fd
here) form a sub-network that processes student turns from the chatroom, as shown by filters fa through fd in
Figure 1. This sub-network annotates turns with applicable semantic categories, accumulates them to identify
inactive students and generates events that regulate the coordinators (fsocial and fplan).
          The fplan coordinator is responsible for executing the task-related interaction plan of the tutor. On the
other hand, the fsocial coordinator interleaves social prompts into the interaction. Before the prompts generated by
the actor    components    are   sent  to the students,  an appropriate    variation of   the  prompt  ( heteroglossic  /
monoglossic ) is selected by the prompt selection filter depending on the tutor's configuration.

Method
The  rest  of the  paper   describes   the procedures   and results from    a  controlled experiment    we  conducted  to
investigate the impact of the nature and style of feedback offered to students in an idea generation task.

Experimental Design
Our experimental design was a 2x3 between subjects factorial design. The first independent factor in our study
manipulates    whether    social  prompts   motivated   by  Bales'  IPA    are inserted   into the conversation.   In the
experimental    condition  (Social),   students  interacted with  a tutor   that was equipped    with  the  eleven social
interaction   strategies, unlike   the   control condition  (Task)  which   is our lower   baseline   condition. In both
conditions, students would receive the same task related information (instructions / lessons / feedback) through
the automated tutor. Based on the examples in Table 3 above, we notice that in the task condition, the tutor has
features (like asking questions and giving feedback) that most common tutors do.
          The second independent factor manipulates the form of the task related prompts presented by the tutor.
In the first experimental condition (Heteroglossic), turns are presented in a Heteroglossic style. Approximately
90%    of these were   expressed   in  the Heteroglossic   expand   style, whereas   about 10%   were   expressed  in the
Heteroglossic contract style. In the second experimental condition (Monoglossic), all task related prompts were
authored in a Monoglossic style. In the Control condition (Neutral), employed as an ecological control, we used
the same task prompts that were used in an earlier study (Kumar et al., 2010).
          The time allotted for the interaction is the same for each group.

Procedure and Outcome Measures
We  conducted     a   between-subjects    experiment    during  a college   freshmen  computer-aided     engineering  lab
project. 131 mechanical engineering students enrolled in the lab and participated in the experiment, which was
held over six sessions spread evenly between two days. The two days of the experiment were separated by two
weeks. Students were grouped into teams of three to four individuals. Each group communicated using a private
chatroom (Stahl, 2006). No two members of the same group sat next to each other during the lab. The groups
were evenly distributed between the six conditions in each session.
          The procedure of the experiment comprised of 5 steps:
          (1) Each session started with a follow along tutorial of computer-aided analysis where the students
analyzed a wrench they had designed in a previous lab. Students spent about 25 minutes on the analysis.
          (2) A pre-test with 11 questions (7 multiple choice questions and 4 brief explanation questions) was
administered.
          (3) The experimental manipulation happened during the Collaborative Design Competition after the
pre-test.  Students   were  asked     to  work   as  a team  to   design a  better wrench      taking three aspects   into
consideration: ease of use, material cost, and safety. Students were instructed to make three new designs and
calculate success measures for each of the three aspects under consideration for their designs. They were also
told that a tutor will help them with the first and the second designs so that they are well prepared to do the final
design. No additional details about the tutor were given.
          (4) After the students spent 35 minutes on the design competition, a post-test was administered.
          (5) Following the test, student filled out a perception survey. The survey comprised of ten items to be
rated on a seven point Likert-scale ranging from Strongly Disagree (1) to Strongly Agree (7). These questions

© ISLS                                                                                                                 402
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                            Volume I: Long Papers

are shown in Table 4. Additionally, we asked students to check all of the following personality descriptors that
they   felt described   the tutor  agent: Encouraging,  Inspiring,  Assertive, Wishy   Washy,    Accommodating,
Manipulative, Supportive, and Pushy.

Table 4: Items about Tutor and Learning Task rated by students on a 7-point Likert Scale.

             Q1   The tutor provided very good ideas for the discussion.
             Q2   I am happy with the discussion we had during the design challenge.
             Q3   The tutor was part of my team.
             Q4   The tutor was very cordial and friendly during the discussion.
             Q5   The tutor received my ideas positively during the discussion.
             Q6   The tutor helped keep tension low during the design activity.
             Q7   The design challenge was exciting, and I did my best to come up with good designs.
             Q8   Overall, I liked the tutor very much.
             Q9   I think the tutor was as good as a human tutor.
            Q10   Overall, I think we were successful at meeting the goals of the design challenge.

Results and Discussion

Idea Generation Productivity
In our analysis, the most important outcome factor is idea generation productivity. Idea generation productivity
was estimated using an automatic measure developed in an earlier study using the same design task (Kumar et
al., 2010). A dictionary was constructed using keywords from design ideas contributed in transcripts from the
earlier studies. Counts of occurrences of words in this dictionary in the contributions of a student can serve as a
rough estimate of idea generation productivity. Although this is a noisy measure, the effect of our experimental
manipulation was strong enough to show significant differences between conditions. In order to identify the
optimal design for feedback in an idea generation scenario from the standpoint of productivity, we used an
ANOVA       model with   our  estimate  of  idea generation   productivity as  the dependent variable. The   two
independent   factors  manipulated  to determine  the composition  of  feedback presented to students  were  each
independent   variables. We   also included  an  interaction term that computes the  interaction between the two
independent factors in our design. There was no significant effect of the Social factor F(1,125) = 0.0045, p =
.97. However there was a significant effect of the Heteroglossia manipulation F(2,125) = 5.1, p < 0.01, whereby
the Heteroglossic condition was significantly higher than the Neutral condition (effect size 0.61 s.d.) and the
Monoglossic condition (effect size 0.52 s.d.). Overall, this result confirms the hypothesis that a heteroglossic
presentation style encourages more exploration and more productive idea generation.

Figure 2. Interaction between the Social Manipulation and the Heteroglossia Manipulation on Idea Productivity.

© ISLS                                                                                                          403
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                        Volume I: Long Papers

          There was a significant interaction effect (displayed in Figure 2) such that in the No Social condition,
Heteroglossic is better than Neutral but not Monoglossic, and in the Social condition, Heteroglossic is better
than Monoglossic, but not Neutral, F(2,125) = 3.18, p < 0.05. We find that the use of heteroglossic prompts
could potentially compensate for the tutor's lack of social capabilities.

Learning Outcomes
There was no significant effect of either factor on learning, nor was there any significant interaction between
factors on learning. Furthermore, whereas Wang and colleagues (2007) found a significant correlation between
idea generation productivity and learning, we found no such relationship in our data. Wang and colleagues very
carefully designed their preparatory reading materials, tests, and tasks in such a way that the act of generating an
idea would provide opportunities for students to reflect on connections between facts presented in the reading
materials  and  to   generate    bridging inferences     akin to  self-explanations    (Chi et  al., 1994).  We    believe   this
explains the difference in findings. In our task, learning occurs from deepening the understanding of principles
through application. While we expect that factors that affect how deeply students reflect on the principles they
are applying    would  have   an   effect  on  learning  in   our   task, it is  not necessarily the  case   that  this level of
engagement with the material corresponds to the number of design ideas students contribute to the discussion
during the task. While we do not make any strong claims about learning and idea generation from our results,
we  believe    this raises questions  about     the nature    of the  connection     between   learning  and  idea  generation
productivity, leading us to believe that the connection is complex and highly contextual.

Perception Ratings
On perceptual questionnaire, the Social manipulation had a relatively minimal effect. There were no significant
main effects and no significant interactions between factors. There was a marginal effect of Social on Q5 such
that students felt that the tutor received their ideas more positively in the Social condition, F(1,125) = 3.55, p =
0.06. Unfortunately, this is not necessarily a positive result since there was a negative correlation between the
Q5 ratings and our idea productivity measure, R = -0.34, p < 0.0001.
          The Heteroglossia manipulation had a larger effect. There was a significant effect of Heteroglossia on
Q2, indicating that students in the Heteroglossia condition were significantly happier with the discussion than
students in the Control condition, and the Monoglossic condition was not different from either, F(2,125) = 3.65,
p <    0.05. There    was  also  a significant    effect  of  Heteroglossia      on  Q8,   indicating that   students   like  the
Heteroglossic and Monoglossic tutor agents more than the agent in the Control condition, F(2,125) = 3.48, p <
0.05. There were also two marginal effects. First, students felt that the tutor agent was as good as a human tutor
marginally more often in the Heteroglossic condition than the Control condition, with the Monoglossic agent
not being different from either, F(2,125) = 2.6, p = 0.08. Similar to Q5, this was found to have a significant
negative correlation with our idea productivity measure as well, R = -0.22, p = 0.01. Also, there was a marginal
effect of  Heteroglossia     on  Q10  such  that   students   in  the Heteroglossic    condition   felt that they   were    more
successful than students in the Monoglossic condition, with students in the Control condition not being different
from   either, F(2,125)    = 2.84, p =    0.06. There    was  no    correlation  between   idea generation   success    and  this
perception of success.
          Overall,   these   are relatively weak    effects,  although     they  do  demonstrate   some    preference    for  the
Heteroglossic   style  of    presentation.  However,     when    we   evaluated    the effect   of condition  on    personality
indicators using binary logistic regressions, the story became a little more complex. There were only significant
effects of the Social manipulation such that the Social condition rated the tutor agent more Supportive and less
Pushy than the Control condition. There was no effect of the Heteroglossic manipulation. Thus, we see that the
Social  manipulation    had   more   of  an effect   on  the  perception     of  the tutor agent's   personality   whereas    the
Heteroglossia manipulation had more of an effect on how the students felt about working with the agent and
how successful they were in their task. Since we do not see significant interactions between factors, we can
conclude   that we    can  achieve   the  best of  both  by   combining      the Heteroglossic  style   with the   added  social
strategies of the Social condition.

Conclusion
First  and foremost,   the   study presented    in  this paper   shows    that   conversational tutors  used  in   collaborative
learning   scenarios  can  be    improved   significantly   by   making    them   socially capable    while  keeping    the  task
(tutoring) related behavior the same. In this study, we investigated social strategies from two angles. The first
angle was to insert additional socially focused prompts over and above task related prompts. The effect of this
addition was to make the tutor agent appear more supportive and less pushy. The second angle was to explore
the style of presentation of task related prompts using the Martin and White (2005) Heteroglossia framework.
Here we see an advantage in terms of supporting idea generation productivity in addition to eliciting more liking
of the tutor agent and more satisfaction with the task.
          In our future work we will continue to explore additional stylistic dimensions of tutor feedback and
their  associated   effect   on  the student    experiences      in collaborative    contexts,  including    their own    social

© ISLS                                                                                                                        404
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                     Volume I: Long Papers

positioning within their groups, their effective participation within those groups, and ultimately their learning. In
particular,  we have   discussed    how   the construct  of heteroglossia   introduces   the   notion that the  voice of  the
speaker is situated among other voices. But beyond that acknowledgement of the existence of other voices, what
we do not see in this simple binary distinction is the manner of that positioning. The details of that positioning
are further specified within Martin and White's Appraisal framework (Martin & White, 2005), which includes
Attitude, in which feelings are revealed towards propositional content, Graduation, in which feelings are either
magnified or downlplayed, and Engagement, in which a speaker positions herself in relation to the propositional
content of the utterance, positions the audience in relation to the propositional content, and positions herself in
relation to the audience (Martin & White, 2005).        The observed effects of the Heteroglossia manipulation in this
study demonstrate how productive it may be to explore how constructs from sociolinguistics might inspire the
design of more effective support for social interactions in computer supported collaborative learning.

References
Ai, H., Kumar, R., Nguyen, D., Nagasunder, A., Rose, C. P. (2010). Exploring the Effectiveness of Social Capabilities
         and Goal Alignment in Computer Supported Collaborative Learning, in Proceedings of Intelligent Tutoring
         Systems, Pittsburgh PA
Bales, R. (1958). Task Roles and Social Roles in Problem Solving Groups, Readings in Social Psychology, E.E.
         Maccoby, et al. (eds.), New York: Holt, Rinehart, and Winston
Bales,  R.F.  (1950).  Interaction   process   analysis:  A method     for the  study of small   groups,   Addison-Wesley,
         Cambridge, MA
Bhatt, K.,  Evens,    M., Argamon,     S. (2004). Hedged    responses  and   expressions  of   affect in  human/human    and
         human/computer tutorial interactions. In Proc. of the Cognitive Science Society, 114-119, Chicago, IL.
Chaudhuri, S., Kumar, R., Joshi, M., Terrell, E., Higgs, F., Aleven, V., Rosé, C. P. (2008). It's Not Easy Being Green:
         Supporting    Collaborative   Green   Design    Learning.  In Proc.    of Intelligent Tutoring   Systems, 807-809,
         Montreal, Canada.
Chaudhuri, S., Kumar, R., Howley, I., Rosé, C. P. (2009). Engaging Collaborative Learners with Helping Agents. In
         Proc of AI in Education, 365­372, Amsterdam.
Chi, M. H., De Leeuw, N., Chiu, M., Lavancher, C. (1994). Eliciting self-explanations improves understanding.
         Cognitive Science, 18, 439-488.
Diehl, M., & Stroebe, W. (1987). Productivity loss in brainstorming groups: toward the solution of a riddle. Journal of
         Personality and Social Psychology. 53(3), 497-509.
D'Mello, S. K., Craig, S. D., Gholson, B., Frankin, S., Picard, R., Graesser, A. C. (2005). Integrating Affect Sensors
         in an Intelligent Tutoring System. In Proc. of Workshop on Affective Interactions: The Computer in the
         Affective Loop at IUI, 7-13, New York, NY
Hill, G. W. (1982). Group versus individual performance: are N+1 heads better than one? Psychological Bulletin,
         91(3), 517-539.
Joshi, M.   &  Rosé,   C.  P.  (2007).  Using  Transactivity  in   Conversation    Summarization     in  Educational  Dialog.
         Proceedings of the SLaTE Workshop on Speech and Language Technology in Education, 53-56, Farmington,
         PA.
Kumar, R., Gweon, G., Joshi, M., Cui, Y., Rosé, C. P. (2007a). Supporting students working together on Math with
         Social Dialogue. Workshop on Speech and Language Technology in Education, Farmington, PA.
Kumar, R., Rosé, C. P., Wang, Y. C., Joshi, M., Robinson, A. (2007b). Tutorial Dialogue as Adaptive Collaborative
         Learning Support. In Proc. of AI in Education, 383-390, Los Angeles, CA.
Kumar,   R., Ai,  H.,  Beuth,   J., Rosé,  C. P.  (2010). Socially-capable    Conversational    Tutors   can be Effective in
         Collaborative Learning Situations, in Proceedings of Intelligent Tutoring Systems, 156-164, Pittsburgh, PA.
Kumar,   R.  &  Rosé,   C. P.  (2011).    Architecture  for building   Conversational  Agents    that support   Collaborative
         Learning, IEEE Transactions on Learning Technologies Special issue on Intelligent and Innovative Support
         Systems for Computer Supported Collaborative Learning, 4(1), 21-34.
Martin, J. R. & White, P. R. (2005).   The Language of Evaluation: Appraisal in English, Palgrave
McGrath, J. E. (1984). Groups: Interaction and Performance. Prentice-Hall, NJ
Nijstad, B. A., & Stroebe, W. (2006). How the group affects the mind: a cognitive model of idea generation in groups.
         Personality and Social Psychology Review, 10(3), 186-213.
Stahl, G. (2006). Group cognition: Computer support for building collaborative knowledge. Cambridge, MA: MIT
         Press.
Wang, H-C., Rosé, C.P., Cue, Y., Chang, C-Y. Huang, C-C., & Li, T-Y. (2007). Thinking hard together: the long and
         short  of collaborative     idea  generation  in scientific   inquiry, in  Proceedings   of    Computer   Supported
         Collaborative Learning, New Brunswick, NJ.
Weinberger,   A., Ertl,   B., Fischer, F., &   Mandl,  H.   (2005). Epistemic   and   social scripts  in computer-supported
         collaborative learning. Instructional Science, 33 (1), 1-30.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported in part by NSF EEC 0935145, NSF DRL 0835426, and NSF SBE 0836012.

© ISLS                                                                                                                    405
