CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                       Volume I: Long Papers

The Myth of Over-scripting: Can Novices be Supported Too Much?
   Karsten Stegmann, Jin Mu, Vera Gehlen-Baum, Frank Fischer, LMU München, Leopoldstrasse 13, 80802
                                                  München, GERMANY
Email: karsten.stegmann@psy.lmu.de, jin.mu@psy.lmu.de, vera.baum@psy.lmu.de, frank.fischer@psy.lmu.de

         Abstract:    Despite  the  fact  that   many   researchers  in  CSCL    use   the  term over-scripting     to
         interpret  negative   effects of scripts,   the term   is not clearly   defined.   Our  contribution    is to
         reframe    the   term  according     to concepts    of    internal  and  external     scripts. We    further
         conceptualize    potential   interferences     between    internal  and  external     scripts  in terms    of
         cognitive processes and motivation. In an empirical study (N = 81) we varied the degree of an
         argumentative script (low vs. medium vs. high) and examined the effects on processes and
         outcomes of argumentative knowledge construction. Our results show positive effects of the
         medium and high degree of scripting on argumentative knowledge construction. We found
         negative effects of the medium and high degree of scripting on motivation, however, but low
         motivation     did   not negatively     interfere  with   knowledge     acquisition.    Furthermore,      our
         reframing of over-scripting allowed us to differentiate between under-scripting, over-scripting
         and, finally, malfunctional scripts.

Origin of Over-scripting
In 2002,   Pierre  Dillenbourg    wrote  an   influential   paper  with  the  title  'Over-scripting    CSCL:    The    risks of
blending collaborative learning with instructional design.' Since then, many authors have referred to the term
over-scripting when they talk about the design and (negative, unexpected) effects of collaboration scripts (e.g.
Beers et al., 2005; Karakostas & Demetriadis, 2009; Kollar et al., 2007). Over-scripting seems to be implicitly
defined as a negative learning outcome when collaboration is scripted, rather than as the specific cognitive or
motivational   effect  of scripts  on  collaborative    processes.  Thus,    whereas   the  term  over-scripting     may    help
researchers  to articulate  their  concerns   regarding    `too much    script', it is of   doubtful    value as  a  theoretical
concept to guide research on the effects of collaboration scripts on collaborative knowledge construction. Using
the term over-scripting in its current meaning to explain negative effects of scripts is therefore not of much help
in the endeavour to understand better the mechanisms leading to positive or negative collaboration script effects.
         Therefore, we will try to reframe the idea of `too much script' regarding cognitive and motivational
aspects in this contribution. Further, we aim to answer the question whether there can be too much collaboration
script to support collaborating novices during online discussions of cases in an experimental study.

Reframing Over-scripting in Terms of Internal and External Scripts
Novices in terms of computer-supported collaborative learning can be regarded having a low-structured internal
(collaboration)   script (cf. Kollar  et al., 2007).    Schank  and  Abelson     (1977)   introduced    the   term  to  describe
cognitive structures that represent context-dependent knowledge in sequences of activities and roles in specific
situations (e.g.,  knowledge    about  sequence    and   roles  during   a  school   lesson).  Scripts   are  abstract   mental
structures that organize the processing of sequences of events.
         With respect to external collaboration scripts we follow the definition that they specify and sequence
learning   activities and/or   assign   roles  to  different    learners (Kollar,    Fischer,   &  Hesse,     2006)     and can
consequently facilitate specific discourse activities such as the construction of arguments or specific interaction
patterns (e.g. Schellens et al., 2005; Weinberger et al., 2010). Kobbe and colleagues (2007) specified that the
components of a collaboration script are participants, activities, roles, resources, and groups. The mechanisms
of CSCL scripts that manipulate the components are task distribution, group formation, and sequencing (Kobbe
et al., 2007).
         Research     on  collaborative  learning    in online  discussions   has    provided   evidence    that  at least  two
argumentative internal scripts are related to learning: epistemic activities and providing warrants for claims. A
central epistemic activity is the application of conceptual knowledge on problem information (cf. Weinberger &
Fischer, 2006). The higher the amount of the application of conceptual knowledge, the higher the epistemic
quality of  argumentation     and  the higher    the knowledge     acquisition   is. Providing    warrants    for   the relation
between grounds and claims has been regarded as a process very similar to self-explanations (cf. Baker, 2003).
The more claims and grounds are connected with a warrant, the higher the quality of argumentation.
         The   next   two sections  will  now    focus   on problems    that may    occur   if external  and   internal  scripts
interfere. We   identified  two   main   areas   where   internal  and   external   scripts may   interfere   and    potentially
undermine collaborative knowledge construction: First, suboptimal fit of internal and external scripts may have
negative   effects on  cognitive  processes   during    collaboration.  Second,   external  regulation     may have     negative
effects on motivation of learners during collaboration.

© ISLS                                                                                                                        406
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                Volume I: Long Papers

Potential Interference between Internal and External Scripts on Cognitive Processes
The perfect   fit between  external  and   internal collaboration would  be  if existing  (but not activated)   internal
scripts are activated by an external script and enough information is provided regarding all activities that are not
yet part of the internal script of a learner. This perfect fit is, however, the ideal rather than the typical case. It is
more likely that an external script addresses scenes (e.g. `Please provide a counterargument!') without sufficient
information on the activity or addresses scripts that are not known (e.g. `Please engage in knowledge building
by integrating pros and cons!'). The domain-specific knowledge acquisition as well as the internalization of the
script is not supported. This kind of interference between internal and external scripts might be called `cognitive
under-scripting'.
          If an external   script provides scaffolds  that  guide procedures   for which  internal scripts are  already
represented by the learner or where a learner might even hold more effective or efficient internal script, the
performance   of  the  learner will decrease.  Instead  of  performing   highly automated   cognitive   skills, learners
slowdown because they have to follow the external script. The time-in-task is reduced, whereas the time on
handling the script is unnecessarily increased. The internalization of the script is restricted to scripts that were
not held before. The acquisition of domain-specific knowledge is not facilitated owing to the lowered efficiency.
This kind of interference between internal and external scripts might be called `cognitive over-scripting'.
          If collaboration lasts a certain amount of time, the originally perfect fit of internal and external script
may change towards cognitive over-scripting owing to an ongoing internalization of the script (cf. Wecker &
Fischer,  2009).  To   avoid this  cognitive over-scripting,  the script might  be  faded  out, i.e.  components   like
examples and explanations vanish or several small steps collapse to bigger steps. A script may ask the learner to
provide a complete argument instead of asking for claim, ground and warrant (e.g. Kollar et al., 2007).
          Last but not least, an external collaboration script asks the learner to perform activities that do not
facilitate collaborative knowledge construction. Such an external script may even have a positive effect on the
internalization of the script, but the domain-specific knowledge acquisition might be hindered. At this point we
have to clarify that a script might lead to a `better' online discussion, but not to better learning processes. The
negative effect of the script on domain-specific knowledge acquisition compared with an unsupported control
condition should not be regarded as `over-scripting'. This kind of interference between internal and external
scripts produces a malfunctional scripting. The script is functioning, but with negative effects on collaborative
knowledge construction.
          The interference between internal and external scripts depends on the degree to which the (internal or
external) script specifies activities. The more details of activities are specified the higher the degree of scripting.

Potential Interferences between Internal and External Scripts on Motivation
Motivation is an important factor in learning. Motivation is usually regarded as affecting the effort a learner is
willing to invest, i.e. to what extent a learner contributes to collaboration. If instruction reduces motivation it
carries the risk that engagement in collaborative knowledge construction will decrease. Even the best (internal
or external) script does not foster learning if learners are not motivated to activate or use it, respectively.
          Deci and Ryan (1991) posited that a decrease of the feeling of autonomy may cause a loss of intrinsic
motivation.   External  collaboration  scripts usually  reduce  the degree  of  freedom  of learners  and  lower   their
perceived autonomy. Therefore, learners may put less effort into activity or strategy guided by the script. As a
consequence, processes and outcomes of collaborative knowledge construction might be negatively affected.
This effect might occur independently of the internal script of a learner, but is related to the extent of how
autonomy is reduced. Against this background, scripts that scaffold procedures on the low level of activities
should always have negative effects on intrinsic motivation. The reduction of autonomy and thereby intrinsic
motivation is then mainly script immanent. The goal, however, has to be to realize scripts that are as `motivation
friendly' as possible.

Research Questions
We are investigating the effects of degree of scripting on processes and outcomes of argumentative knowledge
construction in online discussions. The goal is to examine whether a non-malfunctional script can cause over-
scripting  when   novice   (regarding  argumentative   knowledge    construction)  are supported.  The  first   research
question examines, therefore, the central perquisite, that the scripted activites are positively related to domain-
specific knowledge acquisition.
          RQ1:    To  what extent  are  epistemic   quality and quality  of argumentation   related  to acquisition  of
domain-specific knowledge? According to the approach of argumentative knowledge acquisition we assume that
both,  the epistemic   quality as  well as the  quality of   argumentation  is positively related  to domain-specific
knowledge acquisition.
          RQ2: To what extent does the degree of scripting (without/low vs. medium vs. high) have on effect on
the quality of argumentative knowledge construction? If the collaboration script is not malfunctional, it should

© ISLS                                                                                                               407
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                   Volume I: Long Papers

have positive effects on the epistemic quality and/or quality of argumentation, but not decrease the quality of
argumentative knowledge construction.
           RQ3: To what extent does the degree of scripting (without/low vs. medium vs. high) have an effect on
motivation   during   argumentative     knowledge     construction?    According    to  our   reframing   of motivational
interferences  between     external   and  internal   scripts, the self-reported   intrinsic motivation   as  well   as the
objectively  measured     amount   of  contributions  to online  discussion   during  collaboration   might  be negatively
affected by the degree of scripting. The higher the degree of scripting, the lower the intrinsic motivation and
amount of contributions should be.
           RQ4:  To   what  extent  has the   degree  of  scripting  (without/low  vs.  medium  vs.   high)  effects on the
acquisition of domain-specific knowledge and knowledge of argumentation? The degree of scripting is expected
to have a positive effect on domain-specific knowledge as well as knowledge of argumentation. If, however, the
medium degree of scripting out-performs the high degree scripting condition, cognitive over-scripting occurrs
(if RQ1 and RQ2 provided evidence that the script is not malfunctional).
           RQ5:  To   what  extent does    quality of argumentative    knowledge   construction   and  motivation    during
argumentative     knowledge  construction     predict  the acquisition    of domain-specific  knowledge?     This research
question   finally examines,    which   of the aspects   that  might be   negatively affected  by  interferences  between
external and internal scripts has the strongest influence on domain-specific knowledge acquisition. The answer
to this question   may  allow   us  to  weigh  potential   negative  effects  on  motivation  against positive  effects  on
specific scripts.

Methods

Participants and Design
Eighty-one (81) students of Educational Science at the University of Munich participated in this study during
the summer term 2010. The mean age of the participants was M = 23.36 (SD = 3.85) years. Participation was a
requirement    for receiving    course credit  in  a  mandatory  introductory    course for  undergraduates   because   the
experimental learning environment was part of the regular curriculum. We manipulated the variable `degree of
scripting'  (without/low    vs. medium     vs. high)   by  means    of a  computer-supported    collaboration   script  for
argumentative    knowledge   construction    that  is described  below.   The  participants  were  randomly   assigned   to
groups of three. The groups were then randomly assigned to one of the three experimental conditions in the one-
factorial design.

Learning Environment and Implementation of Collaboration Scripts
The subject of the learning environment was Weiner's attribution theory (1985) and its application in education.
The   students read   the  text of this theory  and   the  text of  introducing   argumentation  individually   before  the
experimental session. In the present study, three problem cases from practical contexts were used as a basis for
online discussions. The group's task was to analyze the three cases and to come up with a joint solution for each
case. The three students in each group were distributed within a laboratory room, i.e. they were together in one
room,   but  not   sitting next  to   each  other.   An  asynchronous,     text-based   discussion  board   was   used  for
collaboration. This discussion board allowed the exchange of text messages that resembled emails.
           The computer-based learning environment used in this experiment is a modified version of the one
employed by Stegmann, Weinberger and Fischer (2007). All of the instructions are presented in the form of
standard videos which vary according to the treatments. The collaboration scripts for supporting argumentative
knowledge construction were implemented in a tool called S-COL (Scripting for Collaborative Online Learning)
which allows for the sustainable development of scripts and scaffolds that can be used with a broad variety of
content and platforms (Wecker et al., 2010).
           (1) The script in the condition with a high degree of scripting consisted of several components. Each
learner was responsible for the analysis of one of the three cases. The collaboration phase was divided into ten
phases. Each learner was asked to provide an analysis for her or his case in the first phase. During the next
phases two and three, each learner had to provide counterarguments for the first analysis of her or his learning
partners.  During   the fourth  phase,  the   learner had  to   integrate the  counterarguments    of her or  his learning
partners into the analysis. Phases two to four were repeated twice. During the tenth phase, however, the learners
were tasked with writing the final analysis for their case. The progression from phase to phase was automatized,
i.e. after a certain  time,  learners  were   automatically    forwarded  to  the  next phase. In  each phase   the   script
specified several steps. The script guided learners first to analyse the case or the arguments of the learning
partners   and second   to  construct  (counter)arguments.     For  example,   the script for the  construction   of single
arguments asked learners to select a person, acting in the case, to analyse it, to specify a concept from theory
that was applicable to the subject, to formulate a claim using the subject and the theoretical concept, to provide a
ground (i.e. case information) that supported the claim and finally to provide a warrant that explained why the
ground supported the claim. For each step of the script the system provided an explanation. For each step of the

© ISLS                                                                                                                   408
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                      Volume I: Long Papers

script an example was provided. Despite the fact the script specified these steps, however, the learners were not
forced to follow them. They always had the chance to write `unscripted' statements in the message box.
         (2) The medium degree of scripting was realized through fading-out of the steps during the different
phases  as  well as   the fading-out   of the  explanations   and   examples.    We  decided     us against a   more  or   less
randomly    selected  degree  of  scripting between   low   and  high,   because   that would    have   meant   that  learners
received different amounts of information regarding the script. Through implementing the medium degree of
scripting using fading, we are able to provide subjects wihtin in this condition the very same information on the
script, but have different degree of scripting on average.
         (3) The   condition     with low degree  of scripting   received    no  additional    support in  solving   the  three
problem  cases,  i.e.  the condition   can  be regarded    as without    script. All participants,   however,    also  in  this
condition,  were  advised     to argue well according   to  the  text on   argumentation       they had  to read    before the
experimental session.

Procedure
First, the participants completed pre-tests that were designed to measure domain-specific prior knowledge and
prior  knowledge      of argumentation.   The   data from     these  tests   were  used     to control  randomization.     All
instructions were presented in the form of videos to standardize the procedure. The groups collaborated for 80
minutes, trying to develop analyses for the three cases and to reach agreement about them. In the final phase
(about 35 minutes), the students took individual post-tests on domain-specific knowledge and knowledge of
argumentation. Time-on-task was held constant for the three conditions.

Data Sources
Online discussions of five problem cases (one pretest case, three cases during collaboration, and one posttest
case) served as data sources. The online discussions were coded in terms of epistemic quality and quality of
argumentation. Furthermore, amount of contributions was measured on the basis of the online discussion on the
three cases during collaboration. Intrinsic motivation and knowledge on argumentation were measured using an
online questionnaire after the online discussion of the post-test case.
         We used individual sentences or parts of a compound sentence as the unit of analysis (segment) (cf.
Strijbos et al., 2005).   Each   sentence  was  coded whether     it was   a claim   (i.e., a  statement   that advances   the
position learners take to analyse case with attribution theory), a ground (i.e., evidence from case to support
claim), a warrant (i.e. logical connections between the grounds and claims that present the theoretical reason
why a claim is valid) or something else (i.e. all other sentences).
         Two   human      coders  analysed  almost  one  tenth   of  the raw   discourse    corpora  (distributed   over   five
cases),  which   have    been further  used for   training the   customized   algorithms     for automatic    coding   on  the
multiple categories by SIDE tool (Mayfield & Rosé, 2010). We achieved a high value of Cohen's Kappa = .96
for segmentation, and the inter-rater agreement between two human coders to classify the text was Cohen's
Kappa = .71. A human coder and SIDE achieved an agreement of Cohen's Kappa = .97 (accuracy = 99.3%) to
segment the conversational data into the units of analysis. The objectivity across all cases comparing SIDE with
a human coder was sufficiently high (Cohen's Kappa = .81; accuracy = 84.5%).
         Subsequently, all claims were analysed regarding epistemic activities, i.e. the correctness of application
of theoretical   concepts    on  case  information.  The   median    of  reliability   between    two   human    coders    was
sufficiently high with Cohen's Kappa value = .89.

Dependent Variables
Prior domain-specific knowledge. Appropriately applied concepts from the Weiner's attribution theory in the
context of analysing the pre-test case were used to measure prior domain-specific knowledge.
         Prior knowledge of argumentation. The proportion of sentences in the online discussion on the pre-test
case that was coded as warrant was used to measure the application of argumentative knowledge during online
discussion.  By  using   the  proportion  instead of the   total amount,   the   value is   controlled for  the  influence  of
domain-specific knowledge.
         Amount of contributions in pre-test discussion. The amount of contributions during pretest discussion
was measured by the number of sentences written by a learner during the online discussions of the pre-test case.
         Intrinsic motivation. The instrument used to investigate the motivational processes that occur during
learning was   a questionnaire     developed   by Prenzel  and   colleagues    (1993).  The    reliability of   the scale  was
sufficiently high (Cronbach's alpha = .73).
         Amount of contributions during collaboration. The amount of contributions during pretest discussion
was measured by the number of sentences written by a learner during the online discussions of the three cases.
         Epistemic quality. The number of appropriately applied concepts from Weiner's attribution theory in
the context of analysing the cases during collaboration was used to measure the epistemic quality.

© ISLS                                                                                                                     409
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                               Volume I: Long Papers

          Quality of argumentation. The quality of argumentation during online discussion was measured in the
same way as the prior knowledge on argumentation, but using the online discussion during the collaborative
learning phase as data source.
          Domain-specific knowledge. The number of appropriately applied concepts from Weiner's attribution
theory in the context of analysing the post-test case was used to measure domain-specific knowledge.
          Knowledge of argumentation. Participants were asked to name the components of a formally complete
single argument and to formulate a single argument on the topic of smoking. One point was given for each of
the three correctly applied components, i.e. claim, ground and warrant. Hence, the test scores could range from
zero   to six points.   Two  trained coders evaluated the tests independently   with a  sufficiently high reliability
(Cohen's Kappa =      .94).
          Application of argumentative knowledge. The proportion of sentences in the online discussion on the
post-test case that were coded as warrant was used to measure the application of argumentative knowledge.

Statistical Tests
To examine the effects of the degree of scripting, we used a linear regression analysis with the dummy variables
script (without vs. with) and degree of scripting (medium vs. high). This method allowed us to examine effects
of the script in general and effects of the degree of scripting in particular with only one statistical analysis.
Therefore,    it is more  efficient than an ONEWAY     ANOVA       with two  subsequent  analyses   of contrasts. To
control for differences prior to the treatments within the different conditions and no effects of specific scripting
degrees are expected, we compared the three different conditions using an ONEWAY ANOVA.

Results

Preliminary Data Analyses
First, we  controlled   for differences  between  conditions prior  to the intervention by applying   an ONEWAY
ANOVA. No significant effects of the degree of script regarding epistemic quality, F(2, 78) = 0.11, p = .90,  <
.01, quality of argumentation, F(2, 78) = 2.15, p = .12, 2 = .05, or amount of contributions, F(2, 78) = 0.18, p =
.833, 2 < .01, in the online discussion on the pre-test case were found.

RQ1: Relation between Quality of Argumentation and Domain Specific Knowledge
The first research question is intended to provide evidence that the processes that we are going to foster with the
collaboration    script are related to individual knowledge  acquisition.  For both aspects, epistemic   quality  and
quality of argumentation, partial correlation with domain-specific knowledge in the post-test was computed to
control for prior knowledge.
          Significant partial correlation have been found between epistemic quality and knowledge acquisition,
rpar = .26, df = 69, p = .01, one-tailed, as well as regarding quality of argumentation, rpar = .29, df = 69, p = .01.
Our assumption that the quality of argumentative knowledge construction during online discussion is associated
with the acquisition of domain-specific knowledge is supported by this result.

Table 1: Epistemic quality, quality of argumentation, intrinsic motivation and amount of contributions during
online discussion by experimental condition: means (m) and standard deviations (SD).

                                                                             Degree of scripting
                                                        Without script/low       medium                high
     Epistemic quality                             M          13.24               10.52                10.47
                                                   SD         12.00               8.78                  7.00
     Quality of argumentation                      M           8.75               11.77                15.88
                                                   SD          6.11               6.91                  8.80
     Intrinsic motivation                          M           2.53               2.03                  1.94
                                                   SD          0.90               0.65                  0.62
     Amount of contributions                       M          57.65               33.50                24.88
                                                   SD         20.60               11.60                12.39

RQ2: Quality of Argumentative Knowledge Construction
The effects of the degree of scripting on the quality of argumentative knowledge construction will be examined
regarding two different aspects: epistemic quality and quality of argumentation.
          Epistemic quality. The regression model regarding epistemic quality was not significant, R2 = .02, F(2,78)
= 0.66, p = .52. Neither the factor script, stand. = -.14, p = .29, nor the factor degree of scripting, stand. < .01, p =

© ISLS                                                                                                             410
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                            Volume I: Long Papers

.98, were significant predictors of the epistemic quality during the online discussion. The script did not facilitate
the epistemic quality of the online discussion (see table 1 for descriptive values).
Quality of argumentation. The model using the predictors script and degree of scripting explained about 12% of
the variance of the quality of argumentation, R2 = .12, F(2, 78) = 5.25, p = .01. The factor script had a significant
positive effect on the quality of argumentation, stand. = .37, p < .01. Learners supported by a script (medium as
well as high degree of scripting) had a higher quality of argumentation during online discussion than learners
without script. The factor degree of scripting had a marginally positive effect (significant at the 10%-level) on
the quality of argumentation, stand. = .22, p = .07. Learners with the medium degree of scripting benefited less
regarding the quality of argumentation than learners with the high degree of scripting (see table 1 for descriptive
values).

RQ3: Motivation during Argumentative Knowledge Construction
The effects of the degree of scripting was examined with respect to two different measures: intrinsic motivation
and amount of contributions.
         Intrinsic motivation. The regression model regarding intrinsic motivation was significant, R2 = .107,
F(2, 78) = 4.57, p = .01. The factor script had a significant negative effect on intrinsic motivation, stand. = -.35, p <
.01. Learners    supported  by  a script  (medium   as well  as high              degree  of   scripting)  showed    lower  intrinsic
motivation than learners without script. The factor degree of scripting had no effect on intrinsic motivation,
stand. = .06, p = .60. The fading of the script neither positively nor negatively affected intrinsic motivation of
learners (see table 1 for descriptive values.
         Amount of contributions. The regression model regarding amount of contributions was significant, R2 =
.42, F(2, 78) = 28.30, p < .001. The factor script had a significant negative effect on amount of contributions, stand.
= -.71,  p <  .001. Learners  supported   by  a script (medium   as  well           as    high degree  of  script)  contributed  less
sentences to the online discussion than learners without script. The factor degree of scripting had a positive
effect on amount of contributions, stand. = .22, p = .03. The medium degree of script diminished the negative
effect of the script on amount of contributions, i.e. learners with a medium degree of script contributed more
sentences  to  the  online discussion  than  learners  with the high              degree  of   script (see table  1  for descriptive
values).
         Post hoc, the question was, to what extent the effects of script and degree of scripting on amount of
contributions are mediated by intrinsic motivation. We have to clarify whether this negative effect on amount of
contributions    through a  loss  of motivation  or not.   Therefore,             we conducted     a   mediator   analysis, i.e. we
computed the residual of the model where intrinsic motivation predict amount of contributions and checked
whether the factors script and degree of scripting still had an effect on the residual. If the effect disappears or the
effect size is much smaller than on the initial variable, mediation has taken place. If no mediation can be found,
other, non-motivational, factors, may have mediated the effect of script and degree of scripting on motivation.
         Mediator analysis. Predicting amount of contributions with intrinsic motivation resulted in a significant
model, R2 = .13, F(2, 78) = 11.52, p = .001. Intrinsic motivation is a significant positive predictor of amount of
contributions, stand. = .36, p = .001. The higher the intrinsic motivation of learners, the higher the number of
sentences they contributed to the online discussion. The factors script and degree of scripting, however, are still
significant predictors of the residual, R2 = .36, F(2, 78) = 21.05, p < .001. The explained variance regarding the
residual   is 15%   lower  than   regarding  amount    of contributions             directly.  Thus,   intrinsic motivation   partly
mediates the effect of script and degree of scripting on amount of contributions, but a major part of the variance
cannot be explained by motivation.

RQ4: Acquisition of Domain-specific Knowledge and Knowledge of Argumentation
The effects of the degree of scripting on knowledge acquisition were examined regarding three different aspects:
domain specific knowledge, declarative knowledge of argumentation, and script internalization.
         Domain specific knowledge. No effect of the degree of scripting on domain-specific knowledge could
be found, R2 = .02, F(2, 78) = 0.76, p = .47. Neither the factor script, stand. = .12, p = .38, nor the factor degree of
scripting, stand. = .05, p = .68, were significant predictors of domain-specific knowledge in the post-test (see
table 2 for descriptive values).
         Knowledge of argumentation. The model using the factors script and degree of scripting to predict the
knowledge     of argumentation    was significant, R2  =  .20, F(2,           78) = 9.53,  p   < .001.    The factor   script had a
significant positive effect on declarative knowledge of argumentation, stand. = .34, p = .003. Learners supported
by a script (medium as well as high degree of scripting) were better able to list components of single arguments
according to Toulmin (1958) and to provide a complete argument on smoking than learners without script. The
factor degree of scripting had no significant effect on declarative knowledge of argumentation, stand. = .18, p =
.12 (see table 2 for descriptive values).
         Application    of argumentative    knowledge.    While  the              overall model   predicting     the application  of
argumentative knowledge using the factors script and degree of scripting failed to reach significance, R2 = .05,

© ISLS                                                                                                                           411
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                 Volume I: Long Papers

F(2, 78) = 1.91, p = .16, the factor script had a marginal significant positive effect, stand. = .24, p = .05. The factor
degree of scripting, stand. = -.12, p = .33, was not a significant predictor of the internal script on argumentation.
Learners supported by the script seemingly developed a better internal script. The fading of the script in the
condition with a medium degree of scripting did not interfere with this effect (see table 2 for descriptive values).

 Table  2:  Domain-specific    knowledge,    knowledge      of argumentation     and  application  of argumentative
 knowledge by experimental condition: means (m) and standard deviations (SD).

                                                                            Degree of scripting
                                                        Without script/low       medium                  high
 Domain-specific knowledge                        M            4.62                5.76                  5.40
                                                 SD            2.91                3.28                  3.07
 Knowledge on argumentation                       M            3.14                4.90                  4.20
                                                 SD            1.80                0.89                  1.19
 Application of argumentative knowledge           M            9.64                12.91                 15.64
                                                 SD            9.89                11.04                 11.64

RQ5: Predicting Domain-specific Knowledge with Quality of Argumentative
Knowledge Construction and Motivation
This research question aimed to answer which of the aforementioned aspects of collaborative learning in online
discussions, i.e. intrinsic motivation, amount of contributions, epistemic quality and quality of argumentation
are most relevant for the acquisition of domain-specific knowledge. Therefore, we tested a regression model for
domain   specific-knowledge   in  the   posttest with  the  predictors intrinsic motivation,  amount     of contributions,
epistemic quality, and quality of argumentation. The overall model was significant, R2 = .15, F(2, 78) = 2.82, p =
.03. Aspects of quality of argumentative knowledge construction, epistemic quality, stand. = .27, p = .03, as well
as  quality of  argumentation,   stand. = .27,   p   = .04, were significant   positive  predictors   of domain-specific
knowledge in the posttest. The more inferences between case information and theoretical concepts are drawn
and the higher the proportion of warrants, the higher is the domain-specific knowledge in the posttest. Intrinsic
motivation, stand. = .12, p = .35, as well as amount of contributions, stand. = -.06, p = .66, were not significant
predictors of domain-specific knowledge in the posttest.

Discussion
Our    results provide   evidence for   the basic    assumptions    of argumentative    knowledge     construction. Both
epistemic quality and quality of argumentation are positively related to domain-specific knowledge acquisition.
Furthermore,    we have    shown  that  our  collaboration     script fostered the   quality of  argumentation   without
impairing epistemic quality during online discussions.
         As    expected, the script affected   intrinsic motivation    negatively. A  lower  degree   of scripting  could,
however, not reduce this effect. The perceived over-scriptedness seems rather dichotomous than continuous.
Furthermore, the script had a negative effect on amount of contributions. This effect was less strong for the
medium degree scripting than for the high degree scripting. A mediator analysis revealed that the negative effect
of the script on the amount of contributions could not fully be explained by the loss of motivation. Instead, it
seems to be more probable that learners supported by a script spent more time with learning processes that did
not lead directly  to  more  contributions  to   the online discussion,  e.g.  deeper  elaboration  (Stegmann   et  al., in
press).
         The    script had a positive   effect   on  both   knowledge   of argumentation     and  the internal  script   on
argumentation. Learners supported by the script had more explicit knowledge of argumentation in a knowledge
test on argumentation and, much more importantly, applied the script more frequently in an unsupported online
discussion after the learning phase. Findings by Kollar and colleagues (2007) showed that learners with highly
structured  internal   argumentation    script   outperformed   learners   with    low  structured  internal   scripts   on
argumentation regarding domain-specific knowledge acquisition. It can be argued that the script might have a
sustainable effect, because the internalised script might facilitate future collaborative learning.
         A positive effect of the script, however, could not be found with respect to domain-specific knowledge
immediatley after the collaboration. In line with the argumentation on amount of contributions, we argue that
this can be seen as a trade-of function: given constant time, learners who elaborate single concepts in more
depth do have less time to elaborate a broad range of concepts and vice versa. The regression analysis showed
that, the epistemic quality as well as the quality of argumentation is a significant predictor of domain-specific
knowledge gains. Motivation and amount of contributions are less predictive here. These results show that for
predicting learning outcomes, learning activities are better than motivational aspects. Intrinsic motivation can be
helpful for collaborative learning, but it is not a prerequisite. In particular, novices to collaborative learning need

© ISLS                                                                                                                 412
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                      Volume I: Long Papers

to acquire   internal  scripts for  successful   collaboration.  This  process    can   be supported   through   collaboration
scripts. In  summary,     this study   did  not  provide  any  evidence     of cognitive   over-scripting   of novices   using
computer-supported collaboration scripts.
         Finally, the reframing of over-scripting allows differentiation between under-scripting, over-scripting,
and malfunctional     scripting.   Our   conceptualization   allows   us to  classify   scripts using  result  patterns of the
effects of the script on process and outcomes as well as the relations between processes and outcomes. This is a
substantial improvement compared with the conceptualization of over-scripting so far. Our approach will not be
sufficient,  however,   for   those   researchers who     are describing    over-scripting    only  as  "disturbing  `natural'
interactions and `natural' problem solving processes". These problems are problems of `too much script', but
only if learners have access to functional internal scripts on collaboration that can be disturbed. In particular
novices on collaboration have not. Therefore, negative effects of scripts on outcomes or processes should not
any longer simply be classified as over-scripting. Instead, it has to be shown that the externally provided script
is not just a malfunctional script.

References
Baker, M. (2003). Computer-mediated argumentative interactions for the co-elaboration of scientiWc notions. In
         J. Andriessen, M. Baker, & D. Suthers (Eds.), Arguing to learn: confronting cognitions in computer-
         supported collaborative learning environments (Vol. 1, pp. 1­25). Dordrecht: Kluwer.
Beers, P. J., Boshuizen, H. P. A., Kirschner, P. A., & Gijselaers, W. H. (2005). Computer support for knowledge
         construction in collaborative learning environments. Computers in Human Behavior, 21, 623-643.
Black,   A.  E. &   Deci,  E.  L.  (2000).   The effects  of  instructors'  autonomy      support  and  students' autonmous
         motivation on learning organic chemistry: A self-determination theory perspective. Science Education,
         84(6), 740-756.
Deci,  E.L.  &   Ryan,  R.M.    (1991).    A   motivational  approach    to the   self: integration in  personality. In  R.A.
         Dienstbier (Ed.). Perspectives on motivation. Nebraska Symposium on Motivation, (Vol. 38, 237-88).
         Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press.
Dillenbourg, P. (2002). Over-scripting CSCL. In P. A. Kirschner (Ed.), Three worlds of CSCL: Can we support
         CSCL (pp. 61-91). Heerlen: Open University of the Netherlands.
Karakostas,     A., Demetriadis,    S.   (2009). Adaptation    patterns  in    systems    for scripted  collaboration.  Paper
         presented at CSCL 2009. International Society of the Learning Sciences (ISLS).
Kobbe, L., Weinberger, A., Dillenbourg, P., Harrer, A., Hämäläinen, R., Häkkinen, P., & Fischer, F. (2007).
         Specifying Computer-Supported Collaboration Scripts. International Journal of Computer-Supported
         Collaborative Learning, 2, 211-224.
Kollar,  I., Fischer,  F., &   Hesse,    F.  W.  (2006).  Collaboration     scripts -   a conceptual   analysis. Educational
         Psychology Review, 18(2), 159-185.
Kollar, I., Fischer, F., & Slotta, J. D. (2007). Internal and external scripts in computer-supported collaborative
         inquiry learning. Learning & Instruction, 17(6), 708-721.
Mayfield,    E. &   Rosé,  C.  P.  (2010).  An  Interactive   Tool for   Supporting     Error Analysis  for  Text Mining.   In
         Proceedings of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics
Prenzel,  M.,   Eitel, F.,  Holzbach,      R., Schoenheinz,    R.  J.  &    Schweiberer,    L.  (1993).  Lernmotivation    im
         studentischen Unterricht in der Chirurgie. Zeitschrift für Pädagogische Psychologie, 7(2/3), 125-137.
Schank, R. C., & Abelson, R. P. (1977). Scripts, plans, goals and understanding. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Schellens, T., Van Keer,    H., & Valcke, M. (2005). The impact of role assignment on knowledge construction in
         asynchronous discussion groups: A multilevel analysis. Small Group Research, 36, 704-745.
Stegmann,    K.,    Wecker,    C., Weinberger,    A.,   & Fischer,    F. (in   press).    Collaborative Argumentation      and
         Cognitive     Elaboration    in a  Computer-Supported     Collaborative     Learning   Environment.     Instructional
         Science.
Strijbos, J-W, Martens, R. L., Prins, F. J., Jochems, W.M.G. (2006). Content analysis: What are they talking
         about? Computers & Education, 46, 29­48.
Toulmin, S. (1958). The uses of argument. Cambridge: Cambridge Universty Press.
Wecker, C., & Fischer, F. (2009). Preventing relapses into novice strategies during the fading of instructional
         scripts: The role of distributed control. Paper presented at EARLI 2009, August 25 to 29, 2009.
Weinberger,     A., &  Fischer,    F.  (2006).  A framework     to  analyze    argumentative    knowledge     construction  in
         computersupported collaborative learning. Computers & Education, 46(1), 71-95.
Weinberger,     A.,  Stegmann,     K., &    Fischer, F.  (2010).   Learning    to argue    online:  Scripted  groups surpass
         individuals (unscripted groups do not). Computers in Human Behavior, 26, 506­515.
Weiner, B. (1985). An attributional theory of achievement motivation and emotion. Psychological Review, 92,
         548-573.

© ISLS                                                                                                                     413
