CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                       Volume I: Long Papers

       Location-based Collaborative Learning at a Geography Trail:
 Examining the Relationship among Task Design, Facilitation and
                                                Discourse Types
 Esther Tan, Hyo-Jeong So, Learning Sciences Lab, National Institute of Education, Nanyang Technological
                                         University, 1 Nanyang Walk, Singapore
                                Email: esther.tan@nie.edu.sg, hyojeong.so@nie.edu.sg
          Abstract: In this paper, we examine the characteristics of a discourse that show evidences of
          collective knowledge construction and investigate the impact of task design and facilitation on
          in situ small     group  collaborative   learning.  To examine     discourse    types,  all audio-recorded
          verbal data of the three groups of secondary students is transcribed, coded and analysed with
          respect to two key dimensions in the knowledge construction process, namely, the epistemic
          and the social. Tasks were categorized largely into performative and knowledge-generative.
          Analysis    showed    that  different epistemic    activities   and   the nature   of  facilitation  have  a
          definitive bearing on group discursive moves and more importantly, the presence of a real
          world   context     could   generate     intense  knowledge       co-construction    even    for  mundane
          performative      tasks. In conclusion,    we    propose     that  a  three-prong     approach    (FAT)    ­
          Facilitation, Activities in-situ, and Technology ­ should be considered to support meaningful
          collaborative learning practices in mobile learning.
Introduction
Rapid advancement in information and communications technology has revolutionised the teaching and learning
landscape;   creating  new    and  exciting possibilities  for   learning   beyond   the  four  walls  of  the   classroom, and
thereby, inevitably changing the role of both the learner and the teacher. Seamless learning across context and
space is now made possible with the affordances of mobile computing and web applications. Interaction with
the real world environment has also given learning, new shades of meaning and intent. In the field of computer-
supported    collaborative   learning   (CSCL),    whilst  there    is extensive    research   and    literature on  leveraging
emerging mobile devices and Web 2.0 technologies to enhance the learning experience in the real-world setting
and/ or learning on the move (e.g., Squire & Klopfer, 2007), there remains little empirical research on other
equally  significant  configurations    of  mobile   learning:   that   is  the design    configuration    of  mobile   learning
environments and the execution path to bring about the desired learning outcomes. Another common pitfall is
the focus on the unending possibilities of mobile devices and innovative software applications over the rich
affordances of the physical environment in the context of enhancing mobile learning.
          To  examine     the  design   configurations     and  the affordances     of real-world     contexts   for promoting
meaningful   collaborative    learning  experiences,  this   paper  articulates  the   in situ  learning   experience   of three
groups   of  Secondary   One    students (ages   12-13)    on  a geography     mobile  learning   trail. Specifically,  we  are
interested in investigating the intricate relationship among task-design, facilitation and the discourse types in
situated small group collaborative learning. This study analyses the content, process and pattern of students'
interactional discourse in the knowledge construction process. We believe that a focus on process rather than
outcome   is pertinent   to  understanding  the    design  configurations    necessary    for effective  in  situ collaborative
learning.

Theoretical Frameworks
The anatomy    of  location-based     collaborative  learning    primarily   composes     of  two  main    constructs:  context-
oriented and a collective enterprise. More importantly, these two constructs should not be conceived as separate
entities operating    in their  own   paradigms;   rather  they  are   closely  interwoven     in the  process   of  knowledge
construction to bring about the desired learning outcomes. Educational researchers argue that students learn best
when they are able to learn skills and theories in the context of real world, then construct their knowledge of a
subject to be applied (Gay, Stefanone, Grace-Martin, & Hembrooke, 2001). This accords with the works of
Brown, Collins and Duguid (1989) on situated cognition where they postulated that "knowledge is situated" and
expounded    on   the    necessity   of  cognitive   apprenticeship     and     collaborative    learning"    where   collective
undertaking of authentic problem solving would give rise to new knowledge and insights. They attributed such a
learning outcome to group dynamics and synergy. And interestingly, in theorising mobile learning, Sharples,
Taylor and Vavoula (2005) reiterated that what essentially differentiates mobile learning from other types of
learning  is that "It    is the learner  that   is mobile,   rather    than the  technology"     and   they contended    that a
fundamental   concern    in  understanding   the   essence   of  mobile   learning  is "to understand     how    people artfully
engage   with  their     surroundings   to  create   impromptu      sites   of  learning".   Further,   they   highlighted  the
prerequisites of successful learning, point towards a social-constructivist approach on learning, where learning

© ISLS                                                                                                                        41
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                Volume I: Long Papers

is conceived of "as an active process of building knowledge and skills through practice within a supportive
community".      Therefore,  a working   pedagogical framework     for  location-based  collaborative learning   should
satisfy these two conditions: context- oriented and a collective enterprise.
           One approach to support situated learning experiences in school is through the form of field trips (e.g.,
excursion, outdoor learning, etc). Previous research on field trip reveals that the educational effectiveness of a
field trip is controlled by its structure, learning materials and the interaction with the environment (Orion &
Hofstein 1994). Field trip visits often result in the students experiencing many phenomena and ideas that are
new to them, where the individual is situated and ultimately have a strong influence on the ways in which
knowledge     is constructed   (Anderson,  Lucas et al. 2000). In   the field trip, the environments    cannot be  pre-
specified, therefore learning in the field trip including re-conceptualisation is created through the activity of
learning.    Knowledge   is  dynamically   constructed  by learners  interacting with   their surroundings   (Sharples,
Corlett, & Westmancott, 2002). This unique feature of location-based learning during field trips is expounded in
Brown et al.'s (1989) concept of learning and cognition, where they posit that "situations might be said to co-
produce knowledge through activity", hence learning and cognition are fundamentally situated.
           Next, a social-constructivist approach also epitomizes the significance of collective co-construction of
knowledge underpinning the nature of the learning process. Here, learners not only construct meaning on their
own, but also with others to apply knowledge in real world context (Pena-Shaff & Nicholls 2004). Collaborative
learning is thus, conceived of as active participation and interaction both with the environment and with others
to negotiate meaning (Jonassen, Davison, Collins, Campbell, & Bannan Haag, 1995). Hence, the sense of place
was  emphasized     in  location-based  learning since  space  not  only refers  to geographical  locations,   but also
cognitive, psychologically affected space where social interactions place an important role (Gruenewald, 2003).
And    on  the  notion  of technology-mediated   mobile   learning,  mobile devices   are  mediating  tools that allow
people    to capitalise  on  the situation in terms  of the immediate    physical   space, while  encouraging    social
communication and archiving in ways that enhance the learning context.

Methodology

Research Setting and Design Consideration
Premised     upon  a  social constructivist framework   on  distributed  cognitions   (Salomon,   1993)  and   situated
learning (Brown et al. 1989), the geography trail at Sentosa island in Singapore serves as a real world platform
to acquaint     students with  situated  collaborative  learning; generating,   sharing  and  affirming  findings  and
solutions    in  problem-solving   and   inquiry-oriented  activities.  For the  implementation    of   location-based
geography trail, three main activity stations, named Yellow, Red, and Green, were identified along Sentosa's
coastal areas spanning from Siloso beach to Palawan beach. To promote independent group decision-making, all
instructions and procedures for activities were hosted on a web-based platform (see Figure 1), and facilitators,
who    are trained university  students, were  also present at all  the activity stations. Facilitation was  a built-in
measure to assist students in their collaborative undertaking by providing them with task-oriented questions and
necessary prompts that build on students' contributions to charter the course of their discussion. Each group was
carrying Macbooks as mobile devices, and given a password to log onto the system and a set of coordinates to
locate the stations with the help of Google maps. They were also able to upload their findings and collected
artifacts onto these web pages created for each station.

Figure 1. Web Platform (Left) and Students Measuring Height of Observation Tower Using Trigonometry (Right).

           Table 1 presents an overview of the type of tasks designed for the mobile learning trail. The tasks were
co-designed     by the  research team  and  collaborating  teachers. Two    key  considerations drive   the design and

© ISLS                                                                                                               42
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                 Volume I: Long Papers

execution of the learning activities. Firstly, the learning activities should provide students with an authentic
platform to apply their acquired geography skills and knowledge in a real world setting. Secondly, the activities
ought to set the stage for in-situ collaborative learning, meaning collaborative meaning-making among students
in the course of interaction with and within context. Hence, the on-site activities seek to maximize the presence
of a   real world  platform, engaging  students   in meaningful     knowledge    creation and   production   where    "the
process of learning is informed by sense of place" (Lim & Barton, 2006, p.107). For instance, some of the key
earning activities include measuring of gradient, identification of physical features in relation to the impact of
physical forces of erosion and disposition, and the collection of qualitative data via face-to-face interviews with
tourists.
          In examining task design and implementation, we are particularly interested in the nature of task types
in terms of its structuredness. In this study, well-structured tasks form performative tasks where learning paths
to complete a task is rather fixed and procedural, leaving relatively little room for negotiation, judgment and
conflict among group members. Measuring and calculating gradients of slopes (Task 1) is an example of well-
structured tasks, as students can apply learned procedural skills to solve the task. On the other hand, we refer ill-
structured   tasks to   knowledge  generative    tasks   where   the   course    of learning    focuses  on  generating,
communicating     and  co-constructing ideas.  Design  thinking  task   at the   Green  station (Task   7) falls into this
category of knowledge generative tasks since the nature of tasks does not lead to one single answer or learning
path;  instead students  need to propose   workable   solutions  in  the  consideration  of  multiple   dimensions.   The
nature of tasks can combine both performance and knowledge generation as the case of Task 2 where students
need to generate interview questions and perform an interview with tourists.

Table 1: Overview of task design and characteristics.
 Station    Task type                  Description of tasks                          Desired learning outcomes
Station     Performative               Task 1: Measure and calculate the             To  understand    the  impact    of
Yellow                                 gradient of the slope at 3 different          physical forces such as erosion
                                       sections of the beach and rank the            and deposition on the steepness
                                       slope   from    the   gentlest  to  the       of the beach.
                                       steepest.
            Performative and           Task  2:  Interview    tourists to  find      To   collect   qualitative     data
            Knowledge generative       out why they picked Sentosa as a              through primary resources such
                                       holiday   destination  and   what   they      as face-to-face    interviews   for
                                       think can be improved for Sentosa             analysis   and     evaluation    of
                                       as a tourist attraction.                      issues.
Station     Performative               Task 3: Capture a picture along the           To  capture   photo   images    and
Red                                    coastal   area  and      annotate   five      label its features as part of the
                                       physical   features:   beach,    island,      process of data collection.
                                       observation     towers,       sea    &
                                       suspension bridge.
            Performative               Task   4:  Calculate     tower   height       To estimate   the  height   of both
                                       using trigonometry                            physical and human features &
                                                                                     to relate the actual features seen
                                                                                     on ground to the representation
                                                                                     on topographical maps.
            Performative               Task 5: Identify, capture a picture of        To      differentiate     between
                                       the ridge and annotate the physical           physical features.
                                       feature.
            Performative and           Task 6 Identify important industries          To  ask    geographic  questions,
            Knowledge generative       near    Sentosa     and   state     their     acquire and analyse geographic
                                       significance    for      the    Sentosa       information
                                       establishment
Station     Knowledge generative       Task   7:  Design   thinking    with   a      To   analyse,   synthesize      and
Green                                  focus on the beachfront area of the           evaluate real-life situations, in a
                                       Sentosa    island   in   terms   of  its      systematic manner.
                                       attractions,    accessibility       and
                                       amenities.   Identify  a problem    area
                                       and   propose   solutions,   following
                                       the   four    fundamental     steps  of
                                       design thinking ­ brainstorm, share,
                                       categorise and solutioning.

© ISLS                                                                                                                  43
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                       Volume I: Long Papers

Participants
In this study, we employed a naturalistic case study method (Stake, 1995) to unpack the relationships among
task design,   discourse   types,   and     facilitation. The  location-based    Geography   trail was    implemented      at   one
Secondary school in Singapore in March 2010. To examine more closely how students co-construct ideas for
each   task  type, our  study  focused      on   three groups  of  four   Secondary  One  students  each.   The   collaborating
teachers initially expressed some concerns about gender and ability issues over technology-enhanced learning
experiences that required complex problem solving skills. Hence, the selection of groups was randomly made in
consideration of gender and academic ability (determined via a standard geography test). The three selected
groups include two mixed-ability groups: Group 1 with all-girls and Group 2 with all-boys and one high-ability
mixed gender group- Group 3.
Data Collection and Analysis
The conversation and interaction of group members for all activities on the learning trail were video- and audio-
recorded and transcribed for analysis (73 pages in total). To analyse the students' interactions and knowledge
construction   process,   all verbal   data     of the students  was   transcribed  and analysed   with   respect  to   two     key
dimensions in the knowledge construction process, namely, the epistemic and the social. We adapted Pena-
Shaff's framework      (2009)  for  analyzing       discourse  where    she  subsumed   the eight  categories   on knowledge
construction proposed by Pena-Shaff and Nicholls (2004) into the epistemic and social dimensions surfaced in
Weinberger and Fischer (2006). We found that while the frameworks were originally used to analyze online
discourse,   the   coding  categories       are general   enough   to  be  applied  in face-to-face  discourse.   Further,      the
frameworks were premised upon a social constructivism theoretical framework consistent with our theoretical
stance  on   collective knowledge      creation.     Fischer  et al.   (2002 in  Weinberger   &    Fischer, 2006)   define      the
epistemic dimension as the on-task discourse where participants undertake knowledge construction tasks, and
emphasis is given to the content of the contributions of the participants. Of equal significance in the analysis of
collaborative learning discourse is Weinberger and Fischer's (2006) proposition of the social dimension where
they   posit that  the social modes    of    co-construction   describes    how  learners response  to and/    or build    on   the
contributions of fellow participants in the course of solving a task. Table 2 features the revised coding category
system for Knowledge Construction.
Table 2: Coding category system for knowledge construction.
 Dimensions                                        Code Category and Description
 Epistemic Dimension                               Elementary Clarification (ECL): Observing or studying a problem
             Construction of Problem Space         identifying its elements, and observing their linkages in order to come to a
             (retell rather than interpret)        basic understanding
 Epistemic Dimension                               Question (QS): Establishing relations between the problem and the
             Construction of Problem and           conceptual space
             Conceptual Space and                  Reply (RP)
             Relationships between both            In-depth Clarification (ICL): Analyzing and understanding a problem which
             (main task in problem-oriented        sheds light on the values, beliefs, and assumptions which underlie the
             learning environments)                statement of the problem

 Epistemic Dimension                               Interpretation (IN)
             Construction of Relations
             between Problem and
             Conceptual Space
 Some Epistemic Dimension                          Evaluation/Judgment (EV/JD)
 Statements not conductive to knowledge            Clarification without grounds; inappropriate use of theory/concepts,
 construction                                      arguments with no ground, remarks on organization matters (non-KC)
 Non-epistemic activities                          Social comments not related to discussions (non-EP)

 Social Dimension                                  Externalisation (EX): Discussions typically start with externalization/
                                                   Explain what they know
                                                   Elicitation (EL): Receiving information from the learning partners learning
                                                   partners as a resource
                                                   Quick consensus building (QCB)
                                                   Integrated-oriented consensus building (ICB)
                                                   Conflict-oriented consensus building (CCB)

Coding Schema and Unit of Analysis
The  group   interactional    discourse     of  completed  tasks  for  all three experiment   groups   at the  various     activity
stations was selected for analysis in this study. The number of tasks varies from station to station, ranging from
minimum      two  tasks to maximum          four tasks.   As such,  the   corpus of transcribed verbal    data at the   different
activity stations was segmentised first according to the different tasks at each station, and thereafter, according
to semantic features such as topics, discussion threads and ideas. Chi (1997) argues that it is more meaningful

© ISLS                                                                                                                           44
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                   Volume I: Long Papers

using semantic boundaries to determine the unit of analysis since an idea may require a few sentences to put
across; moreover, similar idea could be surfaced several times by team members who are more vocal. We found
this particularly true of face-to-face collaboration where tracking the development of the interactions to trace
evidences of collective knowledge construction is necessary. Hence, each segmentised unit of analysis in our
study, depending on the discussion thread and topic, could contain a single or several categories. To achieve
consistency and reliability, two more rounds of re-coding for all three participant groups were carried out by the
first author. A second coder was also deployed, and an inter-rater reliability of 0.712 (Kappa coefficient) was
achieved. In general, a Kappa value of 0.7 above is acceptable.
Findings and Discussion
A Comparison of the Occurrences of Discourse Types
The frequency of occurrences of statements for all task-discourse according to the category system is presented
in Table 3 for all groups at all three activity stations. As mentioned earlier, only the conversational discourse of
completed tasks is coded, thus for the tasks at yellow station, only findings of Group 1 and Group 3 are reflected
and for tasks at red station, Group 3 completed only the first task out of the four tasks assigned. All the groups
managed to complete the task at the green station.
Table 3: Frequency of occurrences of discourse types according to task-type for all three groups.
Task          Performative                                                Performative +               Knowledge
Structure                                                                 Knowledge Generative         Generative
              well-structured                                                                                            ill-
              structured
              Task 3               Task 5        Task 4       Task 1        Task 2        Task 6       Task 7
Groups        G1     G2      G3    G1     G2     G1     G2    G1     G3     G1     G3     G1     G2    G1                G2     G3
Epistemic dimension
ECL           2      0       0     2      1      1      2     4      4      0      0      0      0     0                 2      0
QS            1      1       0     1      1      0      3     0      2      1      1      1      2     3                 5      1
RP            3      2       4     0      1      4      5     4      5      1      3      3      5     3                 3      3
ICL           0      0       0     0      0      0      3     3      1      1      0      0      0     3                 2      2
IN            0      0       0     0      0      1      1     2      2      2      2      1      2     8                 7      4
EV/JD         0      0       0     0      0      2      1     3      1      3      2      0      0     5                 6      3
non- KC       3      2       8     3      0      3      2     3      3      4      4      1      0     6                 8      4
non-EP        2      0       7     0      1      4      1     2      0      0      0      0      0     1                 0      2
Social dimension
EX            2      3       6     2      2      6      5     12     6      1      3      3      1     3                 6      3
EL            3      3       6     3      3      5      5     12     6      3      3      4      2     4                 6      4
QCB           3      2       2     2      2      4      3     10     6      1      2      1      0     3                 3      2
ICB           0      0       0     0      0      1      0     0      0      0      1      1      1     5                 3      1
CCB           0      0       0     0      0      1      1     2      1      2      1      0      0     2                 5      2
Note: ECL= Elementary Clarification, QS= Question, RP= Reply, ICL= In-depth Clarification, IN= Interpretation, EV/JD=
Evaluation/Judgment, Non-KC= Statements not conductive to knowledge construction, Non-EP= Non-epistemic activities, EX=
Externalisation, EL= Elicitation, QCB= Quick consensus building, ICB= Integrated-oriented consensus building, CCB= Conflict-oriented
consensus building

           A comparison of the occurrences of statements across all three stations reveals an unequal distribution
of statement types. The bulk of the utterances during the task-discourse at yellow and red station for all three
groups   fall  chiefly   into  basic clarification, reply, externalization, elicitation and   quick  consensus              building
categories. Clarification statements in the epistemic dimension remain mostly in the elementary phase except for
Group    1 and  Group    3 which  manage    to  raise some  in-depth   discussion  during Tasks    1 and   2          at the  yellow
station.   For     the   red   station,  there   are  no    occurrences   of   in-depth     clarification,    interpretation,
judgment/evaluation,     integrated-oriented    and  conflicted oriented statements   for tasks  3   and   5.         This    unequal
distribution    of occurrences   of   statements   becomes  more   apparent   when   one  compares    the     task-discourse
between    the  red  and   green stations   for all three  groups. The   task-discourse   at green   station          sees    marked
improvement in the occurrences of interpretation and judgment/evaluation across all three groups. Similarly in
the social dimension, there are also reportedly fewer externalization and elicitation statements. Instead, we saw
some instances of integrated-oriented and conflict-oriented statements. Statements not conductive to knowledge
construction also witnessed a noticeable decline. Learners were more engaged in-depth discussions that require
them to consider one another's contributions, give comments and propose suggestions in the course of arriving
at a consensus.

© ISLS                                                                                                                               45
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                 Volume I: Long Papers

Impact of Task-design on Discourse Types
We argue that one reason to explain the above phenomenon lies in the nature of task. Tasks 3, 4 and 5 at the red
station are chiefly application and procedural which require learners to transfer acquired geography knowledge
and skills into  real  world situations.   Hence,  in the social  dimension,   statements   made  were pre-dominantly
externalisation to verbalise what they already knew about a specific application or problem-solving process, and
likewise, elicitation statements to seek affirmation of known procedures. Learners were also inclined towards
quick consensus building to proceed with tasks since they were relatively familiar with task requirements and
protocol.  Likewise,   we   could  also conclude   that   the task-type   also accounts  for the  occurrences   of basic
clarification, question  and reply  statements    in  the epistemic  dimension.    Comparatively,  the task   on  design
thinking at green station (Task 7) allows more space for collective knowledge generation and construction. To
visualize the difference between performative and knowledge generative tasks, we selected Tasks 3 and 7 and
plotted the frequency of discourse types for each group in Figure 2. The column graphs show that the content of
the contributions     from  the learners   indeed  show    an    increase in   more in-depth  clarification   statements,
evaluation, integrated-oriented and conflict oriented statements for Task 7 across all the three groups.

                          Group 1                                                      Group 2

                                                          Group 3
    Figure 2. Discourse frequency charts between Performative Task (Task 3) & Knowledge Generative Task
                                                        (Task 7).
          Our findings and analysis further accentuated that different epistemic activities are also likely to dictate
the learners'  task-discourse.   This   inherently implies    a  close relationship   between  the types of     epistemic
activities and the social modes of co- constructing and advancing knowledge. On this note, Weinberger and
Fischer (2006) posit that the varying social modes indicate both the degree and extent of "how learners work on
the task and formulate arguments together (as opposed to individually)" (p.86). In a similar fashion, Salomon
(1993 in Pena-Shaff & Nicholls 2004, p.244) postulates that new knowledge arises in the course of exchange,
negotiation and transformation, and he contends that the "exchange of ideas and negotiation of meaning affects
not only the individual's cognition but also the group's distributed cognitions". In the social process dimension,
our case  study  also  shows  that pure  application  and/    or procedural  tasks  tend to yield more externalization,
elicitation and quick consensus building, as surfaced in the conversational discourse for tasks at red and yellow
stations. Discussion   often remains    at the elementary     level of acknowledgement      and   affirmation of known
procedures.    And in   the epistemic   dimension,    there   are also  significantly fewer  evidences   of   a rigorous
interaction in the sharing and improvement of ideas amongst learners to construct and advance knowledge.

© ISLS                                                                                                                 46
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                  Volume I: Long Papers

Role of the Physical Environment in Relation to Task-design and Task Discourse
Types
The essence    of location-based    collaborative  learning  is embodied  in   the  constructivist approach   on learning
environments,   where      students are presented  opportunities   to   think about  the  object   and subject   of study,
construct meaning on their own and with others and to apply knowledge in real world context. A review of the
task discourse for Group1 and Group 3 at yellow station Task 1 and Group 1 and Group 2 at red station Task 4
(see Table 3), shows that this task-type (though mainly skill-based and application) generated some in-depth
clarification, interpretation  and  evaluation  statements   in the epistemic   dimension,  as   well  as, integrated and
conflict-oriented consensus building in the social modes of co-construction. We attribute this phenomenon to
the affordances of in-situ learning, where students are confronted with the real world platform to translate their
acquired  geography    skills  and  knowledge   into practice.  Notwithstanding,    the  nature  of tasks  may   not have
changed drastically from the usual mundane procedural tasks which might have been accomplished in the four
walls of a classroom, but the presence of the real physical environment certainly presented a different facet. The
seemingly straight-forward application tasks such as the measuring and ranking of the gradient of slopes at the
designated beach sections, and calculating tower height at the observation point saw unusual engagement in the
task-discourse    and  greater   collective knowledge    construction.   The   interaction  with   the real  environment
presented some unforeseen variables where students found the application of known formulas was no longer as
clear-cut, and the problem-solving process necessitated collective review of ideas and consensus. Students had
to exercise more critical thinking in the course of finding and affirming solutions collaboratively.

Impact of Facilitation on Discourse Types in Relation to Task
Our findings surface another critical factor, which has significantly impacted the nature, intensity and scope of
discussion, i.e. facilitation. It is evident from the relatively different occurrences of statements though the nature
of task was similar, as in the case of Task 6 at the red station and the design-thinking task at the green station
(see Table 3) that the nature and type of facilitation has a direct bearing on the group discourse. As mentioned
above, the task-discourse at green station witnessed a visible increase of interpretation and judgment/evaluation
across all three groups. Although this trend of discussion ought to have surfaced for Task 6 at the red station for
Group 1 and Group 2 where the nature of the task also necessitated more collaborative critical thinking in the
problem-solving process, there were only slightly fewer externalization and elicitation statements and sparse
occurrence of interpretation and integrated-oriented consensus building statements. Taking a step further to re-
trace the task- discourse for Group 1 and Group 2 at the red station, shows that where facilitator intervened
frequently in the course of discussion and/ or posed highly structured questions, participants became less forth-
coming with ideas. On the role of facilitation and its significance in collaborative learning environments, we
concurred with Hmelo-Silver and Barrows (2008) that there exists a definitive relationship between "how the
facilitator provided   opportunities    for  knowledge-building     discourse   and   how   the  learners   accomplished
collective knowledge building" (p.48). In other words, the type of questions posed will have a bearing on the
discourse   moves     that inherently   associate  with  effective  collaborative   knowledge      building  process  and
outcomes, in which Hmelo-Silver and Barrows (2008) spoke of shared responsibility of both the learners and
the facilitator to move the discourse forward. Facilitation plays a significant role in culminating a productive
discourse.

Conclusion
Overall  findings  provide   accounts   supporting   the close  relationship  between  task types   and discourse   types.
When    groups    participated   in the  tasks  that afford   space for   knowledge     generation,    the occurrence   of
interpretative and    evaluative discourse   appears  to be  high.  On  the   other hand,  when    groups  participated in
performative tasks that are rather fixed and procedural, groups' discursive practices tend to be clustered around
the sequence of question-answer and quick-consensus building. However, this is not to say that performative
tasks are not desirable in collaborative learning practices. As we have presented in this paper, performative tasks
do play  important    roles   in supporting   learners   to internalize and   externalize  their knowledge    and   skills.
Specifically in the context of location-based learning, applying knowledge and skills learned in classroom is not
straightforward   in  authentic  contexts   due to unforeseen   variables and  complex    interaction  with  the physical
environment. Such complex situations of application are important learning opportunities for students to learn
disciplinary problems through struggles, conflicts and even initial failures.
         In relation to the conference theme on connecting CSCL to policy and practices, this study highlights
the importance of paying close attention to the design configurations in mobile learning practices. In recent
years, we have witnessed policy initiatives at the national and institutional levels to provide more affordable and
accessible mobile devices to learners. In addition, there have been increasing interests about how to connect
learning experiences in and out of school contexts through the mediation to mobile technology and applications.
Field trips or outdoor learning supported with mobile technology is one form of situated learning that schools
are exploring to provide students with rich, authentic experiences. We argue that whether such initiatives make

© ISLS                                                                                                                  47
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                       Volume I: Long Papers

any impact     on collaborative   learning   practices   in schools   is closely associated  with    how  learning   tasks are
designed    and   enacted   to  support authentic   learning   experiences.   As    this  study   shows,  the  dominance    of
performative tasks and/or highly structured facilitation is likely to reproduce the traditional discourse pattern
like IRE in classrooms. Hence, we proposed that a three-prong approach (FAT) ­ Facilitation, Activities in-situ,
and  Technology      ­ should   be  considered   to  support   meaningful    collaborative   learning   practices   in mobile
learning.   To  conclude,   we    believe  that this   study  provides    some   insights  about   how    the  three intricate
dimensions     ­task   design,  discursive   practices,  and  facilitation  ­ are   unfolded    in the   situated  context  of
collaborative learning. We argue that a balanced approach in task design is critical to make a transition from
doing tasks to doing tasks with understanding.

References
Anderson, D., Lucas, K. B., Ginns, I. S., & Dierking, L. D. (2000). Development of knowledge about electricity
           and magnetism during a visit to ascience museum and related post-visit activities. Science Education
           84(5), 658-679.
Brown,   J. S.,   Collins,  A., &  Duguid,   P. (1989).    Situated cognition  and    the culture  of  learning.  Educational
           Researcher, 18(1), 32­41.
Chi, M. T. H. (1997). Quantifying qualitative analyses of verbal data: A practical guide. Journal of the Learning
           Sciences, 6(3), 271-315.
Gay,   G., Stefanone,   M.,    Grace-Martin,  M.   &   Hembrooke,     H.  (2001).   The   effects of  wireless  computing   in
           collaborative   learning  environments.    International   Journal    of Human-Computer        Interaction,  13(2),
           257-276.
Gruenewald, D. (2003). Foundations of place: A multidisciplinary framework for place-conscious education.
           American Eeducational Research Journal, 40(3), 619-654.
Hmelo-Silver,     C. E. &   Barrows,  H.   S. (2008).    Facilitating collaborative   knowledge    building.   Cognition   and
           Instruction, 26, 48­94.
Jonassen, D., Davison, M., Collins, M., Campbell, J., & Bannan Haag, B. (1995). Constructivism and computer
           mediated communication in distance education. The American Journal of Distance Education, 9(2), 7­
           26.
Lim, M. & Barton, A. (2006). Science learning and a sense of place in a urban middle school. Cultural Studies
           of Science Education, 1(1), 107-142.
Orion,  N.  &   Hofstein,   A.  (1994).  Factors   that  influence  learning  during   a  scientific  field trip in  a natural
           environment. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 31(10), 1097-1119.
Pena-Shaff, J. B. & Nicholls, C. (2004). Analyzing student interactions and meaning construction                in   computer
           bulletin board discussions. Computers & Education, 42(3), 243- 265.
Pena-Shaff,    J. (2009).   Student  patterns   of interaction   in asynchronous      online discussions:   Implications   for
           teaching  and   research. In  Méndez-Vilas,      Solano   Martín,  Mesa    González    &  Mesa   González    (Eds),
           Research,   reflections  and  innovations    in  integrating  ICT  in education,   1.  (pp. 440-445).    Formatex,
           Badajoz, Spain.
Salomon,    G.  (1993).    No   distribution without    individual's  cognition:    A dynamic     interactional  view.  In G.
           Salomon    (ed.) Distributed   cognitions   - Psychological    and educational    considerations     (pp.111-138).
           Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Sharples,   M.,   Corlett, D.,  &  Westmancott,    O.   (2002).  The  design  and   implementation     of a mobile   learning
           resource. Personal and Ubiquitous Computing, 6(3), 220-234.
Sharples, M., Taylor, J., & Vavoula, G. (2005, October). Towards a theory of mobile learning. Paper presented
           at 4th World conference on mLearning, Cape Town, Africa.
Squire, K.,    &  Klopfer,   E.  (2007).  Augmented      reality simulations   on   handheld    computers.    Journal   of the
           Learning Sciences, 16(3), 371-413.
Stake, R. E. (1995). The art of case study research. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Weinberger,     A.   &  Fischer,  F  (2006).  A    framework     to analyze   argumentative     knowledge     construction  in
           computer-supported collaborative learning. Computers & Education, 46, 71­95.

Acknowledgments
This research is supported by the FutureSchools@Singapore project under the National Research Foundation's
(NRF) Interactive and Digital Media (IDM) in Education Research and Development (R&D) Programme. We
thank SST teachers, students, and Yinjuan Shao for their contribution in this research.

© ISLS                                                                                                                      48
