CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                   Volume I: Long Papers

         A Scaffolded Software Tool for L2 Vocabulary Learning:
                         GroupScribbles with Graphic Organizers
         Wenli Chen, Chee-Kit Looi, Yun Wen, Learning Sciences Lab, National Institute of Education,
                      Nanyang Technological University, 1 Nanyang Walk, Singapore 637616
                  Email: wenli.chen@nie.edu.sg, cheekit.looi@nie.edu.sg, yun.wen@nie.edu.sg

         Abstract:    Understanding      technology   from  the perspective   of the  scaffolding    can help  us
         bridge the    gap  between    abstract  or  general  CSCL   design   principles   and   the design    and
         enactment    of  concrete  CSCL     practices.  This study addresses    this issue  by  describing    and
         discussing how we use GroupScribbles (GS) technology coupled with appropriate pedagogical
         graphic organizers to scaffold effective collaborative learning in the context of L2 students'
         vocabulary    learning    in Singapore    classrooms.  It  is  found  that   the  GS   technology     and
         pedagogical     graphic   organizers    can  jointly scaffold   students'    collaborative  vocabulary
         learning to achieve desired learning outcomes. When equipped with graphic organizers to help
         students plan and organize their problem solving, GS is transformed from a general tool for
         enabling     seamless  interactions  to a   scaffolded software   tool  integrated  with    pedagogical
         design for supporting specific learning, by problematizing important disciplinary content.

Introduction
There has been a discursive shift from knowledge transmission to knowledge construction in second language
(L2) learning literature (Warschauer, 1997; Warschauer & Kern, 2000) since the late 1990s. The integration of
collaborative learning into L2 learning has been emphasized (e.g., Belz, 2002; Lee, 2004) concomitant with the
shift which regards knowledge as not something eternal or unchanging or that exists apart from humans but
something that is the product of human activity.         Learners are able to ultimately enhance their lexical ability
through  generating,   sharing  and   improving    their conceptual artifacts  (e.g.  grammatical    rules  or meaning   of
words) by interacting with each other. Learners can improve both syntactic ability as well as lexical ability
through the collaboration with others.
         This shift of the epistemological perspective prompts much needed changes in traditional classrooms.
One such change is to seek in a more seamless way the integration and orchestration of individual learning,
small-group   and whole-class    interactions   in  the  classroom. Various   technologies   are  used   in classrooms   to
enhance   the  teacher-student   and     student-student   interactions with   the  belief  that  technologies     promotes
productive meaningful interaction for L2 learner's (e.g., Belz, & Kinginger, 2002; Lan, Sung, & Chang, 2007).
The scaffolding   metaphor     has been   used  to  describe  additional forms   of  support and  contexts     for enabling
interaction. How to design or implement technology to scaffold learners' language learning through CSCL has
long been a challenge for both researchers and teacher facilitators. This is particularly true in real classroom
learning where the context for CSCL is complex and dynamic. Understanding technology from the perspective
of the  scaffolding   can  help  us   bridge the   possible gap  between   abstract   or  general design    principles and
enactment   of concrete    CSCL     practices.  This  study   describes  and  discusses   how    we  use   GroupScribbles
technology equipped with pedagogical graphic organizers as a scaffolded software tool to enhance L2 students'
vocabulary learning in Singapore classrooms.

Literature Review

Scaffolded Software Tools
Scaffolding situations are those in which the learner gets assistance or support to perform a task beyond his or
her own reach if pursued independently when "unassisted" (Wood, Brunet & Ross,1976, p. 90). This is related
to Vygotsky's   concept   of Zone     of Proximal   Development    (ZPD,  defined   as the  zone  of  activity in  which a
person  can produce    with  assistance   what   they cannot  produce    alone (or   can  only produce   with   difficulty).
Traditional views of scaffolding focused on the social dimension - interactions with other people (teachers or
peers) as the source of assistance articulating how a more knowledgeable person can help (Hogan & Pressley,
1997; Wood et al., 1976). In the past decade, many researchers started to investigate the scaffolding functions of
the technological tools (Davis & Linn, 2000; Edelson et al., 1999; Guzdial, 1994; Quintana et al., 1999; Reiser
et al., 2001). The technology dimension of scaffolding examines how technology changes the task in some way
so that learners can accomplish tasks that would otherwise be out of their reach. The technology scaffolding
include providing prompts to encourage or remind students what steps to take (Davis & Linn, 2000), graphical
organizers or other notations to help students plan and organize their problem solving (Quintana et al., 1999), or
representations that   help  learners  track what    steps they have    taken (Collins   & Brown,    1988;  Koedinger    &
Anderson, 1993).

© ISLS                                                                                                                   414
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                       Volume I: Long Papers

         Pea   (2004)    summarized    the   2 general   properties   for  how   scaffolding   functions   for the   learner: 1)
channeling and focusing - reducing the degrees of freedom for the task at hand by providing constraints that
increase  the  likelihood  of   the learner's  effective  action;  recruiting    and  focusing   attention  of the   learner  by
marking relevant task features, with the result of maintaining directedness of the learner's activity toward task
achievement,   and    2) modeling:    modeling    more   advanced     solutions  to  the task. Reiser   (2004)   explained    the
"mechanisms" that a technology provides scaffolding for learners by differentiating between task structuring
("guiding  learners   through   key   components     and  supporting     their planning   and  performance"     [p.   273])  and
content problematizing ("tools can shape students' performance and understanding of the task in terms of key
disciplinary content and strategies and thus problematize this important content" [p. 273]).
         The social dimension and the technological dimension of scaffolding is complementary ­ they work
together in helping learners learn better in the sense that certain scaffolding activities can be the responsibility of
the people (teacher or peers) and other scaffolding activities provided by the technology (Reiser, 2004). In this
way, a scaffolding synergy (Tabak, 2004) could be achieved in support of student learning. This paper focuses
on the technology dimension of the scaffolding for L2 vocabulary learning.

CSCL and L2 Language Learning
Collaborative   learning   has  been   considered    to  be one   of   the effective    instructional   strategies in  language
learning (Cohen, 1994; Dagenais, & Walsh, 2008; Wen, Looi, & Chen, 2011). It "has a `social constructivist'
philosophical  base,   which    views  learning   as  construction    of  knowledge     within   a  social context   and   which
therefore  encourages    acculturation    of individuals    into a  learning   community"      (Oxford,    1997,   p 443).   The
learners   co-construct   knowledge       by working     on  joint  problems     or   tasks,  including    making     individual
contributions,  partaking    in discussion   and  arriving  at   joint solutions.    In the  literature on  Second    Language
Acquisition,   learners' active   involvement     in interaction  with   other   learners of  the   target language   has   been
identified as a fundamental aspect of the learning process as it provides opportunities for students to engage in
negotiation of   meaning   (Gutierrez,    2003).  In  doing  so,  they   adopt  ideas   from  their peers  and  share   specific
conceptions after collaborating. They influence one another, and converge or diverge with respect to language
knowledge.
         When    learners  learn    together,  members     of  the group     are becoming     similar   with   respect  to  their
knowledge, as knowledge equivalence and as shared knowledge prior to, during, and subsequent to collaborative
learning (Weinberger et al. 2007). This will lead to knowledge convergence, which is an increase in common
knowledge that all collaborating learners had (Jeong & Chi, 2007). Learners who converge in knowledge have
been found to benefit more from collaborating than learners who do not (Fischer & Mandl, 2005).
         Computer      technologies    play    an  important     role  in  supporting     students'    collaborative   learning.
Networked     technologies    offer   the potential   to bring   collaborative    learning    to   new  heights.   In  a   CSCL
environment, participants are actively and collaboratively engaged in creating knowledge, and the collaboration
is taking place through a computer network They engage in a coordinated effort to perform a task together to
establish common knowledge (Littleton & Häkkinen,1999).
         The   lexicon   may    be the most    important  component      for language    learners   (Gass  &   Selinker, 2001).
Vocabulary is recognized a fundamental to the development of L2 proficiency (Harley, 1996). The vocabulary
learning   activities through   CSCL      approach   can  be   classified  into  2   categories:   incidental  and   intentional
vocabulary learning. "Incidental learning is said to occur when a word is acquired as a by-product of the learner
being  engaged   in   some    language    learning   activity" (Smith,     2004,  p.368).    There  is  fairly solid   evidence
supporting  the  view    that computer-assisted      collaborative  reading    and   writing  benefits  students'    vocabulary
acquisition, in which environment they have less anxiety and more opportunities to negotiate around anew or
problematic    words   (e.g,  Ghaith,  2003).     Intentional  vocabulary      learning   is task-based    which     focuses  on
vocabulary learning. Most classroom vocabulary learning activities are intentional learning activities. Existing
CSCL research in language learning focuses more on incidental learning than intentional learning. This paper
discusses the intentional vocabulary learning in a F2F (face-to-face) CSCL environment in real classrooms.

Background of the Study

Chinese as L2 in Singapore
Singapore   is a multiethnic    and   multilingual   country,  in  which   bilingualism     refers  to proficiency   in  English
which is recognized as the L1, and the L2 known as a "Mother Tongue Language" (MTL). Chinese or Mandarin
is Chinese students' MTL. The Ministry of Education in Singapore defines MTL not by the language used at
home or the first language learned by the student but by ethnicity (Tan, 2006). Hence, one of the characteristics
of L2 learning in Singapore is the difference of students' language abilities in a class due to their different MTL
backgrounds.   For    typical ethnic   Chinese    students  in Singapore,      their lack of  motivation    and    limited basic
linguistic capability    continue  to be  the  fundamental    challenges   to  their  learning   in Chinese    Language    (Sim,

© ISLS                                                                                                                        415
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                 Volume I: Long Papers

2005). Our school-based research is to address the typical linguistic weaknesses of younger Chinese in their L2
proficiency especially their command of vocabulary.
         Chinese is a character-based language. To be literate in Chinese, one needs to know over a thousand
Chinese  characters    (Wing,  et al., 2003). From   the  perspective  of  linguists,  the Chinese    script, due  to  its
logographic nature, is considered the most difficult script to learn by non-native learners (Shen, 2004). Shen
(2002) attributes the challenge to the retention of the combination of the three elements of a character, that is, its
sound,  shape   and   meaning  in learner's  long-term memory,   and   the instant retrieval   of these three    elements.
Innovations   in language   education   have been  targeted  towards   a more  comprehensive      understanding    of  the
development     of children's  capability in  handling   the script of   Chinese,  and  ways   of  enhancing     learners'
structural understanding of the writing system beyond rote learning and mechanical practice (Tse, 2002).

Research Design and Participants
We introduced CSCL in F2F Chinese language classrooms to help the students learn better by collaboratively
constructing  language   knowledge     together  through  authentic  verbal  discussion    (in Chinese)  mediated      and
enhanced   by   GroupScribbles.   A design-research    approach  is adopted   to  address    complex  problems    in  real
classroom  contexts   in collaboration  with  practitioners, and to  integrate design   principles  with technological
affordances to render plausible solutions (Brown, 1992; Collins, 1992). In the 3 year school-based research, we
have worked with one primary school and 3 secondary schools in Singapore in systematically designing and
implementing collaborative learning supported by GroupScribbles for Maths, Chinese, and English language
learning (see Chen & Looi, 2010; Looi & Chen, 2010) . The research reported in this paper focuses on Chinese
language learning, and specifically vocabulary learning.
         All  the  GS-based    collaborative  activities were  co-designed   by   the  teachers   and researchers.    The
students work on groups of four in their collaborative discussions. The students in a group are seated next to
each other with a Tablet PC, and they engage in face-to-face talk. The Chinese language learning curriculum in
Singapore Primary schools focuses on vocabulary (Liu & Zhao, 2008) whereas the Chinese language curriculum
in secondary schools emphasizes textual or discourse structure and grammar. To be aligned with the specific
lesson objectives as stated in the syllabus, our GS-based activities for primary school students were designed to
assist students  to   learn new   characters and  word   formation.    In  secondary   schools,   the GS    activities on
vocabulary were designed to help students review characters and words that they had learnt before. This paper
will   describe  two  activity designs   for vocabulary   learning  at   the primary   and     secondary school    levels
respectively.

GroupScribbles (GS)

                            Figure 1. The User Interface of GS with a Two-Paned Window.

The technology tool we used to support students' collaborative learning is GroupScribbles (GS), which was co-
developed by SRI international and National Institute of Education Singapore. The GS user interface presents
each user with a two-paned window. The lower pane is the user's personal work area, or `private board', with a
virtual pad of fresh `scribble sheets' on which the user can draw or type (see Figure 1). When the scribble sheet
is moved to the public board, it can be synchronized to all the Tablet PC's public board so that all the members
can view it. The essential feature of the GS client is the combination of the private board (where students can
work individually) and group boards or public boards (where students can post their work and position them
relative to the work of others, view others' work and take items back to the private board for further elaboration.
It enables collaborative    generation, collection and   aggregation of  ideas  through    a shared  space  based   upon
individual effort and social sharing of notes in graphical and textual forms. In our school-based research, GS is
used   routinely   in F2F   classroom   setting. Effectively  supporting     students' F2F     interactions   as well  as
coordination in collaborative learning becomes possible with the use of GS.

© ISLS                                                                                                                 416
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                     Volume I: Long Papers

                         Figure 2. A Generalized Student Activity Pattern in GS Classroom.

           Figure 2 shows a generalized student activity pattern supported by GS             which we have found to be
effective  for  productive     language   learning.  One     particular set of   affordances   of the    GS-based   learning
environment     is the   ability for students   to   engage  in  private interactions   in the  GS    private  board, group
interactions in the group board together with F2F verbal discussion, and class-level interactions through GS.
When students work in the GS private space without others being able to see or directly impact them, they can
engage    with  their materials   and  sense-making       processes individually  in  a focused   way    (Vahey,   Tatar,  &
Roschelle,  2007).    We    believe  that it is very   important    to  allow the student  to  complete     as much   of  the
vocabulary task as possible individually. When they drag the posting to the group board, they engage in the
group interaction by constructing and discussing about the product or their work (Vahey et al., 2007). Then they
visit other group boards to engage in class interactions where they are exposed with full range of ideas and
artifacts, and they critique these ideas/artifacts. At the end of this activity, they go back to their own group board
to engage in group or private interactions where they improve their ideas/artifacts after seeing other groups
ideas/artifacts and   comments.     It is evident    that GS  technology    scaffolds the  process    of different levels  of
interactions and the seamless switch between them: private interaction - group interaction - class interaction ­
group/private interaction. It enables a synergy between autonomy and collaboration by combining both private
and collaborative learning. The F2F GS environment leverages resources such as shared screen, gestures, and
conversation    norms    to help  students   jointly construct   meaning,   become    more  proficient   in participating  in
representation-based interactions, and build a common understanding of the subject matter (Chen, Looi, & Tan,
2010; Vahey et al., 2007).

Graphic Organizers
It is  not the  technology     that is the innovation     in student   learning, but  the  integration   of technology   and
pedagogical    practices    in   scaffolding the   meaningful    vocabulary     leaning   activities. Here    we   present 2
pedagogical graphic organizers in GS that help students' vocabulary learning. Figure 3 displays an organizer for
guiding primary school students to learning new words/characters. The purpose of this graphic organizer is to
enhance students' awareness of the character components, and to help students learn the usage of the words in
authentic context by composing sentences that make use of the words. Different groups were responsible for
different new words. They could learn individual new word through visiting one another's group board. Group
students first were required to write down in the centre of the GS board the character/phrase they work with.              In
this case it was a phrase "" (meaning "to completely ignore"). The space surrounding the phrase was
divided into 7 sections, each of which was dedicated for one task. Starting from the top right in clockwise order,
the tasks were: 1) to explain the meaning of the phase; 2) to give a few similar characters as the last character of
the phrase; 3) to give a few homophones of the last character of the phrase; 4) to use the last character of the
phrase to form words (word formation); 5) comments from other groups (similarly this group was required to
give comments on other groups' work); 6) to expand the phrase into a sentence, and 7) to collocate the phrase
with other words (word collocations).
           Figure 4 shows a group board with the organizer completed by one of the groups. With the sub-tasks in
different themes, all group members have an opportunity to contribute their individual knowledge and ideas to
the group, no matter what language proficiency they have. Students who are not good at Chinese language can
post  the  meaning    of the   phrase/word   with  the help   of a  dictionary.  Students  with higher    Chinese  language
capability can take the responsibility for making sentences. All students can contribute homophones and similar
characters for the given characters based on their different prior knowledge of the characters. Within the group,
the task is not dominated by one or two students. Rather, all the students play their part to complete the task. At
the class level, when the teacher asks students to visit other group boards to learn other words and give their

© ISLS                                                                                                                    417
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                Volume I: Long Papers

comments to help others refine their group products, students with different Chinese language proficiency have
an equal   opportunity    to give  and  receive constructive comments.   In   Figure  4, we  can  see  the constructive
comments (as circled out) from other groups which help them correct the wrongly formed Chinese characters.

Figure 3. A Graphic Organizer for New Character
                & Word Learning.

                                                             Figure 4. A Completed Group Board with Organizer
                                                                        (Primary School Example).

         Next we describe the graphic organizer for the vocabulary learning of secondary school students. The
Chinese script system is a principled- and rule-based system. Each Chinese character is comprised of one or
more   components,    spatially  arranged  with  certain principles (Liang,   2004).  There are  different standards to
classify   the basic  spatial   configurations  for  individual   characters. In  this  activity we   adopt  a   regular
categorization, by which all the Chinese characters can be classified into 5 groups. They are up-down, up-mid-
down; left-right; left-mid-right and full/half enclosed structure.

               Figure 5. Graphic Organizer for New Character & Word Learning (Secondary School Example).

         Figure 5 shows an organizer for helping students review vocabulary that they have learnt in the past
semester.  The   centre   of the   figure is a solid circle with  the instruction  ""             (meaning   "up-down
structure").   Students need    to post characters with  up-down    structure onto this  area. The three   outer layers,
working outward, are layer 2 "word formation"; layer 3 "meaning of the word"; layer 4 "expand the word into a
sentence". Students are required to use the posted characters to form words; to give their own explanation for
the words and to make proper sentence using the words. During this process, the students in a group can share
their individual vocabulary knowledge and get a better understanding of the use of the words by negotiating
their meanings in different context. Some blank space of the figure is left for assembling comments from the
students from other groups.
         Round Robin is suggested to be used together with this organizer in activity design, with the aim of
knowledge sharing and construction during the whole class. Different groups are responsible for different tasks
in the beginning.     For example   (see  the  protocol showed   in Figure 6), group   1  students are responsible   for
picking up characters with up-down structures from the words list, and posting them onto the central circle,
group 2 students are responsible for those up-mid-down structured characters, and so on. After all the groups
complete their task in round 1, followed the protocol of round robin, group 1's students go to group 2's board to
post related words onto the task of word formation. At this moment, group 2's students are working at group 3's
board on left-right structured new characters. In round 3, group 1's students enter into group 3's public board for
explaining   the meaning     of the  words.  A  whole   activity completes  until all the groups   finish  checking the
propriety of the postings from all other groups in round 5. Figure 7 displays the screenshot of a group board with
artefacts.

© ISLS                                                                                                               418
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                  Volume I: Long Papers

       Figure 6.  Protocol of Round Robin.

                                                      Figure 7. A Completed Group Board with Organizer for Reviewing
                                                                                 Vocabulary.

Conclusion and Discussion
The teaching     of L2  to  young   students,  which    involves complex    linguistic skills and    is thus  cognitively
demanding, has always been a great challenge to language teachers and researchers. The collaborative learning
activity scaffolded    by  GS   technology  and   graphic    organizers   was developed   with   the  pragmatic    aim of
addressing the fundamental linguistic difficulties and challenges of younger students in learning L2 vocabulary.
As  Collins  (1997)   argued,   "learning  difficulties reflect differences,  not  deficiencies"  (p.   3). Collaborative
learning can help address the learning difficulties because students are more motivated to help each other when
they work together, and they feel less threatened when they made mistakes, as their group-mates will help them.
Consequently, they achieve improvement as a group together. GS activities help address the different language
ability of students. It is hoped that this phenomenon of ability differentiation will be gradually faded out as all
students  will   overcome    their  respective weaknesses,    and   therefore  could   contribute to    the collaborative
vocabulary learning. In these 2 learning scenarios, the GS technology and graphic organizers play important
roles in scaffolding students to collaboratively learn vocabulary better.
         From     the perspective   of Reiser's   (2004)  framework     of scaffolding  mechanisms,        GS technology
provides scaffolding for learners more by task structuring whereas graphic organizers serve as scaffolding by
content problematizing. The design of GS technology supports the seamless switch between different types of
cognition (private cognition ­ group cognition ­ class cognition ­ group cognition ­ private cognition") during
the collaborative learning process. It guides students through the key collaboration procedures and supports their
vocabulary learning planning and performance. Each individual student is not only responsible for his individual
learning, but also for the group learning and class learning. Students must make their vocabulary knowledge
public through GS that represent diverse knowledge explicitly. The artifacts created by students in GS become a
vehicle for negotiation of understanding about the vocabulary knowledge. The shared representation can serve
as a catalyst for negotiation of ideas.
         With the graphic organizer, the students were provided with a pedagogical structure to scaffold their
vocabulary    learning.    The   mechanism     of  scaffolding   by  graphic   organizers    serves   more    as   content
problematizing by "shaping students' performance and understanding of the task in terms of key disciplinary
content  and    strategies and   thus problematizing    this important    content" (Reiser,  2004,      p.  273). Chinese
vocabulary learning is complex. There are different ways in learn such a character-based language. Traditionally,
the students learn the characters by listening to a teacher's lecturing which focuses on one or two components
(e.g., phonetics, structure, radicals) of the characters. This approach is not systematic and ignores the use of the
characters or words in authentic contexts.      The graphic organizers were designed to alleviate the problem by
changing    the nature  of  the  vocabulary learning    task through  highlighting  the key   disciplinary    content and
strategies for vocabulary learning. They can scaffold vocabulary learning by "channelling and focusing" (Pea,
2004).   In the  GS   activity, the organizers help  to  reduce  the degrees   of  freedom   for the  task  by providing
constraints  that increase  the  likelihood of  the learner's   effective action  (focusing on   all key   components  of
vocabulary learning such as the meaning, structure, homophones, similar characters, uses in authentic sentences
etc). The graphic organizers help recruit and focus attention of the learner on the relevant task features so that
students are guided on a track toward task achievement. They help learners to perform by potentially enabling
them to focus on more productive parts of the tasks. In our interview with the teacher, she expressed her view:
"[with the graphic organisers] as time goes on, not only can students' interest of Chinese characters learning
improve, they can internalize these strategies to learn Chinese vocabulary. They can also apply these strategies
when   they  come   across  a   new character  or word.  After   some   time, the  students may   no  longer  need   these
tangible scaffolding   organizers   anymore    because  they  have  learned   what to  do when    they  learn  other  new

© ISLS                                                                                                                 419
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                     Volume I: Long Papers

characters or words".    Thus, the teacher's view is consistent with the expertise reversal effect (Kalyuga, Ayres,
Chandler, & Sweller, 2003).
          Scaffolding is distributed across the tools and context in which learning is happening. GS technology
and graphic    organizers  jointly scaffold  students'   collaborative     vocabulary     learning to achieve   the   desired
learning   outcomes   with technological  scaffolding   synergistically     provided  by  the GS    technology  and    by the
pedagogical graphic organizers. The GS technology scaffolds students' collaboration and distributed cognition
occurring across activities, artifacts, within group and across groups. The GS is a shared workspace for all the
students to share knowledge and ideas. Students are able to view the artefacts generated by other students. They
provide feedback to other groups' artefacts, question each other and argue about the meanings, which in turn
build community knowledge. Therefore, in this F2F CSCL environment, vocabulary knowledge is not an object
that is acquired and possessed by individuals, but becomes embedded in the conversations and social discourse.
Without the graphic organizers, GS is a general collaboration tool that supports different level of interactions by
taking  in to  account   both individual and  social   processes   in    CSCL. It scaffolds   students  in both knowledge
acquisition   and knowledge    as  participation (Sfard,   1998).   When     equipped   with  graphic   organizers    to help
students plan and organize their problem solving, GS is transformed from a general tool for enabling seamless
interactions to a scaffolded software tool integrated with pedagogical design for supporting specific learning
goals  by  problematizing   important   disciplinary   content.    Therefore  by  having    both GS   tool and  appropriate
graphic  organizers,  scaffolding  synergy   could  be  achieved    in   support  of  the learner's advances   by   allowing
greater opportunities for vocabulary learning that otherwise would not be possible in the classroom.

References
Belz, J. A. (2002). Social dimension of telecollaborative foreign language study. Language Learning & Technology, 6(1),
          60-81.
Belz, J. A., & Kinginger, C. (2002). "The cross-linguistic development of address form use in telecollaborative language
          learning: Two case studies." The Canadian Modern Language Review 59(2): 189-214.
Brown, A. L. (1992). Design experiments: Theoretical and methodological challenges in creating complex interventions.
          Journal of the Learning Sciences, 2, 141­178.
Chen,  W.,  &  Looi,  C.K. (2010). What   do Students   do in   a  F2F    CSCL   Classroom?   The  Optimization of    Multiple
          Communications Modes. Computers & Education, 55(3), 1159-1170.
Chen, W., & Looi,C.K. (In press). Active Classroom Participation in a GroupScribbles Primary Science Classroom. British
          Journal of Educational Technology, 41.
Chen,  W.  &   Looi,  C.K. (2010). What   do Students   do in   a  F2F    CSCL  Classroom?    The  Optimization of    Multiple
          Communications Modes, Computers & Education, 55(3), pp. 1159-1170.
Cohen, E. (1994). Designing group work (2nd). New York: Teachers College Press.
Collins, A. (1992). Toward a design science of education. In E. Scanlon&T. O'Shea (Eds.), New directions in educational
          technology (pp. 15­22). Berlin, Germany: Springer-Verlag.
Collins, A., & Brown, J. S. (1988). The computer as a tool for learning through reflection. In H. Mandl & A. Lesgold (Eds.),
          Learning issues for intelligent tutoring systems (pp. 1­18). New York: Springer-Verlag.
Collins, J.L. (1997). Strategies for Struggling Writers. Guilford Press.
Dagenais, D., & Walsh, N. (2008). Collaboration and co-construction of knowledge during language awareness activities in
          Canadian elementary school. Language Awareness, 17(2), 139-155.
Davis,  E. A., &  Linn,  M.   C. (2000). Scaffolding   students'   knowledge   integration: Prompts   for  reflection in KIE.
          International Journal of Science Education, 22, 819­837.
Edelson, D. C., Gordin, D. N., & Pea, R. D. (1999). Addressing the challenges of inquiry-based learning through technology
          and curriculum design. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 8, 391­450.
Gass, S. M., & Selinker, L. (2001). Second language acquisition. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Ghaith, G. (2003). Effects of the learning together model of cooperative learning on English as a foreign language reading
          achievement, academic self-esteem, and feelings of school alienation. Bilingual Research Journal, 27(3), 451-475.
Gutierrez, G. A. G. (2003). Beyond interaction: the study of collaborative activity in computer-mediated tasks. ReCALL,
          15(1), 94-112.
Guzdial, M.   (1994). Software-realized scaffolding to  facilitate programming    for science learning. Interactive   Learning
          Environments, 4, 1­44.
Harley, B. (1996). Vocabulary learning and teaching in a second language. Canadian Modern Language Review, 53, 3-12.
Hogan, K., & Pressley, M. (1997). Scaffolding scientific competencies within classroom communities of inquiry. In K.
          Hogan & M. Pressley (Eds.), Scaffolding student learning: Instructional approaches and issues (pp. 74­107).
          Cambridge, MA: Brookline.
Jeong, H., & Chi, M. T. H. (2007). Knowledge convergence and collaborative learning. Instructional Science, 35, 287-315.
Fischer, F., & Mandl, H. (2005). Knowledge convergence in computer-supported collaborative learning: The role of external
          representation tools. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 14(3), 405-441.
Kalyuga, S. Ayres, P., Chandler, P. & Sweller, J. (2003). The expertise reversal effect. Educational Psychologist, 38(1) 23­
          31.
Koedinger, K. R., & Anderson, J. R. (1993). Reifying implicit planning in geometry: Guidelines for model-based intelligent
          tutoring system design. In S. P. Lajoie & S. J. Derry (Eds.), Computers as cognitive tools (pp. 15­45). Hillsdale,
          NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc.

© ISLS                                                                                                                     420
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                     Volume I: Long Papers

Lan, Y. J., Sung, Y. T., & Chang, K. E. (2007). A mobile-device-supported peer-assisted learning system for collaborative
          early EFL reading. Language Learning & Technology, 11(3): 130-151.
Lee, L. (2004). Native and nonnative speakers' perceptions of networked collaborative interaction: A sociocultural approach.
          In L. Lomicka & J. Cooke-Plagwitz (Fds.), Technology and the language teacher: The theoretical, historical, and
          practical interface (pp. 248-261). Boston: Heinle & Heinle.
Liang, M.-Y. and C. J. Bonk (2009). Interaction in blended EFL learning principles and practice. International Journal of
          Instructional Technology and Distance Learning, 6(1): 3-15.
Littleton, K. & Häkkinen, P. (1999). Learning Together: Understanding the processes of Computer-based Collaborative
          Learning. In P. Dillenbourg (Ed.) Collaborative learning: cognitive and computational approaches (pp. 1-20).
          Pergamon: Oxford.
Liu, Y. B., & Zhao, S. H. (2008). Chinese language instruction in Singapore primary school classrooms: A comparative
          study. Pedagogies: An International Journal, 3, 168-186.
Looi, C. K. & Chen, W. (2010). Community-based individual knowledge construction in the classroom: A process-oriented
          account. Journal of Computer Assisted Learning, 26(3), 202-213.
Oxford, R. L. (1997). Cooperative learning, collaborative learning, and interaction: Three communicative strands in the
          language classroom. The Modern Language Journal, 81(iv), 443-458.
Pea, R. D. (2004). The social and technological dimensions of scaffolding and related theoretical concepts for learning,
          education, and human activity. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 13(3), 423-451.
Quintana, C., Eng, J., Carra, A.,Wu, H.-K., & Soloway, E. (1999). Symphony: A case study in extending learner-centered
          design through    process  space analysis.  In  M. G.  Williams, M.  W. Altom,   K. Ehrlich, &W.   Newman    (Eds.),
          Proceedings    of CHI 99   Conference on    Human   Factors  in  Computing Systems   (pp. 473­480). Reading,  MA:
          Addison-Wesley.
Reiser, B. J., Tabak, I., Sandoval,W. A., Smith, B. K., Steinmuller, F., & Leone, A. J. (2001). BGuILE: Strategic and
          conceptual scaffolds for scientific inquiry in biology classrooms. In S. M. Carver & D. Klahr (Eds.), Cognition and
          instruction: Twenty-five years of progress (pp. 263­305). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc.
Reiser, B.  J. (2004).   Scaffolding complex  learning:   The  mechanisms   of structuring and problematizing  student work.
          Journal of the Learning Sciences, 13(3), 273-304.
Sfard, A. (1998). On two metaphors for learning on the danger of choosing just one. Educational Research, 27 (2), 4-13.
Shen, H. H. (2002). Level of cognitive processing: Effects on character learning among non-native learners of Chinese as a
          foreign language. Language and Education, 18, 167-182.
Shen, H. H. (2004). Level of cognitive processing: Effects on character learning among non-native learner of Chinese as a
          foreign language. Language and Education, 18, 17.
Sim, S.H. (2005). Teaching Chinese composition in Singapore secondary school. In: Shum, M.S. & Zhang, D.L. (Eds.),
          Teaching Writing in Chinese Speaking Areas (pp.245-258), Springer Netherlands.
Smith, B. (2004). Computer-mediated negotiated interaction and lexical acquisition. Studies in Second Language Acquisition,
          26(3), 365-399.
Tabak, I. (2004). Synergy: a complement to emerging patterns of distributed scaffolding. Journal of the Learning Sciences,
          13(3), 305-335.
Tan, C. (2006). Change and continuity: Chinese language policy in Singapore. Language Policy, 5(1), 41-62.
Tse. S.K.   (2002). Comprehensive    and   effective teaching and  learning of  Chinese characters.  Hong  Kong:  Greenfield
          Enterprise Ltd.
Vahey, P., Tatar, D., & Roschelle, J. (2007). Using handled technology to move between private and public interactions in
          the classroom. In M. van't Hooft & K. Swan (Eds.). Ubiquitous computing in education: Invisible technology,
          visible impact (pp.187-210). Mahway, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Warschauer, M. (1997). Computer-mediated collaborative learning: Theory and practice. The Modern Language Journal, 81
          (4), pp. 470-481.
Warschauer, M., & Kern, R. (2000). Network-Based Language Teaching: Concept and Practice. Cambridge University
          Press.
Weinberger, A., Stegmann, K., & Fischer, F. (2007). Knowledge convergence in collaborative learning: Concepts and
          assessment. Learning and Instruction, 17, 416-426.
Wen. Y., Looi, C. K., & Chen, W. (2011). Who are the beneficiaries when CSCL enters into Second Language classroom.
          Global Chinese Journal of Computers in Education, 7. 91-107.
Wing, W. K., Ho, C. L., Chung, A. L. S., & Tse, S. K. (2003). Structural awareness, variation theory and ICT support.
          Educational Studies in Language and literature, 3, 53-78.
Wood,   D., Brunet;  J., &  Ross, G.  (1976). The    role of tutoring in problem  solving. Journal  of Child Psychology  and
          Psychiatry and Allied Disciplines, 17, 89-100.

Acknowledgments
This   material  is based   on the   work  supported     by  the National  Research  Foundation     Singapore  under   Grant
NRF2007-IDM003-MOE-001               and NRF2009-IDM001-MOE-019.            Any   opinions,   findings, and  conclusions or
recommendations expressed in this material are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of
the National Research Foundation Singapore. We are grateful to the School of Science and Technology, and
Mayflower Primary School for collaborating with us on this research.

© ISLS                                                                                                                   421
