CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                    Volume I: Long Papers

  Orchestrating Web-Based Collaborative Inquiry Learning with
                             Small Group and Classroom Scripts
  Ingo Kollar, Christof Wecker, Sybille Langer, Frank Fischer, Ludwig-Maximilians-University of Munich,
                                           Leopoldstrasse 13, D-80802 Munich
           Email: ingo.kollar@psy.lmu.de, christof.wecker@psy.lmu.de, sybille.langer@psy.lmu.de,
                                                frank.fischer@psy.lmu.de

         Abstract: Collaborative inquiry learning is a promising approach to foster students' online
         search competence. Yet, to be effective, it needs to be structured appropriately. In a quasi-
         experimental field study employing a 2x2 design, we investigated the effects of a small-group
         collaboration    script (present  vs.  absent), two   variants  of  a classroom   script  (online search
         activities constantly located on the small group level vs. online search activities alternating
         between    plenary   and   small  group level)  and  their  different  combinations   on  online  search
         competence      during  an inquiry   learning   unit on Genetic     Engineering.  Results   indicate that
         scaffolding on at least one of the two levels (realizing plenary phases or providing a small
         group  script)   is necessary    to reach  higher    levels of  online   search competence.     However,
         combining classroom scripts that alternate between plenary and small-group phases and small-
         group scripts did not further improve online search competence.

Introduction
Scientific literacy   is the capacity  to  deal with  issues  in everyday    life that are related to science   (Laugksch,
2000). As science progresses continuously, no body of domain-specific knowledge acquired in school will be
sufficient for this purpose throughout a lifetime. However, the Internet brings up-to-date scientific findings in
the reach of everyone. Accordingly, scientific literacy has to include online search competence as an integral
part. Yet, as prior research has shown, searching and finding relevant, credible and scientifically substantiated
information on the Internet is a challenging task for high-school students (Lazonder, 2005). Thus, it is a pressing
question how online search competence can be facilitated during secondary education.
         One promising approach to achieve this is inquiry learning (e.g., de Jong, 2006), during which students
act similarly to scientists who are confronted with an authentic research problem. However, prior research has
demonstrated   that   inquiry  learning   needs  to be   structured   to lead  to  significant learning  (de  Jong     & van
Joolingen, 1998), especially when it involves small-group collaboration, since students rarely collaborate on a
high level spontaneously (Cohen, 1994). We argue that when collaborative inquiry learning is embedded in a
real classroom situation, this guidance can be provided in at least two ways. First, if large portions of classroom
learning are realized in small groups, it can effectively be supported with small-group collaboration scripts
(e.g., de Wever, van Keer, Schellens & Valcke, 2010; Kollar, Fischer & Slotta, 2007; Weinberger, Ertl, Fischer
& Mandl, 2005). Second, so-called classroom scripts that distribute learning activities over the different social
planes of the classroom (e.g., the plenary, a small group and an individual level; see Dillenbourg & Jermann,
2007)  may  foster    the acquisition  of  online  search  competence     .In  this paper  we  investigate  the  effects   of
different small group collaboration scripts and classroom scripts as well as their different combinations on the
acquisition of online search competence in a 4.5 weeks inquiry learning unit on Genetic Engineering.

Collaborative Inquiry Learning as an Approach to Foster Online Search
Competence
The basic idea of inquiry learning is that students should acquire domain knowledge and research skills by being
confronted  with  science    problems   and  attempting  to   solve  them  by   engaging   in scientific activities such   as
hypothesis generation, experimentation and drawing conclusions (de Jong, 2006). The retrieval of information
in scientific publications or other sources and the use of this information for the construction of scientifically
valid arguments may be regarded as yet another typical inquiry activity. Broken down to student learning and
given the fact that today the Internet is the main source for information on science-related debates for high
school  students, having     them   search the  Internet for  such   information    to create arguments    they can    use in
scientific debates can be seen as a kind of inquiry learning that is especially needed today.
         In empirical research, inquiry learning has often been employed in a collaborative mode (i.e. involving
small  groups  of   learners),   since engaging    in scientific activities   individually  may   be  and  often    is too  a
demanding task. That said and considering results from prior research on collaborative learning indicating that
learners rarely  collaborate     on a  high  level  spontaneously     (e.g., Cohen,    1994),  there is  a clear need      for
instructional guidance    in order  to make    collaborative  inquiry   learning  a successful  experience.   Accordingly,
research on collaborative inquiry learning has intensively studied and identified ways to scaffold and support
small groups during their inquiry (e.g., Sandoval, 2003; van Joolingen et al., 2005).

© ISLS                                                                                                                     422
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                      Volume I: Long Papers

Scripts as Scaffolds for Collaborative Inquiry Learning
Based on empirical evidence that demonstrates that students often have difficulty to collaborate on a high level
(e.g. because they lack collaborative competences; e.g. Cohen, 1994), CSCL research has over the last years
rediscovered    scripts  as promising    tools   to provide  such   support.   When    reflecting  about   how   to foster the
acquisition of online search competence in real classrooms that consist of a teacher and 20 or more students,
scripts target at least two levels: First, so called "small group collaboration scripts" (Kollar et al., 2006) specify,
distribute and sequence learning activities and roles among the partners of a small group (e.g., dyads or triads).
Second, the script idea may be expanded to the classroom level by introducing "classroom scripts" (very similar
to Dillenbourg      and Jermann's,     2007, "macro-scripts")     as   an instructional  means    to specify,   distribute and
sequence learning activities over the different social planes of the classroom (the plenary, the small group and
the individual level). Both notions of scripts are described next.

Small-group Collaboration Scripts
CSCL     research    has   developed     and empirically     investigated    an   impressive    collection   of  small  group
collaboration   scripts  designed   to raise the    quality of collaboration    processes  (Hämälainen,     &   Arvaja, 2009;
Rummel & Spada, 2005; Schellens, de Wever, van Keer & Valcke, 2005) and individual learning outcomes
(Ertl, Kopp & Mandl, 2007; Kollar et al., 2007; Wecker & Fischer, 2007; Weinberger et al., 2005) of learners
collaborating in small groups (e.g., dyads or triads). For example, such a script may give one learner of a dyad
the task to suggest key terms for a collaborative online search and his/her partner the task to comment on the
adequacy of these terms. In a next step the script may ask one learner to suggest a link to click on, while the
other learner may be asked to estimate whether the proposed linked is likely to contain the needed information
etc..  While   there  are  some  studies    that investigated   the    effects of  collaboration   scripts  on  collaboration
processes and outcomes in field settings (e.g., Hämälainen & Arvaja, 2009; de Wever et al., 2010), the effects of
collaboration scripts on individual learning outcomes have up to now largely been investigated in laboratory
studies  employing    rather  short learning    phases. For    example,   Weinberger    et al. (2005)  report   on  a study in
which   triads  of  learners collaborated    in  an  asynchronous      discussion  board   with the  task  to collaboratively
analyze authentic problem cases by aid of a psychological theory. To support collaboration, they used a small-
group collaboration script which distributed the roles of a case analyst and two criticizers among the learning
partners. These roles rotated among the learners and each role was supported with appropriate prompts. Results
indicated that  compared     to unstructured     CSCL,  the  small-group     collaboration  script   helped  students  acquire
higher   levels of   domain-specific     knowledge.     Other  studies    demonstrated     positive  effects  of small-group
collaboration scripts on the acquisition of more domain-general competences. For example, Kollar et al. (2007)
could show that learners who were supported by an argumentation-related small-group collaboration script in an
inquiry learning environment reached higher levels of argumentation competence (as a learning outcome) than
learners who were not supported by a small group script. However, since the reported studies were conducted in
lab contexts, it is unclear whether small group collaboration scripts will also lead to positive individual learning
outcomes when used in field settings employing longer learning phases.

Classroom Scripts
When    thinking    about  how  to  instructionally   support  learners     during inquiry  learning  under   real  classroom
conditions, i.e. in classrooms that involve a teacher and 20 or more students, scaffolding of small groups is only
one of several options. In an expansion of the script concept to the whole classroom (as compared to the small
group level only; see Dillenbourg & Jermann, 2007), activities and roles may also be specified, sequenced and
distributed over social planes of the classroom beyond the small group level, namely also over the plenary and
the individual level. For example, a lesson may start with the teacher modelling how to search for evidence on
the Internet in front of the class (plenary activity), followed by student dyads searching for evidence together
(small-group    activity)   and closing   with   a  final   phase   in which    students search   the  Internet  individually
(individual activity). In the following, such instructional interventions that structure learning activities through
their distribution of different social levels will be called classroom scripts. It should be noted, however, that the
term "classroom scripts" has in the past also been used in a descriptive meaning for culturally shared norms
about  interaction   patterns occurring   in   a classroom     that emerge   without   explicit external   interventions   (see
Seidel et al., 2002). In contrast to this, we use the term in a prescriptive sense to refer to explicit instructional
interventions that change the structure of activities in larger social entities like classrooms in the way described.
         When taking a look at prominent instructional approaches from the literature, it is striking that very
often  a distribution   of  activities over  the different  social   planes  of the classroom    is  proposed   (although  not
always   over   all three  levels), i.e. research   already  provides     a collection  of classroom   scripts   designed   for
different purposes. For example, during Problem-based Learning (PBL; see for example Hmelo-Silver, 2004),
small student groups and a tutor meet on a plenary level to jointly discuss an authentic problem case (e.g., a
description of a patient with particular illness symptoms), and then split up to individually acquire knowledge
on physiological processes that may account for the illness. After that, students come back to groups to discuss

© ISLS                                                                                                                      423
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                     Volume I: Long Papers

what   they have   found   during   their individual  study  and   apply  this   knowledge   to  the case.   Similar activity
structures can be found in Reciprocal Teaching (Palincsar & Brown, 1984) and Learning by Design (Kolodner,
2007) Although the distribution of activities over different social planes obviously is regarded important for
learning in these approaches, it is striking that there is hardly any research that systematically compares the
effects of  different  classroom    scripts differing   in the  way   activities are distributed  over   the different   social
planes  on  learning   processes  and   outcomes    while   other  features of   the classroom    script are  held   constant.
Therefore, it is an open empirical question how to best sequence and distribute learning activities during inquiry
learning over the different social planes in order to help students reach high levels of competence.

Combining Small Group and Classroom Scripts - Synergistic Scaffolding or
Over-scripting?
Based   on  theoretical   considerations,    specific combinations     of small    group  and   classroom    scripts may   be
regarded   as  either beneficial  or detrimental    for learning.  The   expectation  that a  combination    of  a  particular
small-group collaboration script and a particular type of classroom script will lead to better learning outcomes
than   any  of the  two   alone  would    be an  example    for  "synergistic    scaffolding" (Tabak,    2004).  Synergistic
scaffolding is realized when two different scaffolds mutually amplify their each specific effects on the same
learning outcome. Applied to the notion of small group and classroom scripts, synergistic scaffolding would be
realized when a combination of a small group script and one specific variant of a classroom script leads to
higher competence levels than any of the two scripts alone.
         However, two scaffolds may also inhibit each other's effects on competence acquisition and thus lead
to what Dillenbourg (2002) called "over-scripting". In particular, it may be that adding a small group script to a
classroom script that also includes modeling by the teacher (as a plenary activity (e.g., Rummel & Spada, 2005)
may put too many constraints on the learners so that productive and creative search processes are undermined.
This   would   result in  less positive   learning  outcomes    than  if either  a small-group    collaboration  script  or a
classroom script including plenary phases would have been presented alone.
         Since prior research on the effects of different combinations of small group collaboration scripts and
classroom   scripts   in the context of   CSCL   is scarce,  it is hardly  possible   to opt  for one  and   reject  the other
expectation right away. Therefore, in our empirical study we investigated not only the separate effects of a small
group collaboration script and different variants of a classroom script, but also their combinations.

Research Questions and Hypotheses
We investigated the effects of a small-group collaboration script (present vs. not present) and two variants of a
classroom script as well as their different combinations on the acquisition of online search competence during a
4.5 weeks inquiry learning curriculum unit. In one variant, the classroom script located online search activities
solely on the small group (i.e., dyadic) level ("Small-group Level Only-" or "SLO classroom script"). The SLO
classroom script can be regarded as the standard classroom script that would be employed when dyadic inquiry
learning is realized. This was compared to a classroom script that realized online search activities alternating
between the small group and the plenary level ("Alternations between Plenary and Small group level-" or "APS
classroom script"). Online search processes on a plenary level were realized as phases in which online search
was either modelled by the teacher and a student or two students in front of class. Our research questions were:
         1.    How do small group (present vs. absent) and classroom scripts (SLO vs. APS) play together to
               support online search competence in a Web-based collaborative inquiry environment?
         2.    When no small-group collaboration script is provided, what are the effects of an APS classroom
               script compared to the effects of an SLO classroom script on online search competence in a Web-
               based collaborative inquiry environment?
         3.    When the employed classroom script locates all search activities on the small group level (SLO
               classroom   script),  what   are the effects  of  a small  group    collaboration  script compared    to  non-
               scripted dyadic online search in a Web-based collaborative inquiry environment?
         Concerning      research question   1, we    could not  establish  a clear  hypothesis   due  to the   lack of  prior
similar research. Two conflicting hypotheses can be justified: On the one hand, the combination of the APS
classroom script and a small-group collaboration script may produce "synergistic scaffolding" (Tabak, 2004)
and thus have the most positive effect on the acquisition of online search competence. On the other hand, this
combination    may    produce  "over-scripting"    (Dillenbourg,   2002),  i.e.  too many  constraints   for the learners   to
perform high-level online searches and thus lead to lower levels of online search competence than each of the
two  scripts   alone.    With  respect  to  research    question   2, we   hypothesized    that   when   no   a small-group
collaboration script is provided, learners working with the APS classroom script acquire higher levels of online
search competence than learners working with the SLO classroom script. Concerning research question 3, we
expected that under standard classroom script conditions (i.e., the SLO classroom script),learners collaborating
on the basis of a small group script reach higher levels of online search competence than students not supported
by a small group collaboration script.

© ISLS                                                                                                                     424
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                     Volume I: Long Papers

Method

Sample and Design
174 9th graders from eight secondary urban school classrooms in Germany participated in a quasi-experimental
field  study. 90 students     were   female,   84  students  were   male. We  implemented     a 2x2-factorial pre-post    test
design with the independent factors "type of classroom script" (SLO vs. APS) and "small-group collaboration
script" (present   vs.  absent;   see    table 1). The   comparably     small N   in the condition  "without    small-group
collaboration script/APS classroom script" was due to a higher drop out due to illness and other factors beyond
our influence   in  the   two  classes   in  which  this treatment   was  realized  than in the  other classes.  In fact, all
subjects who missed one or more lessons over the 4.5 weeks curriculum unit were excluded from data analysis.
Originally, the numbers of students in the aforementioned condition was 46 and thus comparable to the Ns in
the other three conditions.

Table 1: Design of the empirical study.

                                                               Small-group collaboration script
                                                               Without                      With
Type of          Search activities solely located on the       N = 43 students              N = 52 students
classroom        small group level (SLO)                       (2 classes)                  (2 classes)
script           Search activities alternating between         N = 28 students              N = 51 students
                 small group and plenary level (APS)           (2 classes)                  (2 classes)

Instructional Setting
For the purpose of the study, a 4.5-weeks inquiry-based curriculum unit on Genetic Engineering was developed.
The   students'  task  was    to develop     a scientifically  sound  and  valid   position on   whether   "green"  Genetic
Engineering (i.e., the genetic modification of plants for food production) should be allowed or not. For this
purpose, each student was equipped with a laptop computer which was connected to the Internet via a wireless
LAN network. Overall, the unit spanned seven Biology lessons, which were led by the regular Biology teacher
of the class, plus one pre- and one post-test lesson in which learners' online search competence (pre and post
instruction) as well as demographic variables were assessed. The actual unit started with an introduction to
Genetics and Genetic Engineering. Also, the teachers in all classes introduced the students to how to perform a
successful online     search.  The    core  of the  seven   lessons  were  three  consecutive   content-specific  cycles  on
different aspects of Genetic Engineering (one on economic, one on ecological, and one on health aspects of
Genetic Engineering). Each of these content-specific cycles included three steps. First, student dyads were asked
to browse through a web-based project library which included biological knowledge on Genetics and Genetic
Engineering. This online library was implemented within the Web-based Inquiry Science Environment (WISE;
Slotta & Linn, 2009) and was designed on the basis of regular 9th grade Biology text books. In step 2, either
student dyads    or (in   case of    the APS   classroom    script) the teacher  or  the student modelers   collaboratively
formulated an initial argument (e.g., that eating genetically modified food is dangerous for health) and searched
the Internet for evidence that would support, modify or discard their initial argument. Online search activities
were supported by a software named S-COL (Wecker et al., 2010) which allowed for collaborative Internet
browsing, i.e. that during their online search, both learning partners of a dyad always saw the same web sites, no
matter who of the two clicked on a link or entered search terms. In step 3, the teacher led a plenary discussion in
which students brought together their arguments they were supposed to back up with their Internet findings. To
reduce statistical dependencies in the sample, dyads were re-organized before each new search phase.

Independent Variables
Both script variables were during each of the three online search phases. The basis of the two treatments (the
small-group and the classroom script) was a multiple-step online search process that was either to be performed
by all student dyads or (during modeling phases) by the teacher together with one student or by one teacher-
selected student dyad in front of the whole class. The search process to be adopted by the students was derived
from a comprehensive literature review, a cognitive task analysis and an expert-novice comparison of Internet
search  activities  using  think-aloud     methodologies    prior to this study   (see Kollar,  Wecker    & Fischer, 2009).
Basically, both    treatments    split   the   dyadic online   search   processes  up  into a   five-step strategy:  (1)  the
formulation of an initial argument and a sketch of the information needed, (2) the selection of search terms, (3)
the evaluation   of   the hit  list, (4) the   localization of relevant   information  on a web    page,  and (5) a  written
formulation   of the  final   elaborated    argument.    For example,   during  the  second  step, the selection  of search
terms, learner A was prompted to suggest a set of search terms, while B was asked to first recall the information
they had decided to look for, and comment on the adequacy of A's suggestions for the search terms.

© ISLS                                                                                                                    425
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                             Volume I: Long Papers

         In the APS classroom script, online search phases consisted of both dyadic online searches, during
which all dyads performed a collaborative online search, and modeling phases in which the teacher picked either
a student to model a successful online search with in front of the whole class, thereby employing specific steps
of the search strategy just described, or pulled one student dyad out of the group to perform an online search in
the plenary, while commenting on the quality of their online search process. That way, an alternation between
search activities on the small-group and the plenary level was realized. The moments for each modeling phase
were roughly chosen to be close to when all student dyads were performing the search steps that were modeled:
Modeling of the first two search steps happened at the beginning of the first search activity, modeling of the
third and fourth step happened at about half time of the second search activity, and modeling of the final step
happened closer to the end of the third search activity. In the SLO classroom script, no such modeling phases
were employed. Rather, students used the complete time allocated for online search within dyads.
         The small-group collaboration script was technically implemented with the S-COL software (Wecker
et al., 2010) and distributed cognitive    and metacognitive activities  related to  each single step  in  the search
process among the members of each dyad. To do so, S-COL divided the browser window in two frames (see
Fig. 1). In the right part of the screen (the browsing area), students could view regular web. In the left part of the
screen (the scaffolding area), each single learner received particular script prompts that guided him or her in
what exactly to do during this step of search. To guarantee the display of "correct" prompts for each step, a
software algorithm was used that was able to differentiate between (a) the Google start page, (b) the Google hit
list or (c) any other web page. For example, when S-COL recognized the Google start page (i.e. during the
selection of search terms), learner A receivec prompts such as "Please suggest a couple of search terms to your
learning partner", while learner B was prompted "Listen to your partner's suggestions and estimate how well
his/her search terms are suited to find what you are looking for". The two roles were switched after each search
cycle. In the condition without small-group collaboration script, dyads performed unstructured online searches,
i.e. their browsers were connected, but no scaffolding area appeared on the screen.

 Figure 1. Screenshot of the Small-group Collaboration Script (left frame: prompts for one of the two learners;
   the learning partner at the same time received complementary prompts; right frame: regular Google hit list).

Dependent Variable
Online search competence was measured by an individual test that asked students to describe in as much detail
as possible how they would proceed if they had to use the Internet to form a position on a science topic that was
different from Genetic Engineering. In the pre-test, the topic was whether mobile phone transmitters should be
banned   from the immediate   surroundings    of kindergartens   and day nurseries;  in the post-test, the topic was
whether nuclear power plants should be shut down. The test pre-structured the students' answers by using a
number of lines and two columns. In the first column of the first line, participants were supposed to write the
action they would take first, and in the second column to note quality criteria they would apply while taking this
step. This could be repeated up to eight times for the following steps. A general expert solution, based on the
steps of the to-be-acquired online search strategy (see above), guided the coding of the students' answers for the
occurrence  of  each    individual step   and  quality criterion contained in    the expert  solution.  Two    coders
independently rated 15 % of the material, reaching a sufficiently high inter-rater agreement (ICC = .83 for the
post test, ICC = .51 for the pre test).

© ISLS                                                                                                            426
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                   Volume I: Long Papers

Statistical Analyses
The alpha-level for all analyses was set to 5 %. To answer research question 1 (combination of small-group and
classroom scripts), an analysis of covariance with the two script variables as fixed factors, classes as fixed factor
nested within experimental conditions, and the scores in the online search competence post test as dependent
variable were conducted. Pre test scores were used as a covariate. With respect to hypotheses 2 and 3, planned
contrasts were conducted to compare the effects of the APS vs. SLO classroom scripts in the condition without
small group collaboration script (hypothesis 2) and the effects of the conditions with vs. without small group
collaboration script when the SLO classroom script was used (hypothesis 3). To avoid inflation of Alpha errors,
Bonferroni corrections were applied, i.e. the two planned contrasts were tested on an alpha-level of 2.5 %.

Results
Table 3 shows the mean post test scores and standard deviations in the online search competence tests (note that
experimental conditions did not differ significantly with respect to online search competence in the pre-test;
F(1,166)   < 2.20;    n.s.). Descriptively, students  who   received   both modeling   of  search strategies  and had  the
opportunity to run online searches on their own (APS classroom script condition), but without the small-group
collaboration script reached the highest post test scores. At the lower end of the spectrum were learners whose
search activities were constantly located on the dyadic level (SLO classroom script condition) and who did not
receive a small-group collaboration script. The means of the other two groups were about half-way in between.

Table 3: Means and standard deviations concerning online search competence in the post test in the four
experimental conditions.

                             Without small group collaboration script       With small group collaboration script
                             SLO classroom          APS classroom           SLO classroom          APS classroom
                             script                 script                  script                 script
                             M          SD          M          SD           M          SD          M            SD
Online search                2.65       2.27        4.75       2.15         3.90       2.58        3.96         2.54
competence (post
test)

         To    the test  the   two   competing   hypotheses   related  to research  question   1 (synergistic   scaffolding
hypothesis   vs. over-scripting     hypothesis), an ANCOVA       revealed   a  significant interaction effect (F(1,165) =
12.41; p < .01; partial Eta² = .07), indicating that the small-group collaboration script was more helpful when
the classroom script located all search activities on the small group level (SLO classroom script) than when
search activities were realized alternately on the plenary and the small group level. When the classroom script
alternated search activities between the small-group and the plenary level (APS classroom script),the small-
group collaboration script seemed to have no effect. Based on this significant interaction effect, main effects of
the two treatments were not further examined.
         To test hypothesis 2 ("If not provided with a small-group collaboration script, learners working with
the APS classroom script acquire higher levels of online search competence than learners working with the SLO
classroom    script"), a planned     comparison    revealed a  significant  difference between    the  APS   and the SLO
classroom script when no small-group collaboration script was provided (F(1,61) = 23.05, p < .01, partial Eta² =
.27).  Thus, hypothesis      2 was   confirmed.  To  test  hypothesis  3  ("If the SLO     classroom  script is employed,
learners collaborating on the basis of the small group collaboration script reach higher levels of online search
competence than students not supported by a small group collaboration script"), a planned comparison revealed
a significant difference between the conditions with vs. without small group collaboration script when the SLO
classroom script was employed (F(1,88) = 8.89, p < .01, partial Eta² = .14). Thus, hypothesis 3 was supported.

Discussion
In this study, we investigated to what extent a small-group collaboration script and particular types of classroom
scripts as  well   as their  different combinations   facilitate the   acquisition of  online  search  competence   in the
context  of  a multiple-weeks       web-based  collaborative  inquiry  curriculum   unit   on Genetic  Engineering.  With
respect to our first research question, namely how a small-group collaboration script and a classroom script that
alternates  between    plenary    and  small-group  activities (APS    classroom   script) play  together  to support  the
acquisition of online search competence, we established two competing hypotheses. On the one hand, we argued
that combining the small-group script with the APS classroom script might represent an example of "synergistic
scaffolding"   (Tabak,   2004)    and lead  to the highest  results in terms   of students'   acquisition of online search
competence. On the other hand, we argued that this combination may produce "over-scripting" (Dillenbourg,
2002) such that this combination would lead to lower effects than each of the two treatments alone.

© ISLS                                                                                                                  427
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                   Volume I: Long Papers

         Upon    close   inspection of   the results, both  hypotheses  need    to be  rejected: Clearly,   no  synergistic
scaffolding effect was found because in the presence of the APS classroom script students working with the
small group collaboration script did not reach higher scores in the posttest than learners who were not provided
with a small group collaboration script. However, also no over-scripting effect has been observed: Adding an
APS classroom script to a small group collaboration script neither enhanced nor harmed the effects of the small
group script. Thus, our results rather indicate a kind of "functional equivalence" of small-group and classroom
scripts: As the results related to hypotheses 2 and 3 show, both treatments alone had comparably large positive
effects on  online    search competence      when  the other treatment   was    not used.  When     used  in combination,
however none of the two treatments adds substantially to the other.
         Obviously, alternating search activities between a small group and a plenary level is a better way of
distributing search-related activities over the classroom than having students perform such activities solely on
the small  group  level.  This   adds  to earlier research  that has demonstrated    the value   of  modeling   on  student
learning  (e.g., Palincsar   &  Brown,    1984;   Rummel   &  Spada,    2005).  Likewise,   if students  are  supposed    to
perform online search activities in dyads without intermitting modeling phases, then supporting them with a
small-group   collaboration     script is  necessary.   This  corroborates   findings   from    prior   studies that   have
demonstrated the effectiveness of small-group collaboration scripts on individual learning outcomes (Ertl et al.,
2007; Weinberger et al., 2005). However, combining the two scaffolds neither made learners perform worse
than students in the control condition (without small group collaboration script and the SLO classroom script),
which   would    have been   expected    following the   over-scripting hypothesis,   nor  made  learners    perform   on a
higher level than could have been expected by adding the two individual effects as the synergism hypothesis
would have predicted.
         With respect to the differential effects of the two employed classroom scripts, our study is among the
first ones to demonstrate that specific distributions over the different social planes of the classroom may have
differential effects on student learning. This assumption has already been reflected in the classroom layouts of
prominent instructional approaches such as Problem-based Learning (Hmelo-Silver, 2004), Learning-by-Design
(Kolodner,  2007)     or Reciprocal    Teaching   (Palincsar &   Brown,   1984),   but  has hardly    been   systematically
investigated before. Obviously, interweaving plenary activities into small-group activities is a good strategy to
bring the expertise of the teacher to bear in (a) modeling a to-be-acquired strategy or competence and (b) in
correcting developing misconceptions or shallow strategies that are used and beginning to be internalized by the
students. Yet, these interpretations may be confirmed by process analyses that demonstrate direct sequential
effects of modeling or of discussing small group script prompts on subsequent search activities of the dyads.
Such analyses are currently under way.
         In interpreting    the  results  of our  study, two  limitations   should  be  noted.   First, the  online search
competence test that was employed did not ask students to really perform an online search themselves. Rather,
the test asked learners to describe what they would do when they had the task to search the Internet to develop a
well-grounded    position   in a science   debate. Possibly,  having    learners  actually perform    a new   search   on a
different science topic would yield somewhat different results. This should be tested in future research. Second,
it should be noted that our variation on the classroom script level only included two social levels, the plenary
and the small-group level. However, since the competence that we wanted students to acquire is in the end an
individual one, it may be promising to also include phases on an individual level. It is not unlikely that, to reach
a high level of online search competence, online searches should also be practiced individually - possibly with
further guidance on the individual level. Also this question is subject to future research.
         Yet,    our  study  produced    promising  results  which   may  be   of  value  for  educational   practice. For
teachers, it is very often a hard task to structure small-group activities. Our results indicate that such efforts may
be  neglected when     instead  small-group   collaboration  is  from time   to  time  interrupted  by  plenary  activities
during which the teacher sets the small groups "on the right track" again. Compared to how to structure small-
group collaboration, teachers are very often more experienced in how to design such plenary level phases. Thus,
the results of our study should encourage teachers to use their skills in designing high-level plenary activities
and align them with small-group learning phases, without structuring the latter ones too severely.

References
Cohen,   E. G.   (1994).    Restructuring    the  classroom:  Conditions    for  productive    small  groups.   Review    of
         Educational Research, 64(1), 1-35.
de Jong, T. (2006). Technological advances in inquiry learning. Science, 312, 532-533.
de  Jong, T.  &   van    Joolingen, W.    R.  (1998).  Scientific discovery    learning  with  computer     simulations   of
         conceptual domains. Review of Educational Research, 68(2), 179-201.
De Wever, B., Van Keer, H., Schellens, T., & Valcke, M. (2010b). Structuring asynchronous discussion groups:
         Comparing       scripting by  assigning   roles with    regulation by   cross-age  peer    tutors. Learning   and
         Instruction, 20, 349-360.

© ISLS                                                                                                                  428
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                Volume I: Long Papers

Dillenbourg, P. (2002).      Over-scripting CSCL: The risks of blending collaborative learning with instructional
           design. In P. A. Kirschner (Ed.), Three worlds of CSCL. Can we support CSCL (pp. 61-91). Heerlen:
           Open Universiteit Nederland.
Dillenbourg, P. & Jermann, P. (2007). Designing integrative scripts. In F. Fischer, I. Kollar, H. Mandl &, J.
           Haake (Eds.), Scripting computer-supported communication of knowledge. Cognitive, computational,
           and educational perspectives (pp. 259-288). New York: Springer.
Ertl,  B., Kopp,    B.,  &   Mandl,    H.  (2007).  Supporting    collaborative learning in videoconferencing     using
           collaboration scripts and content schemes. In F. Fischer, H. Mandl, J. M. Haake, & I. Kollar (Eds.),
           Scripting    computer-supported     communication      of  knowledge   ­   cognitive,   computational,   and
           educational perspectives (pp. 213-236). Berlin: Springer.
Hämäläinen, R. & Arvaja, M. (2009). Scripted collaboration and group-based variations in a higher education
           CSCL context. Scandinavian Journal of Educational Research, 53(1), 1-16.
Hmelo-Silver, C. E. (2004). Problem-based learning: What and how do students learn? Educational Psychology
           Review, 16, 235-266.
Kollar, I.,   Fischer,  F., &  Hesse,   F. W.    (2006). Collaboration  scripts - a  conceptual  analysis. Educational
           Psychology Review, 18(2), 159-185.
Kollar, I., Fischer, F., & Slotta, J. D. (2007). Internal and external scripts in computer-supported collaborative
           inquiry learning. Learning & Instruction, 17 (6), 708-721.
Kollar, I.,   Wecker,   C.,  &  Fischer,   F. (2009,  August).  Supporting   high-school  students'  scientific literacy
           through scripted collaborative inquiry - a use-inspired basic research program. Paper presented at the
           13th Biennial    Conference    for Learning   and Instruction der European    Association  for  Research  on
           Learning and Instruction (Earli) ,,Fostering Communities of Learners", August 25 to 29, 2009.
Kolodner, J. L. (2007). The roles of scripts in promoting collaborative discourse in learning by design. In F.
           Fischer,  I. Kollar,   H. Mandl    &  J. M.   Haake (Eds.),  Scripting Computer-Supported      Collaborative
           Learning - cognitive, computational, and educational perspectives (pp. 237-262). New York: Springer.
Laugksch, R. C. (2000). Scientific Literacy: A conceptual overview. Science Education, 84, 71-94.
Lazonder, A.W. (2005). Do two heads search better than one? Effects of student collaboration on Web search
           behavior and search outcomes. British Journal of Educational Technology, 36, 465-475.
Palincsar, A. S., & Brown, A. L. (1984). Reciprocal teaching of comprehension-fostering and comprehension-
           monitoring activities. Cognition and Instruction, 1(2), 117-175.
Rummel, N., & Spada, H. (2005). Learning to collaborate: An instructional approach to promoting collaborative
           problem-solving in computer-mediated settings. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 14(2), 201-241.
Sandoval, W. A. (2003). Conceptual and epistemic aspects of students' scientific explanations. The Journal of
           the Learning Sciences, 21(1), 5-51.
Schellens, T., Van Keer, H., Valcke, M., & De Wever, B (2005). The impact of role assignment as scripting tool
           on knowledge     construction   in asynchronous   discussion  groups.  Paper  presented at the  International
           Conference on Computer Supported Collaborative Learning (CSCL). Taipei, Taiwan.
Seidel, T., Prenzel, M., Duit, R., Euler, M., Geiser, H., Hoffmann, L., Lehrke, M., Müller, C. T. & Rimmele, R.
           (2002).  ,,Jetzt bitte alle nach   vorne  schauen!"    - Lehr-Lernskripts  im Physikunterricht     und damit
           verbundene Bedingungen für individuelle Lernprozesse. Unterrichtswissenschaft, 30(1), 52-77.
Slotta, J. D. & Linn, M. C. (2009). WISE Science: Inquiry and the Internet in the Science Classroom. Teachers
           College Press.
Tabak, I. (2004). Synergy: A complement to emerging patterns of distributed scaffolding. The Journal of the
           Learning Sciences, 13(3), 305-335.
Van    Joolingen,  W.   R., de  Jong,  T., Lazonder,   A.  W., Savelsbergh,  E.   R. &  Manlove,   S. (2005).   Co-Lab:
           research  and  development     of  an online  learning   environment for  collaborative scientific discovery
           learning. Computers in Human Behavior, 21, 671-688.
Wecker,    C. &   Fischer,  F.  (2007). Fading   scripts  in computer-supported   collaborative  learning: The  role of
           distributed monitoring. In C. Chinn, G. Erkens & S. Puntambekar (Eds.), Proceedings of the CSCL
           2007. Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey, New Brunswick, New Jersey, USA, July 16th ­
           July 21st, 2007 (pp. 763-771). International Society of the Learning Sciences.
Wecker, C., Stegmann, K., Bernstein, F., Huber, M.J., Kalus, G., Kollar, I., Rathmayer, S., & Fischer, F. (2010)
           S-COL: A Copernican turn for the development of flexiblyreusable collaboration scripts. International
           Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 5(3), 321-344.
Weinberger, A., Ertl, B., Fischer, F., & Mandl, H. (2005). Epistemic and social scripts in computer-supported
           collaborative learning. Instructional Science, 33(1), 1-30.

Acknowledgments
The research reported here was funded by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG). The authors would like
to thank the students and teachers who have participated in the study.

© ISLS                                                                                                               429
