CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                   Volume I: Long Papers

           Scripting Collaborative Learning in Smart Classrooms:
                      Towards Building Knowledge Communities
   Michelle Lui, Mike Tissenbaum, James D. Slotta, University of Toronto, 252 Bloor Street West Toronto,
                                                       Canada, ON,
            Email: michelle.lui@utoronto.ca, mike.tissenbaum@utoronto.ca, jslotta@oise.utoronto.ca

          Abstract:    This   paper  shares   preliminary    findings  on  a   new   program    of  research   on
          collaborative learning    in smart  classrooms.    Using  a  co-design method,    researchers  worked
          with high school teachers to create engaging curriculum activities that provided the context
          for  two  studies  in math   and    physics. The   activity  designs aim   to  increase   the depth    of
          students'   conceptual    understanding    by  breaking     down learning   goals    into manageable
          sections. Students "tagged" questions in terms of relevant concepts, analyzed visualizations
          that captured   the   collective wisdom     of the  classroom    community,    critiqued  results,  and
          negotiated  a shared   understanding    of   domain-specific  principles.  Twenty-one     mathematics
          students from grades ten and eleven participated in the first study; thirty-two grade twelve
          physics students participated in the second. Results showed improvements in problem-solving
          (in  the second   study), as well   as improved    tagging  proximity  to  an  expert   model  (in  both
          studies). Issues with collaboration scripts used in the smart classroom are also discussed.

Introduction
Students' lives are increasingly being shaped by technology, and their future in the 21st century workplace will
surely demand a deep fluency with information technologies, the most exciting of which are only just emerging
(e.g., ubiquitous computing, physical computing, real-time collaboration environments). Yet the primary model
of instruction in today's classrooms remains one of traditional didactic pedagogy ­ particularly in math and
science  ­ where    lectures, problem    sets  and   exams   rule the day, and   peer competition    is more     likely than
collaboration.  Designing    instruction   to promote   deep  understanding    means  adopting    new   modes    of  inquiry
where students are encouraged to think deeply about materials and develop their own understandings (Linn &
Eylon, 2006; Quintana et al., 2004). Technology environments can help scaffold students and teachers in new
forms of learning where they collaboratively engage with materials, coordinated by scripts that help guide the
flow of people, materials, and activities (Kollar, Fischer, & Slotta, 2007). However, current means of supporting
instruction with technology are typically isolating, with students hidden behind rows of large monitors, as seen
in typical computer labs.
          The idea of forming knowledge communities, where members are given the responsibility to generate
and build upon each other's ideas, ultimately developing their own knowledge base, is becoming more relevant
for today's learners who are tasked with establishing collaboration skills, critical thinking and communication
skills, in addition to learning content knowledge (Bereiter & Scardamalia, 2003; Partnership for 21st Century
Skills, 2009).  With    the advent   of  sophisticated   collaboration  technologies,    it is now   possible    to develop
applications   that   allow for  more   seamless     and dynamic      collaboration, supporting     real-time face-to-face
interactions while maintaining an intelligent knowledge base that represents the collective wisdom of the entire
class. This paper presents an ambitious new program of research that investigates how technology-enhanced
learning  environments    can   be  embedded     deeply  within   the classroom:  becoming     more  visible  and   yet less
intrusive, responding   intelligently  to  student   inputs, and   capturing the  collective   wisdom   of   the classroom
community as a resource for all participants. We have developed a new "smart classroom" and applied it in a
design  partnership   with  high   school  mathematics     and  physics  teachers  in order    to address  students'    deep
conceptual understanding of these traditionally challenging domains. Sections below describe our curriculum
designs in two smart classroom activities, our technology and material designs, and the outcome of our studies.

Smart Classrooms
Our research recognizes the potential of technology-enhanced learning environments to enable new forms of
learning,  where    students  collaborate     within their classroom    or across    multiple   classrooms,   dynamically
generating  knowledge,    building  on   peer  ideas,  and investigating   questions  as a  knowledge    community.     Our
notion of a smart classroom employs a wide range of technologies to allow investigations of a full spectrum of
collaborative inquiry and knowledge construction activities. Our technology framework consists of a portal that
allows students to register and log in, an intelligent agent framework that allows tracking of student interactions,
a central database that houses curriculum materials and the products of student interactions, and a visualization
layer that controls the information presented to students (Slotta, 2010). At present, our implementation of a
smart classroom includes four large projected displays in each corner of a classroom, a fifth, larger multi-touch
display on the front wall, and twenty laptops, all interconnected via high-speed wireless network.

© ISLS                                                                                                                   430
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                Volume I: Long Papers

Knowledge Communities
Knowledge      communities    are created   through  collaboration,   where students   learn  through   generating   and
building upon each other's ideas within their unique knowledge base (Bereiter & Scardamalia, 2003). Brown
and Campione (1990; 1996) first offered an interpretation of science classrooms as knowledge communities in
their  Fostering Communities      of  Learners  research program,   where   students   engaged  in   research activities,
shared findings, and used their collective expertise to develop a shared understanding. A related approach called
Knowledge Building instead values advancement or creative work performed as a community (Scardamalia &
Bereiter, 2006). In this perspective, students are not recognized for what is in their minds but for contributions
they make to the group's knowledge base. Students are more explicitly involved in the process of building upon
one another's ideas, with the goal of developing a knowledge community in the classroom (Scardamalia and
Bereiter, 1994; 1996). We envision participation in the smart classroom as a portal to a collective knoweledge
base. Students engaging in collaborative activities within the smart classroom can use this knowledge base to
step back and reflect on their participation, and allow their shared knowlege to emerge over time. Unfortunately,
there are numerous challenges in implementing a knowledge community approach, which includes the elevated
investment required of teachers to use it, as well as scalability issues for replication in research (Slotta & Peters,
2008). The open-ended nature of topics covered is also unsuitable to secondary school science courses, where
teachers often carry heavy curriculum expectations (Peters & Slotta, 2009).

Orchestration of Complex Collaborative Designs
Prior research on supporting complex collaborative learning designs offers some insight into the affordances of
new technologies (e.g., awareness or data mining). One common approach is that of the "collaboration script,"
which has been shown to effectively foster collaboration and improve learning outcomes (e.g., De Wever, et al.,
2009; Kollar, Fischer, & Slotta, 2007; Rummel & Spada, 2005; Weinberger, et al. 2005). The script serves to
define participants, activities, roles, and groups, specifying how tasks are distributed, how groups are formed
and the sequence of activity flow (Kobbe, et al., 2007). Collaboration scripts add structure to activities and
distribute responsibility, ensuring that all members actively participate. Scaffolds designed to complement the
script can help guide students' cognitive processes (O'Donnell, 1999), as well as their interactions with peers
(i.e., from different roles within the script) by providing specific task instructions, modeling, and instruction on
skills or  methods    (King,   1999).   Scripts have been   found   to foster   domain-general   knowledge,      such as
argumentation    (Stegmann,    et al.,  2007)   and interdisciplinary  communication     (Rummel     &  Spada,    2007).
Collaboration scripts offer smart classroom curriculum designs structure to maintain focus on specific roles and
content expectations, while allowing room for students' free flowing ideas to emerge and be built upon.

Objective
To understand how certain aspects of a smart classroom and carefully designed complex collaboration activities
might  support   learning  in  a  knowledge     community,  we  first  investigated  how  students   used collaborative
discourse and collective knowledge to make connections among abstract domain concepts in math and physics.
Through    the use of    visualizations as representations  of shared  knowledge,    "tags"  to connect   concepts,  and
reflection scripts    to enhance   understanding,   our  research   team   created   two  iterations of   an  analogous
pedagogical design in sequence, with findings from the first incorporated into the second design. This paper
presents findings from both studies.

Method
Our   research  employs    a  design-based    methodology,  which   is characterized   by iterative  cycles   of design,
evaluation and revision of an intervention for study in authentic settings (Brown, 1992; Design-Based Research
Collective, 2003). Using a co-design method (Penuel, Roschelle, Shechtman, 2007), our team of researchers,
designers, technology     developers,   and high  school  teachers  met  regulary   to develop   curriculum   activities,
content materials and specialized software to coordinate the flow of participants and media amongst various
computers, servers, and displays. The studies took place in the aforementioned smart classroom, located at a
private, local  urban    high school,  where  the excellent students,  the  creative and  reflective teachers,   and  the
supportive  administration    make   this  an ideal setting for an  ongoing   co-design   partnership  for   educational
innovations.

Study 1: Connecting Mathematical Concepts
The curriculum, detailed below, was designed to engage several small groups of students working in parallel as
they   "tagged"  a common     set of  math  problems.  In   so doing,  a collaborative   visualization emerged    as  the
software synthesized tags from all groups. A set of thirty problems was developed by the teacher. Each problem
may be classified into one or more of four category groups: Algebra & Polynomials, Functions & Relations,
Trigonometry,    and  Graphing    Functions.  The basic  goal  of this activity was  to  help students  understand    the

© ISLS                                                                                                                431
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                Volume I: Long Papers

relationships   between   these  four aspects  of  mathematics   by having  them  visualize  the association  of  math
problems with multiple categories.

Participants
A  total  of twenty-one     student volunteers  in grades  ten and  eleven   from  our research  partner  high school
participated in the study. Nineteen students participated in the pre-test and curriculum activities. Ten students
completed the post-test, two of which did not participate in the curriculum activity. The curriculum activity was
co-designed with a high school mathematics teacher.

Design

Part A - Tagging
Students were provided with individual laptops and logged in to a specially-designed system that coordinated
the flow of activities for the session. The software agents distributed students into four groups, each specializing
in one   of the  four mathematics     categories. Each  group  gathered in a specified area   of the room,   where  the
individual students within that group were presented with a set of math problems. For each problem, the student
decided whether it should belong in their group's category, without solving the problem. A projection screen in
front  of each   group displayed    a semantic map   of that group's category, with    each of  the math  problems   as
nodes. If a problem was tagged with their group's category, a connection between the problem and the category
was made (Figure 1). This was represented on the screen as a line, linking the problem node to the category
node. At the front of the room was a larger screen that showed the collaborative visualization, which displayed
an aggregate of the connections made between the questions and all four categories.

Part B - Solving
Once the four groups reviewed all the questions, they were provided with pencil, paper, and calculators. The
software agents presented students with only those problems that were tagged as belonging to their group's
category as well as at least one other category. Students were then instructed to solve each problem, working as
a group. Once completed, they took a photo of their solution using the laptop camera and uploaded it to the
system.

Part C ­ Reflecting
Next, the students in each group were shown the tags that other groups had assigned to the questions they just
solved and asked to vote on the credibility of those tags.    For example, students in the "Algebra & Polynomials"
group might be presented with a problem that had been tagged by their group as well as the "Trigonometry"
group. Students would be informed that the problem had been tagged as being "Trigonometry" as well, and
asked whether they agreed with the "Trigonometry" connection. After stating their agreement or disagreement,
the students would then be prompted to explain their choice in reflection notes. The visualizations were updated
in real-time   ­ the  lines representing    connections that had stronger  consensus   became   thicker, and uploaded
solutions appeared as new nodes.

Procedure
Students  were   given  a   paper-based  pre-test of twelve  questions. Rather than  solve  the  questions,  they were
asked  to   identify problems   as  "Algebra  &   Polynomials",  "Functions  & Relations",    "Trigonometry",  and/or
"Graphing Functions". They could check off more than one category, and were also asked to point out any other
themes the questions were related to. These were collected and compared with the same task as performed by
the teacher, who had helped to assemble the problems. The post-test was similar to the pre-test, except it was in
the form of an online survey and a new set of problems were used. Boxes for comments were made available for
students' input on their experience on the pre-test, curriculum activity and post-test. Qualitative analysis was
performed on video captured during the activity and audio data collected at group workstations.

Results
For the   pre-  and  post-test, as  well as  evaluation of the tagging  from  part  A  of the  curriculum   design, we
examined two constructs, accuracy and structuredness. Accuracy scores were compiled by looking at the group
average of correct connections against the total number of connections made by the teacher. Following previous
work using mathematics concept maps (Hasemann & Mansfield, 1995), the "structuredness" for each set of data
was    evaluated  with  the  number      of connections  made    compared   against  the  total  number   of potential
connections. On the pre-test, students achieved an accuracy rate of 72% (SD = 6.16); the structuredness level
was 52% (SD = 15.70). During the curriculum activity, students made more connections between problems and
categories, with an accuracy rate of 80% (SD = 17.41) and a structuredness rate of 80% (SD = 23.44). On the
post-test, the accuracy rate for the smart classroom group was 77% (SD = 6.04), and the structuredness rate was

© ISLS                                                                                                              432
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                              Volume I: Long Papers

also 63% (SD = 19.16). For those who did not participate in the activity, the accuracy was 76% (SD = 4.82),
while the structuredness rate was 50% (SD = 5.89), as shown in Figure 2.

       Figure 1. Tags Made by the Graphing Group.           Figure 2. Accuracy and Structuredness Results.

          Qualitative analysis of student comments showed that overall students found the visualization useful in
showing different mathematical themes from which a problem could be approached. One student indicated that
the visualization was helpful when he could not solve a problem. Students also stated that, over time and with
more   contributors,  the  system  would   become  increasingly valuable   for  studying    purposes.  Students   also
commented that they became more cognizant of the connections amongst mathematics ideas and themes. It is
noteworthy that students gained awareness that one could discuss properties of math problems and their relevant
themes rather than simply solve them.
          For part A of the activity, video recordings revealed that students worked on the tagging individually
but commented    to   each  other about the  connections  they  created in the    group  visualization (between   the
problem and their group category). In part B, the videos indicated that students made concerted efforts to solve
problems   collaboratively, although  some   groups were  more  successful  than   others.  One  group  showed    two
students taking turns actively solving, while a third member interjected occasionally with valuable comments.
Another   group initially  solved questions  individually then compared    answers    as an approach;   soon   after it
became clear that one member was faster at solving than the others and he took on more responsibility for this
portion of the activity. Discussion in the groups ranged from reading out questions, talking aloud while thinking
through strategies, asking other members what certain formulas are, to verifying or questioning approaches and
answers. Since students only solved problems that were tagged as their group's category, students also discussed
the appropriateness of the tag for certain questions. In the post-test, one student commented that solving math
problems   in groups   was valuable because  it is not something they   usually   get to do.  In the last part of the
activity, the amount    of discussion varied amongst   groups.  Some  discussion   revolved   around   whether  they
solved the problem from the category's perspective to determine whether they agree with the connection or not.
In some groups, the agreement was straightforward, and voting was completed without debate.

Study 2: Collaborative Problem-solving
The  second   study   addressed our objective   by engaging  students in a  slightly  more    complex  collaborative
problem-tagging activity where they worked individually and in groups to identify the important conceptual
elements within a set of qualitative physics problems. Key differences between this and the math curriculum lies
in students providing answers as well as tags in the first step, which gave groups more collective information to
work with in subsequent steps. Also, with the problems being more conceptual in nature, students could focus
on  discussing higher-level  issues rather than manipulating   numbers,  which    seemed   to elicit more  individual
work. Learning outcomes are measured in terms of i) students' precision in answering the qualitative problems,
and ii) their classification and assignment of conceptual characteristics to the physics problems. The problem-
tagging activity is followed by a problem set-up activity, where students worked collaboratively to set up the
equations and approaches for solving a long-answer physics problem. The curriculum activity was designed for
enactment over a class period of ninety minutes, as an end-of-term review activity. Students were randomly
assigned to groups of four. Each student was given a laptop computer and the group was also provided with a
projection screen to be used for the display of the collaborative visualizations.

Participants
A total of thirty-two student volunteers enrolled in grade twelve physics at our research partner high school
participated in the activity. Two smart classroom sessions were conducted over two days with sixteen students
in each cohort. The curriculum activity was co-designed with a high-school physics teacher.

© ISLS                                                                                                            433
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                Volume I: Long Papers

Design

Part A - Individual Solving & Tagging
The curriculum was designed to engage several small groups of students working in parallel as they answered a
common set of sixteen multiple-choice concept-based physics questions. Each student answered and tagged four
multiple-choice concept problems with expert-defined "element" tags (e.g., Newton's first law, net force, kinetic
energy, conservation of momentum, etc.), selected in advance by the co-design team. The goal of this activity
was to familiarize students with the elements with which experts would typically categorize problems.

Part B - Group Review
Once   students had   completed   tagging their four  concept    problems, they   worked   as a group  to   review the
responses   and tags  made by  other students   for four of the  problems.  Collaborative   visualizations  displaying
those results were generated to facilitate this process. Students were instructed to critique the various solutions
contributed by their classmates, as well as the collective tags, then re-negotiate the "definitive" answers and
element sets, and write a brief rationale to explain their choice of elements (Figure 3).

Part C - Long Problem Setup
Upon completion of the concept question reviews, four complex quantitative physics problems were presented
to each group. For each long problem, students were asked to select from a list of four concept questions that
they felt was most related to the long problem. Once the selection was made, students were asked to choose a
set of  elements  and   equations that would    help set up  the    problem for   solving.  Finally, groups  provided
explanations for their choice of formulas.

Figure 3. Students Reviewing Class Responses in Step 2.       Figure 4. Accuracy and Structuredness Results.

Data Analysis
Data were gathered during the activity sessions. Preliminary data screening was conducted to determine whether
there  were differences   between students  who     participated in the  activity in day  1 compared    to  those  who
participated in day 2. Their individual scores (part A) as well as group scores (part B) were assessed and no
significant differences  were  found.  Participant  data in from    both days was    pooled   and  analyzed   together.
Individual performance on concept questions was compared with group performance using a paired samples t
test. Element tags were analyzed using accuracy and structuredness scores, using the protocol described in study
1. Qualitative analysis was performed on video captured and audio data collected at group workstations.

Results
A paired samples t test was conducted to evaluate whether students performed better at the group review step
than at solving individually. The results indicate that the mean group scores (M = 74.00, SD = 23.78) were
significantly higher than the mean individual scores (M = 55.65, SD = 30.40), t(30) = -2.74, p < .05 (see Figure
4). Further analyses    showed no  significant  differences among    group  scores   between   the   eight groups. For
tagging  accuracy and    structuredness, groups  tended  to tag   their problems   closer  to the  expert  model   than
individuals, with average accuracy scores of 79% (SD = 4.84) compared to 77% (SD = 7.40), although the
difference was only marginally significant. In terms of structuredness, students' group scores (M = 68.43, SD =
13.21) were significantly higher than their individual scores (M = 50.92, SD = 18.51) by approximately 18%,
t(30) = -5.654, p < 0.05 (see Figure 4).
         Video recordings of classroom activity and group level audio data indicated that students generally
worked independently in part A, with some seeking help with equations (e.g., for elastic potential energy) and a
few asking group members how to approach certain problems. In part B, students noted what others in the class
chose as the right answer and compared that to their own choices. They discussed formulas and verified which

© ISLS                                                                                                              434
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                    Volume I: Long Papers

should be used, and used analogies to explain concepts to other group members. Students also discussed how
the problem should be approached, often using their own answers as a starting point for discussions. They also
seemed to connect element tags to formulas that should be used in solving the problems, which was in line with
analyses of the written rationales.

Discussion

Collective Knowledge and Connections
Both studies employed large projected displays of the aggregated input from the individual members working
within a small group. In study 1 (math curriculum), the collaborative visualizations served as representations of
collective  knowledge     on small  group   levels as well   as on   a  whole  class  level. They   helped   students make
connections    between    math  problems    and  themes,  but   also provided    researchers  a   means   of  assessing  the
connections    that students   made   by  comparing   their  answers    to those   of the  teacher  (or another   normative
source). The collaborative visualizations also provided a record of the aggregated connections, artifacts (e.g.
problems, solutions) and communications amongst students over time, which can be used to inform the design
of subsequent learning activities. As a result, students in study 1 seemed to gain an appreciation that problems
may exhibit characteristics from more than one distinct category. However, they did not discuss meaningful
differences among concepts, perhaps due in part to the overall activity design and to the limited amount of
information shared in the visualizations.
           Study 2    (physics curriculum)  also   showed   improved    tagging    accuracy  over   time  when   connecting
problems    to underlying    concepts.   In particular, the  structuredness    score   revealed   a  significant  difference
between    individual   and  group efforts,  which  indicates   an improved     willingness   of  students   to  characterize
problems   from    different perspectives.  This was    accompanied     by  a  significant improvement     in   accuracy for
answering conceptual questions over the course of the activity session. From analysis of video and audio data,
the improvement is likely due to a combination of the collaborative discourse and the "wisdom of the crowd"
(i.e., by  way   of reviewing   of  class answers).   For   each question     that groups  reviewed,    students   took  into
consideration how fellow classmates answered the question and what element tags they assigned to it. However,
the bulk of the group discourse was centered on the elements and how they contributed to the correct answer.
Collaborative tagging of elements also seems to help students set up quantitative physics problems. Rationales
for tag selections as well as their collaborative discourse around the elements appear to have provided a rich
conceptual space for students in which they can organize key concepts.
           Dynamic representations of the knowledge base were important design features in the smart classroom.
In study   1,  the  four  corners  of the   room represented    different  location   of  expertise,  with   the aggregated
knowledge of all four groups shown at the front of the room. Students took notice of the representation and
looked around the room at various points of the activity, paying special attention to the front of the room. In
study   2, a  more    distributed approach   was   taken  to represent     the knowledge     base.  Class  responses    were
associated with particular questions (e.g., in the review step, the group would see fellow classmates' responses
for question one while reviewing the first question, once they submitted their final answers for the question,
they would then review the next question and see the class responses pertaining only to the second question). In
study 2, there were no persistent representations of the knowledge base, and the behaviors of the class as a
whole   was   less  cohesive.  Students  tended  to look  around     at other  groups  for   indications  of their progress
completion during the activity, rather than how other groups made connections and solved problems. Casual
comparisons between student behaviors in study 1 and 2 indicate that specialization of groups and persistent
representations    of the class-wide  knowledge    base  may    improve    learning   experiences  in the smart   classroom
(e.g., embodiment, engagement), although this was not explicitly measured in either study.

Orchestration of Smart Classroom Activities
Both studies also employed the notion of orchestration, which was in the form of an individual tagging phase,
group   review  and   a reflection phase.   Asking  students  to perform    slightly  different  tasks  using   collaboration
scripts at each of these phases revealed how they can be utilized optimally for learning in the smart classroom.
The individual phase in both studies served as a "model-building" phase of the participants' initial collective
knowledge base. Although some students occasionally consulted with fellow group members during this stage,
they generally completed the phase individually. The affordances of the smart classroom were not put to use in
this phase in both instances, which means this phase can potentially be placed outside the room, perhaps as
homework assignment.
           Asking students to only tag concepts to problems in the first phase (as in study 1) provided limited
information for groups to discuss in the second phase. Giving additional collective information to students in
study 2 (i.e., more tags, adding answers to question) seemed to elicit more deliberation, but the goal of the
discussions tended to be restricted to finding the correct answer. Perhaps if a richer context was used as part of

© ISLS                                                                                                                   435
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                    Volume I: Long Papers

the activity  and  a  variety of information,   including   different   types of connections     and media,   was   given to
students, the collaborative discourse could increase in complexity and raise the level of knowledge construction.
          In  the reflecting  scripts, we    expected  to see  more   discourse   around    group  decisions  and   creating
rationales. In study 1, group members seemed to attain a similar mental model of each of the problems they
were asked to reflect upon, either through directly solving the problem, or in discussing the strategy to solve the
problem.   Not   much  discussion  was    necessary   to  reach consensus.    In study   2, discussions  around   problem-
solving strategy were complementary to selecting element tags. One person tended to take over responsibility in
creating the rationales based on what the group talked about. In order to draw out student thinking behind the
reflection  process,  scripts may  need    to include  more    "think   aloud" instructions    for students  to share   their
thoughts. Alternatively, we could recognize reflection as an individualistic process and script accordingly, rather
than force this to be a collaborative process.
          Recent research on scripting approaches has focused on "fading" such scaffolds over time (Wecker &
Fischer, 2007), or providing scripts with adaptive scaffolds (Dillenbourg & Tchounikine, 2007; Rummel and
Weinberger, 2008). While these investigations are still in their infancy, we aim to make use of our dynamically
generated knowledge base to modify collaborative processes in real-time, which can provide opportunities for
teachers and students to monitor, evaluate, and adapt learning activities during class time. For example, progress
reports could be given to students and groups between activity phases, and the amount of scaffolding provided
to groups   may   be  adjusted  based  on  formative   assessments.   Data may    be provided     to teachers in  real-time,
allowing them to guide students more effectively, and even potentially "flagging" those who need assistance
most. Using more complex "intelligent agents" (e.g., teacher agents, student agents, and group agents) for data
mining and reporting group activity, we wish to enhance the awareness and detection capabilities of the smart
classroom framework to support group collaborations, student interactions, as well as classroom management.
The  present   research   represents   an early effort   in understanding     how collaboration    scripts  organize   smart
classroom activities.

Collaborative Activities for Building Knowledge Communities
We recognize from prior research that a strong knowledge community can only be formed over a lengthy period
of time (i.e., over weeks and months) around a shared set of knowledge and experiences, rather than in the short
time frame in the enactment of the two studies described above. However, these short studies granted us the
opportunity    to look  for   evidence    of how   students    might  use real-time  collective    knowledge    in  various
representations and how its use would form a cohesive community of learners. Examining student interactions
from   both  studies,  we  gained  valuable    insight regarding   the  importance     of   i) representing  clear, defined
expertise   or roles   for  students   or  groups  of  students    to undertake;   ii)   providing   clear  and   persistent
representations   of  the  community's    knowledge    base;   and iii) focusing  on   a  rich  learning context    to guide
collaborations. Individuals and/or groups that assume distinct roles strengthen the collective knowledge base,
possibly by imparting students with a sense of identity and ownership within the community. The presence of
clear and persistent representations of the knowledge base provides students with concrete evidence of their
shared knowledge, however dynamic the knowledge may be, and allow ideas to be built upon. Moving forward
within the larger research program, our team will apply the findings from these initial studies and investigate
more complex pedagogical configurations, involving longer duration curriculum and dynamic changes to the
shared knowledge base over time. We will further develop the smart classroom environment and curriculum
materials based on our ongoing series of design-oriented studies with a view to extend our basic approach to
build knowledge communities for transformative learning.

References
Bereiter,  C., &   Scardamalia,   M.   (2003).  Learning    to work   creatively  with knowledge.     In  E.  De  Corte,  L.
          Verschaffel, N. Entwistle, & J. van Merriënboer (Eds.), Powerful learning environments: Unraveling
          basic components and dimensions (Advances in learning and instruction series, pp. 55-68). Oxford,
          UK: Elsevier Science.
Brown,   A.   L.  (1992).  Design experiments:     Theoretical  and   methodological     challenges   in creating   complex
          interventions in classroom settings. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 2(2), 141-178.
Brown, A. L., & Campione, J. C. (1990). Communities of learning and thinking, or a context by any other name.
          In Kuhn, D., (Ed.), Developmental Perspectives on Teaching and Learning Thinking Skills, (vol 21, pp.
          108-126). Basel, NY: Karger.
Brown, A.L., & Campione, J.C. (1996). Psychological theory and design of innovative learning environments:
          On procedures, principles, and systems. In L. Schauble & R. Glaser (Eds.), Innovations in learning:
          New environments for education (pp. 289-325). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
De Wever, B., Van Keer, H., Schellens, T., & Valcke, M. (2009). Structuring asynchronous discussion groups:
          the  impact  of  role  assignment    and self-assessment    on  students'  levels    of  knowledge  construction
          through social negotiation. Journal of Computer Assisted Learning, 25, 177-188.

© ISLS                                                                                                                    436
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                 Volume I: Long Papers

Design-Based    Research    Collective.  (2003).   Design-based     research: An emerging    paradigm    for educational
         inquiry. Educational Researcher, 32(1), 5-8.
Dillenbourg, P., & Tchounikine, P. (2007). Flexibility in macro-scripts for computer-supported collaborative
         learning. Journal of Computer Assisted Learning, 23(1), 1-13.
Hasemann, K. & Mansfield, H. (1995). Concept mapping in research on mathematical knowledge development:
         Background, methods, findings, and conclusions. Educational Studies in Mathematics, 29, 45-72.
King,   A. (1999).    Discourse  patterns   for mediating   peer learning.  In  A.  M.  O'Donnell    &   A. King   (Eds.),
         Cognitive perspectives on peer learning (pp. 87-117). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Kobbe,   L., Weinberger,    A.,  Dillenbourg,   P., Harrer, A.,  Hämäläinen,    R., &   Fischer,  F. (2007).  Specifying
         computer-supported collaboration scripts. International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative
         Learning, 2(2­3), 211­224.
Kollar, I., Fischer, F., & Slotta, J. D. (2007). Internal and external scripts in computer-supported collaborative
         inquiry learning. Learning & Instruction, 17(6), 708-721.
Linn, M. C., & Eylon, & B. - S. (2006). Science education: Integrating views of learning and instruction. In P.
         A. Alexander, & P. H. Winne (Eds.), Handbook of Educational Psychology (pp. 511­544). Mahwah,
         NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Partnership    for 21st Century   Skills.   (2009,  December).   Framework     for  21st Century   Learning.   Retrieved
         October 15, 2010, from http://www.21stcenturyskills.org/documents/P21_Framework.pdf
Penuel, W. R., Roschelle, J. & Shechtman, N. (2007). Designing formative assessment software with teachers:
         An analysis of the co-design process. Research and Practice in Technology Enhanced Learning, 2(1),
         51-74.
Peters, V. L., & Slotta, J. D. (2009). Co-designing curricula to promote collaborative knowledge construction in
         secondary    school   science.  In C.  O'Malley,   D. Suthers, P.    Reimann,  &   A. Dimitracopoulou     (Eds.),
         Proceedings    of  the  Computer   Supported    Collaborative  Learning   (CSCL)    Conference   (pp. 204-213).
         International Society of the Learning Sciences (ISLS).
Quintana,  C.,  Reiser,  B.  J., Davis,  E. A.,  Krajcik, J.,  Fretz,  E., Duncan,  R.   G., Kyza,   E., Edelson,  D., &
         Soloway, E. (2004). A scaffolding design framework for software to support science inquiry. Journal
         of the Learning Sciences, 13(3), 337-386.
Rummel, N., & Spada, H. (2005). Learning to collaborate: An instructional approach to promoting collaborative
         problem-solving in computer-mediated settings. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 14(2), 201-241.
Rummel, N., & Spada, H. (2007). Can people learn computer-mediated collaboration by following a script? In
         F. Fischer, H. Mandl, J. Haake, & I. Kollar (Eds.), Scripting computer-supported communication of
         knowledge: Cognitive, computational and educational perspectives (pp. 39­55). New York: Springer.
Rummel,    N.,  &   Weinberger,   A. (2008).    New  challenges  in   CSCL:   Towards    adaptive script  support. In  G.
         Kanselaar, V. Jonker, P.A. Kirschner, & F. Prins, (Eds.), International perspectives of the learning
         sciences: Cre8ing a learning world. Proceedings of the 8th international conference of the learning
         sciences (pp. 338­345). Utrecht, NL.
Scardamalia, M., & Bereiter, C. (1994). Computer support for knowledge-building communities. The Journal of
         the Learning Sciences, 3(3), 265-283.
Scardamalia,    M.,   & Bereiter,  C.    (1996).  Computer    support  for    knowledge-building   communities.    In  T.
         Kotchmann      (Ed.),  CSCL:   Theory   and practice    of an emerging    paradigm.   Mahwah,    NJ:  Lawrence
         Erlbaum Associates.
Scardamalia, M., & Bereiter, C. (2006). Knowledge building: Theory, pedagogy, and technology. In K. Sawyer
         (Ed.), Cambridge Handbook of the Learning Sciences (pp. 97-118). New York: Cambridge University
         Press.
Slotta, J. D.   (2010).  Evolving    the classrooms   of  the  future: The    interplay  of  pedagogy,   technology and
         community. In Mäkitalo-Siegl, K., Kaplan, F., Zottmann, J. & Fischer, F. (Eds.). Classroom of the
         Future: Orchestrating collaborative spaces (pp. 215-242). Rotterdam: Sense.
Slotta, J. D., & Peters, V. L. (2008). A blended model for knowledge communities: Embedding scaffolded
         inquiry. Proceedings of the 8th international conference on international conference for the learning
         sciences, 2, 343-350.
Stegmann, K., Weinberger, A., and Fischer, F. (2007). Facilitating argumentative knowledge construction with
         computer-supported collaboration scripts. International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative
         Learning, 2, 421-447.
Wecker,    C., &   Fischer, F.  (2007).  Fading  scripts in computer-supported     collaborative  learning:  The  role of
         distributed monitoring. In C. A. Chinn, G. Erkens, & S. Puntambekar (Eds.), Proceedings of CSCL
         2007: Of mice, minds and society (pp. 763­771). New Brunswick, NJ, USA.
Weinberger, A., Ertl, B., Fischer, F., & Mandl, H. (2005). Epistemic and social scripts in computer-supported
         collaborative learning. Instructional Science, 33, 1-30.

© ISLS                                                                                                                 437
