CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                  Volume I: Long Papers

Technological Affordances for Productive Multivocality in Analysis
                      Gregory Dyke, Carnegie Mellon University, USA, gregdyke@gmail.com
                 Kristine Lund, CNRS, University of Lyon, France, Kristine.Lund@univ-lyon2.fr
                            Heisawn Jeong, Hallym University, Korea, heis@hallym.ac.kr
                         Richard Medina, University of Hawaii, USA, rmedina@hawaii.edu
                         Daniel D. Suthers, University of Hawaii, USA, suthers@hawaii.edu
                      Jan van Aalst, University of Hong Kong, China, vanaalst@hkucc.hku.hk
             Wenli Chen, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore, wenli.chen@nie.edu.sg
             Chee-Kit Looi, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore, cheekit.looi@nie.edu.sg

         Abstract:    Productive   multivocality  in   CSCL   has  been the focus   of  a series of  workshops
         involving the comparison and contrasting of multiple analyses of the same datasets, with the
         goal of learning how different epistemologies and analysis methods of collaborative learning
         can complement       each   other  and   allow   a more   complete     understanding    to emerge.   A
         prerequisite    to such work   is the  technological  ability to assist the  comparison    of different
         analyses.    In this paper,  we   show   how   the   Tatiana  framework    for manipulating   analytic
         representations was used to compare three different analyses of a computer-mediated small
         group   problem    solving session.   In particular, we   draw conclusions    as to the technological
         affordances that are needed to ensure productive multivocality and illustrate the immediate
         benefits provided by the Tatiana framework.

Introduction
Researchers, designers and practitioners in the Computer Supported Collaborative Learning community work
within a variety of epistemological frameworks, have multiple theoretical perspectives and use a variety of tools
to apply different analytical methodologies to complex datasets. Such multivocality is a strength only to the
extent that boundary objects can be created and shared in order to support dialogue between disciplines and
approaches. Through a series of five workshops over four years, we have attempted to address the issue of what
we call productive multivocality, particularly in the analysis of small group interaction in learning situations.
Over the series of workshops (Suthers et al., 2011), we have come to realize that discussions surrounding these
issues need to be grounded on multiple analyses of the same dataset and that, moreover, few differences can be
addressed without diving back to the primary data and examining each analyst's approach.
         Such comparison of analyses is hard to perform without adequate tool support and extends the need,
already  highlighted    by  many  authors,  for tool-support   for analysis (Sanderson    &   Fischer, 1994;  Hilbert  &
Redmiles, 2000; Suthers & Medina, 2008). However, most tools remain limited to certain kinds of media or
certain kinds of analyses (e.g, Greenhalgh, French, Humble, & Tennent, 2007; Fiotakis, Fidas, & Avouris, 2007;
Georgeon,   Mille,    &  Bellet, 2006).  Our   ability to combine     analyses  through interoperating  tools  is further
contingent on the design of models of analysis (Harrer et al., 2007). This ability is not only desirable within the
context of productive multivocality but is necessary if researchers are to be able to analyse as a team (Goodman,
Drury,  Gaimari,  Kurnland,    &  Zarella,  2006)  and  in  order  to  validate and replicate existing  studies  (Reffay,
Chanier, Noras, & Betbeder, 2008).
         Suthers,  Dwyer,     Medina,   and Vatrapu    (2010) describe  a generic   analytic  framework   for computer-
mediated interactions. They explain that such frameworks can be broken up into three foundations: an empirical
foundation  describes    the  real-world    observable    objects  the data is   composed    of  (typically  events   and
relationships between events); a representational foundation describes how the empirical foundation is modeled
and subsequently visualized (e.g. as a table, as a graph, etc.); a conceptual foundation describes the mapping of
features of the  other   two  foundations   onto   epistemological    concepts  (e.g. ideas  and  uptake).   The  Tatiana
framework (Dyke, Lund, & Girardot, 2009) provides an extensible data model and a typology of operations
from which a variety of representational foundations can be generated, resulting in the Tatiana tool (based on
this framework)    being    generic  enough    to afford  the  creation   and   combination   of a   variety of   analytic
representations.
         In this paper, we describe three analyses on the same dataset to illustrate how the Tatiana framework
can be used to create and combine different analytic representations, and to show technological affordances that
must be catered for when designing analytic tools. The complexity of this dataset and the diversity of analytical
methodologies and representations that were used provide the basis for a discussion about the empirical and
representational foundations of these analyses. Discussion of the conceptual or epistemological foundations and
the commensurability and compatibility of various analytic approaches would need to be based on the entirety
of datasets analyzed over the series of workshops and is beyond the scope of this paper.
         In what   follows,   we  first present   Tatiana and  the core   concepts  onto  which  data  and   analyses are
mapped within the tool. We then describe the study from which the data was collected and the form in which it

© ISLS                                                                                                                454
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                    Volume I: Long Papers

was shared among analysts. Three different analyses were carried out independently from each other with an
overarching   goal  of identifying pivotal   moments    for learning. For   both the  data       and the   three subsequent
analyses, we describe the initial analytic representations, their affordances, and the work that was performed,
both to map them onto the Tatiana framework and to coordinate them in order to compare them. Finally, we
show some examples of the immediate benefits of the Tatiana tool, suggest how it should be improved, and
summarize the technological and pragmatic affordances that appear to be a prerequisite to multivocal analysis.

Tatiana: a Generic Analysis Environment
Tatiana   (Trace   Analysis  Tool  for Interaction  ANAlysts)    (Dyke   et al., 2009)   is      an  environment   (and         an
underlying  conceptual   framework)    designed   for  manipulating   various   kinds of  analytic     representations,         in
particular those that present a view on event-based data, be it the original data or subsequent analyses thereof.
We call these representations replayables, because they can be replayed in a similar fashion to a video. Tatiana
replayables   comprise   a  sequence   of events    and benefit   from  Tatiana's   four  core      functionalities, whose
extensibility differentiates it from   other tools: transformation,  enrichment,    visualization     and  synchronization
(see Figure 1).

   Figure 1. Various replayables visualized in Tatiana: traces of a shared text editor (top left), transcription (middle left),
writing units (top center), visualization of reformulation (bottom left), synchronized with external tools, DREW replayer (top
                             right), video player (middle right), remote control (bottom right).

          Replayables can be transformed (automatically or manually) to create new replayables whose events
might be a subset, an abstraction or a combination of events from other replayables. In analogy to a spreadsheet
view   of data,  transformation  can   be thought   of  as creating, copying    and deleting      rows   or  events. In         the
remainder of this paper, we shall refer to events created as a combination or grouping of other events as parent
events, since they create a parent-child relationship.
          Events within Tatiana can be enriched by analytic data generated by the researcher. There are currently
three  kinds    of  enrichments   supported   by    Tatiana:   free-form   annotation,   categorization,      and    graphs.
Categorization is simply a way annotating the events from a restricted list of words and can be used for coding,
labeling  and   adding  keywords.  Graphs    allow  researchers   to explicitly  mark  relationships       between   events.
Conceptually,   enrichments   add  additional  columns     (or properties) to events,  or add        links between   events.
Tatiana provides an extension mechanism to create new kinds of enrichment.
          All replayables   within Tatiana    can   be  visualized in  different viewers.        Two  viewers    have  been
implemented so far: a table view in which data is presented as in a spreadsheet, with one row per event and
columns for each of the event's properties; and a graphical timeline, which presents each event as a graphical
object whose graphical properties (color, shape, size, position, etc.) can be set according to the properties of the
event (user, tool, timestamp, category, etc.). Tatiana is extensible, allowing new kinds of viewers to be created,
affording new ways of visualizing data.
          Finally, all visualizations of replayables in Tatiana can be synchronized with each other and also with
data viewed in external replayers such as media players. Synchronized replay means that, for example, during
analysis of a video and its transcription in Tatiana, if a researcher clicks on a timestamped utterance in the table
view, this action causes the replayer to move the video to this point. Conversely, when the video is replayed, the

© ISLS                                                                                                                          455
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                  Volume I: Long Papers

corresponding events in the transcript are highlighted one after the other. This functionality helps link different
replayables together, allowing data to be looked at simultaneously from different angles.

Small Group Discussion about Fractions in Group Scribbles
The  dataset   we  are   reporting on  was   drawn   from   a three-year   school-based   research  project using  Group
Scribbles (GS; Roschelle et al., 2007), which provides a shared representational space to support collaborative
practices. Two fifth grade classes (about age 11) in a primary school in Singapore participated in the project.
Students were asked to work in groups of four to solve the problem of dividing two pizzas equally among three
children (Looi & Chen, 2010). They were first asked to work individually, either thinking about the solution or
creating their private note, and then share it with the rest of the group.
         Each student had an individual tablet PC with GS, which enabled them to create notes with hand-drawn
sketches or typed text in their private space and then publish them to the group space. For this activity, the
group space was prepared with a picture of two pizzas. Students could draw directly on the pizza (but were
encouraged not to) or post notes in the public space. They could also view others' work, attach comments on
other members' contributions, or move posts back to the private space.
         The shared dataset focused on a group comprising four students whose names have been anonymized
as Terry, Helen, Victor and Quentin. The students sat in pairs over two rows. One video camera was set to
record the classroom session and another the target group. Each student also had a camera set up on the desk to
capture  their face.   Screen  capture   software   was   used  to record  the contents   of students'  activities in GS
environment. The resulting dataset comprises six videos (one of the classroom, one of the group, and one of
each screen with the face video inserted into the bottom right corner).           The episode that was analyzed lasted
about 16 minutes.
         During the episode, Victor and Helen both produce and discuss similar graphical solutions; Terry is
initially confused and ends up producing a written solution that is equivalent to the graphical solutions. It is not
clear to what extent Terry was unable to come up with any kind of graphical solution and to what extent his
solution was   influenced   by  Helen    and Victor's  solutions   and by  discussion  with  Helen. Quentin    produces a
symbolic arithmetic solution that is initially incorrect but gets amended later on as Quentin realizes his mistake.

Data Transcription and Subsequent Sharing within Tatiana
Transcripts of the videos were provided by Looi, Chen and Tan in a spreadsheet, with approximate time stamps
(provided at   one minute     intervals) and   with the activity organised   into four columns,    one for  each student.
Simultaneous   actions    (or near-simultaneous     actions for  which  timing  was   not considered   important   by the
transcriber) were transcribed in the same row, with actions taking place over a longer period of time spanning
several rows. When the ordering of events was important to show potential reply-structures, these events were
placed on consecutive rows. Many cells also contained screenshots to help understand the GS activity.
         This kind of analytic representation is particularly interesting. It is able to condense the transcription
into a reasonably small area (compared to a transcription with one row per utterance). It also accounts for the
timing between events, albeit with a certain bias (as the transcriber decides whether precise information about
how various actions overlap should be transcribed or not). This account can also be achieved at the relatively
cheap cost of not having to find the precise beginning and end date of each event. Furthermore, the presence of
screenshots  helps    to remove    the difficulty in   understanding   the transcription without   the aid  of the video,
making the transcription a remarkably standalone analytic representation. The cost for this is higher, as screen
captures must be made and inserted for each event.
         One   goal   of transcription   is to remove   the necessity  of  constantly having  to replay  the video.   This
comes at the cost of "trusting" that the transcription adequately serves as a proxy for the original video. In order
to allow the   analysts  to view   the   transcription in synchronization   with  the videos  and  thus to  alleviate this
problem, the transcription was adapted to Tatiana before sharing. This produced four replayables, one for each
student and a global replayable created through the automated merging of the four individual replayables. The
events in these replayables were time-aligned with the videos, to reduce ambiguity and because Tatiana does not
afford partial time-alignment. A basic typology of events was created (speech, note creation, posting a note,
etc.) to enable better differentiation between them. Although no visualization in Tatiana allows screenshots to be
associated with events, and the tabular view matches each event to a single row, the affordances present in the
original transcription can be reproduced in Tatiana by opening in parallel the four replayables and one of the
videos. However, as each video only shows the corresponding student's private space, all four videos must be
opened to examine all the private spaces. The disadvantage of this mapping is that synchronization is dynamic,
and static representations lose these affordances (i.e. it is no longer possible to click on a visualization in a paper
and cause something to happen). One workaround is to print out the tabular view of the combined replayable,
which at least provides complete timing information, in spite of displaying it in a less intuitive fashion.
         Once this mapping into Tatiana was completed, the data was shared, both in Tatiana and in its original
form. We now present the three analyses, two of which were performed with Tatiana and a third later adapted.

© ISLS                                                                                                                 456
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                 Volume I: Long Papers

Analysis from the Perspective of Knowledge Building
Knowledge Building is the work that a community does to advance the state of knowledge in the community,
such as creating, improving and using new ideas (Scardamalia, 2002). Knowledge building involves not only
sharing ideas with others, but also jointly understanding and improving them. There must be a context in which
such work is important, so that the new ideas are gradually used in the later work that the community does.
Recent  literature  on knowledge     building  emphasizes     "knowledge  practices"   (van Aalst, 2009;   Hakkarainen,
2009). The first analysis was conducted from this perspective, entirely within Tatiana.
         Because of the short length of the dataset, we did not expect evidence of all aspects of knowledge
building ­ particularly the diffusion of the new ideas in the work of the community (a small group in this case).
From the knowledge-building perspective, it is difficult to say whether learning has taken place without seeing
ideas reused in multiple contexts, and by multiple students. Nevertheless it is possible to examine whether the
efforts of students are limited to sharing ideas, or whether students collaboratively work to improve them and
develop shared understanding. This analysis highlighted the fact that there were very few attempts to improve
on existing solutions or to relate them (as all correct solutions are in some way equivalent). The problem itself
was also not ideal, as it was not motivated by students' knowledge needs and was not very complicated: two of
the students quickly identified solutions but did not understand why they should attempt to reconcile them.

Analytic Representations Created
The transcription     was coded   in Tatiana   in  a set of  codes   derived  from the  knowledge-building    principles
(Scardamalia, 2002) and some additional codes from a study that focuses on the social aspects of knowledge
building (van   Aalst,    2009). These   codes  were   not  mutually    exclusive  and  each line  was  coded   with  all
applicable codes. Tatiana's current implementation does not allow for more than one code per event (which
might be described as tagging), so three enrichments based on the same coding scheme were created and most
events  were  given   between    one and  three codes.   A  further  annotation  enrichment  was   created to provide a
narrative description of what was happening at each line and to justify the choice of certain codes.

Analysis of the Uptake of Representational Practices
Medina   conducted    uptake  analysis  of the  GS   dataset   using concepts  and methods   from  the  uptake  analysis
framework    described    in (Suthers,  Dwyer,  Medina,     &  Vatrapu, 2010).   This  analysis was  mostly   performed
within Tatiana. Its focus was twofold. The first part of the analysis showed, through participants' orientation to
each other throughout the first few minutes that, in spite of little apparent explicit communication, the group
was aware of the GS workspace as a shared medium for whose content they were accountable. In this brief
period  they  also  demonstrated     an appropriation    of a  diverse  range of  modal  resources  (talk, gesture,  and
inscription), The second part of the analysis used uptake graphs and information about the context in which the
dataset was produced. It showed that (1) the students were operating on representational practices developed in
prior classroom activity (2), each student demonstrated a varied interpretation of these practices in the problem
setting and (3), interaction between two of the students (Helen and Terry) revealed that, at times, reconciliation
of interpretations    can be  mediated   through   shared,  yet uniquely  applied,  representational and    inscriptional
practices (Medina, Suthers, & Vatrapu, 2009).

Analytic Representations Created
Similar  to   other   analyses   conducted   under    this  framework,   (e.g.  Medina   et  al.,  2009),  the  analytic
implementation in the current investigation was multilevel. At an empirical level, the analysis attends to the
sequential  order   of participants'   actions  in   order  to identify contingencies   between    acts and   produce a
contingency graph that, in turn, serves as a resource for identifying uptake. Identification of uptake relations,
based on the empirical evidence provided by contingencies, produces an uptake graph as a derivative of the
contingency graph. In the process of creating these graphs, a new replayable was created with its events being
either a single act, already present in the original transcription, or a new event, representing a collection of
related acts in the original transcript (e.g. when an idea was published in two separate notes, forming a single
whole). This replayable added the affordance of being able to see how much time was taken between beginning
the crafting of a new idea and its final publication.
         Two graph enrichments were created, one for each analysis, making explicit the contingencies between
the different acts. The replayable can be visualized on a graphical timeline, with one horizontal line per student.
The    arrows provided    by  the  graph   enrichment    show   how    students  re-use and  respond    to each other's
contributions. An additional annotation enrichment was created to provide a narrative of the episode.

Analysis from a Cognitive Perspective of Group Understanding
The last analysis was performed in a spreadsheet and later adapted to Tatiana. The analysis was an attempt to
further our understanding of how groups operate as a cognitive unit in artifact-mediated discourse situations
(Jeong, Chen, & Looi, 2011). Jeong examined how group understanding developed by tracing contributions to

© ISLS                                                                                                               457
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                   Volume I: Long Papers

the group workspace and how individual contributions evolved over verbal and non-verbal activities. This was
done   by splitting  the session up   into various   activity threads   around contributions that   represent  a group   of
postings about the same core idea. The contributions were further coded in terms of whether they were on-task
or off-task, collaborative or individualistic, and made public or kept private.
          The main findings were that the group space became crowded with many postings and comments, but
still remained fragmented at the end of the activity, as students made little attempt to integrate and consolidate
different postings and their relationships to each other. The analyst suggests that this could be remedied through
better regulation of the group space and of the student activity. Furthermore, the students' group work was
mediated by both verbal and non-verbal exchanges, e.g. a verbal question was answered by an action in GS.
Thus, when group work is mediated by artifact construction, non-verbal actions must also be taken into account.

Analytic Representations Created
As with the original transcription, this analysis was particularly interesting from a representational standpoint.
The  original    events  were taken   and  rearranged,   so   that each  event  (or rather the   cell  in the  spreadsheet
representing this event) was placed in the row corresponding to the contribution thread it belonged to. This
extracted the time-student ordering of the data into as many timelines as there were threads, thus enabled the
analyst   to examine    more  clearly how   each   thread   developed,  how   many  participants  were    involved   and to
distinguish off-task threads and exclusively private events more easily.
          This representation can be mapped onto the Tatiana framework in any one of three ways, depending on
the desired affordances. First, a replayable can be created in which the events of each contribution thread are
collected together into a single parent event. In the Tatiana framework, this is a transformation that abstracts up
from individual events to higher-level threads. Of the three, it is the most visually similar to the original and, via
synchronization, allows events to stay in their original context while still showing to which thread they belong.
Second, a categorization enrichment could enable the coding of each event according to the parent thread to
which it belongs, this makes it easier to visualize thread-belonging as an extra property of the data, rather than
as its central property. Third a replayable could be created for each thread, making it easier to consider threads
in isolation. In the work done for this paper, only the first (initially) and second (later) was created.

Combining Analyses in Tatiana
The original idea was that the analyses (four enrichments for the first analysis, two enrichments and a replayable
for the   second    and  one  replayable   for   the third) could    be  opened  at the  same    time  and    visualized in
synchronization in order to compare them, thus creating a common boundary object. In practice, this was not
immediately possible, for several reasons.
          First, the knowledge building categories were applied to all events. GS forces users to first write a note
in  their private   space (producing   a   first event in   the transcription)  and then   drag  it to  the   public space,
(producing    a  second).  The  first event    would   typically   be   coded "new  idea"  and   the   latter "community
knowledge". The uptake analysis only considered events in the public space. In order to meaningfully compare
the analyses, the knowledge building categories from events in the private space needed to be transferred to their
public space counterparts.
          Second, the replayable to which the uptake graph was applied contained events that were parents of the
events  in   the original transcription  (typically,   the  events   of note  creation, editing, publication   and   verbal
explanation would all be grouped together into a single parent event). As enrichments (categories, annotations
and links) attach to individual events, the newly created parent event was not aware of the KB categories and the
children of the parent event were not aware of the links that had been attached to their parent event. Again, there
needed to be some kind of transfer of enrichments for comparison to be possible.
          Last, the initial replayable that was created for the group understanding analysis, with one event per
thread, also did not afford easy comparison with the other analyses, since it was only possible to see which
events belonged to which thread through synchronization.
          To solve these problems, all three replayables (the original transcription, the one on which the uptake
graph was drawn, and the threads replayable) were opened side by side along with their associated enrichments
and synchronized. From these, a fourth replayable was created, which initially contained all the events of the
transcription. The following procedure was then applied, event by event:
          ·      The event was deleted (from the fourth replayable, but remained present in the original transcript),
          unless one of the following conditions was met:
                 ­    It appeared (itself or by proxy via its parent event) in the uptake graph.
                 ­    It was public, and coded otherwise than "off task" in the knowledge building analysis.
                 ­    It was public and did not belong to an "off task" contribution thread.
          ·      If the event was deleted   and   was  private,  its  knowledge  building  codes    and annotations   were
          transferred to the corresponding publication event.
          ·      If the event was not deleted, it was coded according to the thread it belonged to.

© ISLS                                                                                                                   458
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                              Volume I: Long Papers

          ·    If the event was the last publication event and child of a parent event in the uptake graph, it was
          added into a new graph in place of the parent event.
          In order to preserve the affordance, provided by the uptake graph, of "seeing" how long a given idea
takes to construct, we also then added back in the private events that lead up to a publication. The application of
this process resulted in a single replayable containing only the events that had been considered pertinent in at
least one analysis. Although "off task" activity, particularly in the regulation of social relations, has often been
considered important in CSCL (Baker, Andriessen, & Lund, 2009), none of the three analyses focused on such
events, which is why they were mostly ignored. In effect, the publication event of a note was considered as a
proxy for its creation and editing on the one hand and for any parent events to which it belonged on the other, in
order to conciliate the units considered in the various analyses.
          In an attempt to provide a single visualization in which to examine all the analyses (in combination
with synchronization with other visualizations), we used Tatiana to automatically produce a graphical timeline
based on the various enrichments of the different analyses, an extract of which is shown in Figure 2. In this
timeline, time progresses horizontally, each row corresponds to a contribution thread, each color corresponds to
a student, squares are speech events, circles are GS-mediated events, small circles are private events, and the
largest circles and   squares show   events   which  have    been coded with  the   "core" principles of knowledge
building (i.e. new ideas, idea diversity, etc.). The majority of the interaction occurs in the shown threads, with
the core of the uptake between Helen (red) and Terry (blue). Potential for knowledge building can also be found
in threads that do not involve multiple students (e.g. Quentin's symbolic solution in yellow).

Figure 2. Graphical Timeline Showing the Combined Analyses by Thread. Four of the Nine Threads are Shown.

Benefits of Combined Analyses
Although we do not discuss the lessons learnt from these different analytic interpretations in this paper, this
section briefly discusses  some   of the   benefits that are immediately   afforded by tools such as  Tatiana when
embarking on a multivocality or mixed-methods route.
          The separation into threads carried the risk of having difficulty in identifying any transitions of ideas
between threads. Opening the uptake graph on top of a graphical timeline where each line represents a thread, as
in Figure 2, confirms that such transitions do occur. Conversely, the original uptake analysis showed that there
was some uptake between Helen and Victor but focused on the importance uptake between Helen and Terry.
However, this is not as obvious in the uptake analysis' original graph (cf. Figure 3) where the separation of
users on different lines seems to indicate that the main interaction is between Helen and Victor. Separating by
contribution thread, rather than by user, immediately focuses our attention on the places where uptake moves
from   one  contribution thread  to  another, showing    the interactions  beween   various students' solutions  and
representations. Indeed, the places where arrows cross from one thread to another in Figure 2 were identified by
all three analysts as  being  of interest. This is  hardly surprising  and confirms the suggestion by    Suthers and
Medina (2008) that, in process analysis, trajectories of ideas should be examined to look for their transformation
(which is an important concept in many epistemologies of collaborative learning and meaning-making).

            Figure 3. Same Data as in Figure 2 Above, But Organized by User, Rather Than by Thread.

          This  visualization also   immediately     highlights   some differences  between   analytic   approaches,
providing the opportunity to discuss issues concerning the data (uptake between threads, important moments for

© ISLS                                                                                                            459
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                      Volume I: Long Papers

knowledge    building  which    are  "ignored"   by other  analyses,  etc.), which   are  connected     to discussions    about
epistemological   questions    in general,    grounded  on  these  analyses,   such  as   the relative  importance     of idea
diversity   (the mere   "presence"      of different   ideas),  collaboration    in threads,    or uptake     across   threads.
Furthermore, when discussing data points, synchronization allows a return to the original data in the videos in
order to verify that interpretations are not influenced by imprecision in the transcription.

Design of Tools to Support the Construction and Use of Analytic
Representations
We  now     draw upon   this  case   study to  discuss  how    tools and  their  design  can    support  multivocal    analytic
dialogue. While the previous sections show the Tatiana framework to be an important contribution as a means to
reuse and combine analyses in order to create boundary objects for discussion of multiple analyses, we also
highlighted some issues, which we hope to address and encourage other analysis tool designers to draw upon.
          The  biggest  difficulty   we   had in combining     these analyses    stemmed    from   the  unit  of analysis.   As
explained by Suthers et al. (2010), the events of a CSCL transcript are frequently used as proxies for higher-
level concepts. In other words, what is of interest to analysts are not so much events, but, for example, the ideas
represented by these events. It is therefore not surprising that the proxy for an idea should be quite variable
(initiation of private  authorship,   editing,   publication,  or some   combination     of  the three).   The   issue can   be
addressed pragmatically, either by discussion after analysis (as exemplified in this paper), or by prior agreement
among   analysts.  In  either case,  analysts  might   address   what  the  unit of  analysis   should  be,  whether   private
spaces should be considered, whether the time taken to craft a contribution is important, and whether events in
all modes (e.g. speech and tool mediation) should be considered equal.
          A  complement     to  this pragmatic   approach   would    be  to  adjust  tool  support  so   that enrichment     be
transitively propagated to parent and child events under certain conditions. For example, it would make sense
for the parent   events  in   the uptake   analysis  to "inherit"    the knowledge      building   codes   attributed  to their
constituent child events. And in the case of the replayable containing contribution thread events, it would be
beneficial to be able to propagate the thread an event belongs to down to the event itself in order to add the
thread as a category. In general it should be easy to transition events across such near equivalent features as
parent  event    belongingness,   replayable    belongingness     and  having    identical   properties    (same  user,   same
category, etc.).
          During  the   course  of   this  work,  Tatiana's   synchronization    feature   had  to be   refined.  Sometimes
synchronization   is  used   to identify   overlapping  or  synchronous      events  (e.g.   between    speech   and   artifact-
mediated dialog); in other cases it can be used to identify the same event in different visualizations of the same
replayable; a hybrid of these two is identifying the children of a parent event from one visualization to another.
This only becomes a problem when there are many occurrences of simultaneous events, as is the case with the
GS dataset. For this reason, Tatiana has been modified to make it possible to choose the synchronization mode:
by timestamp or by identity (the latter includes parent-child event relationships).
          The affordances synchronization provides are dynamic and lost in the case of static representations
(such as those found in conference and journal publications). In spite of this drawback, there are so few static
visual dimensions (size, shape, position and color) that it makes sense to transfer as many aspects as possible to
a dynamic register, particularly for the performance of the analysis, as opposed to its publication.
          Finally, so many analytic representations were created during the analyses and their combination that it
would be useful to have meta-data describing their assumptions and purposes, along with software support for
recording   this meta-data.    This  is an  extension   of  the  recommendation      by   Reffay   et  al. (2008),   that it is
indispensable to include the educational and research context when sharing learning data.

Conclusion
In this paper, we described the lessons learned from the multivocal comparison of three independent analyses of
the same dataset, and discussed their implications for the design of analytic tools. The original data set and the
three  analyses  provided   a  diversity   of analytic representations    whose   affordances    were   discussed.    We  then
explained   how   these analyses     were  combined    with   the assistance   of   the  Tatiana   tool and   provided    some
examples of the benefits of combining analyses in such a way. Finally, we discussed some of the issues raised
and provided guidance for development of analytic tools beyond the existing Tatiana framework, focusing in
particular on aspects such as analytic unit, propagation at different levels of abstraction, synchronization, and
analytic and pedagogical context.
          The  current  Tatiana   framework     proved  a   very  positive  experience    as  a means    to  create  boundary
objects for  discussing  multivocal     analysis.   These  analyses   provide    further support   for  the   hypothesis   that
Tatiana's   provisions  for generating     representational foundations    are  generic  enough    to  serve  as the  basis  of
boundary objects in CSCL. While there appears to be a certain influence of the conceptual foundation of an
analysis on its empirical foundation (e.g. what aspect of the data will serve as proxy for an idea), this need not
be an obstacle to multivocality, assuming analysts agree beforehand on a common empirical foundation (and its

© ISLS                                                                                                                      460
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                    Volume I: Long Papers

mapping onto respective representational and conceptual foundations), and are aware of the choices that might
later introduce bias. Furthermore, the use of synchronization, automated transformation and enrichment reduces
the need of finding a unique representational foundation for comparing analyses.
          We hope to draw on this work to apply similar methods in comparing analyses in other datasets. In
particular, we need to extend these methods to address analyses that are more quantitatively oriented. Having
diminished the pragmatic representation-driven issues related to multivocality, we hope to be able to focus on
methodological and epistemological issues to promote better understanding in the diverse field of CSCL.

References
Baker,  M.,   Andriessen,     J., Lund,  K.  (2009).  Socio-relational,  affective  and cognitive   dimensions     of CSCL
          interactions: integrating theoretical-methodological perspectives. CSCL'09. Rhodes, Greece.
Dyke, G., Lund, K.,& Girardot, J.-J. (2009). Tatiana: an environment to support the CSCL analysis process.
          Proc. CSCL 2009, Rhodes, Greece, 58­67.
Fiotakis, G.,     Fidas, C.   &   Avouris,  N  (2007).   Comparative     usability evaluation  of  web   systems    through
          ActivityLens, Proc. PCI 2007, Patras, Greece.
Georgeon, O, Mille, A, & Bellet, B.T. (2006). ABSTRACT: a tool and a methodology for analyzing human
          activity   mediated     by a  complex   technical   artifact. Ingéniérie  des Connaissances.      Semaine   de  la
          connaissance. Nantes, France.
Goodman, B. A., Drury, J. Gaimari, R. D., Kurland, L., & Zarrella, J (2006) Applying User Models to Improve
          Team           Decision           Making.         Retrieved          April          10,        2008          from
          http://mitre.org/work/tech_papers/tech_papers_07/06_1351/
Greenhalgh, C., French, A., Humble, J. and Tennent, P. (2007) Engineering a replay application based on RDF
          and  OWL,      Online   Proceedings    of the  UK   e-Science   All Hands   Meeting     2007,  September    10-13,
          Nottingham: NeSC/JISC.
Hilbert, & Redmiles. (2000). Extracting usability information from user interface events. ACM Comput. Surv.,
          32(4), 384­421. doi: http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/371578.371593.
Harrer, A. Zeini, S. Kahrimanis, G. Avouris, N. Marcos, J. A. Martinez-Mones, A. Meier, A. Rummel, & N.
          Spada,     H (2007)     Towards   a Flexible   Model  for     Computer-based   Analysis   and   Visualisation   of
          Collaborative Learning Activities, Proc. CSCL 2007, New Jersey, USA
Hakkarainen,      K. (2009)   A   knowledge-practice    perspective  on  technology-mediated      learning. ijcscl 4(2), pp.
          213-231.
Jeong, H., Chen, W., & Looi, C. K. (2011). Analysis of group understanding in artifact-mediated discourse.
          CSCL 2011. Hong Kong.
Looi,  C.-K.,  &   Chen,   W.   (2010).  Community-based      individual  knowledge    construction   in the classroom:   A
          process-oriented account. Journal of Computer Assisted Learning, 26(3), 202-213.
Medina,   R.,  Suthers,   D.,  &   Vatrapu,   R. (2009). Inscriptions    becoming   representations.    CSCL'09.    Rhodes,
          Greece.
Reffay,   C., Chanier,    T., Noras,    M.,  &   Betbeder,  M.-L.   (2008)  Contribution    à  la structuration de    corpus
          d'apprentissage     pour   un meilleur partage   en recherche,   STICEF   journal,   Volume    15, ISSN   : 1764-
          7223. Put online 14th October 2008, http://sticef.org.
Roschelle,    J., Tatar,  D.,     Chaudhury,  S.  R., Dimitriadis,   Y.,   Patton,  C., &      DiGiano,   C.  (2007).    Ink,
          improvisation, and interactive engagement: Learning with tablets. Computer, 40(9), 38-44.
Sanderson P., & Fisher C. (1994). Exploratory sequential data analysis: foundations. Hum.-Comput. Interact.,
          9(4), 251­317.
Scardamalia,   M.    (2002).  Collective  cognitive   responsibility for  the advancement     of  knowledge.  In   B. Smith
          (Ed.) Liberal education in a knowledge society (pp. 67-98). Chicago: Open Court.
Suthers,  D.  D.,    Lund,  K.,   Dyke,  G.,  Rosé,  C., Law,   N.,  Teplovs,   C., et  al. (2011).   Towards   productive
          multivocality in the analysis of collaborative learning. CSCL 2011, Hong Kong.
Suthers, D. D. & Medina, R. (2008). Tracing Interaction in Distributed Collaborative Learning . Annual Meeting
          of the American Educational Research Association (AERA), New York, March 24-28, 2008.
Suthers, D. D., Dwyer, N., Medina, R., & Vatrapu, R. (2010). A framework for conceptualizing, representing,
          and analyzing distributed interaction. ijcscl 5(1), pp. 5-42.
van Aalst,    J.  (2009)   Distinguishing     knowledge-sharing,     knowledge-construction,      and knowledge-creation
          discourses. ijcscl 4(3), pp. 259-287.

Acknowledgments
The authors    would     like to   thank  the organizers   and financers   of  the  series  of workshops     on productive
multivocality,    as well  as the    many  participants whose  contributions    helped  structure  our   thoughts  on  these
issues.

© ISLS                                                                                                                   461
