CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                 Volume I: Long Papers

 Learning through Collaborative Creation of Knowledge Objects in
                                              Teacher Education
 Crina Dama, Sten Ludvigsen, InterMedia, University of Oslo, Postboks 1161 Blindern 0318 Oslo, Norway
                      Email: crina.damsa@intermedia.uio.no, s.r.ludvigsen@intermedia.uio.no

          Abstract: This contribution presents an empirical study of object-oriented collaboration. The
          participants are groups of teacher students, who work on knowledge objects (e.g., didactic
          materials, study materials and guidelines for teachers) intended to address problems identified
          at schools where they pursue their internships. The knowledge creation approach to learning,
          which places collaborative creation of knowledge objects at its core, served as a guide for the
          pedagogical     design, which  includes   specifications of  the collaborative activities and   tools
          utilized. We collected different types of data. Analyses followed three lines of investigation:
          analysis of group interactions, of concepts and ideas uptake, and of object co-construction and
          development. Findings show various degrees of idea sharing and of co-elaboration of object
          iterations. These findings assist us in formulating recommendations for future research and
          pedagogical design, especially with regard to pedagogical settings, and technological support
          for object co-construction and co-elaboration.

Introduction
Exposing students to knowledge practices and the problems they will face as professionals is a challenging task
for higher education institutions. Various studies (see Muukkonen & Lakkala, 2009) posit that collaborative
settings and problems with open-ended character entice students to activate and employ knowledge acquired in
different settings, and to envision solutions to these problems together with peers. This calls for theoretical and
practical knowledge to be concretized in knowledge objects wherein this knowledge becomes materialized (e.g.,
in designs, research reports, educational material, etc.) and transparent for the participants involved. However,
becoming     actively involved    in  such complex   processes    and creating  sophisticated knowledge     objects is a
challenging task for students. In order to learn more about how students can be supported in their endeavor, in-
depth examination of these aspects is needed. In this paper we investigate how teacher students collaborate to
create and develop knowledge objects that will be employed at the schools where they pursue their internships.
In our analyses we focus on the interactions that constitute the object-oriented collaborative process, and on the
mechanisms of iterative knowledge object development.
          Various theoretical perspectives (Bereiter, 2003; Vygotsky, 1987) reconceptualize learning as a social
activity, and knowledge as socially constructed. The idea of learning as a social activity has been explored and
investigated from various angles, i.e., the situated approach or the different versions of social-cultural theory. In
our  work  we  employ     the latter,  and we  emphasize   the  epistemic  and   regulative  dimensions  of  learning  in
interaction and collaboration, aimed at creating new knowledge objects. The focus on creation and development
of knowledge objects is proposed by Paavola and Hakkarainen (2005), as part of their view of learning as a
collaborative, knowledge-creating activity. As posed by Van Aalst (2009), this view goes beyond objectivist
stances, and emphasizes that understanding and knowing are mediated by the objects that are created and shared
by  a  community.     Rather  than   residing inside individual   minds, ideas  are regarded  as  cultural  objects that
mediate learning and understanding. In general, objects play an important role in human interactions, as they
structure interaction,    generate   problems  (Jordan  &  Henderson,    1995),  or provide  groups   with  motives   for
interaction or outcomes to reach for (Stahl, 2006). However, in spite of the theoretical account of objects in
learning  settings, not   much    is known  about   how they emerge    from  these  interactions, about  the way    these
objects develop and change over time, or about how they are mediated by collaborative technologies. When
studying objects, the emphasis has been placed mostly on the role of objects (see Eckert & Boujut, 2003) rather
than on the nature of the objects themselves (Ewenstein & White, 2009). Hence, in order to investigate whether
objects  play a key    role  in knowledge     creation and learning,   we  need  to  understand   how  objects  become
constituted and how they are developed.
          This paper attempts to examine the mechanisms of collaborative creation of knowledge objects in a
teacher training program. The aim of this study is twofold. First, we aim to pin down interactions that lead to
knowledge object development. Second, we seek to understand how the knowledge objects created gain shape
through collaboration, and how object development can be related to interactions between participants. In the
case   study reported  in  this paper,  we  employ   a qualitative perspective,  as well as  methods   to  gain a better
understanding   of    the aforementioned    processes  and to  depict  their characteristics. A   set of  data  from  an
extensive design study that involved teacher students working on collaborative projects is used to illustrate these
mechanisms.    Analyses    aim    to unveil   the characteristics of  learners' interactions that contribute   to object
advancement.

© ISLS                                                                                                                470
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                     Volume I: Long Papers

Productive Interactions and Object Development
The  idea that  interactions  are  productive    builds on  the concepts    of social  and    constructive interaction.  The
former accounts for learning as a socially shared and culturally situated phenomenon wherein activities and
meanings are subjectively realized (see Ludvigsen, 2009). The latter refers to learning in and through dialogue
(Baker, 2009), and is related to the social construction of meaning and knowledge as proposed by the various
socio-constructivist   views  of  learning. In   knowledge     creation, the denotation    of  this concept  expands    from
collaborative meaning-making to the materialization of knowledge objects.
         A brief literature study shows that there are no clear-cut definitions of the concept of "object". Objects
are referred to as a collection of artifacts that individuals work with, i.e., create, measure, and manipulate. To
avoid   confusion  between    the  terms    "object" and    "artifact,"  we    refer  here  solely  to objects,    given  the
synonymous use of both terms in the literature (see Paavola & Hakkarainen, 2005). It seems plausible to adopt a
broad definition of objects, most notably because they also vary in their degree of abstraction (Ewenstein &
Whyte, 2009). We adopt the distinction between historical object of activity, which is developed and represents
an answer to societal needs (e.g., assessment systems), and situational object, which is a manifestation of the
historical object but is procedural and discursively constructed (e.g., a report produced by a group of students in
a project). The interaction of learners, in this case, is only understandable in relation to this situational object
they construct together (Jahreie, 2010). Thus we employ the concept of object as conceived in the latter stance.
         Knowledge objects, also referred to as epistemic objects or epistemic things (Miettinen & Virkkunen,
2005), are considered to focus on what is not yet known. These authors described epistemic objects as open-
ended projections oriented towards something that does not yet exist, or to something that is not known for sure.
These objects are characterized by their incompleteness and continuous evolution (Ewenstein & Whyte, 2009),
and as projects under construction, moving from potential raw material to meaningful forms (i.e., iterations),
resulting in a final outcome. Work itself is therefore a continuous process of transforming an object from its
current state into a required end state. Examples of epistemic objects may include theories, plans, protocols, etc.
Our  stance  becomes     instrumental when    attempting   to  understand   the  way  objects   are created  and   how   they
develop. We approach these processes with the premise that knowledge objects are evolving entities, which are
shaped  by  the interactions   around  them,   but which    also   shape   those interactions.  This   stance allows   us to
understand how students' learning evolves over extensive periods of time.

Methods
This one-year study was conducted at a university of applied sciences and teacher education in the Netherlands
that prepares   pre-  and  in-service teachers   for secondary     vocational   education.    The  curriculum   is based  on
courses called Professional Situations (PS). At the start of this project, learning in the PSs was organized around
a combination of lectures and seminars given by the teachers, and individual student projects. These projects
required  students    to perform  various   learning tasks   (literature   reviews,  risk assessments,    designs). Twenty
groups of 73 mixed-age students, enrolled in three randomly selected PSs, participated in our study.
         Through the project we present here, students' learning was enhanced by facilitating participation in
collaborative projects in the PSs. Groups of students were required to develop and report on knowledge objects
(e.g., didactic materials,   study   material for teachers,    guidelines  for   applying  new    teaching  methods,    etc.).
Various scaffolds were provided, such as workshops on object-oriented collaboration, templates for work plans,
and tool-training sessions. Brainstorming sessions were organized to discuss topics collected at those places
where students pursued their internships. Next, topics were clustered and, based on these clusters, project topics
were   formulated  by    the students themselves.    Once   the    project groups    were  formed,   students'  interactions
focused on the chosen topic, and took place mostly within group and with the tutor. Group members had the
opportunity to work online, to meet face-to-face, and to have regular coaching sessions with the tutor. Groups
were required to provide theoretical grounding for their products and, at the end of the project, students were to
reflect on the quality of the object and their individual and group activities.
         Technological       support  was   provided     by    the  Knowledge       Practices   Environment     (KPE,    see
www.knowledgepractices.info), a web 2.0 application that provides virtual collaboration spaces. In the KPE,
each   group had   its   own  shared  virtual  work     space. Inside    these spaces,    students  were   expected  to  use
functionalities that  supported   the organization   of  the   collaborative   process (i.e.,  task creation  and   planning
functionalities) and the creation and iterative development of knowledge objects (i.e., item creation, versions,
commenting, linking, sources collection and display, and chatting). We collected a rich set of data, consisting of
the following categories: (a) interaction data (recordings of group meetings, e-mail correspondence, field notes);
(b)  knowledge   objects,    both produced    in KPE    (documents,   wiki,    notes, comments)     and   during   fieldwork
(meeting   notes,     comments,   course    documents,     project   material),   and     (c)  reflection  data    (reflective
questionnaires,  semi-structured     interviews).  This    contribution    discusses   data   drawn    primarily   upon   the
transcribed group discussions, object iterations (text documents), and meeting and researcher's notes. Data were
chronologically ordered, and the analyzed recordings were transcribed verbatim. We used a set of analytic tools

© ISLS                                                                                                                    471
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                 Volume I: Long Papers

embedded    in  the   KPE,   which provide    an    overview  of the  members'     activities in the shared    space    and
contributions to the developing objects.
         For the purpose of this study, a case was defined as the activities and products of one group of students
during the 20-week course period. The analyses followed three lines of investigation. First, we selected and
coded action-relevant episodes from the group's interactions, in order to understand the nature of their activities.
We conducted a focused examination of those episodes and selected from the five discussion sessions, equally
distributed over  the  project  period.   The categories employed     were  based  on   a coding   system    developed  by
Dama, Kirschner, Andriessen, Erkens, and Sins (2010), and refined based on the models of discourse by Van
Aalst (2009). The case emerged based on a literature review and iterative analyses of other (similar) data sets.
The resulting   categories  distinguish   between   epistemic actions aimed    at  eventually  creating    knowledge  (i.e.,
creating awareness, sharing knowledge, creating shared understanding, and generative collaborative actions) and
regulative  actions   (including  planning,   coordinating,  monitoring,   and  reflecting    activities). We  labeled  all
actions and traced the newly introduced concepts and ideas. Second, we mapped the relevant concepts and ideas
discussed during the analyzed interactions, and examined whether they were adopted and materialized into the
knowledge objects (and their iterations). The relevant-concepts map was created based on the first discussion
session of the group, then it was subsequently revised. Only new relevant-concepts and ideas were added to the
map, based on subsequent group discussions. Next, we created a concept map based on different versions of the
knowledge object the group created. We compared the concept maps created based on interaction and object
versions and established the similarities, the relevant-concepts and ideas that were put forward most frequently
and those that were elaborated in the final object version. Finally, we operationalized object progression and
elaboration, and analyzed how the relevant concepts and the ideas generated were gradually materialized and
elaborated  into object     iterations. Several readings  of  these  iterations led to  the   understanding    that object
development can be described based on two aspects: first, the way concepts and ideas are adopted from one
interaction to another and, second, how ideas and concepts are conceptually expanded from one iteration to
another, i.e., elaboration. To determine the degree of elaboration, we employed an instrument containing four
levels, derived from Cummings, Schlosser and Arrow's (1996) concept of the integrative complexity of ideas.
The following levels were distinguished: (0) idea or concept was not further elaborated in the subsequent object
iterations; (1) low   integrative complexity    means  that  the content is   constructed  using  (literally) information
selected from one or more sources; (2) moderate integrative complexity means that multiple perspectives are
expressed, based on information sources and one's own insights, but without new conceptualizations; (3) high
integrative complexity specifies a dynamic relation between perspectives, including integration of source-based
knowledge and information, and one's own ideas and interpretations, which can lead to new conceptualizations.

Empirical Analyses
The analyses    concern  one  student    group, named  BOKITO,     consisting   of four female   students;   however,   the
whole data corpus was analyzed, following an ethnographic approach, to identify variations between groups and
aspects that reflect problems illustrative of students' experiences. We selected this group because their activities
and knowledge object provide a good illustration of how knowledge is created. This sampling can be situated
between  representative     and theoretical sampling.   We   analyzed  the  group's  materials   and activities    over the
course of 20 weeks (February­June 2010). This group's members were enrolled in PS11, which focuses on the
analysis, design, and evaluation of assessment instruments. Students were required to conduct a literature study
and, based on its conclusions, design an assessment-related product. The group conducted a study on quality
criteria for authentic assessment methods in competence-based education, and developed a set of guidelines for
teachers who    intend   to use such    methods  in  secondary   and tertiary vocational  education.  The     product   was
concretized in a report containing the literature study, a description of the developed object, and explanations
regarding   the  choices    they  made     in   the design   process.  Additionally,    the   group  summarized       these
recommendations in artifact resembling a fan, with several plasticized sheets, containing the main guidelines.
         This section begins with a discussion of an interaction sequence, followed by an illustration of the
uptake of relevant concepts and ideas put forward in the respective interactions. Next, illustrations of the object
progression and elaboration are presented and discussed.

Productive Interactions
In this group's work we noticed a high concern among students about understanding concepts. Concepts related
to assessment   took   a central  place  in group   discussions. A   relevant portion  of the  interactive   sessions   was
dedicated to deciding which concepts and ideas were relevant, what their meaning was, and how they should be
explained, linked to each other, and elaborated. One strategy for elaborating such conceptual systems was by
discussion; another was by searching for external information and integrating it with their own ideas.
         An analysis of sources led to the development of iterations of theoretical section A, in which the group
analyzed and separately presented both traditional and new quality criteria for assessment, and three assessment
methods  specific   to competence-based     education.  The   following  step was   to  shape  the next    section of their

© ISLS                                                                                                                  472
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                        Volume I: Long Papers

knowledge object, wherein they planned to establish a relationship between the three assessment methods and
the  quality   criteria.  The   following   discussion  episode      is  selected from     an    interactive  session  used   for
brainstorming and making plans and establishing agreements for this object section.
Excerpt 1, eighth project week: Elaboration of concepts and object versions
     Participant                                 Discussion line                                          Analytic
                                                                                                         categories
     1. Liz:        ...So, in Part A we have these theoretical sections, wherein the main             (3) Structuring
                    criteria validity, reliability, transparency, and authenticity are defined and        concepts
                    explained...and then ...
     2. Ann:        Then we apply them. No, wait...
     3. Jane:       No, we don't apply them. We establish the relationship between the                (3) Framing
                    criteria and each method.                                                             focus
     4. Ann:        Yes, that's it. In here it goes from broad to more specific, related to the        (3) Elaborating
                    practice situation and the specificity of the method. [...]                           ideas
     5. Liz :       But how do you translate the theoretical idea to the very practical way           (3) Problema-
                    these assessment methods are used in our schools?                                     tizing
     6. Ann:        A good point, but we shouldn't go in that direction. I see it differently. I
                    would suggest that we take each method as described and discuss how we            (4) Generating
                    think it should be applied to meet the quality criteria.                              new idea
     7. Jane:       But that is again very theoretical, don't you think? Why not take the             (4) Negotiating
                    standard way designed for our schools and check that out in relation to               ideas
                    the criteria? Then make conclusions based on that.
     8. Ann:        Can you explain? I don't get it.
     9. Jane:       Errrm, well, in my school they have, for example, this common                     (2) Sharing
                    assessment form for proof of competence. All the assessors must use it,               information
                    and the assessment of the same pupils by more assessors is discussed at the       (3) Framing
                    end. It's something that has to do with reliability.                                  Focus
     10. Liz:       ... While reading about validity I came across things I recognized in practice.
                    The task, for example. How that is covered by the tests has to do with            (2) Sharing
                    content validity.                                                                     information
     11. Ann:       Also with authenticity. Tasks have to reflect the real work situation.            (3) Elaborate
     12. Liz:       Right, see? I guess this is the way we can go.                                        idea
     13. Jane:      And the context, too, can influence reliability.                                  (4) Sharing inf.
     14. Ann:       Yes, let's see how we approach this.    I guess we can each collect the            (5) Planning and
                    information from own school, maybe from the web about other schools,                  coordinating
                    too? Then we discuss and then start writing.                                          process

         This episode shows the way group members attempt to establish a link between the theory on quality
criteria and the existing methods. The first utterance by Liz (line 1) immediately provides a good summary of
the relevant quality criteria the group chose to elaborate (validity, reliability, transparency, and authenticity). At
this point, the existing knowledge is structured, and it serves as a basis for brainstorming about the conceptual
links possible in the respective object section. In the next lines, the students attempt to establish the focus of this
section, and   they do    it by   taking up the idea  put forward    in  their  second  meeting     (line 3:  We   establish  the
relationship between the criteria and each method). By problematizing and elaborating on the proposed idea,
students come to a better understanding of what this relationship actually means and how they might approach
it. This is needed because, while the general goal of this step (i.e., establishing the relationship) is clear, the way
they   will elaborate  on    this relationship still needs  to be    delineated.  By  generating     a new    idea  (line 6), by
negotiating   aspects    that seem   not  to suit  some   of   the   members'     views of    the   conceptual   system   under
consideration   (line 7),    and  by elaborating  on  their own    or   others' ideas  (lines    4, 11),  the  students reach  a
common understanding of the conceptual system under development. Based on this, they pin down the strategy
they will use in order to materialize the ideas put forward.

Uptake - Relevant Concept Map
The concept map created based on the object iterations defined one week after the above interaction shows that
the relevant concepts from this interaction sequence are adopted by the group and processed into the object. In
the concept map in Figure 1, we clustered these concepts (using interrupted-line rectangular frames) in order to
indicate how the concepts were treated by the group, both in the discussions and in the object iterations. In fact,
this is a conceptual system created by the group members themselves during verbal interaction and, later, in the
text iterations. The gradual shading indicates the importance assigned by the group to the concepts (the darker
shading  indicates    the most    important  concepts), while   figures   attached   to each     box  indicate   the  interaction
analytic framework category - see excerpt above). In the center, a number of main concepts are shown (quality
criteria for  authentic   assessment,    authentic   assessment    methods,  relationship     methods,    and  criteria), which
were adopted from the previous discussion sessions and the first object iteration. These concepts cover the main

© ISLS                                                                                                                        473
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                  Volume I: Long Papers

topic  of the   project. In the upper-left corner    are the authentic  assessment   methods  proposed    in the second
meeting, which were adopted by the group as one of the focus of the knowledge object. These methods are
defined and described in the first section of the knowledge object, the research report. The two clusters on the
right side of the map display the quality criteria as identified by the group members, in discussions (also with
their teacher) in the literature, and in the preliminary object iterations. In this map version, the group indicates
that "validity" and "reliability" are traditional psychometric criteria, while the others are specifically related to
authentic  assessment.    The group  decided    on  the  former  two and on "transparency"    and   "authenticity"  to be
further elaborated in their knowledge object, and they provided arguments for their decision. The cluster of
concepts  in    the lower section of the map     indicates  some concrete  elements    (instruments, activities) used  or
performed in the educational practice to ensure quality of assessment. These are used by the group in the object
iterations, in order to bridge concepts and to emphasize the relationship between the two conceptual dimensions
(methods and criteria) elaborated upon. The last cluster, in the lower-left corner, contains the weight points of
the knowledge object and the way the relevant concepts were to be elaborated.

Figure 1. Relevant-concepts Map Based on Interaction in the Eighth Week and Object Iterations in Weeks 9-12.

          An    analysis of the progression     of the  knowledge  objects shows    that the majority  of  the   concepts
proposed in the first two group meetings were adopted and evolved into knowledge objects (materialized in the
iterations) at later stages. The main concepts (quality criteria, assessment methods) were employed throughout
the entire project period. These concepts were defined and described in general terms in the introduction of the
report, but no extended analysis of these general concepts was conducted. The concepts directly addressed in the
project,  i.e., the three assessment  methods      and  the four quality criteria, were  adopted   fully, explained  and
described based on information sources, and elaborated in relation to each other. Some concepts were dropped,
and some interaction instances indicated that this was a deliberate decision of the group, since these concepts
were not (directly) linked to the focus of the study.

Object Progression and Elaboration
The general overview based on the analytic tools provides an insight into the individual contributions to the
shared knowledge object, in terms of types of items created using functionalities at their disposal in the shared
virtual work space. As the figures in Table 1 show, the number of contributions is rather comparable, without
obvious outliers. Jane is the only member who seems to have uploaded or modified most files, but the meeting
notes and observations indicated that she was the one who was assigned to upload all product iterations when
finished. The higher number of links created by Liz indicates that she organized the materials and created the
relationship between various sections and iterations of the object.
Table 1: Illustrative overview of contribution to the object.
Group member                Files (iterations)      Links between items    Comments    (on files)         Web links
Jane                              38                        12                       7                       5
Ann                               26                        11                       5                       0
Liz                               21                        21                       6                       0
Julie                             23                        11                       8                       0
Teacher 1                          0                         0                       8                       2

          In qualitative terms, the activities emerged according to the general research activities phases. In the
beginning, brainstorming took place and ideas were proposed as topics for investigation. Once the focus was
decided upon, following discussions with the stakeholders and a preliminary source search, a joint plan was
created. The plan consisted of the research topic, focus, and the types of activities to be performed. Once this

© ISLS                                                                                                                 474
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                       Volume I: Long Papers

plan   was  accepted,     the group    proceeded   with    individual   source   searching   and   information     processing.
Information was first summarized, then discussed with the group, then processed individually in text (in object
iterations), and later discussed in the group again. Also, group members gave written feedback on the written
draftsAll  the object   iterations  were   placed  in   the  group's  shared    space,  where  there  were   possibilities     for
conceptual  structuring   and    commenting.   Once     the  theoretical  section   on methods    and   criteria was   partially
elaborated, work on linking the theory with the practical solutions commenced. The same strategy was applied
as in the previous phase. Once various sections were commented upon and finalized, they were organized and
integrated into the final object.
          Object elaboration at level zero (0) was applicable to 10 concepts identified in the group's interactions,
which   were   then   omitted.   Other  types of   data   indicate that  these  concepts    were  not   elaborated,    based   on
deliberate decisions, because they were considered too marginal to the main topic. While the purpose of these
analyses was not quantification and normative assessment, we can state that, on average, overall elaboration is
situated as the second level of our framework. At this level, information from sources and group's own ideas
were used, sometimes combined, in order to explain and expand the concepts in discussion. However, the levels
of conceptualization      differed  between   the  sections   of  the report.   In  section A,   the  literature  study  of    the
assessment   methods    and   criteria, the average     level was  two   (2). This   indicates   that the   literature was     not
interpreted and processed in depth. In Table 2, we present an example of a comparison between the source text
and the text written by the students, which was assigned level 1 of elaboration, a rather low elaboration level.
Furthermore, a relatively low number of sources were used when defining and describing the quality criteria.
Nevertheless, the group succeeded in structuring the text and employing the source information in a meaningful
manner, which contributed to achieving their goal, namely presenting the given concepts in a concise manner.
Table 2: Example of a level 1 elaboration object sequence.
                      Text from sources                                                   Group's text
 2 Comparability                                                  Comparability
 Consists of that a Competence Assessment Program (a)             Consists of that the assessment
 must be performed consistently. The (b) assignments done         (a) must be performed consistently. The (b) assignments
 by students, the de-evaluation procedure, and the                done by students, the de-evaluation procedure, and the
 evaluation criteria must be comparable in sufficient degree      evaluation criteria must be comparable for all students. In
 for all students. In competence-based education this is (c)      competence-based education this is (c) not always easy to
 not always easy to oversee and it also doesn't means that        oversee. It also doesn't mean that for each assessment there
 the entire assessment should be standardized. But a study        is a standard that can be employed, but there are, for
 program can (d) pose particular requirements to the              example, (d) particular requirements that can be posed to
 practical training in a company and to (e) the tasks a           the practical training and to (e) the tasks students must
 student must perform as part of this practical training.         perform during the practical training.

          In section B of the product, elaboration of concepts was at the highest level. Information sources were
used to explain various theoretical aspects but, in general, the information from the sources was well integrated
with students' own ideas. In this section, it was students' interpretations that were the leading element in the
elaboration, and not the structures provided by the literature. The former became visible in the way particular
ideas were elaborated across the versions, and by the conceptual elaboration techniques that were employed.
Such techniques involved: creating arguments based on conflicting input from the literature versus education
practice, providing examples, or providing elements of reference for comparison. To illustrate the aspect of
gradual elaboration of one's own ideas and materialization into the text, we present an example of how a text
section evolved    across    the three  iterations we   analyzed.   Because     the original text was    too   extended     to be
presented here, we summarized and synthesized the content (see Table 3). The text deals with the relationship
between the method (Proof of Competence) and the criterion (Authenticity). In each of the three columns, the
type of material and the strategy used to work with that material are described, while in the boxes attached to the
table  we  indicate   the type   of action  taken  by   the  group  upon    the respective   iteration.  In the  first iteration
(column   1),  the  idea  of  the   relationship  between     the  two  concepts    is in an  initial phase    of elaboration.
Knowledge     presented   in  the  previous section   is  repeated,   and   information   from   sources  is used  to  provide
arguments   for this  relationship.    Here the   students   establish  an  unelaborated    link with    educational   practice.
Iteration 2 is further elaborated towards a more integrative use of one's own ideas, information from sources,
and information from practice. There are not yet any conceptualizations based on these different perspectives
and there is, still, information presented in list form, without explanations. The third iteration, which follows a
systematic round of feedback by all group members, shows a higher degree of elaboration and the creation of a
new conceptualization that employs different perspectives. Examples are used to support the given explanations.
          In general it appears that students adapted their strategy to the purpose of each section. In the first
section the  goal   was   to  provide  definitions and    descriptions   of the concepts    agreed   upon   in the interaction
sessions, not to provide extended elaborations. In the second section, the goal was to establish a link between
the quality criteria and the three assessment methods, which required interpretations, conceptual expansion, and

© ISLS                                                                                                                         475
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                         Volume I: Long Papers

application of theory. To conclude, we can state that the level of conceptual elaboration varied rather strongly
between sections, which means that the object development was not optimal.
Table 3: Example of elaboration across object versions.
          Iteration 1                              Iteration 2                                    Iteration 3
 1. Method and criterion ­         1. Method and criterion ­ definition and     1. Method and criterion ­ definition and
 definition and explanation        explanation                                  explanation
 2. One paragraph containing       2. One paragraph containing a summary        2. One paragraph containing summarizing
 a summary of source               of source information on why this            source information on why this criterion is
 information on why this           criterion is important                       important
 criterion is important            3. Elaborated paragraph explaining           3. Elaborated paragraph explaining several
 3. Three sentences on             several assessment situations to be          assessment situations to be taken into account
 possible assessment               taken into account by the assessing          by the assessing institution
 situations to be taken into       institution                                  4. Presentation of the framework using the
 consideration as assessing        4. Summary of literature on a                source information, but processed
 institution.                      framework used to formalize the              reformulated) and using quoting
                                   possibilities and the options the            5. List of tools associated with the above
                                   assessing institutions has to meet the       framework with explanations for each tool
                                   criterion                                    6. Paragraph on how the tools can be employed
                                   5. List of tools associated with the         and applied in to the given situations presented
                                   above framework                              by point 3; with examples.

    Group discussion on the                    Written feedback on                          Structure of final version
   applicability of the criterion           preliminary text by group

Discussion and Concluding Remarks
This   paper  focused    on  understanding       the  mechanisms     of  collaborative   creation of  knowledge     objects,   by
analyzing the interactions of students engaged in authentic projects, and by tracing the development process of
the group`s knowledge objects. The analyses and preliminary findings presented in this paper provide an insight
into how knowledge objects are created through a collective effort in this type of pedagogical setting. We were
able to interpret the interactions as being productive through mapping of concepts and ideas put forward in
interaction   sequences   and     by "following"     these concepts   as  they  were   pursued   and as they   "grew"    through
object  iterations. The   analyzed     interactions   had   a  heterogeneous   character.   The   productive   interactions   that
explicitly led to shared agreement and understanding, and to generation of new ideas, enhanced the conceptual
development    of  the   shared   knowledge      objects.  The analyses   yielded   sets of relevant  concepts.   The   relevant
concepts identified through concept-mapping showed that the majority of concepts and ideas put forward in
these productive interactions were adopted, expanded, and elaborated. Elaborations led to the materialization of
the group's    shared   views     and stance,  since   the  concepts    chosen  for elaboration   were  decided   upon     in the
interaction. However, much of the work of expanding these concepts and ideas took place individually and led,
at times,  to  lower  levels   of  elaboration.    Finally, individual    contributions   were  closely combined     with   joint
activities. Individual elaboration led to numerous feedback moments by the other group members. The analyses
indicated that the object sections that were discussed more than once showed a higher degree of elaboration.
          These findings provide ideas for improvements of the pedagogical setting. First, productive interactions
should focus on the epistemic aspects of work on the shared object (see also Dama et al., 2010). This group of
students  approached     their    interaction  not only   from  a procedural    level, but  also  interacted  around   concepts,
ideas, and    the knowledge       object itself. They   became    involved   in desirable   practices that   should  be    further
stimulated    and   applied  in    other    settings. Next,    we  partly   illustrated  successful   instances   showing     the
materialization of the group's views and ideas into concrete objects. Different studies (Van Aalst, 2009) indicate
that this is not the default way of working on shared knowledge objects. In most cases, complete division of
labor occurs. In this group we also observed deliberate attempts to discuss knowledge domain-related ideas,
collaborative   editing,  and     consistent   feedback    on  individually  written    texts. This  indicates   an orientation
towards  a    collective way   of    acting upon   the shared   object,  to be  considered     when  organizing  and   coaching
group work. It is desirable that students work towards high levels of elaboration, but it should not be taken for
granted that they are always aware of the differences in the elaboration levels. Hence, these findings call for
attention to students' understanding of this pedagogical setting and, also, to how these types of designs can
provide more specific scaffolds for students when entering knowledge co-construction processes. At theoretical
level, our study contributes to the field by, first, problematizing and extending the discussion on the concept of
"knowledge     object".  A   second    contribution    consists of   the  attempt to   link this  concept,   and the   way  it   is
materialized, to the productive interaction concept. This theoretical discussion is taken up at empirical level,
where we investigate this link by creating and integrated analytic framework that addresses both the interaction
process and the developing knowledge objects. Hence, at empirical-analytic level, our contribution rests in the

© ISLS                                                                                                                        476
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                Volume I: Long Papers

attempt to employ different analytic angles and to tackle these processes from an organic perspective. However,
while very functional in categorizing interactions, our analytic categories prove to be insufficient in unveiling
the way students follow up on the topics based on the interactions. In the same way, the elaboration framework
developed  based  on   Cummings    et   al. (1996) provides  us  with an ideal  model.   This  model   is  useful  when
unpacking   the conceptual   structure  and  elaboration of  the object but  it leaves   out important    aspects of the
collective contributions to and the (gradual) progression of the object. As such, this study contributes to the field
by demonstrating the necessity of an integrated analytic approach, and a joint interpretation of the processes
involved. Nevertheless, there are several aspects that require careful consideration when attempting to formalize
the analysis framework employed. We have used an explorative in-depth case-study approach that attempts to
unveil mechanisms of a complex process. In order to refine the method used here and to increase the potential
for future generalizations, an extended analysis on a larger sample is recommended. Regarding the design and
use of technology, this study showed how face-to-face collaboration can be organically combined with online
support. Although the analyses in this paper did not focus specifically on the use of technology, the processes
and products    analyzed emerged   in   the context of technology-supported      collaboration. Reflections on these
activities indicated that KPE provided good support for work on developing the knowledge objects (individually
or jointly) and organizing the group work, but lesser support for communication.
         To conclude, our assumption that productive interactions lead to the emergence and development of
knowledge objects worked upon by the participating groups is partially confirmed by the illustrative material
analyzed  and   discussed. Furthermore,     the emphasis  was    on  envisioning ways    to  analyze   and   display the
(interactional) processes  taking  place    and whether  there  is a follow-up   to these    interactions in the  object
iterations and the final knowledge objects. Our attempts to understand and depict the process of collaborative
creation of knowledge objects and the way these object develop provided important insight, but more work is
needed to specify and ground these phenomena.

References
Baker, M.J. (2009). Argumentative interactions and the social construction of knowledge, in N.M. Mirza & A.-
         N.  Perret-Clermont    (Eds.), Argumentation    and Education:   Theoretical    Foundations   and   Practices,
         Berlin: Springer Verlag, pp. 127-144.
Cummings, A., Schlosser, A., & Arrow, H. (1996). Developing complex group products: Idea combination in
         computer-mediated and face-to-face groups. Computer Supported Cooperative Work, 4, 229-251.
Dama, C.I., Kirschner, P.A, Andriessen, J.E.B., Erkens, G., Sins, P.H.M. (2010). Shared epistemic agency: An
         empirical study of an emergent construct. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 19(2), 143-186.
Eckert, C., & Boujut, J.F. (2003). The role of objects in design co-operation: Communication through physical
         or virtual objects. Computer Supported Cooperative Work, 12, 145-151.
Ewenstein,  B.,  &    Whyte, J. (2009).     Knowledge  practices in  design: The    role of  visual representations   as
         `epistemic objects'. Organization Studies, 30(1), 7-30.
Jahreie, C.F., & Ottesen, E. (2010). Construction of boundaries in teacher education: Analyzing student
         teachers' accounts. Mind, culture and activity ISSN: 1074-9039
Jordan, B., & Henderson, A. (1995). Interaction analysis: Foundations and practice. Journal of the Learning
         Sciences, 4(1), 39-103.
Miettinen, R., & Virkkunen, J. (2005). Epistemic objects, artefacts, and organizational change. Organization,
         12(3), 437-456.
Muukkonen, H., Lakkala, M. (2009). Exploring metaskills of knowledge-creating inquiry in higher education.
         Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 4, 187-211.
Paavola, S., &   Hakkarainen,   K. (2005).    The  knowledge   creation  metaphor   ­  An    emergent  epistemological
         approach to learning. Science & Education, 14, 535-557.
Stahl, G. (2006). Group cognition: Computer support for building collaborative knowledge. Cambridge, MA.
van Aalst,   J. (2009).  Distinguishing     knowledge-sharing,   knowledge-construction,     and knowledge-creation
         discourses. Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 4, 259-287.
Vygotsky, L. (1978). Mind in society: the development of higher social processes. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
         University Press.

Acknowledgments
This study was conducted in the context of the KP-Lab project (see www.knowledgepractices.info). We thank
Patrick Sins and   Johan   van  Strien  for  ideas regarding the   analyses, and  our  colleagues   in the   InterMedia
department at the University of Oslo for their feedback on the text.

© ISLS                                                                                                               477
