CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                          Volume I: Long Papers

  Assessing the Use of a Trace-Based Synchronous Tool for Distant
                                              Language Tutoring
    Mireille Bétrancourt, FPSE, University of Geneva, CH-1211 Geneva 4, Mireille.Betrancourt@unige.ch
Nicolas Guichon, Université de Lyon 2, Laboratoire ICAR, Université Lyon 2,5, Parvis Descartes, 69342 Lyon
                                 cedex 07 FRANCE, Nicolas.guichon@univ-lyon2.fr
        Yannick Prié, Université de Lyon, CNRS Université Lyon 1, LIRIS, UMR5205, F-69622, France,
                                                   yannick.prie@liris.cnrs.fr

          Abstract:   This  article presents       a pilot  study   carried   out to   investigate  the  potential  of a
          functionality  marker   setting,    included      in  a  synchronous     collaborative    videoconferencing
          platform (VISU). Markers, supported by a trace-based system, are designed to facilitate tutors'
          activity. They   provide     tutors with    (1)   the possibility    of annotating    their distant  learners'
          learning  activity, and (2)   information        pertaining to  their   own   behavior   during  pedagogical
          interaction, which can potentially enhance their professional performance as online language
          tutors. This study concentrates on the marker-based traces of eight language tutors collected in
          the  course  of  pedagogical     interactions       with  their distant    learners   during  a  seven-week
          transnational collaborative project. It presents both quantitative and qualitative analyses
          of the use of markers during synchronous language teaching sessions and assesses the utility
          and usability of such a functionality for language tutoring in order to inform future design and
          training.

Introduction
While   asynchronous     collaborative   distant     learning   is  now   relatively   well   researched,  synchronous    distant
learning is less well documented although it is gaining more and more attention thanks to the availability of
efficient technologies for synchronous communication (videoconferencing, chat, whiteboards, screen sharing,
etc.). This research   was    conducted  in   the    context    of  the  ITHACA1      project,  an  interdisciplinary  (language
education,  computer    science,  cognitive    science)     project  whose     aim  is to study   how   traces can  be   used for
providing such synchronous collaborative systems with reflective features so as to enhance their functionalities
in the context of activities involving tutoring at a distance. We define traces as features of the system that offer
the means to provide instant or delayed feedback regarding the unfolding of the pedagogical interaction, and
thus allow both learners and tutors to reflect on the experience.
          This paper    is organized    in    two    parts. First,  we    will present    the  rationale  and  the  design  of a
synchronous trace-based prototype tool called VISU2 featuring means to share and interact with three types of
traces: automatically recorded interaction traces; marker-based traces composed of ad hoc annotations added by
the user in the course of the activity; comment-based traces composed of post hoc annotations added by the user
in order to comment upon his/her past activity. In the second section of the paper, we will focus on the use of
one type of trace - marker-based traces ­ as used during a real 7-week long real distant pedagogical interaction
between language tutors in France and distant learners from a North-American university. Our results, which are
mostly qualitative, tend to support the potential of such traces for online language teaching as well as language
teachers' professional   development.    The       article is organized   as   follows: We    begin   with a  brief overview   of
distant tutoring and   trace-based  reflexivity,     before    examining    the   VISU  tool  in  section  3, the  experiment  in
section 4 and the results in section 5.

Theoretical Rationale

Tutoring in Synchronous Distant Learning
Synchronous collaborative learning systems support more or less predefined collaborative activities (Lonchamp,
2006), with various roles for the users and various tasks to be carried out. When synchronous online tutoring is
involved,   teachers  are  often  faced    with      an ill-defined     pedagogical     situation  and   have  to  develop  new
competencies and attitudes that are necessary for effective interactions with distant learners in addition to more
traditional pedagogical skills (see Guichon, 2009). Besides, conducting a synchronous online interaction induces
a high  cognitive   cost because    it involves      carrying   out several   tasks  at the   same  time   as well  as managing
interrupted   connections  and  various    distractions     (Oviatt   et al.,  2004).  Social   and Cognitive   Awareness     and
Navigation    (SCAN)    tools (Buder    et    al., 2009)    can   provide   feedback    and   a sense   of group   awareness   to
participants of the interaction. The rationale that underpins this research is that teaching (and teacher training)
can be facilitated with trace-based SCAN systems that foster teachers' reflexivity. Such systems help augment
their awareness by providing them with traces that are pertinent for their activity, all the more so when these
traces are generated by the users themselves.

© ISLS                                                                                                                        478
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                      Volume I: Long Papers

Systems Which Foster Reflexivity
Reflexivity, defined as the capacity to reflect upon one's activity, is deemed crucial in learning processes, be it
for simple adjustments of one's actions or attitude in the course of one's activity (self-awareness) or for meta-
cognitive   regulation   tasks    that  involve   assessment   or  extension    of  one's    knowledge,      individually and
collectively (Yukawa,     2006).   Reflexivity    can be  fostered   by  systems   that provide    users  with  two kinds   of
elements   upon  which    to   build  a reflective  activity. The  first level is  related to instantaneous     reflection: it
provides feedback on the activity such as clues about the effectiveness of one's actions such as mirroring of the
activity  (Jermann    et  al., 2005),    real time    collaboration   indicators  (Nova    et al.,  2006),    temporal/social
representations of current group activity (Farooq et al., 2007) or peer feedback (Phielix et al., 2009). The second
level of reflexivity involves delayed reflection: it provides representations of the interaction beyond its scope
such   as histories or Edit    or Read   ware  (Hill  et al., 1992),  "reflective  follow-up"  representing    one's  way   of
solving a problem (Katz et al., 1992), indicators summarizing the interaction within a group (Bratitsis et al.,
2006), or activity summaries (Laffey et al., 2009).

Trace-based Systems
The present research project focuses on traces of interactions between users and systems. Those that should not
be confused with traces generally defined as what remains of an activity, including documents produced by
participants. Logs are obviously traces for engineers who need to understand the functioning of the systems they
build. While some approaches have tried to design log-mining techniques in order to obtain higher-level user
activity-related traces (see Romero & Ventura, 2007 for a survey of the educational use of traces), our own
approach pertains to research dealing with explicitly designed rich histories of interaction. Such traces can be
used either by professional analysts to understand the activity that has taken place (Avouris et al., 2007) or by
users willing to make sense of their own activity by consulting Web navigation histories (Weinreich et al., 2006)
or even by replaying online interactions in which they took part (Plaisant et al., 1999).
          Because   most  such    tracing systems    are designed   in  an ad  hoc  way   to  test particular  research   ideas
related to dedicated activities, it is rarely possible to reuse these tools in subsequent projects. To go beyond such
punctual   approaches,   we    have   proposed   a  model-based    approach    to traces,  formally   defining  Trace-Based
Systems (Settouti et al., 2009a) as systems built upon "modeled traces" organized in trace bases. A trace model
is an ontology of the obsels (observed elements) that can be collected in one trace. Trace transformations in
trace bases allow simplifying, merging or rewriting traces so as to obtain higher-level traces that present users
with adequate representations of their activity. A formalization of our proposal can be found in (Settouti et al.,
2009b).

The VISU Tool
VISU is a trace-based tool that features a number of different modeled traces for instantaneous and delayed
reflection in the context of synchronous tutoring interaction.

Three Levels of Traces in VISU
Our videoconference tool provides three types of trace. Each corresponds to a distinct obsel type:
   -      Interaction  traces     are  histories of  users'   actions automatically   collected    in   real time from    their
          interactions with the software. Events such as "launch video", "open image" or "begin a new activity"
          are considered. In Figure 1, the raw interaction trace of user1 has been filtered (transformation 1), and
          the resulting trace is shared. In Figure 2, the vertical timeline features (a) and (b) that correspond to
          representations of obsels that have been shared by learners with their tutor while (c) is a representation
          of the "beginning of a new activity".
   -      Marker-based traces refer to text annotations that are written during the activity describing events such
          as "vocabulary" or "problem with microphone". Such annotations are similar to notes that are usually
          jotted down by a teacher during a learner's oral presentation so as to provide her with feedback. These
          traces can refer to the tutor's activity, the learner's or their joint activity. In figure 1, the marker-based
          trace has   been   built (transformation    2)    from  the  marking    trace (which     describes  the activity  of
          creating, deleting,   modifying     markers).  On   the vertical timeline   shown   in   Figure 2,  (d) and (e)  are
          markers that have been set by the tutor.
   -      Comment-based traces correspond to text annotations that are added after the activity with obsels such
          as "effective dialogue between learners" or "nice piece of dialogue". A comment-based trace can be
          considered   as a  post-hoc    manual   transformation   /  rewriting   (3) of  traces   that have  been  collected
          during the activity. On the vertical timeline shown in Figure 2, (g) is a comment-based trace.

© ISLS                                                                                                                     479
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                                                                            Volume I: Long Papers

                                                                                                                                                                  Sharing user 2
                                                                                                                                                                 traces with user 1
                                                                     Collecting
                                                                 user 1 traces

                                                                                           Mint    my InteractionTraceMmarking  my Markingtrace   Mmarker    u2 Marker-based trace
                                                                                                       1                           2
                                                            Visu         user 1            Mint     my Sharedinteraction traceMmarkermy Marker-based trace  Mint       u2 Sharedinteraction trace
                                                         application     (tutor)
                                                                                                                                          3 (manual)
 Visu Server                                                                                                Mcomment    my Comment-based Trace         User1 Trace Base
                     Session / user
    Visu Core          Database
    Video Base        Trace Bases                                    Collecting                                                                               Sharing user 1 tracewith user 2
                                                                 user 2 traces
       User1           User1 TB
       User2           User2 TB                                                            Mint    my InteractionTraceMmarking  my Markingtrace
                                                                                                       1                           2
                                                            Visu         user 2            Mint     my Sharedinteraction traceMmarkermy Marker-based trace  Mint       u1 Sharedinteraction trace
                                                         application    (student)
                                                                                                                                          3 (manual)
                                                                                                            Mcomment    my Comment-based Trace         User2 Trace Base

 Figure 1. A tutor (user1) is interacting with a learner (user2). A video base stores the video streams that have
been recorded during the interaction. Each user has her own trace base. User1's trace base contains 7 traces, 5 of
 which   have been collected from her activity, while 2 have been shared by user2 from her trace base. User2's
Trace Base contains 6 traces, 5 of which have been collected from her activity, and 1 has been shared by user1
 from her Trace Base. As a tutor, user1 does not share her marker-based trace while, as a learner, user2 does.

Instant      Reflection             in the   Interaction                          Room:          A  Synchronous                             Timeline              for     Activity
Awareness and Activity Annotation
The interaction room (Figure 2 - left) is a classical videoconference room with a text chat. Tutors have access
(on the left of the screen) to their "session manager", which gathers planned session activities, instructions and
keywords.      The main         feature  which   distinguishes                      VISU         from       other      videoconference                    tools    is   the      vertical
"synchronous     timeline".         This timeline                presents         users  with      selected          elements            from        interaction        traces        (here
"Image received" obsels represented as thumbnails) as well as marker-based traces.
         VISU's     synchronous          timeline                is  designed       to   foster     instant          reflection             by augmenting               synchronous
interaction with elements of other participants' activity (e.g. indicating when a document is accessed) and it
allows participants to take notes on the activity with markers. Instant sharing of interaction traces is a means of
extending collective awareness amongst participants. Using markers allows tutors to select critical events in the
course of the activity in order to come back to them m in order (1) to provide learners with feedback at the end
of the session and (2) to reflect on one's own activity in the retrospection room.

Delayed Reflection in the Retrospection Room: Obsels and Comments for Experience
Reconstitution
The retrospection     room          (Figure 2  - right)               basically        functions            as     a video       player        allowing          users    to     review
previously recorded sessions (video and audio). The playback feature is supplemented by a horizontal timeline
displaying the collected obsels (interaction + marker-based traces) organized either by obsel types or by users.
The annotating     tool ("Mes commentaires"                          [my comments])               allows           the user      to      annotate         events        that occurred
during the session. Such comment-based traces will serve as a basis for teacher development and be used for
example in weekly trainee teacher debriefing sessions in which pedagogical interactions are analyzed.
         The retrospection room in VISU is designed to foster delayed reflection. The delayed retrospection
made   possible    in the       retrospection    room                allows        for  teacher     development                  in      the   following          way.       To       learn
professional    competencies           such as monitoring                        distant learner            interactions         effectively,             providing          clear     and
concise instructions, giving useful and timely feedback, trainees are confronted with traces of their own situated
activity of a past online teaching session and are asked to select samples of this activity, analyze them and
comment upon them during a collective debriefing session (Guichon, 2009). Several operations are required:
noticing critical events that are worth commenting upon, categorizing them (what is the purpose of a specific
sequence of actions?) and assessing their efficiency or lack thereof (was it adequate, timely, etc.?) against a

© ISLS                                                                                                                                                                                   480
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                         Volume I: Long Papers

professional repertoire (see for instance Hampel & Stickler, 2005). The aim is thus to help trainees to explore
and reflect on a still ill-defined professional situation and retrospectively make sense of problematic events that
occurred   in  the course   of the activity.   We   contend    that  getting apprentices     to  analyze their  own   context-
embedded    practice   is a necessary condition    to make     them    aware of their     behavior in context   and  a way  to
provide them with some kind of "annotated template[s] for future praxis in similar situations" (Olson, 1995:
121).

     c                                       1
         d                                                        3
                                                        2

         a                                                                                                  4

         b

                                                                                     g
         e

                                                                                        f

 Figure 2. Interaction room (left) and retrospection room (right) in VISU1. The interaction room is used during
 the synchronous interaction: it provides (1) a session manager, (2) a chat window and (3) a vertical timeline,
which features several presentations of obsels from both the interaction trace (a, b, c) and the marker trace (d, e).
The retrospection room is used asynchronously after the interaction. It has a horizontal timeline (4) that presents
 markers and interaction obsels (f). It also allows the user to add comment obsels. (g) Unlike interaction trace
                   and marker-based trace obsels, comment-based trace obsels can have a duration.

A Pilot Study of Marker-Based Traces
An exploratory study was conducted in real teaching context in order to (1) investigate the quantitative and
qualitative use of markers during synchronous language teaching sessions and (2) assess the utility and usability
of such a functionality for language tutoring. The ultimate aim was to further investigate design and training
issues. Although    the   markers were also    used in    the delayed   retrospective     phase, only what    happened  in  the
interaction room was analysed. We focus here on the interaction trace, which appears on the timeline in real
time and is also recorded in the chat history that remains available throughout the session.

Method ­ Experimental Data
The study was part of a telecollaborative project between the university of Berkeley and the University of Lyon
2. The VISU tool was used to support distant synchronous French lessons given by trainee French teachers in
Lyon to language learners in Berkeley. Each session was organized in three phases:
   -       Each week, teacher trainees in Lyon (now referred to as tutors) had to prepare a lesson that aimed at
           fostering oral communication and to conduct it with one or two learners in VISU's interaction room. At
           the end  of  the session, tutors    were instructed      to conduct  a rapid    debriefing  with    the learners on
           linguistic issues with the help of the markers they had set during the interaction.
   -       After the interaction, the tutors had to analyze the learning session on the basis of the traces recorded in
           VISU's retrospection room.
   -       The following week, teaching interactions were then displayed and discussed in a plenary session with
           all the tutors and trainers in order to raise language teaching and tutoring issues (see Guichon, 2009 for
           the detail of the training program).

© ISLS                                                                                                                      481
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                            Volume I: Long Papers

Tutors were given an introductory training session on the VISU platform, but the use of markers was not a
focus.  Thus we have the opportunity to study the tutors' intuitive use of these markers as they learned to use the
technology to teach their distance language sessions.

Data Collection and Analysis
The data regarding marker setting and chat messaging were collected from 8 tutors over 7 tutoring sessions. At
the end of the third session, each tutor was interviewed in order to comment on the markers he/she created
during the session. They were also asked about their global perception of VISU. A quantitative analysis was
conducted on the number of markers and text chat messages over time and across the sample of the 8 tutors. In
addition, qualitative analyses were conducted on the type of markers produced by 2 specific tutors, selected
before the first session on the basis of their prior experience: These two tutors had similar one-year experience
in face-to-face language teaching but none in online tutoring. Interviews data were used to complement the
quantitative analysis of markers.

Results
Given that the tutors were not familiar with the tool and rather new to online tutoring, it was expected that they
would   find  the early sessions  cognitively challenging. We   predicted  that markers  set  by the  tutors   would
improve  over  time,   both qualitatively and  quantitatively, for two non    exclusive  reasons: first, the   tutors
gradually develop competence with the tool and the task so that cognitive resources would be sufficient for
carrying out this dual task; second, their perception of the utility of setting markers to prepare for the debriefing
and the next tutoring session would rapidly increase once the markers had been used for language teaching and
reflexive analysis.
         We present quantitative analyses of the number of markers and chat edited by all tutors (Figure 3),
followed by a qualitative analysis of the type of markers set by two tutors.

       Figure 3. Mean Number of Markers and Chat Messages Averaged across Tutors over the 7 Sessions.

Number of Markers Edited over the 7 Sessions
As shown in Figure 3, the number of markers increased from the first to the second session and remained stable
across the next sessions, except for a drop in the last session. Overall, the mean number of markers did not differ
significantly across   sessions (F (6,42) = 1.624, NS). However,   a large   variation across tutors was  observed
(min = 0.29 and max =12.7 mean number of markers per session) and the difference was statistically significant
(F (1,7) = 10.47, p < .05). Moreover, there were significant correlations between the number of markers set by
each tutor for session 2 to 6 (all r > .80, p < .01), but not between session 1 nor 7 and the others, meaning that in
sessions 1 and 7 the tutors behaved differently than in other sessions. These results suggest that participants
quickly became acquainted with the system and the task since they were able to set markers in a stable way as
early as the second session. The drop in the number of markers set in the 7th session is probably related to the
fact that it was the last session. If the markers were used not only to keep track of linguistic issues during the
session but also to prepare for the next session, there would be less need to set markers in the last session.

© ISLS                                                                                                            482
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                 Volume I: Long Papers

Number of Chat Messages over Time
The tutors wrote a large number of messages in the chat (M = 15.94, SD = 12.56, see Figure 3). The mean
number of messages seemed to vary over time but the difference did not reach statistical significance (F (6,24) =
.343, NS). As for markers, the variation across tutors was large (min = 8 and max = 34.28 mean number of chat
messages   per  session) and  was    statistically significant (F (1,7) = 28.73, p < .001).  There  was  no   correlation
between the number of markers and the number of chat messages (r = .63, NS), suggesting that the variability
across tutors was not linked to a general writing behavior but rather to a differentiated use of the marker and
chat functionalities.

Qualitative Analysis of Markers
As mentioned in the methodology, the markers set by two tutors during their interaction with the distant learners
across the 7 sessions were further analyzed in order to better evaluate the type and function of markers in this
situation. We   used   Daele &   Docq's  (2002)     typology,  based  on  previous  work   on face-to-face  and  distant
tutoring, which classifies tutor's interventions according to different purposes. It has to be noted that Daele &
Docq's classification was elaborated to analyze tutor interactions with the learners while here the markers were
also  intended  to  regulate the tutors' own  activity   and   were   not displayed   to learners. The   four categories
proposed by Daele & Docq (2002) were thus adapted as followed:
     -    Social function: pertaining to the quality of the communication and its social quality (e.g. "learner 1 is
          pleased")
     -    Organizational function: dealing with the organization of the session (e.g. "learner 3 arrives", "use of
          keywords")
     -    Pedagogical function: providing indications on learners' linguistic skills and their recurrent mistakes
          (e.g. "pronunciation of fromage")
     -    Technical function: corresponding to comments on the system (e.g. "learner 3 does not see the image")
     -    A fifth category (other) was created for markers that did not fit any of the above categories.

          The classification (displayed in Table 1) was made thanks to the analysis of the content of the markers
and the context in which they occur. In addition, the interviews with these two particular tutors were taken into
account so as to better comprehend how they used the markers.

Table 1: Number of markers in each category for the two tutors (names have been changed).

               Category                                  Cindy                                     Nelly
                         Social                           13                                        0
                Organizational                            22                                        0
                    Pedagogical                           37                                        48
                      Technical                            8                                        0
                           Other                           5                                        3
                           Total                          85                                        51

          As shown in Table 1, though pedagogical markers were the most frequent for both tutors, other specific
uses of the markers can be observed. Nelly used them exclusively to take notes about pedagogical events that
she could use for the wrap-up at the end of the session, or to prepare the next session. Cindy used the whole
range of categories. Further examination showed that many of the markers created by Cindy were used to keep
track  of  her evaluation  of  learner's behaviors,     personality  and  skills ("S  is not  talkative" "they  use the
vocabulary from last session, good") and reflections on her own tutor practice ("+ good idea for the dialogue",
"- I interrupted her").
          An   interesting phenomenon     is the     emergence   of   operative  language   over   time. For   example,
"pronunciation" is shortened into "pron" by Nelly from session 3 on. Personal cues were sometimes used by
Cindy, like + or ­, to indicate when she evaluated the event as positive or negative, or capitals for emphasis
("SHE TALKS A LOT"). Interviews with the two tutors indicated the development of instrumentation over
time. For example, Nelly first noted only "pronunciation" or the correct sentence without indicating where the
mistake was. Then she found ways to keep track of what was said by the learner, for example by using capitals
to indicate the place where the mistake was (e.g. "tellemenT"), or by noting a phonetic approximation of the
learner's contribution rather than the correct sentence.

Usability and Subjective Utility
All the tutors were interviewed after session 3 about their perception of the tool and particularly their use of the
markers. As expected, tutors appreciated the fact that they could set markers about learner's mistakes without
interrupting   the oral interaction. Moreover,     they kept   track of events   they could  use during  the  debriefing

© ISLS                                                                                                               483
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                    Volume I: Long Papers

sessions with the other tutors and the teacher trainers. However, they found that the interaction was disturbed
when they were in the process of setting markers because, thanks to the webcam, learners could see that the
tutor was typing something that they could not see and was thus not looking at them at that precise moment. For
these reasons, they reported using the markers for important events only and tried to find suitable moments (e.g.,
when the learner was looking at a video) to set markers. Regarding usability, they reported that setting a marker
required more effort than writing in the text chat, particularly because the marker zone was very small. Finally
they underscored that writing on the vertical timeline was not natural at all.

Discussion and Future Work
This study aimed at evaluating how novice language tutors used the functionality of setting markers during the
synchronous     session. Regarding    marker     setting, although markers   were    used  overall as  early as   the second
session, considerable differences in behaviour were observed across tutors, both qualitatively and quantitatively.
Some tutors appreciated to keep track of learners' mistakes without interrupting the oral interaction. But some
considered that the time taken and the attention required to set the marker caused a major disturbance in the
flow   of  the  activity and    therefore they   seldom   used   this functionality. Moreover,     the qualitative   in-depth
analysis of two tutors' behaviors and perceptions revealed that the use of markers is not self-evident, one of the
tutors exploiting all the possible functions of the marker while the other concentrated only on its corrective
function. In addition, the tutors complained that the marker functionality was not easy to use. Therefore, design
issues had to be examined since they dramatically affected the actual utility of the marker functionality, both as
an external memory of the activity and support for practice. In this exploratory study, tutors have been explained
how the marker functionality worked, but not how they could use it to improve the tutoring situation since no
similar situation has been studied before. The present results suggest that tutors have also to be trained to make
an optimal pedagogical use of markers, prompting tutors to use markers not only for keeping track of learners'
mistakes, but also for fueling their reflection on their own practice and on the learning situation.
           A second version of the application, VISU2, has been designed on the basis of the results obtained
through this study. In order to avoid the split-attention effect and lessen the disruptive effect of setting markers,
the marker text field has been enlarged and now appears next to the chat window and just below the webcam
images.   After  being   edited,   markers   are automatically   moved   to the  right of  the timeline.    In addition,  the
timeline has been set horizontally to align it with the regular representation of time and ensure consistency with
time representation in the retrospection room. Preliminary observations with the new version of VISU suggest
that different tutors now set more markers than with the previous version of the tool. If confirmed, this result
will reinforce the hypothesis that metacognitive or awareness tools need to be integrated into the workspace in
order to be attended to without too much extraneous cognitive load (Buder, in press).
           Future studies will focus on (1) evaluating how tutors make use of the markers in the retrospection
room   to  analyze    their tutoring  activity   retrospectively   and  (2) whether    markers  modify    distant    learners'
behaviors and contribute to enhance their language competence.

Endnotes
(1)  ITHACA (Interactive Traces for Human Awareness and Collaborative Annotation) is a project funded by the French
     Research Agency (ANR), see http://liris.cnrs.fr/ithaca
(2)  VISU V1 adopts the architecture for trace-based synchronous collaborative systems defined in Clauzel et. al (2010). It
     is open source software (LGPL) based on Adobe® Flash/Flex and Red5 server. Olivier Aubert, Lionel Breduillieard
     and Serguei Sayfulin are the main developers.

References
Avouris,   N.  Fiotakis,  G. Kahrimanis,     G.  Margaritis,  M.,  &   Komis,  V.  (2007).   Beyond    logging    of fingertip
           actions: analysis    of collaborative   learning  using    multiple sources    of data. Journal     of Interactive
           Learning Research, 18(2), pp. 231-250.
Bratitsis, T.,  &   Dimitracopoulou,    A.   (2006). Monitoring    and   analyzing   group   interactions in   asynchronous
           discussions with the DIAS system. In CRIWG 2006, Lecture Notes in Computer Science 4154. 54-61.
Buder,    J., Bodemer,   D.,    Dehler, J.,  &   Engelmann,   T.  (2009).   SCAN     tools for collaborative    learning. In
           International  Conference      of Computer     Supported   Collaborative   Learning  (pp.   606­615),     Rhodes,
           Greece.
Buder, J. (in press). Group awareness tools for learning : Current and future directions. Computers in Human
           Behavior, 10-13.
Clauzel,   D.,  Sehaba,     K., &   Prié, Y.   (2010).    Enhancing   synchronous    collaboration  by    using   interactive
           visualisation of modelled traces. Simulation Modelling Practice and Theory, In Press, Corrected Proof.
Daele,    A.,  &  Docq,   F.    (2002). Le   tuteur  en   ligne, quelles  conditions   d'efficacité    dans  un   dispositive
           d'apprentissage collaboratif à distance ? in Proceedings of the AIPU Conference, Louvain-la-Neuve.

© ISLS                                                                                                                     484
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                               Volume I: Long Papers

Farooq,   U., Carroll    J.-M., &  Ganoe,    C.-H. (2007).  Supporting    creativity with   awareness   in distributed
          collaboration, in   International Conference on Supporting Group Work (pp 31-40).
Guichon, N. (2009). Training future language teachers to develop online tutors' competence through reflective
          analysis. ReCALL, 21(2), 166-185.
Hampel, R., & Stickler, U. (2005). New skills for new classrooms: training tutors to teach languages online.
          Computer Assisted Language Learning, 18(4), 311­326.
Hill, W. Hollan, J. Wroblewski, D., & McCandless. T. (1992). Edit wear and read. In Conference on Human
          Factors in Computing Systems (CHI'92) (pp 3­9).
Jermann, P., Soller, A., & Muehlenbrock, M. (2005). From mirroring to guiding: a review of the state of the art
          technology     for supporting collaborative  learning. International   Journal of Artificial Intelligence in
          Education, 15, 261­290.
Laffey, J., Amelung,     C.,  & Goggins,  S. (2009).   A Context  Awareness    System   for Online  Learning:  Design
          Based Research. International Journal on E-Learning, 8(3), 313-330.
Lonchamp,     J. (2006).  Supporting    synchronous   collaborative learning:  a generic,   multi-dimensional  model,
          International Journal of Computer Supported Collaborative Learning, 1, 247­276.
Nova, N. Wehrle, T. ,Goslin, J., Bourquin, Y., & Dillenbourg, P. (2006). Collaboration in a multi-usergame:
          impacts of an awareness tool on mutual modeling. Multimedia Tools and Applications, 32(2),161­183,
          2006.
Oviatt, S., Coulston,    R.,  &  Lunsford,  R.  (2004).  When    do we interact  multimodally?   Cognitive  load  and
          multimodal     communication   patterns.  In  Proceedings   of  the  6th Int.  Conference    on  Multimodal
          interfaces (pp 129­136), Penn. State College.
Olson,  M.  R.   (1995).  Conceptualizing   narrative authority: Implications  for teacher  education.  Teaching and
          Teacher Education, 11, 119­135.
Phielix C., Prins F.-J., & Kirschner P.-A. (2009). The design of peer feedback and reflection tools in a {CSCL}
          environment, in International Conference CSCL (pp.626-635).
Plaisant, C., Rose, A., Rubloff, G., Salter, R. & Shneiderman, B. (1999). The design of history mechanisms and
          their use in collaborative educational simulations, in Proceedings of the International Conference on
          Computer Supported Collaborative Learning (pp. 348­359).
Romero, C. & Ventura, S. (2007). Educational data mining: A survey from 1995 to 2005. Expert Systems with
          Applications, 33(1), 135-146.
Settouti, L.-S.,   Prié, Y.,  Marty, J.-C.,  &  Mille,  A. (2009a).  Trace-based   system   for technology-enhanced
          learning  systems    personalization, In  9th  IEEE    International Conference    on  Advanced   Learning
          Technologies, Riga, Latvia.
Settouti, L.-S., Prié, Y., Champin, P.-A. Marty, J.-C., & Mille, A. (2009b). A Trace-Based Systems Framework:
          Models, Languages and Semantics, LIRIS Research Report, inria-00363260, 40 pp.
Weinreich, H., Obendorf, H., Herder, E. & Mayer, M., (2006). Off the beaten tracks: Exploring three aspects of
          web navigation. In: World Wide Web Conference (pp. 133­142).
Yukawa, J. (2006). Co-reflection in online learning: Collaborative critical thinking as narrative. International
          Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 1(2), 203­228.

Acknowledgments
We are    grateful to J. Lüthi  who  carried out the  data collection for this study  and   D. Pries, R.  Kern and  D.
Malinowski    from    UC  Berkeley   who   made  this  experiment   possible  in Berkeley   and  N.   Guichon  and  C.
Develotte at the University of Lyon 2. We also wish to acknowledge Shona Whyte's insightful remarks on a
previous version of this paper.

© ISLS                                                                                                              485
