CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                        Volume I: Long Papers

       A Collaborative Platform Supporting Knowledge Sharing and
           Problem Solving for Teacher Professional Development
 Thierry Condamines, Laboratoire MIS, Université de Picardie Jules Verne, 33 rue Saint Leu, 80039, Amiens
                                    Cedex 1, France, thierry.condamines@u-picardie.fr

          Abstract: The present paper proposes a platform to support teacher professional development.
          From    a study    of exchanges   between    teachers    on  Web      forums  we    examine   two  facets  of
          knowledge     exchange,     usual teaching   practices   and  problem     solving,   and  how   they can  be
          managed on a unique web platform. We use a task/method paradigm for knowledge elicitation
          about usual teaching practices, driven by the exchanges between teachers and capitalized into
          individual memories.        For problem solving we use an IBIS-like approach (problem, solution,
          argument)    and    REX-like    cards   to  structure    the problem      and  solution   description.   The
          important problem of knowledge evaluation is treated with a three-level evaluation (opinion,
          usefulness and difficulty). The teacher's profile and its central role in connecting teachers is
          described. For knowledge classification, because a consensus is difficult in this domain, we
          propose    a mixed      approach  between    structured  classification    techniques    (taxonomies)    and
          unstructured techniques (folksonomies).

Introduction
In France, like in many countries all around the world, teacher professional development is one of the main
concerns of authorities in charge of Education, and the case of young teachers is the most critical one. The first
years  of their   career are    a moment    where    they  oscillate   between   pleasure     and suffering,  facing a   "double
learning":   that of   their pupils   and that  of   their job. If professional     development     has for  a long  time   been
considered   as   a linear   process  where    teachers    apply external     knowledge    developed    by   researchers,   latest
researches and learning theories (Knight, 2002; Butler et al., 2004) have shown that this process is continuous
mixing formal training and informal training through discussions with colleagues and reflection on teaching
practices (Uwamariya & Mukamurera, 2005).
          The lack of formal training urges teachers to compensate by participating in Communities of Practice
either at a local level (inside their school or institution) or at a global level on the Web gathering together people
with common practices, interests and purposes (Wenger, 1998; Koh & Kim, 2004). There, teachers exchange
ideas  and   experiences,    help   each  other   to develop    their  skills   and expertise   and  exchange    to  solve  very
contextual   problems.   In   this  community     the dynamics     of  the  exchanges    favor    innovation   (creation of new
methods and practices) thanks to debates and practice confrontation (Daele, 2006) (see Figure 1).
          On  one   hand,    at the local  level, teachers   exchange    in   a face-to-face   relationship  without   computer
mediation and avoiding capitalization of the knowledge created. On the other hand, at the global level, Web
technologies  like   forums,    blogs and   wikis    allow  the accumulation     of  exchanges    but  in an   unstructured and
poorly  contextualized    way.    Thus,   knowledge    created   through   discussions   is   hardly reusable.  Moreover,     the
number of online forums in France where teachers talk about their practices limits knowledge creation, each one
reinventing what has been discussed in another forum. This is due to the fact that the environments used are not
specific for CoPs as stated by numerous works. Tools are often designed either to support sociability to the
detriment of contextualized resource production and their reification, like Tapped In (Schlager & Fusco, 2004)
or CoPe_it!   (Karacapilidis      & Tzagarakis,      2007), or  to support      resource accumulation     to   the detriment  of
sociability, like   in doceNet     (Brito Mirian   et al.,  2006). New     works    try to unify   the  two  approaches,   in an
effective application    of  Web    2.0  principle,  like  Cloudworks    (Conole     et  al., 2008)  and  TE-Cap    (Lavoué   &
George, 2010), by supporting exchanges between members of the CoP and between CoPs and also capitalizing
on these exchanges by placing them in the associated context. In these tools, a message on a subject, which can
contain educational resources, a question about a difficulty, or a simple idea, is posted by a member and shared
by the CoP allowing other members to react by posting messages, sharing resources ... But separation is blurred
between   teaching     practice   description  and   requests   from   a teacher    seeking    help  about   a very  contextual
difficulty in his own practice. As in online forums, practice description is often given by a teacher A as an
answer to a request for help from a teacher B and is actually an adaptation of the practice in the context of the
described problem (what A would do in the situation of B) and can be different from the real practice of A in his
own context (which can also be interesting to capitalize).
          In fact, when we observe formal training in teachers training institutes (called IUFM in France) and
lifelong training programs we can see two facets of knowledge construction. First, teachers have to observe
other  (experienced)    teachers   in different teaching    contexts   which    allow   them,  by  reflecting  on  the observed
practices, to construct their own practice. They can then experiment their new practice in their own context

© ISLS                                                                                                                        486
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                  Volume I: Long Papers

encountering difficulties and asking colleagues or experienced teachers for help. Following this observation, our
work aims to provide CoPs of teachers with a unique Web platform which will support:
           ·   knowledge elicitation       (teaching practice) guided by the exchanges between teachers, capitalized
               into individual memories with the associated context;
           ·   exchanges for problem solving, capitalizing problems (and their context)    and solutions given by
               other teachers;
           ·   Sociability and member participation with a Web 2.0 approach and a user profile management.
           As a first stage in addressing this aim, we propose in the next part a description of the two facets in
knowledge exchange and the models we use to take them into account.

                          Figure 1. Daele Model of Teacher Professional Development through a CoP.

Two Facets in Knowledge Exchange
The first step of our work was to analyze online forums (http//forums-enseignants-du primaire.com is one of the
most active), one of the tools mostly used in France by teachers to exchange on their practices, and cross the
results with those observed in a teacher training institute. From this study we have classified the knowledge
exchanged in two categories (see Table 1)

Table 1: Examples illustrating the two categories of the exchanged knowledge.

                  Usual teaching practices                                        Problem solving
"In your classroom, how do you proceed for diagnostic          "I have a CP-level class with 24 pupils. 9 of them have
evaluations?"                                                  big difficulties (2 of them having a MS level). I began
                      --------------------                     with the book "L'école des Albums" but those 9 pupils
"This   is   a post   for CE1/CE2-level       teachers.   Can  don't follow [...] Do you have an idea and help me?"
youtell me what you do in this kind of two-level class                            --------------------
and give me good ideas to improve my practice?"                "I have a  pupil   who seems  to        have no  auditory
                      --------------------                     memory. He can't neither remember the alphabet nor
"I need help to construct a time-table for a CE1-level         recite the first numbers list, [...] but he can [...]. What
class."                                                        can I do for him?"
                      --------------------                                        --------------------
"Next   year   I will have  a double       level class. I have "I have a CM1-level class. We've worked on numbers
never   had    this configuration  before.       How    can  I until 999999 with all the class and at the same time on
organize my teaching (schedule, group work ...)?"              numbers until 99999  with 3 pupils      having difficulties

© ISLS                                                                                                                487
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                     Volume I: Long Papers

                      --------------------                      and until 9999 with one having more difficulties. But
"I  have  a  four-level   class (MS/GS/CP/CE1)          and  I  now    I don't   know   how  to manage    the next activities
would like to share my experience on this kind of class.        because I have introduced big numbers (million). What
How    do  you   make   your  time-table?      How    do   you  can I do for the 4 pupils still having big difficulties on
manage readers and non-readers...?"                             smaller numbers?"

          The first category refers to what we call "usual teaching practices". This refers to tasks having to be
achieved by all the teachers and the methods used to achieve them. It depends on the global context of the class
(level) but it doesn't refer to a very particular situation. A teacher, often a young teacher, wants to know what
others do in a given context (same class level). This reflects a need to share practices and to have reference
teaching practices to analyze and from which to construct their own practice (Perrenoud, 1999).
          The second category refers to a problem solving support. A teacher encounters a very specific problem
depending on the global context of the class but also particularities like particular pupils (handicapped pupils,
pupils with specific difficulties ...). It can also refer to a particular activity constructed by the teacher, the use of
a particular resource ...
          When a teacher wants to know what others do in their class (similar to his own class) in their day-to-
day practice  he  is  not interested in    very specific   problems.   On    the other  hand when   a  teacher encounters a
problem in his practice, this is always in a particular situation and he needs a specific answer. So our postulate is
that these two facets can't be treated at the same level.

Usual Teaching Practices: The Task/Method Paradigm and an Exchange Driven
Acquisition
In This   Module  Of   our  platform,      we  want  to allow   a teacher    to  construct a personal  knowledge    memory
containing descriptions of his practices. In this process it's not only important to know what he does but also his
reasoning. To represent the reasoning model (how a task can be performed), we used the Task/Method paradigm
(Camilleri, 2003) where a task (what the teacher have to do) can be performed by different methods (a method
describing   one  way   of performing       a  task) giving  a  decomposition     of   the task into  sub-tasks. A  method
represents   the know-how    which    it's     possible  to implement       in  order to   achieve the task.   A method   is
characterized by conditions that must be satisfied to apply the method, controls giving the achievement order of
the sub-tasks and a sub-task set. In this paradigm, a special type of tasks is available: terminal tasks. Terminal
tasks are directly executable tasks requiring no decomposition (see Figure 2).

                                                     Task: To manage a group learning activity

                                     Method 1Condition : new learning                                     ...
                           Controls: ST1; ST2;
                           while a solution is not
                           found by each group do
                           ST3

              ST 1: Make                    ST 2: give the             ST 3: Let the
              heterogeneous                 materials                  pupils search a
              groups                                                   solution

                      Figure 2. Example on Task/Method Decomposition (ST Means Subtask).

          In knowledge     management,         knowledge    acquisition     is realized  through   discussions  (interviews)
between   a  knowledge     engineer  and      experts.  In  our   case   if there  are  experienced   teachers  there is no
representative expert. Each teacher have developed his own know-how which can be different from another
teacher but  equally   effective. There     is often  no consensus     on   a  teaching  method.   So our idea  is based on
knowledge acquisition from each teacher using the platform, storing it in a personal knowledge memory. Since
interviews can't be done we use an exchange driven process. Starting from a reference list of basic tasks (high
level tasks) each teacher have to achieve, the task/method decomposition can be started by a teacher wanting to

© ISLS                                                                                                                   488
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                 Volume I: Long Papers

share his practice and is refined through requests from other teachers (see Figure 3). It can be a request with a
new condition getting to describe a new method. For example, in the case described on Figure 2, a teacher can
ask  "How    do  you   manage   a  group  learning    activity in the case of  reinvestment     of an  already    learned
knowledge?". A new method must be described with the new condition (reinvestment of a learned knowledge).
It can also be a request for more details on a method or a terminal task. For example, a teacher can ask "how do
you make the heterogeneous groups?". The method or the terminal task must be refined.

                                                                              Condition

                                                                             More details

                                             Personal
                                            knowledge
                                             memories

                              Figure 3. An Exchange Driven Knowledge Acquisition.

           If a teacher ask for details, describing an unusual situation, it can't be managed in this part and enter in
a problem solving process.

Problem Solving: The IBIS Approach
In this part,  a problem   refers to a difficulty encountered    by a teacher facing    an unusual  situation  in a very
precise context and for which he needs help (see examples in Table 1). When we look at the answers on the
forum we find different solutions given by different teachers but also arguments for or against a given solution.
The exchange (problem, solutions and arguments) can also generate a new question referring to a new difficulty.
For modeling those exchanges we use the IBIS method (Conklin et al., 1991) approach (which is traditionally
used   for capturing  Design  Rationale)  with  three  elements:  problem  (defined by     the context of the  situation,
particularly the task during which the problem occurs, and a question specifying the help needed), solution and
argument.

                                                                        Is suggested
                                                                        by
                                                      Problem
                         Is suggested by
                                               solves                      Is suggested by
                                                          supports
                              Solution                                     Argument
                                                Is opposed to

                                     Figure 4. General Model of Problem Solving.

           When a teacher describes a problem, he writes a problem card giving several characteristics:
    ·      The task   during which   the problem  was   encountered.  For  example:     "Implementation   of a teaching
           sequence ­ Collaborative working phase". The first task level comes from the reference list of tasks
           mentioned in the previous part. Subtasks can be proposed (coming from subtasks already given for
           others problems or coming from the personal knowledge memories) and new subtasks can be entered.
    ·      The type   of the problem.    For example:   "problem   of discipline". Types    of  problems  are  proposed
           coming from problems already defined and referring to the same task. A new type can also be defined.

© ISLS                                                                                                                489
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                  Volume I: Long Papers

    ·    The context during which the problem occurs. It's different from the working context of the teacher
         which is defined in his profile as we will see later. For example: "The children were very excited,
         speaking loudly, moving from one group to another. After one hour during which I was often shouting,
         I stopped the activity and ask for the solutions found. But there were no interesting results and I have
         to do it again later!"
    ·    The question that specifies the help needed. For example: "If I do it again what can I do for more
         concentration of my pupils?"
    ·    Tags.
         When another teacher wants to propose a solution, he can ask the problem author for more details. It
could be done through a discussion between all the teachers like in online forums but it's long and difficult for a
third teacher to read all the exchange and have a good idea of the problem and its solution. So we choose
another  way  using   a  solution  card    and separate asynchronous   discussions    between the   problem  author    and
solution authors.  The    solution    card contains  a description  of the  solution, an  arguments    supporting  it  and
recommendations       to success   in the  solution  practical use (especially for young    teachers). This approach    is
inspired by the REX method (Malvache et al., 1993) used for knowledge capitalization and using knowledge
card. When one ask for more details (problem author or solution author) the corresponding card is modified.
The solution  card    is visible only  by  its author  and the  problem  author  until the  description is  clear  for the
problem author. When the discussion is closed, the solution card becomes visible to everyone and arguments
can be given.

Knowledge Evaluation and Feedback
An important point is the knowledge evaluation process. Our choice was to use a three-level evaluation and
rating:
    ·    The  opinion    about   a method   (in  the personal   knowledge   memory)    or a problem    solution which   is
         important to identify communities having similar teaching methods or pedagogical approaches. A mark
         (from 0 to 4) can be given with an argument describing the reason of such a mark.
    ·    The usefulness of a method or a problem solution. When a teacher try to use a method or a solution he
         gives a feedback with : a mark (from 0 to 4), an argument describing the reason of such a mark, a
         description about how he has applied and perhaps adapted the method/solution in his own class, and
         advices for a better use of the method/solution. This evaluation is very important, especially when it
         comes from young teachers.
    ·    The difficulty to use the method/solution in the practice. A mark (from 0 to 4) is given when a teacher
         has used it and details about the difficult steps are given.
         The usefulness and difficulty evaluations can be crossed with the teacher profile to know more about it
for a given level of experience or class type.

Teacher Profile for Connecting People
The teacher profile is composed of:
    ·    Identification data for accessing     the platform (login, password, ...)
    ·    Pseudo: the fear to be judged is important in this community so anonymity is crucial.
    ·    Age, sex
    ·    Certifications
    ·    Working context (see Figure 5): characteristics of the current class (level, number of pupils, standard or
         specialized class, presence of handicapped pupils), characteristics of the school (located in city center,
         suburbs,  rural   area, special   locations like "violence  area", number    of classes), characteristics of  the
         position (full-time, part-time, ...)
    ·    Past experiences: different working contexts
    ·    Books used : this is an indicator about the pedagogical profile of the teacher since a book generally
         refers to a specific pedagogical method
    ·    Centers of interest: tasks about which the teacher wants to be kept informed in priority
    ·    Statistics about the teacher activity on the platform: number of connections, last connection, number of
         problems/solutions published, number of evaluations given ...

© ISLS                                                                                                                 490
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                   Volume I: Long Papers

                                     Figure 5. A Profile Element: Actual Working Context.

          This profile is very important because it gives a better understanding of methods and problems but also
to connect  people.    Knowledge     broadcasting   is a  well-known    problem   and Van   Heijst   et  al. (1996)   gives
different ways  of    collecting  and broadcasting    knowledge.   When    a  problem is put   in the   system, its author
generally needs help quite quickly. So to avoid passivity we choose an active broadcast (push way): when a
problem card is written, it's published on the home page of teachers who are likely to give an appropriate help,
that is people  who    have    a sufficient experience  in/near the   same  working  context.  In   the same  way,    when
solutions cards are published, the problem and its solution appear on the home page of teachers having quoted
the task where the problem occurs as a center of interest.

Knowledge Classification
If taxonomies   and   ontologies    are structured  conceptual    representations  often used    in knowledge    indexing
systems,  they  require  a  consensus   between   experts  which    is long  and  expensive   to  obtain and   not  always
comprehensible   by   novices.    When  we   observe   the literature  in the education  field we   can  see  that  such a
consensus is quite impossible. Moreover the evolution in time of these models is difficult to manage and is the
subject of lots of recent researches. The other indexing system, the folksonomies, is less structuring but is based
on the community activity and allows each user (knowledge as well as experts) to enrich the descriptions.
          Our approach mixes the two systems, taxonomies and folksonomies. A general task classification (up
to 2 levels) of high level tasks was constructed from official documents (Ministry of Education) on teachers'
skills and interviews   of  teachers   about  their usual  tasks. Subtasks    can be  added   by  each  user  through  his
personal memory construction or problem description. In addition users can add tags.
          In addition, in a search, subjects are filtered by the teacher profile (working context) with a possible
extension of the search space to other contexts.

Implementation and First Results
Our  approach   is  implemented     on  a   Web   platform called   TeTraKap   (for  Teacher   Training   by  Knowledge
capitalization) using   PHP+MySQL        technologies.   The tests  were  realized  with a group    of  10   teachers from
primary school with different level of experience (from novice to expert).          Note that the technology was still
under development during the time of study; therefore the results are mainly indicative.
          The first   criteria we  used to  know   if the  platform matches   teachers'  real needs   were   usability and
sociability of the environment, level of knowledge sharing and adoption of the environment by users.
          The community is of course too small to induce high interactions. But observing the activity on the
platform  and   knowledge      exchanged    shows a progressive   refinement   of practice description   (of  experienced
teachers) thanks to requests for details coming from novices. Moreover a novice can focus on an experienced
teacher having a similar context and systematically asks him for help on specific problems (using the form for
practice refinement). This effect shows that we must better think the separation between the two parts.

© ISLS                                                                                                                  491
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                Volume I: Long Papers

          With interviews of teachers we could have details which can't be observed directly on the platform. If
some tasks are not detailed because they are not crucial, even for young teachers, some of them are not because
teachers need to exchange documents, timetables, photos of the classroom ... this functionality is also important
to help tacit knowledge elicitation, through videos for example. Concerning the interface, the "facebook-like"
interface (see Figure 6) with profiles, practices and problems suggestions filtered according to the user profile
seems to be appreciated. But the use of forms for practice elicitation is too heavy and not adapted. A graphical
one could be a solution but this problem is still under study because the teachers don't seem to be familiar with
some graphical tools presented.

                                                Figure 6. A Teacher Home Page.

Discussion and Further Work

Knowledge Co-construction
In  this paper, we    have shown    a double  approach   of knowledge    sharing for professional    development     in a
community    of practice   linking  up practice  description and  knowledge    solving   on  a unique  platform.   This
approach   corresponds    to a real and  important  request  from teachers,  especially  young    teachers   or teachers
changing context. Constructing your own practice by a try and error process is not only a long and difficult way
for professional   development    but also  a brake  for innovation.  In our approach,    by  connecting   people  with
similar  professional  contexts, we   will favor knowledge   co-construction   and innovation,    allowing   teachers   to
construct  and  improve    their own   practice  by analyzing  different  existing practices.  If the first  results are
encouraging    the tests  must be   extended  to a  bigger  population to evaluate   the effectiveness    of knowledge
classification  and   the way  people  are connected,  especially for  problem   solving. In   this part, problems   are
indexed by the task/subtask where they occur and the problem type is given by the user. It would be interesting
to use a high level problem taxonomy, as for the tasks, for better structuring. It would also be interesting to use a
graphical interface, especially for the task/method decomposition of practices. But it's delicate because teachers,
especially in primary school, are often reticent to use and construct computerized diagrams.

Bridging the Gap between Teachers' Practices and Educational Policies
A future work about our platform is to give functionalities to analyze the practices and problems. We believe
that it could give indicators to adapt teachers training policies with better reactivity and an inventory of real
teaching practices. On the other way it would be interesting to make it possible to education managers to give a
knowledge   "institutional   evaluation"   (but  keeping   anonymity,  crucial for   teacher   participation).  This  4th
evaluation could give a return to teachers about the appropriateness of their practices to educational policies.

© ISLS                                                                                                               492
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                  Volume I: Long Papers

References
Brito  Mirian,    C.A.,  da Nobrega,     G.M.,   de Oliveira,   K.M.  (2006).  Integrating Instructional    Material and
           Teaching Experience into a Teachers Collaborative Learning Environment. First European Conference
           on Technology Enhanced Learning (ET-TEL 2006), pp. 458-463, Greece: Springer Berlin / Heidelberg.
Butler, D.    L.,  Novak  Lausher,    H., Jarvis-Selinger,   S. &  Beckingham,     B. (2004).   Collaboration   and  self-
           regulation in teachers professional development. Teaching and teacher education,20, 435-455.
Camilleri, G., Soubie, J. L., Zaraté, P. (2005). Critical Situations for Decision Making : A support Based on a
           Modelling Tool. Group Decision and Negociation, 14, 159-171.
Conklin,   J. &   Burgess   Yakemovic,    K.  C. (1991).   A  process-oriented approach   to design  rationale. Human-
           Computer Interaction, 6(3), 357-391.
Conole, G., Culver, J., Williams, P., Cross, S., Clark, P. & Brasher, A. (2008). Cloudworks: Social networking
           for learning design. Ascilite 2008 conference, pp. 187-196, Melbourne.
Daele, A. (2006). A model for representing professional development through the participation in a virtual CoP:
           uses for developing   enhanced    services. Proceedings    of  the 1st International  Workshop    on Building
           Technology    Enhanced  Learning    solutions   for  Communities    of Practice (TEL-CoPs'06),     pp. 40-53,
           Greece.
Karacapilidis, N. & Tzagarakis, M. (2007). Web-based collaboration and decision making support: A multi-
           disciplinary approach. International Journal of Web-Based Learning and Teaching Technologies, 2(4),
           12-23.
Knight,    P. (2002). A   systemic approach      to professional  development:    Learning as    practice. Teaching  and
           teacher education, 18, 229-241.
Koh,   J., &  Kim,    Y. (2004). Knowledge       sharing in  virtual communities:    an e-business  perspective.  Expert
           Systems with Applications, 26(2), 155-166.
Lavoué, E. & Geaorge, S. (2010). Supporting the Interconnexion of Communities of Practice: The example of
           TE-Cap 2. International Journal of Web-Based Learning and Teaching Technologies (IJWLTT), 5(2),
           37-57.
Malvache, P. & Prieur, P. (1993). Mastering Corporate Experience with the REX method, Proceeding of the
           International Symposium on the Management of Industrial and Corporate Knowledge (ISMICK'93),
           pp. 33-41. Compiegne, France.
Perrenoud, P. (1999). Du concret avant toute chose ... ou comment faire réfléchir un enseignant qui veut agir.
           Retrieved November 5, 2010, http://www.unige.ch/fapse/SSE/teachers/perrenoud/php_main/php_1999/
           1999_20.html
Schlager, M. & Fusco, J. (2004). Teacher professional development, technology, and communities of practice:
           Are  we  putting the  cart before  the   horse? In  Barab, S., Kling,  R.  & Gray,   J. (Eds.), Designing  for
           virtual communities in the service of learning. (pp. 120-153). Cambridge : Cambridge University Press.
Uwamariya,      A. &  Mukamurera,     J.  (2005). Le  concept   de "développement     professionnel"  en   enseignement:
           Approches théoriques. Revue des sciences de l'éducation, 31(1), 133-155.
Van Heijst, G., Van der Spek, R., Kruizinga, E. (1996). Organizing Corporate Memories. Proceedings of the
           10th Banff Knowledge Acquisition for Knowledge-Based Systems Workshop (KAW'96), pp. 42-1/42-17.
           Banff, Canada.
Wenger,    E.   (1998).  Communities      of practice:   Learning,   meaning,   and   identity. Cambridge:   Cambridge
           University Press.

Acknowledgments
We would like to acknowledge the teachers and colleagues for their participation in the study of the TeTraKap
platform.

© ISLS                                                                                                                493
