CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                  Volume I: Long Papers

        Unfolding Experienced Teachers' Pedagogical Practices in
                    Technology-enhanced Collaborative Learning
   Minna Lakkala, Liisa Ilomäki, Institute of Behavioural Sciences, P.O. Box 9, 00014 University of Helsinki,
                                                        Finland
                              Email: minna.lakkala@helsinki.fi, liisa.ilomaki@helsinki.fi

         Abstract: Several studies address the problem that the pedagogically meaningful usage of
         technology     does  not  propagate  easily; new  methods     for teacher  training  are  needed.   One
         method is to distribute experienced teachers' cultivated practices as examples, but good ways
         of  presenting   the  essential aspects  of these exemplary    practices   should  be developed.    The
         study   examined     how  two   experienced   primary  teachers   constructed   technology-enhanced
         collaborative learning units in order to document these examples as training materials. The
         first case was an inquiry project in biology; the second case focused on the virtual publishing
         of  a  Web   journal.   The Pedagogical   Infrastructure  Framework,     including   technical,  social,
         epistemological and cognitive components, was applied in the analysis. The results revealed
         that  experienced    teachers   planned  long-term,   goal-oriented   processes   consisting   of well-
         organized activities where various elements of the pedagogical infrastructure were coherently
         integrated,    which  provided  pupils  with the  possibility to  practice challenging   technical  and
         academic     skills  in a meaningful     context. Based   on   the  analysis,   ideas for  the   further
         development of teacher training materials are discussed.

Introduction
Modern digital technologies are considered to provide new, valuable possibilities for education. Yet research
results indicate that pedagogical change in schools through information and communication technology (ICT)
has not actualized as expected. Technology is still infrequently used by few teachers and is often relegated to
traditional teaching methods such as sharing information or doing simple, mechanical exercises instead of being
used to advance collaborative work, creative activities and the solving of complex, authentic problems or to
support students' knowledge management skills (OECD, 2010; Smeets, 2005). ICT is not used to transform
pedagogical practices but to support the teaching of domain content, and the school use of ICT is boring and
monotonous (Gibson & Oberg, 2004; Pedersen et al., 2006).
         In  teacher    training programs,    technology,  pedagogy    and  subject  domain    content  are  often taught
separately, which does not necessarily provide teachers with competencies for integrating them adequately into
classroom    practice (Hyo-Jeong   &   Kim,   2009).  Teachers  would   benefit  from   concrete,  practical examples   of
using technology in real classroom settings and the combining of technical and pedagogical training (Pedersen
et al., 2006;  Putnam     &   Borko,  2000).  To  develop  exemplary    material    for in-service  teacher  training, we
examined    and  documented      how two  experienced   teachers  applied  digital  technology  in  their  real classroom
practices.  The  main    idea was  to  disseminate   examples   that represent   challenging   pedagogical   approaches,
including the rich use of technology and complex activities, and to draw on experienced teachers' well-tried and
cultivated   practices.  Many  studies   have examined    the innovative   usage  of ICT   in  teaching  (e.g., Kozma   &
Anderson,    2002),   but the  studies have   not focused  on  unfolding   experienced    teachers' established,   refined
classroom practices with ICT in detail, in order to create best practice models for other teachers.
         The   aim    of  the present  study  was  to  investigate   how   two  experienced    primary   school   teachers
constructed a learning setting for their pupils through the overall design and timely scaffolding of classroom
activities.  The Pedagogical     Infrastructure Framework,    developed    in our   previous   studies, was   used  as an
analysis framework for unfolding and describing the pedagogical elements and solutions in the expert teachers'
designs  and  practices.  First, the Pedagogical   Infrastructure  Framework     is shortly  explained,   after which  the
methods and results of the study are described. At the end of the article, some conclusions are made about the
issues  that appear   exceptional  and   worth  disseminating  in experienced    teachers'  pedagogical    practices with
technology.

The Pedagogical Infrastructure Framework
To  unfold   the central   elements   in the  teachers' pedagogical    practices,   especially in  technology-enhanced
collaborative knowledge creation activities, we illustrated the organization of an educational setting as building
up an appropriate pedagogical infrastructure. The idea for using the notion of infrastructure as a metaphor was
adopted from previous studies (Bielaczyc, 2006; Paavola, Lipponen & Hakkarainen, 2002), to emphasize how
the pedagogical design of collaborative settings is indirect in that it sets up background conditions that mediate
intended social and cultural practices but does not prescribe the contents or tasks in detail (Jones, Dirckinck-
Holmfeld & Lindström, 2006).

© ISLS                                                                                                                 502
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                Volume I: Long Papers

          The approach has been developed further in our own studies (e.g., Lakkala, Muukkonen, Paavola &
Hakkarainen, 2008), resulting in the Pedagogical Infrastructure Framework. It specifies four essential support
structures - technical, social, epistemic and cognitive ­ that are considered important to include in the design of
learning settings. The components are chosen in order to highlight aspects that are essential particularly for
promoting   technology-enhanced      collaborative knowledge     creation   practices, but  which are   not necessarily
emphasized or systematically considered in conventional pedagogical practices. The framework, as such, is not
normative; it merely helps to examine and evaluate the design features in a structured fashion, drawing the
designers' or researchers' attention to some critical but often unnoticed elements in the setting (Lakkala, 2010).
The basic components are defined in the following way:
    1)    Technical conditions: What kind of technology and tools are in use? The provision of technology and
          technical advice to the participants, the organization and orchestration of the use of technology, and the
          functionality of the tools provided and their appropriateness for the desired activity.
    2)    Social  conditions: How    is collaboration  organized    and    supported?   The combination     of designed
          individual  or collaborative  student   activities and   required  outcomes;  the organization    of students'
          collaboration and social interaction.
    3)    Epistemological conditions: Why, how and by whom is knowledge produced? The ways of operating
          with knowledge and knowledge practices that the assignments promote, the nature of the information
          resources used, and the role of the participants and information resources in working with knowledge.
    4)    Cognitive   conditions:  How   can  the  intended   activity   and competence    improvement    be   explicitly
          supported and scaffolded?     Designed tasks and artifacts or tools that perform a modeling and reflective
          function for promoting students' self-regulative competencies to work in an intended way.

          A teacher's role in setting up technology-enhanced collaborative learning settings can be divided into
two main tasks (see also Hogan & Pressley, 1997): first, planning, organizing and structuring the overall activity
by establishing the underlying pedagogical conditions for the collective effort (overall design), and secondly,
participating in the activities as a guide and expert who provides adapted, situation-specific guidance to the
learners when needed (scaffolding). In the present study, both the overall design and the scaffolding activities of
the experienced teachers were examined through the components of the Pedagogical Infrastructure Framework.

Methods
The general  methodological    approach    in the  present   study was   a multiple case  study approach    (Yin,  2003)
where   two primary    school teachers'    educational units  in   their classrooms   were  investigated. For  the  data
analysis, we used     descriptive  and qualitative content   analysis  methods   to unfold  the teachers'   pedagogical
practices based on multiple types of data.

Research Context
The educational cases investigated in the study represented the Finnish cases in an international FICTUP project
(Fostering ICT Usage in Pedagogical practices; see http://www.fictup-project.eu) supported by the EU. The aim
of the project was to create training materials (written pedagogical scenarios and related short videos) describing
concrete pedagogical activities using ICT, to experiment with a close tutoring process among experienced and
novice teachers, and to provide training institutions with recommendations based on the experimentations. The
present study focuses on the pedagogical units carried out by two experienced teachers from Finnish elementary
schools. The training materials created for the cases are available on the FICTUP project website (FICTUP
pedagogical scenario, 2010a; FICTUP pedagogical scenario, 2010b).

Participating Teachers and Their Pedagogical Cases
Two primary school teachers participated in the study, conducting technology-enhanced collaborative learning
units in their classrooms. The teachers were experienced in the pedagogical use of ICT, they had participated in
various  development     projects, and  they  were acknowledged      teacher  trainers on  the communal     level. Their
practices with ICT have also been evaluated as advanced in previous studies (see the case 'Rome' in Lakkala,
Lallimo & Hakkarainen, 2005, and the case 'Do you eat healthily' in Ilomäki, Lakkala & Paavola, 2006), and
they were chosen as tutors for the FICTUP project because of their expertise in the pedagogical use of ICT. The
cases  were designed    and conducted   by   the teachers  themselves,   and  they  represented the teachers'  ordinary
practices, which were not earlier influenced by the Pedagogical Infrastructure Framework.
          In Case 1, titled `Exploring growth factors', primary school pupils from the 3rd grade (9-10 years of
age) studied wild courtyard plants and practiced the construction of a simple experimental design related to
growth   factors. They   carried   out  an inquiry project    in small   groups, practicing  scientific skills  such  as
formulating  research    questions   and   hypotheses,    searching    for   information,  making   and   documenting
observations, and writing and commenting on scientific explanations. The duration of the unit was ten lessons
over three weeks; successive lessons varied from one to three lessons during the same day. Online working

© ISLS                                                                                                                503
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                    Volume I: Long Papers

spaces of the Web-based collaboration system Fronter (http://com.fronter.info/) organized by the teacher were
used   to structure   the inquiry  process.  The  educational  objectives  of the  unit  related to learning    the  subject
domain content (to understand the role of growth factors for wild courtyard plants) as well as to improving more
general skills, such as writing, information search, categorization of knowledge, science skills, collaboration
skills and technical competence. The inquiry process had various phases where the students took turns working
alone (when producing and commenting on research questions and explanations), in pairs (when searching for
information   from    literary sources)  and in   teams  of four (when   examining    the courtyard     plants, explaining
observations     and   presenting   the  outcomes).   Varying    tools  of   the web-based    collaboration     system  (a
brainstorming tool, discussion forums, co-editable documents etc.) as well as an interactive whiteboard (IVB)
were used for documenting and sharing ideas and contributions, depending on the nature and requirements of
the activity  in  each    phase.  Teacher  1 conducting    the unit  was   a male  teacher with     20  years of  teaching
experience, 19 of them at the current school. He had used ICT for 20 years in teaching, 24 years altogether. He
was the teacher in charge of ICT issues at his school. He had been an active developer of ICT in education also
outside the school for several years, working as a teacher trainer and scriptwriter of educational materials.
          In Case 2, titled `School children's Web journal', 5th grade primary school pupils (11-12 years of age)
created   stories for  a  digital school journal. About   one  third of the  pupils  had  special   education   needs. The
project   lasted  for six weeks,   with  two lessons  at school  each  week,   twelve lessons    in all. The  journal  was
published    with the  Magazine    Factory  program   (http://www.mazinefactory.edu.fi),   which     is  a free publishing
application for schools that simulates professional publication practices. Besides that, the Microsoft Notepad
application, digital cameras and IVBs were used. The aims of the unit were to become acquainted with virtual
publishing and editorial tasks as well as to develop skills for creating digital material through story writing,
taking pictures with a digital camera and pasting pictures and text in the publishing tool. The pupils were given
the responsibility for creating stories in pairs or groups. They decided the themes, wrote the stories, took digital
pictures and made proposals for the layout. Moreover, they commented on each others' drafts in the middle of
the process and together evaluated all the outcomes and the working process at the end of the unit. Teacher 2
conducting the unit had 26 years of teaching experience, two of them at the current school.         He had used ICT for
15 years in teaching, about 17 years in all. He was an active developer also outside the school and had belonged
to an ICT expert teacher team in his city for several years, training other teachers to use various ICT tools in
teaching.

Data Collection
All the lessons constituting the pedagogical units conducted by the two teachers were observed and videotaped
by  one   or two  researchers.    The teachers  were  shortly  interviewed   before  and  after  each  session  about  that
particular lesson. In the pre-interview, the questions were about the goals, plans and expectations concerning the
lesson and the usage of technology. In the post-interview, the teachers were asked whether the goals and plans
were achieved and what they would do differently next time. All the outcomes produced by the teachers and the
pupils during the process in the virtual working spaces and the Web were collected. The training materials for
the FICTUP project (the written pedagogical scenario and related videos) were co-constructed together by the
teachers and the researchers, based on the collected data and draft plans written by the teachers.

Data Analysis
The qualitative data analysis method used in the study was based on the approach introduced by Chi (1997). The
primary   data   were  the videotaped    lesson observations   because  we   wanted   to focus   on  the   teachers' actual
practices in the classroom. All the videotapes were examined by the principal investigator of the study, and
those sections revealing a design solution or scaffolding activity of the teacher were categorized qualitatively
using  the   components    of  the  Pedagogical   Infrastructure Framework     into  whether  the   activity  focussed  on
technical, social, epistemological or cognitive support. The detailed video data analysis was conducted using the
Atlas.ti program. The main distinctive phases in the pupils' working process in each unit were defined based on
the classroom observations and the written scenario. The distribution of the pedagogical infrastructure elements
visible in the practices was then counted for each phase in order to get an overview of the teachers' pedagogical
designs. Other data were used as a complementary source for interpreting the classroom activities and providing
examples of the practices and reflections of the teachers.

Results
The  results  are  presented   separately  for  each case,  and  in both  cases  the ways  that   teachers   designed  and
scaffolded the pupils' learning efforts in the units are unfolded.      First, the distinctive phases of the process are
shortly described, then the distribution of the pedagogical infrastructure elements in each phase is presented
with   a  diagram.    Sophisticated   examples    of the  teachers'  pedagogical    practices   in  technology-enhanced
collaborative learning are presented in a table, structured according to the four central pedagogical infrastructure
elements. Finally, the main issues from the teachers' self-reflections after the lessons are summarized.

© ISLS                                                                                                                  504
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                Volume I: Long Papers

Pedagogical Practices in Case 1: Exploring Growth Factors through Inquiry
In Case 1, the teacher structured the working process in phases that for the most part followed the Progressive
Inquiry model, which had been adopted by the teacher several years before in a previous development project
(Lakkala   et al.,  2005). The  teacher also presented the   model to   the pupils in a   visual  form   (see FICTUP
Pedagogical scenario, 2010a). The pupils' concrete activities in each lesson were shaped by these phases. The
following phases of the process were identified:
      1.  Creating the context, including orientation to the topic, introduction of the progressive inquiry model
          and demonstration of the working phases in the Web-based collaboration system.
      2.  Generating questions and forming the research groups, where pupils generated questions about growth
          factors  with a  brainstorming tool. The  questions   were  examined   together   using the  IVB,   and four
          research groups were formed based on them (light, water, warmth and soil/nutrients).
      3.  Writing explanations of the research questions, where pupils wrote explanations that answered their
          group's research question in a discussion forum and commented on other group's explanations.
      4.  Making    and documenting   observations,   including field work   where pupils   measured     the  length of
          plants in two areas in the school courtyard. The results were written down in the pupils' notebooks.
      5.  Interpreting and explaining observations, where groups constructed a table about their observations in
          the groups' Web document, compared the length of plants in two areas and wrote interpretations of the
          differences. Then the pupils commented on the explanations of the other groups in a forum.
      6.  Adding explanations from information sources, where the pupils first in pairs sought new information
          about their research topic from a text source on the Web and then added relevant explanations to their
          group's Web document as a group.
      7.  Giving presentations, where each group presented their results in front of the class by explaining the
          content of their Web document (topic, results, interpretations and new knowledge found) with the IVB.

          In  all, 184 separate sections representing the   pedagogical  design  solution   or scaffolding activity  of
Teacher   1  were   chosen  from the 10  lessons of   Case  1. The sections  were  distributed    in the four  support
categories in the following way: 23% technical, 25% social, 35% epistemological and 17% cognitive. Figure 1
presents the distribution of these activities into categories in each phase of the process.

      Figure 1. The Relative Distribution of the Pedagogical Infrastructure Elements in the Phases of Case 1.

          Figure 1 shows how the focus of the designed activity in the first and second phases of the process was
more   on  epistemological   issues concerning  the   topic of  inquiry and  the research   questions.   Social issues
received more emphasis from the teacher when the pupils started their group work or shifted between working
individually, in pairs or in groups. What is noteworthy is that the roles of all four supporting elements were
quite evenly distributed throughout the process. In Table 1 we have chosen examples of pedagogical practices
by Teacher 1, which can be regarded to represent sophisticated, expert-like practices that are good models for
other teachers. Separate examples are presented for overall design solutions and for scaffolding activities. When
a practice relates to a specific phase of the process, the phase is mentioned in parentheses.
          According to the post-interviews after the sessions, the teacher was generally satisfied with his design
of the unit and the students' engagement. He did not do much evaluation of whether the process was successful
or not, but carefully and critically analyzed which practices were challenging for pupils and in which skills they
still required more    guidance  and  practice (e.g., asking   questions, making   a  table,   understanding    written
instructions, sharing responsibilities in group work). The teacher thought that the same design could well be
applied to various age groups and topics, if the participants' competence level is taken into account.

© ISLS                                                                                                               505
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                               Volume I: Long Papers

Table 1: Examples of sophisticated pedagogical practices in Case 1.

Support     Overall design                                         Scaffolding
Technical   The introduction of versatile tools relevant for the   Giving advice about advanced practices for using
            specific activity in different phases (brainstorming   various, appropriate tools for different purposes
            tool, discourse forums, Web document, IVB etc.).       and for managing multiple working spaces.
Social      Versatile combinations of individual, pair and         Training good collaboration practices and
            group work according to the process phase and          reminding groups to follow them throughout the
            nature of the activity.                                process.
            Explicit demands for groups to combine individual      Constantly taking care that pupils take turns in
            results and make a common report page and              tasks carried out in groups with shared resources
            presentation.                                          (e.g., one computer).
Epistemo-   A relatively complex, overarching inquiry task         Encouraging wild idea generation and the
logical     simulating scientific work.                            comparison of viewpoints. (P2)
            Groups were formed on the basis of the pupils' own     Requiring improvement in discourse quality
            inquiry questions. (P2)                                because of pupils' unclear or irrelevant messages
            The use of various information sources: videos and     in the forums. (P5)
            texts in the Web, guide books, observations.
Cognitive   The modeling of inquiry strategies with a visual       Repeatedly connecting the phases of the inquiry
            progressive inquiry cycle.                             cycle to concrete ongoing activities.
            Explication of the process progression through         Teaching pupils to read and follow written
            cumulative written guidelines in the virtual spaces.   guidelines instead of leaning on the teacher.
                                                                   Stopping the process for self-evaluation and
                                                                   corrective actions when needed.

Pedagogical Practices in Case 2: School Children's Web Journal
As in Case 1, in Case 2 the teacher modeled the progression of the publishing process by dividing it into clear
sub-tasks and drawing a picture of it on the blackboard. All the pupil groups did the tasks in the same order, but
they   worked  at their own  pace.   During the same  lesson,  one group   might  still be writing  their  story  while
another group was already taking photos. Therefore, the teacher did not often give general instructions to the
whole class; instead, he guided each group separately in the new procedures when they reached a new phase in
their process. The following phases of the process were identified:
     1.  Orientation to the task by examining existing journals and forming editorial groups.
     2.  Brainstorming of article topics first in groups and then in a whole class discussion. After choosing a
         topic, the groups planned the content of their story by constructing a mind map in paper.
     3.  Creating articles through process writing, including multiple revisions of article drafts in groups and
         reciprocal feedback sessions between two groups.
     4.  Taking photographs for the articles, where the groups took photographs for their journal stories after
         the teacher had instructed them in the use of a digital camera. Each group also moved the photographs
         from the camera to a computer and further to the publishing tool with the teacher's support.
     5.  Continuing the writing and publishing of articles, where the groups finalized their stories, after which
         the   teacher  guided  each group  as they  combined  their story  texts and   photos into  an  article  in the
         school's Web journal using the publishing program.
     6.  Self-evaluation of the process and outcomes included a session where pupils evaluated both the articles
         and the whole working process first in groups and then in a whole class discussion. Each pupil was also
         asked to evaluate his or her own contribution to the process.

         In  all, 261   separate sections representing   a pedagogical  design solution    or scaffolding   activity  of
Teacher 2 were chosen from the 12 lessons of Case 2. Because each pupil group worked at their own pace in the
process,  the  chronological    progression of  the  teachers' pedagogical   activities  cannot    fully be presented
according   to the process   phases. Most   groups  also worked  on  the writing  project  during   their leisure time
between the weekly lessons, which partly explains the variation in the process progression. The sections were
distributed  among     the four  support  categories in  the  following  way:  31%      technical, 21%    social, 25%
epistemological and 23% cognitive. In Figure 2, the process is divided into weekly sessions consisting of two
lessons, and the various process phases that separate pupil groups focused on during each session is mentioned
in parentheses.

© ISLS                                                                                                               506
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                Volume I: Long Papers

   Figure 2. The Relative Distribution of the Pedagogical Infrastructure Elements in the Sessions of Case 2.

         Figure   2   reveals that in the Web  journal  case,  the support   for learning technical competencies    was
substantial, especially in the middle phases when pupils learned to use digital cameras and to transfer material
from   the writing    application  and the  cameras  to the   publishing  program.    Epistemological  elements    were
emphasized     at the beginning    of the writing process   when   pupils brainstormed    the content  of their stories,
whereas    the teachers' structuring   of cognitive or  metacognitive   elements   increased  towards  the end   of the
process    through    promoting    evaluative and   self-reflective activities.   Support  for  social  activities  and
collaboration was less evident, but the teacher did made it clear in all situations whether pupils were supposed to
work in groups or as a whole class, and which pupils or groups were supposed to work with each other. In Table
2 is a  selection  of  exemplary    pedagogical   practices by Teacher    2, which   can  be  regarded as representing
sophisticated, expert-like practices that are good examples for other teachers. Separate examples are presented
for overall design solutions and for scaffolding activities. When a practice relates to a specific phase of the
process, the phase is mentioned in parentheses.
         In the post-interviews after each session, the teacher evaluated that the goals of the unit were achieved
well; in some phases pupils managed even better than the teacher expected, and the technology did not cause
problems.  Some     pupils appeared    to require more  guidance    in engaging   in group   work and  in coordinating
activities done at home and at school. The peer-commenting activity was tested by the teacher for the first time
as part of the writing process, and he thought that its design and scaffolding required improvement. Overall, the
teacher believed that after finishing the unit, the pupils were able to continue writing stories in the school's
journal on their own.

Table 2: Examples of sophisticated pedagogical practices in Case 2.

Support     Overall design                                          Scaffolding
Technical   Introducing versatile tools according to the nature     Guiding new technical skills for each group when
            of the activity (Notepad, Magazine Factory, digital     they needed them in their own process, not in a
            camera, IVB)                                            general manner.
Social      Directing the students to make stories in pairs or      Emphasizing to pupils in the final evaluation
            groups.   (P1)                                          session that in group work, the whole group should
            Directing the groups to evaluate each others' drafts    take care of each member's turn and contribution in
            through peer reviewing. (P3)                            doing a collective activity. (P6)
            Smoothly combining group and whole class
            discussions both in the brainstorming and in the
            evaluation phase.
Epistemo-   The whole process simulated the practices of a          Explaining to pupils that they are documenting
logical     professional editorial staff.                           their school's preserved history with the stories.
            The pupils were allowed to choose the topic for         Repeatedly encouraging the pupils to be creative
            their stories according to their own interests. (P2)    and to make the stories richer and more interesting.
Cognitive   Explicating the phases of a publishing activity         Regularly speaking with each group about what
            through a visual process scheme.                        phases of the process they have finished and what
            Organizing an evaluation session at the end in          phases are remaining, and asking the groups to
            which the final stories, group work and individual      report the status of their work.
            contributions were evaluated by the pupils.

© ISLS                                                                                                              507
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                    Volume I: Long Papers

Discussion and Conclusions
In  the present  study,   the classroom    practices  (pedagogical   design   solutions  or scaffolding  activities) of two
elementary  school     teachers  who   are experienced     in the pedagogical    use  of ICT   were   analyzed  in detail to
exemplify   sophisticated   ways    of using  ICT    in school   education.   The classroom    practices were   categorized
according   to  their  supporting    role  in the pedagogical     infrastructure:   technical, social,  epistemological   or
cognitive (Lakkala, 2010).
         In both of the units, one goal defined by the teachers was to develop pupils' technical competencies. In
the units,  the  young    pupils  were    taught quite  challenging    procedures   in  combining   the  usage  of   various
technological   applications,   and  the   ICT   usage  was   embedded    in  a  meaningful    context  of  a goal-oriented
complex   task.  The   teachers'  approach    complied   with  the   opinion  shared   by many   researchers   (Pruulmann-
Vengerfeldt, Kalmus & Runnel, 2008; Tierney, Bond & Bresler, 2006; Erstad, 2010) that digital competence is
developed best in settings that include rich and integrated use of various technical tools as well as a wide range
of  activities  that  are based   on   complex,   open-ended     tasks such   as  product   development,    the solving   of
multidisciplinary problems, project work or collaboration.
         Both teachers gave a large amount of responsibility to the pupils themselves in their group task, but
also constantly monitored their progression, and when they good reasons, required corrective actions from the
pupils if the criteria of the work were not met. It appears that very high-level and clear criteria both for social
behavior (shared responsibility and negotiations, a common goal, proper commenting practices etc.) and for the
epistemological quality of the work (a focus on concrete outcomes, the relevance of the produced questions and
explanations, quality requirements for publishable texts etc.) were directing the teachers' design solutions and
scaffolding activities throughout the process. In the classroom situations, these experienced teachers constantly
and very conscientiously took care of those issues that they believed to be important in the designed activity.
         Both of the teachers also promoted the pupils' self-regulative competences concerning the working
practices through various sophisticated methods representing cognitive support. White and Fredriksen (2005)
divided  methods      supporting    metacognitive    development     into conceptual     tools (e.g.,  guidelines,   models,
templates or software scaffolds) and metacognitive tasks (explicit tasks for planning, monitoring and reflecting
one's   own activity).   In both  units,  the teachers   provided  the  pupils   with  conceptual  tools by   modeling    the
working strategies and process progression through using visual modeling, writing systematic guidelines and
phase   descriptions,  explicating   the  goals  for the activity  or  emphasizing    the criteria for  high-level ways   of
working.   Metacognitive      tasks were   explicitly   included  as essential  working   phases   in  both units,   such as
evaluating and improving one's own writings, commenting on others' productions, or having group-level and
whole-class discussions in which the outcomes and working practices were reflected on and assessed together.
         One important pedagogical characteristic in both of the units investigated was that the activity designed
by the teachers was based on a holistic and goal-oriented working model that created a meaningful context for
separate sub-activities and lessons. What is noteworthy is that the working models that the processes followed
did not represent any pedagogical model that focuses on learning (such as the models of collaborative learning,
problem-based    learning   or  discovery  learning).   Rather,   they were   models   simulating   authentic  professional
practices in some field: in Case 1, scientific inquiry practices, and in Case 2, professional publication practices.
For instance, Chinn and Malhotra (2002) criticized the practices of typically scientific reasoning being taught in
schools through `simple inquiry tasks' instead of `authentic scientific inquiry tasks'. The teachers of the present
study   trusted in   the  pupils' ability  to conduct    a complex,    challenging   working   process   including   various
technical, social and epistemological elements, which is even more significant taking into account the nature of
the pupil groups: very young pupils in Case 1, or a large proportion of pupils with special needs in Case 2.
         The analysis revealed that the experienced teachers planned well-organized activities in which various
elements of a pedagogical infrastructure were closely attended to and smoothly integrated. The study confirmed
our previous    result (Ilomäki   et al., 2006)  that   technological  skills as  such  are not sufficient  for teachers  to
develop their pedagogical practices with ICT, but other competencies for planning, organizing, structuring and
guiding pupils' learning activities with ICT are needed. The results can be used to complement current training
materials presenting experienced teachers' practices with guidelines where essential aspects of the practices are
unfolded and emphasized. A research aim for the future is to apply this approach to other situations and test the
effectiveness of the materials in teacher training courses, collegial tutoring practices and self-study settings.

References
Bielaczyc,  K.  (2006).   Designing    social infrastructure:  Critical issues   in creating   learning environments    with
         technology. Journal of the Learning Sciences 15, 301­329.
Chi, M.T.H. (1997). Quantifying qualitative analyses of verbal data: A practical guide. Journal of the Learning
         Sciences, 6(3), 271­315.
Chinn,  C.  A.,  &    Malhotra,   B. A.   (2002). Epistemologically     authentic   reasoning   in schools:   A theoretical
         framework for evaluating inquiry tasks. Science Education, 86, 175­218.
Erstad, O. (2010). Educating the digital generation. Nordic Journal of Digital Literacy, 1, 56­70.

© ISLS                                                                                                                    508
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                  Volume I: Long Papers

FICTUP Pedagogical scenario (2010a). Exploring growth factors. Applying inquiry learning and virtual forums.
         Retrieved          March          3,      2011,        from           http://www.fictup-project.eu/index.php/
         Exploring_growth_factors._Applying_inquiry_learning_and_virtual_forums
FICTUP Pedagogical scenario (2010b). School children's Web journal. Publishing with Magazine Factory tool.
         Retrieved          March          3,      2011,        from           http://www.fictup-project.eu/index.php/
         School_children%E2%80%99s_Web_journal._Publishing_with_Magazine_Factory_tool
Cuban,  L.,  Kirkpatrick,   H., &   Peck,   C. (2001).  High  access   and    low use  of technologies    in high school
         classrooms: Explaining an apparent paradox. American Educational Research Journal, 38, 813­834.
Gibson, S., & Oberg, D. (2004). Visions and reality of Internet use in schools: Canadian perspectives. British
         Journal of Educational Technology, 35, 569­585.
Hogan,   K., &   Pressley,  M.    (1997).  Scaffolding  scientific  competencies    within classroom    communities    of
         inquiry. In K. Hogan & M. Pressley (Eds.), Scaffolding student learning: Instructional approaches and
         issues (pp. 74­107). Cambridge, MA: Brookline Books.
Hyo-Jeong    S., &    Kim,  B.  (2009).   Learning  about   problem    based   learning:  Student   teachers  integrating
         technology, pedagogy and content knowledge. Australasian Journal of Educational Technology, 25(1),
         101­116.
Ilomäki, L.,  Lakkala,   M., &     Paavola, S.  (2006). Case   studies  of  learning  objects   used in school  settings.
         Learning, Media, and Technology, 31(3), 249­267.
Jones C., Dirckinck-Holmfeld, L., & Lindström, B. (2006). A relational, indirect, meso-level approach to CSCL
         design in the next decade. International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 1(1),
         35­56.
Kozma, R., & Anderson, R. (2002). Qualitative case studies of innovative pedagogical practices using ICT.
         Journal of Computer Assisted Learning, 18(4), 387­394.
Lakkala,  M.   (2010).  How     to design   educational    settings to promote    collaborative   inquiry:   Pedagogical
         infrastructures   for  technology-enhanced     progressive    inquiry.   University   of Helsinki,  Institute of
         Behavioural Sciences, Studies in Psychology 66. Helsinki: Helsinki University Print.
Lakkala, M., Lallimo, J., & Hakkarainen, K. (2005). Teachers' pedagogical designs for technology-supported
         collective inquiry: A national case study. Computers & Education, 45(3), 337­356.
Lakkala, M., Muukkonen, H., Paavola, S., & Hakkarainen, K. (2008). Designing pedagogical infrastructures in
         university    courses    for  technology-enhanced    collaborative     inquiry.  Research    and    Practice  in
         Technology Enhanced Learning, 3(1), 33­64.
OECD    (2010).   Are   the  new   Millennium    learners   making   the grade?     Technology    use   and  educational
         performance in PISA 2006. Paris: OECD Publishing.
Paavola, S., Lipponen, L., & Hakkarainen, K. (2002). Epistemological foundations for CSCL: A comparison of
         three   models  of  innovative     knowledge   communities.     In   G.  Stahl  (Ed.),   Computer   support   for
         collaborative learning: Foundations for a CSCL community (pp. 24­32). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Pedersen, S., Malmberg, P., Christensen, A. J., Pedersen, M., Nipper, S. Graem, C. D., et al. (Eds.). (2006). E-
         learning Nordic 2006. Impact of ICT on education. Copenhagen: Ramboll Management.
Putnam, R., & Borko, H. (2000). What do new views of knowledge and thinking have to say about research on
         teacher learning. Educational Researcher, 29, 4­15.
Pruulmann-Vengerfeldt, P., Kalmus, V., & Runnel, P. (2008). Creating content or creating hype: Practices of
         online content creation and consumption in Estonia. Cyberpsychology, 2(1), 1­8.
Putnam, R., & Borko, H. (2000). What do new views of knowledge and thinking have to say about research on
         teacher learning. Educational Researcher, 29, 4­15.
Smeets, E. (2005). Does ICT contribute to powerful learning environments in primary education? Computers &
         Education, 44, 343­355.
Tierney, R.  J., Bond,   E., &    Bresler,  J. (2006). Examining     literate lives as  students  engage   with multiple
         literacies. Theory Into Practice, 45(4), 359­367.
White,  B.,  &   Fredriksen,   J.  (2005).  A   theoretical framework    and   approach    for  fostering metacognitive
         development. Educational Psychologist, 40, 211­223.
Yin, R. K. (2003). Case study research. Design and methods (3rd ed.). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.

Acknowledgments
The research   work    was  partially  supported  by   the  Lifelong Learning     Programme    of the European    Union,
contract 141929-2008-LLP-FR-COMENIUS-CMP (the FICTUP project). The authors thank the teachers and
their pupils for participating in the study.

© ISLS                                                                                                                 509
