CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                  Volume I: Long Papers

    Mind the Gaps: Using Patterns to Change Everyday Classroom
                   Practice Towards Contingent CSCL Teaching
          Luis P. Prieto, Sara Villagrá-Sobrino, Yannis Dimitriadis, University of Valladolid, SPAIN,
                         Email: lprisan@gsic.uva.es, sarena@pdg.uva.es, yannis@tel.uva.es
       Patricia Schank, William Penuel, Angela Haydel DeBarger, SRI International, Menlo Park CA, USA,
                Email: patricia.schank@sri.com, william.penuel@sri.com, angela.haydel@sri.com

         Abstract:    Educational    research  has  established the  benefits  of adapting   lesson   plans   and
         teaching to the evolution of student knowledge and emergent occurrences in the classroom.
         This   kind  of  improvisatory    adaptation  of teaching,  however,  is  seldom   seen   in  everyday
         classroom practice of CSCL. This paper describes two independent research projects that aim
         to influence authentic classroom practices to promote this kind of teaching using the same
         collaborative learning tool, Group Scribbles. Evidence from both projects shows that merely
         providing technologies that support this adaptation is not enough to provoke the change and
         that exposing teachers to good uses of the tool (in the form of pedagogical patterns) also has
         limited  success.   Both    projects highlight the  difficulty for practitioners   to bridge    the  gap
         between   de-contextualized     advice and   contextualized  classroom   situations.  We  propose    the
         use   of more    atomic,  actionable  moves   to help  teachers   orchestrate technology     to support
         deeper collaborative knowledge building.

Introduction
A main concern of the CSCL community in recent years (as it is evident from Dillenbourg, 2009, and from the
title of this CSCL 2011 conference) is how to apply CSCL research results to everyday educational practice. For
example, facilitating highly interactive discussion and adjustment of instruction based on what teachers learn
from   student responses    have  long been   considered  beneficial  (Alexander,   2008).  This   is especially  true for
collaborative learning, where the teacher's role shifts to facilitator, working with students to help them tackle
the learning   challenge    through   the  sharing  and   construction  of questions,  ideas,   or data.   However,    the
adjustment of teaching for deep and meaningful collaborative discussion is seldom seen in everyday teacher
practice with information and communication technologies (ICT) (Kennewell et al., 2008).
         The   success   of such   agile  instruction  depends  on teachers  having    resources that    help them adjust
lessons, contingent on what they find out students know and can do (Beatty et al., 2006). Yet existing research is
insufficient to   indicate  how   to  best scaffold   improvisational   adjustments in  everyday      classroom   practice,
especially in reaction to rich, constructed student responses.
         Pedagogical patterns are a common resource for scaffolding teacher enactment and enabling contingent
teaching with classroom network technologies (DeBarger et al., 2010; Conole et al., in press; DiGiano et al.,
2003; Prieto et al, 2010). These patterns represent best practices and prior knowledge by expert practitioners as
tried-and-true solutions to recurrent problems in a field or practice (Alexander et al., 1977). Patterns can be
formulated to help teachers make student thinking visible and engage students in genuine dialogue so that the
students shape the flow and direction of the discussion. Such dialogic discussions improve students' learning
and development of scientific explanations (Nystrand & Gamoran, 1991).
         Technology is another resource for supporting instruction that can flexibly adjust in response to student
thinking, making it easy for the teacher to modulate the discussion by, for example, posing a new question or
activity on the fly based on student responses (Penuel et al., 2005, Roschelle et al, 2007). Only recently have the
appropriate  kinds    of flexible technologies  emerged   to support   such malleable,  interactive   instruction. In  the
context of collaborative learning, clickers have foreshadowed this new potential, and virtual whiteboard systems
with individual and shared displays show promise in supporting the rapid exchange and submission of sketched
representations (Anderson et al., 2007). Group Scribbles, a collaborative tool based on the familiar metaphors of
private/public boards and adhesive stickers, is an example of a flexible, collaborative whiteboard system that
supports a range of learning activities (DeBarger et al., 2010; Dimitriadis et al., 2007; Looi et al., 2010).
         This paper relates findings from two independent projects­­one in Spain and one in the United States­
­that studied Group Scribbles implementations in real classroom settings to better understand the impact of
flexible network technology and pedagogical patterns on contingent, student-centered teaching. Both projects
employed   professional     development    workshops    and  classroom   observations,  but    otherwise   used   different
research approaches. Using a largely bottom-up approach, researchers in Spain introduced Group Scribbles into
primary  school   classrooms  and    helped   teachers transform  their lesson ideas   into Group     Scribbles activities,
documenting    such   practices   as common    design  and  enactment   patterns  and  improvisational    adjustments   to
instruction. Using    a  mix of   researcher-  and    co-designed  pedagogical    patterns  and  interactive   assessment

© ISLS                                                                                                                 518
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                              Volume I: Long Papers

activities, researchers in the United States introduced Group Scribbles to middle school teachers, documenting
implementation challenges and how teachers adjusted instruction within the provided structure.
         Evidence from both projects shows that a key challenge in putting contingent teaching into practice,
and especially in reusing best practices and prior knowledge from research (e.g., in the form of pedagogical
patterns), is bridging the gap between de-contextualized advice and specific classroom situations and actions
(Goodwin & Duranti, 1992). The multiple decisions to be made when implementing a pedagogical pattern or
when   reacting  to rich  student-generated  responses  present pedagogical  pitfalls and risks. To  circumvent   this
problem, researchers on both projects independently proposed using more atomic and actionable instructional
moves.   Initial evidence     from both   projects suggests that  by   using  this  approach (rather than   just  de-
contextualized pedagogical patterns), the design and enactment of activities is greatly facilitated.
         This paper first describes the research approaches of both projects and the main findings regarding the
implementation    of  contingent   teaching. Then  the  challenge of  bridging  the gap between   de-contextualized
advice   and  contextualized     enactments   in   everyday  practice  is  discussed.  Finally,  conclusions   about
implementing innovations for contingent teaching in CSCL are presented, as are paths of potential future work.

                                   Figure 1. Screen Shot of Group Scribbles Boards.

A Tale of Two Projects
Group Scribbles is being used by the Grupo de Sistemas Inteligentes y Cooperativos (GSIC) research group at
the University of Valladolid and in the Contingent Pedagogies project at SRI International. Since 2006, both
groups have been working with Group Scribbles in several research efforts. Albeit independent, both groups
were aware of each other's work as part of the tight research community around Group Scribbles. Initially, both
institutions focused on the potential for Group Scribbles to support improvisation and social coordination in the
classroom; subsequently, pedagogical patterns have taken on a more important role in the projects' work.
         Group Scribbles is a participation-oriented network technology that supports collaborative activities
using  text, sketches,    and images (Figure  1).  The metaphor   is based on  common   physical  artifacts from  the
classroom: adhesive notes, whiteboards, pens and markers. Participants can scribble contributions on notes and
post them anonymously in a shared public space that becomes the object of discussion. Teachers can quickly
configure    spaces   for a   short-term collaborative or group   activity and, as  the activity  unfolds,  alter the
configuration on the fly and create new public boards to support multiple spaces for small groups to work.

GSIC Experiences with Group Scribbles
The GSIC research followed a bottom-up approach driven by a case study method (Stake, 2005). The research
took place in five classrooms of a primary school (with 18­25 students each, ages 6­8) in Spain with eight

© ISLS                                                                                                            519
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                 Volume I: Long Papers

teachers who had varying levels of teaching experience and ICT training. The researchers spent 2 years working
closely with the teachers to help them orchestrate their activities using Group Scribbles and other ICT tools
(e.g., digital whiteboards, tablet PCs) that were already in their classrooms. All the designed and enacted Group
Scribbles activities were related to the teachers' usual curricula.
         In  the  first stage  of   the research, Group   Scribbles  was  introduced  in a  brief training session with
teachers. Then, during activity design sessions, the researchers helped transform teachers' activity ideas into
Group Scribbles activities. Thirty-one enactments of those activities were observed and analyzed. Additional
information  on   the   school and   teacher context    was gathered through   three semi-structured  interviews  and a
focus group with teachers. All sessions were audio-recorded, and observation notes were taken by at least two
researchers for triangulation. See Villagrá-Sobrino & Prieto (2011) for more on the enactments analysis process.
         The main result of this first stage of research was that the role of improvisation in teachers' practice
was minimal, even when teachers used a tool like Group Scribbles that supports improvisation (Roschelle et al.,
2007). They also acknowledged the importance of emergent occurrences in classroom enactment:
         T2: Maybe during the enactment of an activity many things can happen, which I have
         not   prepared,   but    I think   that  it is important   that  teachers   design   their activities.
         [Teachers' focus group, 2009/03/17, translated from Spanish]

         Further, teachers tended to design high-level tasks but their enactments had more small-scale, patterned
kinds of improvisation. The activity patterns extracted from actual teaching were dubbed routines (both design
routines and enactment routines) to differentiate them from researcher-specified patterns. Figure 2 (A) shows an
activity design from a teacher's notebook. Figure 2 (B) shows the activity enactment analysis, reflecting its
phases  (distinct  portions of  activity    enactment,  often  traceable to a design routine)  and   enactment  routines
(recurrent teacher moves present in the enactment) observed during each phase. The activity design (in bold)
was completed by phases and routines that emerged during the enactment (e.g., R4a"Disallow tool usage").

        Figure 2. (A) Design, (B) Enactment Analysis of one Activity. Adapted from Prieto et al. (2010).

         The goal of the second stage of this research was to foster collaborative learning practices among the
teachers through   different   forms    of  professional  development.   A  2-hour   training session  on  collaborative
techniques centered on the use of collaborative learning flow patterns (CLFPs, see Hernández et al., 2010). As
illustrated in the following   excerpts     from the  session, the macro-level CLFPs     presented  were considered by
teachers as too separated from their classroom contexts and practice, and thus not easily re-contextualizable:
         T3: It is very difficult to put into practice a role-play and a think-pair-share [names of
         CLFPs]       with  children     in the   first  grade  (6­7  years).   [CLFPs     training   session,
         2009/11/10, translated from Spanish]

© ISLS                                                                                                               520
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                   Volume I: Long Papers

          T4: I would be hard-pressed to say anything I do that resembles these techniques [the
         CLFPs] [CLFPs training session, 2009/11/10, translated from Spanish]

         The researchers speculated that routines elicited from teachers' real practice (such as the ones in Figure
2 above) might be a better entry point for teachers to design activities and to promote their reflection on the
enactment (Prieto et al., 2010). A 2-hour professional development workshop was carried out with nine teachers
from the same school (four teachers who were part of the previous research effort and five new to the research).
After a brief presentation of the design and enactment routines from their practice, teachers were able to design
and role-play an enactment of a complex Group Scribbles activity in 10 minutes. Moreover, a survey taken just
after the workshop showed that the routines were familiar to them and that they appreciated their usefulness.
          (To the question: Have you ever used these [design] routines? Which ones?)
          T5:  Yes,   almost   all: brainstorming,     classification,  ordering,   where    is  on   the image,
         Etc. [Survey after routines workshop, 2010/06/25, translated from Spanish]
          (To the question: Did the [design] routines help you in enriching the design? Why?)
          T6:  Yes,   because    they   bring new   ideas  about   how  to  work    on  the  same    contents  in
         different ways. [Survey after routines workshop, 2010/06/25, translated from Spanish]

The Contingent Pedagogies Project
The aim of the Contingent Pedagogies project is to improve student science learning by integrating assessment
activities into a widely used Earth systems science curriculum, Investigating Earth Systems (IES), to create a
comprehensive curricular activity system (Roschelle, Knudsen, & Hegedus, 2009). The Contingent Pedagogies
project developed activities called interactive formative assessments (IFAs) for IES that use classroom network
technology,   clickers  and   Group   Scribbles.   The  IFAs specify    questions for  teachers    to pose; how    network
technology   will be    used to  support  collection,  aggregation,  and  display   of data;   and how    teachers can  use
assessment information to organize instruction. Pedagogical patterns successful in prior research for promoting
individual and group learning served as templates for designing the IFAs (DeBarger et al., 2010).
          In the  first stage  of research,   five sixth-grade teachers   who   had  experience    implementing    the  IES
curriculum were introduced to the network technology and pedagogical patterns in a professional development
workshop.    The  teachers   then   worked  together   in small  groups   with   an assessment     researcher, curriculum
developer,   and  subject  matter   expert to develop   activities. After   the workshop,    the project  team   developed
additional IFAs and worked with the five teachers to pilot-test the activities in their classrooms in Colorado.
Each   teacher taught   at least  three classroom   sections in  Earth  science  with  25­35     students  each. The team
engaged the teachers in monthly 1.5-hour teleconferences in which technology issues that teachers encountered
were addressed, teachers reported on an activity that they implemented with students, and the team shared tips
related to effective use of the technology. Technological support was also provided through web conferencing.
          During  the   school  year,   Contingent  Pedagogies   researchers    observed   12  classroom   sections where
teachers used Group Scribbles activities. Using semi-structured observation protocols, observers recorded the
focal science topic and described teachers' and students' interactions. At the end of the class, observers recorded
summaries of the class, including instructions teachers gave, teacher support for student engagement, variations
in students' responses to the activity, questions posed and nature of the responses, breakdowns in the flow and
management of activities, technology use, and communication of science content by the teacher. At the end of
the year, an   online   survey was  fielded   to obtain a comprehensive     view  of   all the activities and  patterns the
teachers  attempted   to implement    and  to identify  activities  and patterns  that were    more   and less valuable  or
usable from the teacher's perspective. Detailed findings from this research appear in Penuel et al. (2010).
          Both   the  survey  and   the observations   indicated that   the teachers   could   enact  the Group   Scribbles
activities and patterns and that they did so many times during the 5 or so months when they were using the IES
units. On average, each teacher used Group Scribbles activities six times in their classroom. Teachers reported
that they had implemented most, but not all, of the activities developed by the team and that they had also
created several of their own Group Scribbles activities based on the pedagogical patterns provided.
          Results from the first stage of research suggested promising levels of adoption, but also highlighted
challenges to implementation and the need for a broader set of tools to improve the quality of enactment of
patterns in the classroom. The teachers felt that the patterns advanced the goals of enhancing communication,
motivation, and feedback and that the IFAs helped students learn high-level skills. But they also experienced
many tensions in classroom management, such as technical issues sidetracking lesson flow, figuring out the
"right amount of time" to allow students to answer questions, and keeping students on task during group work.
          T7:  I want   to have   more   training   activities for  my   students   to  learn   about  it before
         they have to use it. I felt that was the hardest part this year; they were so enthralled to
         find out things that it was tough to manage. [Teacher teleconference, 2010/1/21]

© ISLS                                                                                                                  521
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                     Volume I: Long Papers

          T8:  The    only  issue for   me   is  when   they're  doing    the wrong   things--writing    on   each
          other's  boards,  or   writing   a   scribble  that  says   "hi john".  I take  away    their computer
          after a warning to stop doing that. [Teacher teleconference, 2010/3/25]

          Further,  the  quality  of the  student  participation   and   the  contingent teaching   observed   were limited.
Observers noted that teachers often asked students to explain their ideas, but teachers did most of the intellectual
work of building on and connecting ideas and rarely engaged students in discussion of one another's ideas.
Instead, teachers addressed issues by restating correct ideas or explaining why certain answers were incorrect.
For example, after trying several times to explain a scientific idea related to divergent plate boundaries, one
teacher asked students to "show by giving thumbs up, to the side, or down" the level of understanding they felt
they had achieved. For those who displayed a thumb down (still confused) or to the side (not completely sure),
the teacher told them that they could return to the classroom during lunch for further review.
          Finally, the researchers found little evidence of teachers changing the direction of lessons to address
clearly problematic ideas. Project staff had planned to introduce a set of contingent activities to teachers in a
field trial the next year but concluded that providing contingent activities was insufficient; the teachers needed a
broader suite of tools to improve the quality of enactment of patterns in classrooms. To support a more dialogic
style in such enactment (O'Connor & Michaels, 2007), the project team developed a set of classroom norms for
participation, discourse moves for discussion, and decision rules for contingent teaching, all of which are being
implemented and studied with 15 teachers in the current (third year) of the project. Norms set expectations
about how students will participate in discussion and establish a classroom community with a shared purpose of
making    sense  of scientific  ideas  and   practices  (e.g., everyone   will reason   and respond;    challenge ideas, not
identities). Discourse moves (e.g., inviting students to build on a classmate's idea or summarize a key idea from
a discussion) can help shift responsibility for thinking to students. Decision rules provide teachers guidance on
how    to proceed   on  the basis   of assessment    information.   For   example,  if  the class  is divided  between   two
alternative explanations, a teacher might break the class into two groups and ask students from each to pose
questions   to the  other  group  about    their  explanations.    Preliminary indications  suggest   promising   uptake  by
teachers of these dialogic supports. Weekly logs from teachers show high levels of uptake of both the norms and
discourse  moves,   and    teachers  report  that  they helped  them     advance  their goals  for instruction in nearly  all
instances when they employed them in conjunction with network technologies (Penuel & DeBarger, 2011). In
focus group discussions, teachers offered accounts for why:
          T9:  I really  like   the  norms     and I think  they   set a  good   standard   in the  classroom   of
          what do to, and I see the kids using it in everything they're doing... The one I like the
          most   is   explaining,    it's really   making      the kids   support   their   reasoning.   [Teacher
          teleconference, 2010/10/27]
          T10: I agree, it has really set a good tone for the kids... There are a lot of times when
          something     is happening      in class   and I  can    refer  back to  those  norms.   Like   the  one
          norm   about    "it's okay   to  be   wrong"   based     on  your   current   understanding;   that  has
          come up on several occasions... We look at when you took that test that was what your
          understanding     was...   but   now    that  you    have  this  new    understanding    it's different.
          [Teacher teleconference, 2010/10/27]

Bridging the Gaps: A Challenge for Changing Everyday Practice
The findings and evolution of these two projects exemplify a common problem of CSCL research that tries to
influence classroom practice in authentic settings: how to make the results of past research (often in the form of
de-contextualized theories and principles or reified into new technological tools) available to practitioners in a
way that they can appropriate them­­and, moreover, how to do it for practitioners who are not especially gifted
or motivated or are not experts (Dillenbourg, 2009). Studies into the sustainability and scalability of research-
based interventions (Fishman et al., 2004; Penuel et al., 2007) point to the importance of such factors as the
professional development approach, its coherence with current reform ideas in the schools, and the challenges
that teachers face in their daily practice. Slavin & Lake (2008) also highlight the effectiveness of programs that
address changes in teacher practice (e.g. by creating architectures for collaborative learning).
          The   projects   depicted  in   this paper   explored    pedagogical  patterns  as   a professional  development
approach   to  help   address   everyday   teaching  challenges.    The   pattern approach   offers   several advantages: it
serves as a means of communication between researchers and practitioners (and also among practitioners), it
offers practitioners a number of building blocks that can be creatively combined into new solutions, and finally,
it is suitable for nonexperts because of its problem orientation. However, the evidence from the two projects
described above shows that its application to everyday teaching practice is not without potential limitations. The
findings of both research groups highlight two important tensions or gaps that often arise when researchers try
to influence everyday practice in an authentic setting. These tensions are represented graphically in Figure 3.

© ISLS                                                                                                                    522
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                            Volume I: Long Papers

     Figure 3. Gaps in the Contextualization and Mediational Support of Teaching. The focus of the research
                        presented here is highlighted with a grey background (bottom-left).

         The first of these tensions appears between researchers' efforts to de-contextualize empirical data to
obtain widely applicable principles and teachers' application of those principles to concrete situations, which can
be seen  as an  act    of re-contextualization (Goodwin     & Duranti, 1992). Teaching   practice, and especially
innovative teaching practice, can be seen as the appropriation of the de-contextualized tools such as curriculum
materials, classroom    management   techniques,  as  well  as resources provided  by  researchers  (e.g. theories,
patterns, or even technological tools such as Group Scribbles). In this sense, pedagogical patterns provide de-
contextualized advice on how to attain certain pedagogical goals. However, as noted by Winters & Mor (2009),
dealing with de-contextualized tools can be difficult for teachers, even if they contain more elements of context
than an abstract theory (e.g. they assume a certain kind of classroom, or they are provided along with a short
narrative example of their application to other contexts). Instructional moves and design and enactment routines
elicited from actual teaching practice are also examples of this de-contextualization effort, but they originate
from a different source than theory. Having more elements of a familiar context present in these patterns (e.g.
assuming usage of the Group Scribbles tool and a whiteboard, or assuming a specific outcome of a previous
task)  enhances their   mirroring properties and makes   them   more actionable (i.e. teachers recognize  them as
actions that they normally take in the classroom or may take in an easily recognizable situation).
         There is a second tension or gap between the macro-level designs and plans for instruction (provided
by researchers, developed by teachers, or co-designed) and the emergent micro-level enactment of those plans
by a specific teacher in a classroom. Such plans are incomplete by their very nature, since any representation of
a practice is a simplification. Even if plans are designed by teachers thinking about their specific classroom
context, plans cannot take into account all emergent occurrences or accurately predict students' notions and their
evolution. If we look at this gap from the point of view of socio-cultural activity theory (Engeström, 1987),
lesson plans and pedagogical patterns at the macro-level (e.g. the CLFPs mentioned above) provide mediational
tools for teachers at the action level that respond to needs such as providing feedback to students or promoting
self-regulation. But even with that scaffolding, teachers must still make decisions on how to enact the plans
using specific instructional moves in their classroom context. These instructional moves (which correspond to
operations in activity theory terminology) can be highly routinized and often vary based on teacher style. By
also  providing scaffolding  at the operation   level (e.g. Contingent Pedagogies' discourse   moves,  or  GSIC's
enactment patterns), more coherent pedagogical strategies can be enacted by teachers. Having a set of atomic,
actionable patterns that are easy to call forth, tweak and recombine can empower teachers to creatively design
and enact activities according to the theories and design principles of CSCL research (Hernández et al., 2010)
and dialogic teaching research (Wells & Mejia-Arauz, 2006; O'Connor & Michaels, 2007).
         Moreover, this combination of patterns of different granularities is supported by Alexander's concept
of a pattern language (Alexander et al., 1977), that is, a set of related patterns that provide increasing detail on
how to implement the higher-granularity patterns. In our case, norms, rules, moves, and routines can be seen as

© ISLS                                                                                                          523
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                   Volume I: Long Papers

tools for goal-directed action that ideally become operationalized in ways that support teachers' enactment of
collaborative, dialogic activities. They also help teachers in specifying further innovations using technology in
ways that can enhance their implementation (Cohen & Ball, 1999).

Conclusions and Future Work
The pedagogical patterns approach has been motivated by the need to exchange knowledge and good practices
between    research   literature and   the real  world,  as    a way  to    support  practitioners and   as a  means   of
communication among various stakeholders (e.g., teachers and education or technology researchers).
         However,     researchers  who    use patterns  in  CSCL    still encounter  challenges    in changing  everyday
classroom practice. This paper has presented two CSCL projects that tried to take contingent, adaptive teaching
with flexible network technology (Group Scribbles) to the real world through the use of patterns. Despite the
differences in school context or even the overall research approach, researchers on both projects independently
identified  and analyzed     several common     issues that    must  be   addressed. One   is the  gap  between   the  de-
contextualized theories and tools that researchers often produce and teachers' need to provide ad-hoc practice in
their classroom situations (which can be seen as an act of re-contextualization). Another is the gap between the
macro-level advice (e.g. in the form of pedagogical patterns or lesson plans) that is often given to teachers and
the micro-level decisions and actions that teachers must take in their particular contexts. In both cases, the use
of more atomic, actionable teacher moves (coming from real practice and derived from literature) has showed
promising results. The use of practice-derived enactment patterns, classroom norms, and decision rules seems to
complement the advantages of macro-level pedagogical patterns and to enable a wider adoption and change of
daily practice. Thus, we posit the combination of both kinds of patterns as a coherent mediational strategy for
teachers to produce contextual, pedagogically-sound uses of technology, making the most of its affordances for
enhancing teaching and learning.
         Further research is needed to accumulate more evidence in favor of or against this proposal for an
effective use of pedagogical patterns in CSCL. Our research teams in the United States and Spain intend to build
on the findings of both projects and thus tackle a common problem in CSCL­­the low reusability of knowledge.
For example, we plan to explore the application of patterns (including routines, moves, rules, and norms) across
both projects and analyze teacher practice in the U.S. context to identify additional routines that can be used in
professional development workshops in conjunction with research-driven patterns. By addressing these issues in
two contexts,   we    hope   to  generate  insights into  how    to prepare   teachers to  become     more  proficient in
orchestrating collaborative discussions and in enacting contingent teaching with ICT in real-world classrooms.

References
Alexander, R. (2008) Towards dialogic teaching: Rethinking classroom talk, 4th edition. York, UK: Dialogos.
Alexander, C., Ishikawa, S., & Silverstein, M. (1977). A pattern language: Towns, buildings, construction. New
         York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Anderson, R., Anderson, R., Davis, P., Linnell, N., Prince, P., Razmov, V., & Videon, F. (2007). Classroom
         Presenter: Enhancing interactive education with digital ink. IEEE Computer, 9, 56-61.
Beatty, I., Gerace,   W.,   Leonard,   W.,  &   Dufresne,   R.   (2006).  Designing  effective questions   for classroom
         response system teaching. American Journal of Physics, 74(1), 31-39.
Cohen,  D.  K., &     Ball, D.  L. (1999). Instruction,  capacity,   and  improvement.    Philadelphia:  Consortium    for
         Policy Research in Education.
Conole, G., McAndrew, P., & Dimitriadis, Y. (in press). The role of CSCL pedagogical patterns as mediating
         artifacts for repurposing Open Educational Resources. In F. Pozzi & D. Persico (Eds.), Techniques for
         fostering    collaboration   in  online learning    communities:     Theoretical  and  practical   perspectives.
         Hershey, PA: IGI Global.
DeBarger, A., Penuel, W., Harris, C., & Schank, P. (2010). Teaching routines to enhance collaboration using
         classroom network technology. In F. Pozzi & D. Persico (Eds.), Techniques for fostering collaboration
         in online learning communities (pp. 222-244). Hershey, PA: IGI Global.
DiGiano,   C.,  Yarnall, L.,   Patton, C., Roschelle,   J., Tatar,  D.,   & Manley,   M.  (2003).  Collaboration  design
         patterns:    Conceptual   tools for  planning  for  the  wireless  classroom.  Journal    of Computer-Assisted
         Learning, 19(3), 284-297.
Dillenbourg, P. (2009). Exploring neglected planes: social signals and class orchestration. Proceedings of the
         9th International Conference on Computer Supported Collaborative Learning - Volume 2 (pp. 6-7).
         New Brunswick, NJ: International Society of the Learning Sciences.
Dimitriadis, Y., Asensio, J., Hernandez, D., Roschelle, J., Brecht, J., Tatar, D., Chaudhury, S., DiGiano, C., &
         Patton, C.   (2007).    From  socially-mediated    to technology-mediated    coordination:   A  study of design
         tensions   using   Group    Scribbles.  Proceedings     of the   8th International   Conference    on Computer
         Supported    Collaborative    Learning  (pp.  184-186).    New   Brunswick,   NJ: International  Society of   the
         Learning Sciences.

© ISLS                                                                                                                 524
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                               Volume I: Long Papers

Engeström,   Y.  (1987).  Learning   by   expanding:   an activity-theoretical approach  to developmental   research.
          Helsinki, Finland: Orienta-Konsultit.
Fishman, B., Marx, R., Blumenfeld, P., Krajcik, J., & Soloway, E. (2004). Creating a framework for research on
          systemic technology innovations. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 13(1), 43-76.
Goodwin, C., & Duranti, A. (1992). Rethinking context: An introduction. In A. Duranti & C. Goodwin (Eds.),
          Rethinking context: Language as an interactive phenomenon (pp. 1-42). New York, NY: Cambridge
          University Press.
Hernández, D., Asensio, J. I., Dimitriadis, Y., & Villasclaras, E. D.       (2010). Pattern languages for generating
          CSCL scripts: From a conceptual model to the design of a real situation. In P. Goodyear & S. Retalis
          (Eds.), E-learning, design patterns and pattern languages (pp. 46-64). Rotterdam, The Netherlands:
          Sense Publishers.
Kennewell, S., Tanner, H., Jones, S., & Beauchamp, G. (2008). Analysing the use of interactive technology to
          implement interactive teaching. Journal of Computer Assisted Learning, 24 (1), 61-73.
Looi,  C.  K., Chen,   W.   &   Ng,  F.   (2010). Collaborative  activities enabled   by Group   Scribbles  (GS): An
          exploratory study of learning effectiveness. Computers & Education, 54 (1), 14-26.
Nystrand, M., & Gamoran, A. (1991). Instructional discourse, student engagement, and literature achievement.
          Research in the Teaching of English, 25(3) 261-290.
O'Connor, C., & Michaels, S. (2007). When is dialogue "dialogic"? Human Development, 50, 275-285.
Penuel, W. R., & DeBarger, A. H. (2011, April). Supporting teacher learning to improve classroom assessment
          in science. Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the American Educational Research Association,
          New Orleans, LA.
Penuel,  W.,   Roschelle,   J., &  Abrahamson,      A. (2005).  Research    on classroom  networks   for whole-class
          activities. Proceedings of the IEEE International Workshop on Wireless and Mobile Technologies in
          Education (pp. 222-229). Los Alamitos, CA: IEEE.
Penuel,  W.,   Fishman,  B.,    Yamaguchi,   R.,  & Gallagher,  L.  (2007).  What  makes   professional  development
          effective? Strategies that foster curriculum implementation. American Educational Research Journal,
          44(4), 921-958.
Penuel, W. R., Beatty, I. D., Remold, J., Harris, C. J., Bienkowski, M., & DeBarger, A. H. (2010). Pedagogical
          patterns to support interactive formative assessment with classroom response systems. Menlo Park,
          CA: SRI International.
Prieto, L. P., Villagrá-Sobrino, S., Dimitriadis, Y., Jorrín-Abellán, I., Martínez-Monés, A., Anguita-Martínez, R.
          (2010).  Recurrent    routines  in  the classroom    madness:   pushing  patterns   past the  design phase.
          Proceedings   of  the 7th International   Conference   on Networked    Learning  (pp. 499-507).   Lancaster,
          UK: Lancaster University.
Roschelle, J., Knudsen, J., & Hegedus, S. (2009). From new technological infrastructures to curricular activity
          systems:    Advanced    designs for teaching  and  learning. In   Jacobson, M.  J., & Reimann,    P. (Eds.).
          Designs  for  Learning    Environments    of  the Future: International  Perspectives    from the Learning
          Sciences. New York: Springer.
Roschelle, J., Tatar, D., Chaudbury, S., Dimitriadis, Y., Patton, C., & DiGiano, C. (2007). Ink, improvisation,
          and interactive engagement: learning with tablets. IEEE Computer, 40(9), 42-48.
Slavin, R.E.   &  Lake,  C. (2008).  Effective    programs  in elementary   mathematics:  A   best-evidence synthesis.
          Review of Educational Research, 78 (3), 427-515.
Stake,  R. (2005).    Qualitative case studies.  In N. K.  Denzin  &   Y. S. Lincoln  (Eds.), The  Sage  handbook  of
          qualitative research (pp. 443-466). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Villagrá-Sobrino, S., & Prieto, L. P. (2011). The making of a routine catalogue. Valladolid, Spain: University of
          Valladolid. Available online at http://www.gsic.uva.es/~lprisan/Villagra2011_RoutineAnalysis.pdf
Wells, G., & Mejia-Arauz, R. (2006). Dialogue in the classroom. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 15(3), 379-
          428.
Winters, N., & Mor, Y. (2009). Dealing with abstraction: Case study generalisation as a method for eliciting
          design patterns. Computers in Human Behavior, 25(5), 1079-1088.

Acknowledgments
This material is based on work supported by the National Science Foundation under grant numbers 0713711 and
0822314,   the  Spanish    Ministry  of   Education  and  Science   project  TIN2008-03023/TSI,     and  Autonomous
Government of Castilla and Leon (Spain) projects VA107A08 and VA106A08. Any opinions, findings, and
conclusions or recommendations expressed in this paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the funding agencies. The authors thank the teachers and students of the CEIP Ana de Austria
school and Denver Public Schools for their participation, support, and significant contributions to this research.

© ISLS                                                                                                             525
