CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                         Volume I: Long Papers

Learning Design as a Medium for Scaffolding Teacher Learning and
                                                  Collaboration
                  Nancy Law, University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam Road, Hong Kong, nlaw@hku.hk
    Diana Laurillard, London Knowledge Lab, Institute of Education, 23-29 Emerald St, London WC1N 3QS,
                                                   d.laurillard@ioe.ac.uk
           Yeung Lee, University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam Road, Hong Kong, yeunglee@hkucc.hku.hk

           Abstract: Teachers implementing new curricula targeting the development of 21st century
           skills face the challenge of learning how to design learning experiences that align with the
           intended pedagogical approach. Curriculum reform initiatives expect that development will
           take place at least in part through teacher collaboration and sharing of curriculum resources
           through digital repositories. However, curriculum artifacts have not so far proved to be an
           effective    medium   for  teacher  collaboration.   This    paper argues   that the  teaching    profession
           suffers  from   not having    a shared professional      language  to  describe  and  communicate       their
           design   ideas,   and demonstrates     that  the provision    of   a design  language      and  format    that
           highlights the multilevel, multi-faceted aspects of a design helps to scaffold teacher discourse
           to  deeper     pedagogical    discussions.   On  the  basis   of   the findings   from     a  cross-cultural
           collaboration, we set out the implications for computer-supported collaborative learning for
           teachers, to enable more effective teacher learning and collaboration.

Introduction
There have been increasing pressures from businesses and governments to move education from a focus on
competence       in specific knowledge     and  skills  to developing    students'   information   literacy,  problem     solving,
collaboration     and     communication    skills--abilities    that are   generally   referred   to    as   21st century   skills
(Partnership for 21st Century Skills, 2003.; UNESCO, 2008). The demand is for education to produce graduates
who    are capable     of  knowledge  creation   and   innovation,   which    requires changes    in  the  goals,  curricula  and
processes     of  schooling  (e.g.  Kozma,    2008;   UNESCO,        2008; CERI,     2001).  In  response    to   such pressures,
education policy documents in many countries show a strong orientation towards more student centered modes
of learning and pedagogies that encourage students' active engagement in collaborative inquiry and the use of
ICT to support collaboration and inquiry (Pelgrum & Law, 2003; Plomp, Anderson, Law & Quale, 2009). These
changes can only be realized through deep changes in teachers' knowledge, beliefs and practice. It is thus not
surprising that many major curriculum reform initiatives are accompanied by significant investment to provide
support    for teacher     learning and  curriculum    development,     as  well  as  teacher   collaboration     and  sharing of
curriculum resources through digital repositories.
           In  Hong     Kong   (and  possibly  in many     other countries),    curriculum   and   professional      development
projects are expected to deliver, as an important outcome, curriculum artifacts generated by teachers and/or
researchers    that    can be  used   by   other  teachers  in  implementing      new   curriculum       and  pedagogy.    Hence
curriculum resources act as a kind of defacto medium for teacher collaboration and professional learning. On the
other hand, it has been observed that the adoption of open education resources is much lower than the amount of
materials that have been shared (1). So we have a somewhat contradictory observation that teachers complain
about lack of suitable resources for implementing new goals and approaches in the school curriculum, while
curriculum     resources   specifically  designed  for  teachers,    including  those  by   teachers,    are not  being   adopted.
Furthermore, even in cases where the curriculum artifacts are adopted by another teacher, it is often the case that
the use    is different   from how    it was  initially intended     or designed  for  in   the first instance    (Laurillard and
McAndrew 2003). Thus, curriculum artifacts have not proved to be an effective medium for teacher sharing, nor
have they been an effective medium for communicating pedagogy.
           The biggest challenge to teachers in implementing new curricula targeting the development of 21st
century    skills   is in  learning how    to design   learning  experiences     that align  with  the    intended   pedagogical
approach.     There    are three different    aspects  of  curriculum    design   on  which  teachers      typically  collaborate:
theories about learning and pedagogy, teaching and learning activities, and resources for teaching and learning.
While these types of teacher interactions are useful and important, they are not sufficient for negotiating the full
complexity of the learning design process. To ensure that learners are provided with learning opportunities to
achieve the targeted outcomes, teachers have to engage in design work at several different but interconnected
levels: the curriculum unit (or module), the sessions (or lessons) comprising the unit, teaching and learning
activities before, during and after a session, and the resources and tools to be used within a session. At each of
the design levels, the teacher has to give due consideration to the learning goals (content, skills and/or attitude),
pedagogical      approach   to be   adopted,  the nature   of   the  student  engagement    needed,     what  student-generated
content    needs    to be  specified, the  rubric or   criteria for  assessment,   and  the  kind     of feedback    that will be

© ISLS                                                                                                                         526
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                   Volume I: Long Papers

provided to the learner. In addition, the teacher needs to ensure that the different levels and facets of the design
are properly aligned to provide a coherent set of appropriate learning experiences (Biggs 2003).
          In this paper, we put forward the view that the teaching profession suffers from not having a shared
professional    language    to  adequately   describe   and   communicate      these  design  issues  and   decisions,     and
demonstrate    that  the provision   of a design   language   and  format   that highlights  the  multilevel,   multi-faceted
aspects of a design helps to scaffold teacher discourse to deeper pedagogical discussions. We will also discuss,
on the basis of the findings, implications for the design of technology support for learning design that will be
able to support more effective teacher learning and collaboration.

Context of the Study
The present study is conducted in the context of a university-school partnership project, titled Learning 2.0 (2),
which   aims   to  design   a curriculum  and   assessment    platform   to be used   to  support the  teaching    of  Liberal
Studies, a new, compulsory subject in the Hong Kong New Senior Secondary School Curriculum launched in
September 2009 (CDC & HKEAA, 2007). This subject was introduced by the Education Bureau to address the
issue  of an   over-emphasis    on  rote-learning. The    subject focuses   on fostering  students'  lifelong   learning   and
inquiry skills. The curriculum specifies a number of key concepts such as social mobility, quality of life and
globalization in the humanities, science and technology areas for students to develop a reasonable understanding
through   exploring    issues  emerging   from   contemporary    and  current  themes    and problems.  There    is no  a  set
textbook or content specification, but the curriculum specifies issue-enquiry as the pedagogical approach of
choice that teachers should adopt in teaching this subject. Furthermore, teachers are expected to play the role of
curriculum     and  assessment   designers   to develop   modules   to   implement   this issue-enquiry   approach     for the
achievement of the curriculum goals for this subject.
          The Liberal Studies Curriculum and Assessment Guide (CDC & HKEAA, 2007, to be referred to as the
C&A Guide) recommended some design principles on implementing the curriculum, with implications for how
issue-enquiry modules should be designed. First of all, these modules should provide contexts for students to
learn to integrate, apply, consolidate and broaden their foundational knowledge through engaging in in-depth
inquiry and reflection on contemporary issues connected with the selected contexts. Students should be exposed
to perspectives    and   concepts  essential  to the   understanding   of issues  of  human   concern,  and   develop     their
independent    and   lifelong  learning skills, values  and   attitudes, which   could be  transferred  and applied    to  the
understanding     of new    issues and  contexts. According    to the  C&A    Guide,   each  module   should    be organized
around    a central  concept   within   one  of  three areas  of  study  specified in  the   curriculum   (e.g. Society    and
Culture). Each module should identify questions for inquiry related to key themes (e.g. quality of life, rule of
law and     socio-political   participation) relevant  to  students'  lives, and   embody    perennial  issues   (i.e. issues
involving values that are important to students and society and underpinned much of the debates and conflicts
surrounding the problem context).
          The   Learning    2.0  project  is funded    by  the Hong      Kong  Quality    Education  Fund.    An   important
component of the project is to develop a Moodle-based (3) online learning and assessment platform (iLAP) (4)
that teachers can use to create online course-rooms for their students as an integral part of the teaching and
learning    activities   in the  Liberal  Studies  subject.   Participating   project  schools   identify key    teachers   to
contribute to the design and development of iLAP, as well as the design, implementation and evaluation of the
inquiry enquiry modules on this platform. Teachers involved in this project hold weekly meetings to discuss and
share module ideas and designs (all meetings are audio-recorded, and are used for the analysis reported in this
paper). They are also able to visit each other's actual course websites (referred to as course-rooms in the project)
on the iLAP platform. The iLAP platform enables the teachers in this project to collaborate and share the full
richness    of their teaching   designs  in  terms of  activities and    resources used   as well as  review    the   student-
generated work in these course-rooms.

Nature of Teacher Discourse on Designs Presented in the iLAP Course-rooms
Teachers in the network hold weekly project meetings and one of the regular items on the agenda is to share
design ideas and implementation experiences on the curriculum modules they have set up on iLAP. The teachers
are generally very interested in sharing their work and discussing ways of improvement. On the other hand, the
discussions were at a level that made it difficult to move the designs forward at a deeper pedagogical level. To
give some concrete illustration of the focus of the discussions, the following is a list of the issues/suggestions
raised in   one  of  the teacher   meetings  on  two   of the modules    designed  and   implemented   by  teachers    in  two
different project schools in June and July of 2010 (these two modules will also be the focus of our further
exploration on ways to enhance teacher sharing and collaboration later in this paper):
1.     Recommend the use of the forum function in "group discussion" activities, as this will allow the discussion
       to be commented on and assessed by peers and by the teacher using the built-in assessment function.
2.     Suggest getting students to work on the Wiki for consolidating what they have learnt through the module.
       The availability of the history function in Wiki will allow teachers to track students' contributions.

© ISLS                                                                                                                     527
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                     Volume I: Long Papers

3.     Suggest the use of Mahara on the iLAP platform for students to build a module folder
4.     It may be better to provide every student with his or her own individual Wiki page.
5.     The self-reflection tasks may be better done on paper.
6.     Which will be better for student learning: online forum v.s. a face-to-face debate?
7.     One  teacher   shared  a  generic rubric     on  critical thinking   and suggested     providing   such for students'
       reference as an implementation of the "assessment for learning" idea.
8.     Suggest getting students to answer questions from the C&A Guide as a after-lesson consolidation
9.     Students in some schools may not have the motivation to participate in collaborating on the wiki or in self-
       reflection activity
10.    The allocation of two weeks for the module limits the extent to which relevant iLAP tools/activities can be
       integrated into the module
         It  can be   seen  from  the  above    list that  the teachers  were   very  engaged   in  sharing  and  discussing
pedagogical    design  during    these meetings,     particularly  in relation    to the  effectiveness   of using different
technological tools for specific learning activities (points 1 to 6 of the above list). Points 7 and 8 were related to
assessment and learning activity design to enhance students' learning that could be applicable for the subject in
general. Point 9 was about the match between the motivation (and ability) of students and a specific type of
online activity. All these discussions were valuable, but were pitched at a very general level. Only point 10 was
about the specific feature of the particular module under discussion. Moreover, none of these discussions were
specific to designing issue-enquiry pedagogy as specified by the C&A Guide.

Comparing Learning Designs as Communicated through Artifacts in an Online
Course-room
The project research team was somewhat disappointed about the lack of more holistic discussions about module
level pedagogical design for issue-enquiry. In addition, the foci of the teachers' discussions for both of these
modules were very similar despite important pedagogical differences between them as perceived by the research
team. Further explorations reveal that the activity structures of these two modules were very similar as can be
seen from Table 1, which presents a summary of the information available in the two respective course-rooms.
Both identify a conceptual focus and generic inquiry skills as the learning goals and a current affair issue as the
context  for students'   exploration.  Both  started    with   using media   materials   (videos from   TV   broadcasts and
newspaper clips) to introduce the issue context and to stimulate student discussion. This was followed by group
discussions guided by a worksheet for a focal student activity in the module--a role-play in Module A and a
debate in Module B. Students were provided with a structured wiki to continue their group preparation at home.
Finally, after the focal activity, students were asked to complete a reflection activity. The total class contact time
was the same--five 35-minute periods. Module A has a double period in session 4. Sessions 2 and 3 in module
B were double periods. Upon detailed inspection, there are differences at the level of specific activities such as
the nature of the reflection task. It is apparent that these are the critical differences at the specific activity level
that constituted each teacher's focus of attention on these designs.

The Structure of a Pedagogical Pattern
It can be argued that what is being presented in the online course-rooms are not adequate representations of
teachers' curricular designs. The challenge to us is--what would be an adequate representation? We need a
common     format   that is capable  of  revealing     the similarities and  critical  differences  in teachers'   pedagogic
designs.
         A research project in the UK is developing a prototype for a `learning design support environment for
lecturers'  (LDSE)    (5)   with the   explicit intention   of   having an   impact   on  teachers' practice   in  designing
technology enhanced learning (TEL) by giving them the means to represent and share their design ideas. . In
this study, the two projects are collaborating to test the extent to which the prototype meets the requirements of
teachers who    need  help  with  making  good      use of  technology,   and  whether    it succeeds  in promoting   deeper
pedagogical discussions and more collaborations in pedagogical design.
         The requirements for a design pattern of any kind are that it must have a context, problem to be solved,
and a way of solving the problem (Goodyear 2005). For a pattern that captures a good pedagogic design, the
context is formal education, the problem is the learning outcome to be achieved, and the solution is the sequence
of teaching-learning activities that have been found to succeed in that. Representing pedagogy succinctly and
intelligibly is not easy. The current formats for representing learning design cover several parameters relevant to
the teaching context, such as rationale, roles, group size, etc., but they disguise the complexity of the pedagogy
by  placing  it  in a  single category   such    as  `sequence    of  activities' (Laurillard   and Ljubojevic,    in press).
Alternatively,  the   narrative  account of     the  learning  design   (6) is  detailed, but  difficult  to generalize and
customize   to  one's  own   context.  The  pedagogical      pattern  format   that  can  scaffold productive   pedagogical
discussions, professional collaboration and development has to unpack the sequence of teaching and learning
activities to expose the crucial features that makes a pedagogy work.

© ISLS                                                                                                                    528
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                               Volume I: Long Papers

Table 1: A comparison of two issue-enquiry modules as communicated through the iLAP online course room.

                                       Module A                                       Module B
 Module title         Fine-tuning of medium of instruction (MOI)       Understanding post-'80s youth through the
                      policy in Hong Kong                              high-speed rail conflict
 Learning goals       Understand the concept "quality of life" and     Understand the concept "political
                      learn generic skills of inquiry                  participation" and learn generic skills of
                                                                       inquiry
 Module               The change in language policy by the             Post-80s youth staging high profile
 context              Education Bureau in Hong Kong                    demonstrations against the construction of
                                                                       high-speed rail through a remote village
 Module level         Teacher generated handout containing             A group wiki on concepts for students to
 resources            definitions of key concepts, and list of key     write down and share the most appropriate
                      policy changes related to context                definitions of key concepts
 Session 1            · Video 1--an interview (for teacher             · Pre-session preparation--online
                        presentation)                                    discussion forum for students to discuss
                      · Group wiki/worksheet 1 on video 1 (for           issues related to the context and to
                        use in groups discussion)                        summarizes key views found in
                      · Video 2--an interview (for teacher               discussion in a group wiki
                        presentation)                                  · Handout 1 containing newspaper clips on
                      · Student worksheet 2 on video 2(for               context--teacher presentation
                        individual work in class)                      · Supervised group discussion to complete
                                                                         group wiki/worksheet
                                                                       · Video 1--a televised public debate--
                                                                         teacher presentation
                                                                       · Supervised group discussion to complete
                                                                         group wiki/worksheet
                                                                       · Post-session review--students read
                                                                         Handout 2 with more newspaper clips
                                                                         and complete online quiz
 Session 2            · Video 3--a TV feature on the policy            · Pre-session preparation--students read
                        change (for teacher presentation)                Handout 3 (newspaper article by one
                      · Student worksheet 3 on video 3 (for              post-80s activist)
                        individual work in class)                      · Supervised group discussion to prepare
                      · Political cartoon (for teacher presentation)     for role play using group wiki/worksheet
                      · Group wiki/worksheet 4 (for use in groups
                        discussion)
 Session 3            · Group wiki/worksheet  5    (used    in group   · Debate
                        discussions to prepare for role play)          · Group concept mapping as a part of
                      · Four sets of  newspaper    clips  ­ one  for     debriefing consolidation
                        each stakeholder in the role play
                      · Self-evaluation rubric for students to
                        assess their own preparation
 Session 4            · Role-play
                      · Evaluation rubric for assessing role-play
                      · Student to submit reflection essay (online)

         Our current template for a `pedagogical pattern' consists in the following categories of description:
   ·     Title ­ to capture the point of interest;
   ·     Learning outcome ­ to help the teacher decide if it is likely to fit their need;
   ·     Summary ­ similar to a brief abstract;
   ·     Sequence of teaching and learning activities (TLA) with the time needed for each ­ time on task is a
         critical aspect of pedagogic value;
   ·     The category of TLA each one falls into ­ to assist analysis and comparison;
   ·     A description of each TLA that reflects the core focus and critical aspect in implementation
   ·     The assessment used to evaluate learner attainment
   ·     Tools and resources needed ­ to promote the sharing of these across patterns, and to enhance them by
         embedding them in a pedagogical pattern
   ·     The designer's reflections ­ to promote reflective use and revision of the pattern

© ISLS                                                                                                              529
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                 Volume I: Long Papers

         A   pedagogical   pattern  is developed  initially from  a specific instance,   as that is where  the   effort of
design is to be found, where a teacher is intent upon achieving the best outcome for the learners they know, in
the topic they know. Once the teaching idea is articulated in a formal pattern description it is often easier for the
teacher to see what is missing or what could be improved, so this can be a useful exercise in its own right. An
example   is given    in Figure 1,  using a   pattern derived   originally  from  the iCOPER     project (7).  This was
developed for an initial teacher-training context, represented by the content details defined at the top: classroom
teaching,  photographing    key  situations,  and children's    engagement.    Each   of the content   items  is colored
differently  to highlight  specific aspects  important  to  the  particular instance  of the design.   For example   the
pattern in Figure 1 can be replaced with new content items, e.g. dental surgery, video recording, and patient
care, to adapt the pattern to a quite different professional development field (8). The essence of the pedagogy is
captured in the unchanging text, making it possible for good teaching ideas to be shared more easily across
discipline  boundaries.   The   colored  text in  the  activity  sequence   in Figure    1  indicates how  the   specific
curriculum aspects of the design are taken care of in the TLA sequence. The task for our collaborative project is
to test whether this approach works for teachers in schools, and whether they can use it to enhance the process
of exchanging ideas on pedagogic design.

 Figure 1. A `Pedagogical Pattern' Instantiated with the User's Content for an Initial Teacher-training Course.

Comparing Learning Designs Represented on a Design Template
A preliminary    pedagogical    pattern was   constructed   to capture the  essence   of the features  and pedagogical
decisions in the design of issue-enquiry modules for the present study. We identified five critical elements in the
pedagogical pattern--conceptual learning outcomes targeted (e.g. quality of life, political participation), generic
skills and attitude outcomes targeted (e.g. able to identify key points of debate, be open and listen to different
opinions), the issue context for the module (e.g. the Fine-tuning of the MOI policy in Hong Kong, construction
of the high-speed rail through a remote village), teacher-provided content (e.g. news media, assessment rubrics),
and student-generated content (e.g. wiki, online forum). Figure 2 presents a design template we developed for
use in this study to represent the designs for Modules A and B described above.
         The pedagogical patterns as constructed using this template highlighted important differences between
the two   modules.    For  Module   A,  there was  no   activity  that explicitly addresses   the   conceptual   learning
outcomes; generic skills was addressed through the assessment rubrics, focusing on students' presentation and
communication skills); and most of the activities were centered around the specific context--the impact of the
policy change on different stakeholders. For Module B, we see a gradually changing focus of the activities from
the specific context (construction of high-speed rail) to identification of the focus of the debate to linking the
debate to some key concepts related to political participation. There is a strong focus on developing students'
conceptual understanding through teacher-led discussions as well as the tasks designed for group discussion and
unsupervised individual student work.

Effect of Learning Design Representation on Teachers' Professional Discourse
In September 2010, six new schools joined the project as a second phase to scale up the innovation. Modules A
and B were presented to all of the participating teachers, most of whom are new to the project. In addition to the

© ISLS                                                                                                                  530
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                 Volume I: Long Papers

        Figure 2. A Design Template Used for Generating the Pedagogical Patterns for Modules A and B.

iLAP course room, the teachers were presented with the pedagogical patterns for the two modules and asked to
provide comments. From the pedagogical patterns, the teachers very quickly identified the difference in the
nature  of the  content  focus    for the two  modules.   A very   lively discussion  ensued   that covered  issues not
observed in previous discussions. The key issues raised by the teachers include:
1.     Module A could be improved through more appropriate consolidation activities such as asking students to
       write a short essay that explicitly reflect on the link between the MOI policy with the key concepts related
       to quality of life that the module wants to target.
2.     Students [in   module   A] should   be guided   to demonstrate   their   understanding of the targeted concepts
       through their discussions on the contextual issues.
3.     Module B is able to achieve a better alignment with the key conceptual outcomes targeted as students were
       guided to identify the conceptual issues underpinning the conflicts rather than simply identifying the view
       points on the contextual issues [as in Module A].
4.     Module B has a context/scenario-based design in that students are introduced to the context and issues
       before the  content.  This  design  is  better  as students will   first develop a stronger   empathy  with   the
       contextual issues, making the students feel that the conceptual issues are relevant to their everyday life.
5.     Opposing   viewpoint    to the  above   was  also   expressed--Module      A adopts a   deductive   approach  of
       introducing  the concepts   before  the context,   which could be   clearer  and more   explicit for students to
       follow, and is hence preferable to the inductive approach of first introducing the context.
6.     Some teachers think that both inductive and deductive approaches could work, but it is important for the
       teacher to be fully aware and be explicit about the approach that is being adopted.
7.     The current issues selected as the context of enquiry should not be the focus of enquiry in a Liberal Studies
       module--it only serves the purpose of stimulating explorations of the targeted conceptual outcomes.
8.     Current  issues  easily become     outdated and lose  their relevance.   There should   be continuity  from  one
       module to the next--we should find ways to check and ensure that students are able to apply the concepts
       learnt in one module to the analysis of issues in another, different context. This is the core design idea of
       the Liberal Studies curriculum.
9.     There is no need to address every relevant concept, skill and attitude in one lesson or in a single module.
       Sometimes it may be better if the teachers just focus on one focal learning outcome in one lesson.
10.    Teachers should pay close attention to the questions in the C&A Guide in designing learning tasks such as
       student discussions to ensure a better alignment with the targeted learning goals.
         There are two prominent features in this discourse. First of all, there is a strong focus on the alignment
between  the   targeted learning  outcomes    and  the design at individual     TLA and module    levels. Secondly,  the
discourse encompasses design considerations at activity, module and curriculum levels. Points 1 to 3 focus on

© ISLS                                                                                                               531
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                 Volume I: Long Papers

how the alignment could be improved through changes in the selection or implementation of individual learning
activities. Points 4 to 6 concern the sequencing of activities and the implicit pedagogical model underpinning
them,  which   is a   module    level   design  issue.  Point   7 addresses   a core  design  concern   in issue-enquiry
pedagogy--the role of context in a module. Point 8 goes beyond a single module to discuss the connection
between modules within the context of the whole curriculum. Point 9 is a design concept that could be applied
to the whole curriculum and point 10 refers explicitly to how the C&A Guide could be used in the process of
module design. This discourse is clearly much richer in terms of pedagogical design considerations compared to
the discussions on the same modules when the pedagogical patterns were not available. This is an indication that
an appropriately structured learning design representation can potentially make a difference to teachers' learning
and collaboration discourse in pedagogical design.
         We were also interested in teachers' views of the usefulness of the pedagogical pattern template in
supporting  teacher   sharing   and  collaboration.  Interestingly,  the response was   less than  positive. The general
feedback is that the template is not user-friendly, and the many colors (actually five was used, as presented in
Figure 2) in the text were somewhat overwhelming. The teachers were particularly concerned and reluctant to
use the  template  for   presenting  their  design. On   the   other hand, some  teachers commended     the  clear list of
important module descriptors that has to be clearly spelt out at the start of each module pedagogical pattern (the
colored text in the top box in Figure 2 are placeholders, which are replaced by specific content in actual module
patterns such as the patterns for Modules A and B presented to the teachers). The teachers also liked the clear
specification of the learning outcomes targeted for each TLA listed in the sessions. One teacher proposed using
a tabular format for listing the sequence of TLA and a separate column be created to identify the conceptual
focus for each listed TLA. One teacher also suggested that a table containing all the concepts and generic skills
listed in the C&A Guide should be made readily available for consultation by teachers when they work in iLAP
to construct the module course-rooms.

Discussion
The work we have reported here is just a preliminary exploration of whether and in what ways a pedagogical
pattern template may support deeper levels of sharing and collaboration on pedagogical design among teachers.
It is clear from the teachers' responses that the preliminary pattern template for issue-enquiry modules we have
constructed is far from perfect. On the other hand, the depth and richness reached by discourse is impressive,
considering  the  very   preliminary  nature    of this exploration.  This  work  reveals the need  for learning   design
support environments to scaffold teacher learning and collaboration if they are to take on more of the role of a
learning design professional and less as an instructor.

Learning Design as a High-level Professional Activity
Learning   design  is  a  complex    professional   activity,
which is multi-level and multi-faceted, as represented
in Figure   3. There   are design    considerations     to be
deliberated at  many   levels--from      entire curriculum,
module,   session,    activity, to learning  resource    and
technological   tool   to be    used (if applicable).   The
design at each level need to take account of a number
of  facets: the   learning    goals  to  be achieved,      the
pedagogical    approach    to   be adopted,  nature  of    the
student  engagement,      the kind   of  student-generated
content to be elicited, the criteria for assessment (and
rubrics  to be  used   if applicable),   and    the kind   of
feedback that needs to be provided to students. These
different facets need to be well orchestrated to achieve        Figure 3. The Levels and Facets of Pedagogical Design.
the design requirements at each level. These different
levels of design need to be consistent and aligned with each other. The teaching profession needs appropriate
learning design support environments to rise to the challenge of collaborating to improve pedagogical design.
         A recent contribution to the Foresight Report points out that teaching and learning is so complex an
enterprise that it needs the seamless integration of all the current forms of interactive, adaptive, informational,
virtual, communication,    collaborative,   and    presentational    forms of technology  currently in  use  (Laurillard,
Kolokitha, Mellar, Selwyn, and Noss 2009). While other design-focused professionals such as architects and
engineers have well developed conventions and tools for describing, constructing, sharing and communicating
designs, the same is not available for teaching professionals in relation to pedagogical design. This lack of a
commonly    adopted   convention     and tools  for learning   design  poses  serious obstacles to teacher   learning  and
collaboration, and consequently the speed with which pedagogical advances can be propagated.

© ISLS                                                                                                                  532
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                     Volume I: Long Papers

Adapting, Testing and Improving Learning Designs
If teachers are to articulate their developing knowledge of effective pedagogy, then they need to be not only able
to share and build on each other's work, but also to test it. This happens in the classroom every day, but if there
is a viable way of setting a design against theoretical principles for good design, then to some extent its quality
can be estimated in advance. A well-developed patterns template should contain all the information needed to
do that, because it tells us how learners are spending their time, on what kinds of activities, and how the balance
of their time is distributed across the different kinds of learning. The LDSE has an internal representation of the
pedagogic type of each activity in the pattern and, using the information about the respective times spent on
each activity, can interpret the nature of the whole pedagogical pattern as a pie-chart showing the distribution of
the kinds of learning it affords, whether through acquisition, inquiry, discussion, practice, or production, and the
distribution of learning outcomes these activities target. Building on the outcomes of the present study and the
patterns and design support tools that the LDSE project has developed, we hope to construct an issue-enquiry
pedagogical   patterns  support   system   that Liberal     Studies teachers     in Hong    Kong    can  use as a kind  of
microworld for learning design, to enable teachers to design-test-redesign before trying it on their students. And
because it also captures their design, they and their students can annotate it retrospectively, improve it, and then
publish and share it with their peers. In this way we hope to appropriate technology to scaffold professional
collaboration and sharing in learning design. A learning design support environment of this kind would offer a
specialized tool for teachers of a kind they have never had, that exploits the capabilities of the technology to
represent their decisions, interpret them and visualise the feedback. By representing the full complexity of what
teachers  do, in a    way  that remains   close to    their practice, and    yet also   challenges  it, they become   more
empowered to develop that practice, in collaboration with their peers.

Endnotes
(1)  For a discussion of issues related to low adoption, see http://opencontent.org/blog/
(2)  Details can be found at the project website http://learn20.cite.hku.hk
(3)  Moodle is an open source Learning Management System (LMS). Details can be found from http://moodle.org/.
(4)  iLAP   stands     for   interactive   Learning     and   Assessment      Platform.   Details   can   be   found   from
     http://learn20.cite.hku.hk/page.php?page=platform
(5)  See the project website at http://www.ldse.org.uk for more information.
(6)  Learning Designs http://www.learningdesigns.uow.edu.au/
(7)  ICOPER http://www.icoper.org/
(8)  Available for trial at tinyurl.com/ldsepatterns

References
Biggs, J. (2003). Teaching for Quality Learning at University. Buckingham: SRHE/OUP.
CDC & HKEAA (2007) Liberal Studies Curriculum and Assessment Guide. Hong Kong: Education Bureau.
CERI. (2001). What Schools for the Future. Paris, France: OECD.
Goodyear,  P.  (2005).     Educational   design and     networked   learning:    Patterns,  pattern languages   and  design
         practice. Australasian Journal of Educational Technology, 21(1), 82-101.
Kozma, R. (2008). ICT, Education Reform, and Economic Growth: A Conceptual Framework. IntelCorporation.
Laurillard, D., Kolokitha, M., Mellar, H., Selwyn, N., & Noss, R. (2009). Learning through life: The role of
         technology. London: Office of Science and Innovationo. Document Number)
Laurillard, D., & Ljubojevic, D. (in press). Evaluating learning designs through the formal representation of
         pedagogical patterns. In J. W. Kohls & C. Kohls (Eds.), Investigations of E-Learning Patterns: Context
         Factors, Problems and Solutions: IGI Global.
Laurillard, D. & McAndrew, P. (2003). Reusable educational software: a basis for generic learning activities. In
         A. Littlejohn (Ed.), Reusing Online Resources: A Sustainable Approach to e-Learning. London: Kogan
         Page.
Partnership for 21st Century Skills, (2003). Learning for the 21st century: A report and MILE guide for 21st
         century skills. Retrieved 8/11/2010,from http://www.21stcenturyskills.org/downloads/P21_Report.pdf
Pelgrum, W. J., & Law, N. (2003). ICT in education around the world: trends, problems and prospects. Paris:
         UNESCO: International Institute for Educational Planning.
Plomp,T., Anderson,R.E., Law, N., & Quale, A. (Eds.). (2009). Cross-national Information and Communication
         Technology Policy and Practices in Education (2nd ed). Greenwich, CT: Information Age Publishing
         Inc.
UNESCO, 2008 Towards information literacy indicators. Paris: UNESCO

Acknowledgments
The Learning 2.0 project in Hong Kong is funded by the Quality Education Fund. The UK LDSE project is funded by the
ESRC/EPSRC Teaching and Learning Research Programme in Technology Enhanced Learning (RES-139-25-0406). The
award of a HKU Overseas Fellowship made it possible for building the research collaboration between the two institutions.

© ISLS                                                                                                                   533
