CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                 Volume I: Long Papers

 Is CSCL the Missing Link between Education and the 21st Century
                                                  Economy?
   Jeremy Roschelle, Charles Patton, Yukie Toyama, SRI International, 333 Ravenswood Avenue, Menlo Park,
                                                     CA 94025 USA
             Email: Jeremy.Roschelle@sri.com, Charles.Patton@sri.com,Yukie.Toyama@sri.com

         Abstract: To foster discussion that links CSCL to policy and practice (per the conference
         theme), we ask: what can CSCL research contribute towards preparing learners for the future
         economy?      Building  on   the knowledge     base  we  developed    in a  2-year   research project
         involving    both   learning scientists and    economists, we   first briefly   review   some of    the
         challenges in establishing strong links from educational innovations to economic impacts. We
         postulate that the promise of linking CSCL to economic concerns requires shifting attention
         from goals of efficiency to goals that balance efficiency and innovation ­ yet the outcomes
         most   researchers   seek and  measure   still focus too much   on  efficiency.  To  further  catalyze
         discussion, we suggest more deeply theorizing innovation and developing assessments that are
         sensitive to cognitive diversity. We offer a definition of innovation tasks as those that require
         student  to  adapt   resources and expertise   to define and   solve  challenging   problems  for   the
         benefit of others.

Introduction
This year's conference theme is "connecting computer supported collaborative learning to policy and practice."
In China, as in other countries, policy leaders broadly see education as relating to the demands of a 21st century
economy. For example, the official report of the Seventeenth CPC Central Committee Plenary Meeting of the
Fifth which took place in October, 2010) pointed out that the next five years is the crucial period of economic
development of China. In order to promote long-term stable and rapid economic development, China's leaders
believe that China needs to further deepen the implementation of the "Rejuvenating the Nation through Science
and Education Strategy", encourage scientific and technological innovation, and improve the existing science
and    technology innovation    system    and  mechanism      to  speed  up    educational   reform   and  development
(http://tinyurl.com/ChinaEdEconPolicy).     Similar   beliefs are also  articulated  in the  U.S. National   Educational
Technology   Plan     (US Department    of Education,    2010)   which  opens  by    stating "Education   is the  key  to
America's economic growth and prosperity and to our ability to compete in the global economy."            A wide range
of policy documents from the range of geographic regions represented at a typical CSCL conference state this
policy concern (e.g. Committee on Science, Engineering, and Public Policy, 2007, OECD 2006).
         We acknowledge that CSCL researchers can adopt many valid rationales for their research, not limited
to economic    concerns.   Although   researchers  are  prone  to retell the   story of  educational  reform  in  purely
economic terms, a major concern driving educational reform in the United States one hundred years ago was
social assimilation of a booming immigrant population. At other times, nations have pursued reforms to increase
their ability to reproduce the best of their cultural accomplishments. In the civil rights era, the major goals of
educational reform were to increase the equity of access to educational opportunity. Although, transitioning to a
future economy need not be the only way to link CSCL to policy and practice; it does appear to be what is on
policymakers' minds right now.
         The   challenge   of connecting   CSCL   to  policy  through  the lens   of economic   concerns  offers  CSCL
researchers  a  chance    to  operate  in  "Pasteur's   Quadrant"   (Stokes,  1997)   -- to  conduct   research   that is
simultaneously foundational and applied to compelling societal needs. Much CSCL research emphasizes rather
foundational   concerns   with  how   we   can   analyze  collaborative  discourse   (Bohr's  Quadrant);   other  CSCL
research inventively explores the potential of new technology without necessarily advancing theory (Edison's
Quadrant). What would it take for CSCL researchers deeply operate in Pasteur's Quadrant where the compelling
societal need is the pressure leaders feel to prepare learners for an emerging Innovation Economy?
         We phrase this last question with deliberate caution, because we believe that it is easy to superficially
link CSCL research to a 21st century economy ("in the future, we all need to use technology and collaborate
more") while overlooking the very real gaps in our knowledge base and methods ­ for example, that almost all
CSCL research consists of cross-sectional studies (how students improve from pre-test to post-test over a short
time period) and we have almost no knowledge of whether CSCL-based improvements persist beyond the initial
intervention and have on-going longitudinal consequences in students' lives. If we are serious about operating in
Pasteur's Quadrant, we need to advance knowledge and methods to make links between collaborative learning
and the economic needs stronger and more plausible.
         To engage the community in discussing this challenge, this paper shares highlights of a much longer
manuscript   to  appear    in the  Journal  of   the  Learning   Sciences  (Roschelle,    Bakia,  Toyama,     &   Patton,

© ISLS                                                                                                                 542
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                             Volume I: Long Papers

forthcoming) and further develops themes of collaborative learning and innovation beyond what we wrote in
that paper. The JLS      paper represents the work  of  a team  of scholars with backgrounds   both in the learning
sciences and the economy to make sense of the existing literature, to probe the strength of existing evidence
linking education     and the  economy,   and to seek direction for  how to strengthen research in  the future. We
advance beyond that paper by focusing here on how we could more deeply theorize connections among CSCL,
innovation, and the needs of a 21st century economy.

Reconsidering Outcomes: Innovation and Efficiency
A focus on efficiency is pervasive in education and perhaps is most easily recognized by its distinctive pattern
of means-ends thinking. In an efficiency orientation, the end (the goal) of an educational reform is known and
set ahead of time--for example, we want to increase a particular test score. The question is how to accomplish
that end most efficiently. For example, in a paper (Roschelle et al, 2009) that won an award at the last CSCL
conference, we asked "will a mobile CSCL technology increase the efficiency with which students learn the
challenging  topic    of  fractions?" In this question, CSCL    is a means  and  the end is a  test score.  In  the
preponderance of CSCL research, the measured outcome is how efficiently (e.g. with lower standard deviation
and greater mean learning gains) did students achieve a defined knowledge or skill ­ and collaboration is seen as
a mediating process.
         A distinction between means-ends thinking and innovation goes back at least as far as John Dewey,
who distinguished between ordinary problem solving and inquiry (Dewey, 1938). In inquiry, the problem frame
itself is open to reconfiguration ­ new perceptions can be registered, new relationships formed, and new ends
visualized. More recently, work of the LIFE Center team has resulting in an understanding that efficiency and
inquiry are NOT in opposition or different modalities, but rather they can be two dimensions of the same flow of
activity (Schwartz, Bransford & Sears, 2005). In reviewing the literature on "adaptive expertise," the team found
that there is an "optimal corridor" of activity that balances between innovation and efficiency (Figure 1).

                                      Figure 1. The Optimal Adaptability Corridor.
                                    Source: Schwartz, Bransford, & Sears (2005).

         We suggest that a concept of CSCL as a better means to efficient educational outcomes (e.g. raising
today's standardized test scores) is highly unlikely to lead to lasting economic impact for participating children.
However, we will also not advocate a concept of CSCL that is only focused on helping children learn to be more
innovative. Instead, we suggest we need a CSCL that leads educators to be able to sustain long-term work with
learners in the optimal corridor. A reformed education system cannot focus children on efficiency in routine
problem solving (even through collaborative means) for a dozen years and then expect them to suddenly become
innovative. Likewise, innovation requires and builds upon certain kinds of efficiency ­ therefore, we believe
that a CSCL that offers isolated "innovation experiences" will have low net impact as well.
         Now  having      set the stage, we   broaden our perspective to consider  the general problem   of linking
education and the economy, and then, with this in mind, consider what steps the field might have to take to
move productively forward.

© ISLS                                                                                                           543
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                               Volume I: Long Papers

Difficulties in Linking Education and the Economy
In our JLS paper, which will be in print by the time of the conference, we problematize popular socio-political
discourse around education and the economy. This discourse operates by coupling a "fear of falling" with a
focus on education's contribution to the economy in isolation from other more powerful factors, such as the
quality of management, taxation regimes, regulatory environments, etc. If education were really the only factor
that produces wealth in a society, then it becomes hard to explain why Brazil has people who are educated
enough to build top-rated airplanes but not to run banks. Or why an automobile in Fremont, California went
from the least productive to the most productive without changing its US-educated workers (the plant changed
management    from    GM   to   a  joint effort of GM     and Toyota).   We   recapitulate three key    ideas from   our
problematization, to set a context for the rest of the paper.

Rank Is Not Likely to Be the Answer
One    commonplace      context in which    education is  linked to  the economy   is around  international   test  score
rankings, such as the rankings on TIMSS or PISA. A focus on rankings overemphasizes the mean differences
and underemphasizes the standard deviations. Indeed, newspapers tend to report national educational rankings
as if they were as straightforward as baseball team rankings, when in fact the margin of effort around these
rankings is so large that all one can really say is whether a country is in the top, middle, or bottom third. Second,
a focus on improve a national ranking tends to align with educational research that is purely aimed at efficiency.
Increasing mean scores is emphasized and decreasing societal gaps is de-emphasized even though gaps and not
means may be a more important driver of the economy, as argued by Goldin & Katz (2008).            More to the point,
cognitive diversity may be the most important innovation asset a society has and societies with high mean test
scores (e.g. in Asian) tend to struggle with how to unleash creativity and innovation. Just as medical research
has helped broad populations to understand the difference between good cholesterol and bad cholesterol, CSCL
may    have a role   in helping   societies  understand that  achieving  high standardization of  human     capital (and
correspondingly low standard deviations in test scores) may be counterproductive: there is a difference between
bad achievement gaps and good cognitive diversity.

The Answer Is Not Necessarily in School
Our literature review also found that employers tend to value social and collaboration skills very highly, once
students have achieved a sufficient educational credential (Bowles & Gintis, 2020). For example, in the Toyota
management    methods     that  improved     autoworkers  productivity   in the Fremont,    California  plant,  workers
collaborate to improve vehicle production quality. The Toyota management did not need higher math or science
scores to produce more innovative autoworkers; they needed workers who could solve problems collaboratively
(Lewis, 2004). Further, we observe that as tests such as PISA introduce more real world problem solving, the
test creators readily acknowledge that the tests are no longer measuring the quality of school; rather PISA is said
to measure    the  cumulative    learning   opportunities a  society  provides  to children  through    the age  of  15.
Consequently, it is not necessarily the case that the impact of CSCL that eventually reaches the economy must
be mediated by in-school learning experiences, nor of CSCL applications that focus on school-like knowledge.
It could be that CSCL's most important impacts will be felt outside of school. In a small example, one of the
authors  has   observed     the    effects   of  a  research-based    program    on   youth   sports    in  his    region
(http://www.positivecoach.org/);    by   emphasizing    collaborative improvement     of sports  skills and   teamwork
rather than "winning," sports have been transformed to provide an environment in which kids learn a lot more
about leveraging each others' diverse skills instead of focusing on the young star athletes.

Longitudinal Programs May Matter Most
Our literature review also noted that educational researchers tend to implicitly trust in "pipeline" concept; that
students are in a pipeline from childhood to productive STEM careers and that our job is to improve one section
of the pipeline. There are indeed a few studies that show that very positive early experiences can have dramatic
long-term   effects.  For example,  in   the famous   Perry Preschool  Study  (Schweinhart,  Montie,    Xiang,  Barnett,
Belfield, &. Nores, 2005), young children experienced a school setting that valued creativity and social skills as
well as academic skills and parent participation. Years later, the students had higher high school graduation rates
and achievement levels--and at age 27, participating students had high incomes than a comparison group (and
groups were initially assigned to the Perry Preschool Program randomly). However, by and large it is rare to
find longitudinal impacts from interventions that are designed only to increase a short-term measure and that are
only tested cross-section ally. Indeed, most educational interventions have very poor prospects for making any
noticeable difference longitudinally. Even more importantly, because we rarely measure longitudinal impacts,
our field would have no way of knowing whether our best designs influence participating students' trajectories
later in their studies or in their careers. We note that CSCL could have an advantage relative to subject matter
specific interventions; our approaches could span multiple subject matters and multiple years. To realize this
impact, we may need to focus less on improving a particular, short-term test score and more upon what it takes

© ISLS                                                                                                               544
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                       Volume I: Long Papers

to achieve consistent engagement in a productive CSCL environment over the course of many years and across
many topics.

Innovation and Efficiency in Existing CSCL Approaches
In this section,  we    discuss  three existing  CSCL     approaches   that  balance   goals of   innovation   and efficiency.
Subsequently,     we  discuss    how researchers   might   go    beyond   these  approaches   to  more    thoroughly   address
innovation.

Knowledge Building
Scardamalia     and  Bereiter's  knowledge     building   approach    (Scardamalia   &  Bereiter,    2006)  aims   at enabling
school  communities       to  attain a   knowledge     building    character   similar  to   that of    innovation-generating
organizations by providing teachers and students with an online environment called "Knowledge Forum" and a
set of pedagogical principals. In this approach, all ideas are viewed as improvable and students are seen as
capable  of   actively  participating  in  collective  idea improvement       process. The   online    communal    knowledge
spaces and discourse tools make the idea-improvement process visible to everyone, thereby enabling students to
contribute   to collective   knowledge    base just as  scientists    and professionals   of creative   work   do. To  capture
student  progress    in   Knowledge    Forum,    researchers  have    used   not  only  traditional   summative    assessment
measures     such as  standardized   tests (Scardamalia    et al., 1992)   but  also novel   formative   tools  such  as social
network    analysis   tools  (Teplovs,   Donohaue,    Scardamalia,     &   Philip  2007;   Zhang,    Scardamalia,     Reeve &
Messina,     2009). More    specifically,  the latter  type   of measures    capture   the degree    to which   students  take
collective cognitive responsibility (Scardamalia, 2002)--being aware of others' contributions, building on rising
above   or referencing    others' ideas,   and participating  in   top-level  planning  decision     making, and   community
coordination (Zhang, Scardamalia, Reeve, & Messina, 2009). These tools are not only used by the researchers
but are also offered to the teacher and students to gain just in time feedback that transform on-going practice
(Teplovs, Donohaue, Scardamalia, & Philip 2007).

Group Scribbles
Group   Scribbles   is  a CSCL    tool developed    by  SRI   International   in collaboration    with  the Learning   Science
Laboratory at the National Institute of Education, Singapore (Roschelle et al, 2007). Using Group Scribbles, a
classroom can type or use a style to write virtual sticky notes. These sticky notes can be stored privately, shared
with a team, or posted to a public display. The notes can be posted in flexible spatial configuration, and thus
meaning can be established by their relative position or position relative to a background image (such as a map,
diagram    or template).   Group    Scribbles  activities often  focus  deliberately   on  tapping   into cognitive   diversity
within a classroom. For example, in one common demonstration activity (Roschelle et al, 2007), students are
asked   to   generate   fractions   between    0  and  1.   Then   the    classroom  can    focus    on generating    multiple
representations of particular fractions that show the equivalence, for example, of 2/3 and 4/6. The variety of
representations that students create is often wider than those shown in a textbook and comparing the meaning of
2/3 across    representations  is a  very  powerful   cognitive    activity. Presently a   team   in Singapore  is scaling  up
Group   Scribbles    within   local  science   and  language     arts classrooms,    according    to  a Rapid   Collaborative
Knowledge Building (Ng, Looi, & Chen, 2008) approach that shares some similarities with Scardamalia and
Bereiter's knowledge building approach. Research with Group Scribbles in Singapore has found that it can both
improve    test scores    and dramatically    increase  the   students'   innovativeness   and    participation of  classroom
discourse. For example, students in GroupScribbles classrooms contribute more often and generate more unique
ideas, as well as being more likely to build on each others' ideas.

Productive Failure
In a   third example,   Dr.   Manu   Kapur   has  done    significant  research  establishing   the  concept   of  "Productive
Failure"   (Kapur,   2008).   In an  instructional sequence    organized     according  to  this  concept,  students  are first
placed in teams and given a difficult problem in the target domain of knowledge, such as "standard deviation" in
statistics. For two class sessions, they collaboratively struggle to solve the problem but ultimately fail. They then
receive two lectures on that present the target concept in manner that builds upon a learning progression from
students'  naïve  concepts    to  a more   expert  understanding.     Comparison     groups  receive   four lectures  from  an
equally   well-qualified     instructor.  In  Dr.  Kapur's    research,    students  in   "productive     failure" conditions
consistently    outperform    students in  more   traditional conditions,    particularly  with   regard  to more     advanced
understanding and transfer of what they have learned (Kapur, 2008). One can also imagine that if collaborative
"productive failure" was a more common feature of classroom instructional sequences, students would develop
great comfort with one of the maxims of innovators everywhere: "Fail early and often." Thus, although it is not
instrumented by a CSCL tool, productive failure provides another example of an approach that straddles the
optimal adaptivity corridor.

© ISLS                                                                                                                      545
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                 Volume I: Long Papers

A Modern Concept of Innovation
The existing approaches we have cited still stay fairly close to the assumptions we critiqued earlier. Results
focus  on  ranking    (which  approach    produced   higher   mean  learning gains?),   the context is  school, and  the
longitudinal impacts are rarely evaluated. Thus, we would suggest that the overall balance of the focus is still on
efficiency of   school  learning   in localized moments,     and not  on the   broader, long-term   gains in  innovation
capacity in a society's stock of human capital.
         To move beyond an efficiency perspective in connecting the economy to education, in general, and
CSCL    in particular, we   need   to  consider the  challenge   of the  other  dimension   of the  optimal  adaptability
corridor: innovation. What is required to meet the challenge of preparing our students to innovate? What are key
characteristics of tasks that would require students to innovate? What is required to support students in their
development of innovation capacity, that is, learn to innovate?
         In a rubric our colleagues at SRI are using to examine teacher assignments and student work developed
by schools, they have found this definition to be exceptionally productive:

         Tasks that require students to innovate are ones that require them to:
                     Adapt resources and expertise
                     To define and solve challenging problems
                     To benefit others

         The definition is inspired by research on what successful innovation looks like in the business world,
and by examination of SRI's experience with innovation over its long history. It is framed in terms of what
kinds of things we need to ask students to do (and support them in doing) if they are to be prepared to recognize
and participate in innovation in work, in life, and in learning. Unhappily, student opportunities to take on tasks
like these are quite rare, and, in the U.S. at least, those opportunities are quite inequitably distributed.
         Norton Grubb, in his analysis (Grubb, 2008) of longitudinal data linking a wide range of factors with
student success, makes the key theoretical distinction between simple and more complex resources The primary
simple resource, money, is a poor predictor of the quality of schooling (Hanushek, 1989). However, money can
be used for different purposes, and when school leaders use it and teachers to build more complex resources for
instruction,   those  resources  can   be quite relevant   to school  quality.  By complex,    we   mean  not that  such
resources are hard to understand or use, but that they have multiple interlocking aspects and that they often
require some amount of adaptation by local leaders and teachers ­ and, for innovation tasks, by students. Not
simply a novel pedagogical approach, for example, but such an approach together with access to external (and
possibly conflicting) expertise, mentoring, or coaching.
         In his book, "The Difference" (Page, 2007), Scott E. Page lays out a powerful theoretical framework
for understanding     the key  role   of cognitive diversity  in collaborative  problem-solving    and  innovation. The
components, mechanisms, and conditions of his theorem "Diversity Trumps Expertise" sheds light on all parts
of the above definition of innovation, but none more so than on the issue of adapting resources and expertise.
While we might suppose that in learning to adapt resources and expertise students would be learning to gain
new knowledge quickly and expand the range of experts' tools they had available to them. And these, of course
are good and important things. However, these are not at the heart of the matter. Embedded in both the resources
and the expertise are a diversity of perspectives (more precisely, topologies) applicable to the problem space at
hand. It is the iterative (and non-destructive) application of diverse perspectives ­ either by the individual or, as
Page   has it, collaboratively  ­  that  powers  the triumph   of  diversity over  expertise ­  for hard  problems  like
innovation - and informs our view of adapting resources and expertise.
         SRI's CEO, Curt Carlson, in his book on Innovation (Carlson & Wilmott, 2006) makes a strong case
that an essential element of innovation not simply problem solving, but equally problem identification. Speaking
economically,   an    innovation   is only as  significant as  the  problem  it solves.  The   discipline of identifying
problems, and iteratively validating, reframing, and revising them with the goal of perfecting their importance
has clear value. Moreover, importance is a reasonable proxy for the "hard" or "challenging" condition of Page's
theorem. In important problem that not also "hard" is not likely to be a problem for long. Both of these inform
our view of the role of students self-defining the challenging problems.
         No caring teacher would assign tasks at which their students would be assured to fail. And yet in tasks
for which innovation is required, local failure is inevitable even while long-term success is assured. Even if
students are adept at perfecting important problems, and adapting resources and expertise to leverage cognitive
diversity, local "failures to advance a solution" are endemic to the process. Page's theorem assures that from
some perspective, an advance is nearby and reachable with the available tools, not that from every perspective
such an advance is at hand. Many perspectives will lead one in what can be seen, in retrospect, as exactly the
wrong   direction -   but only  in retrospect.  Testing and   validating these  potential advances  to  a solution, then
learning from and valuing them ­ whether they advance the solution directly or not ­ this is an aspect of solving
challenging    problems   we  term    "productive  failure."  Outside of school   settings, it is  well understood  that

© ISLS                                                                                                               546
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                    Volume I: Long Papers

productive failure itself, especially when combined with problem (re-)identification, can be powerful driver of
innovation (as in the classic story of the invention of Post-It® Notes.) But in school, the challenge of engaging
students in solving important problems remains one of teaching and managing productive failure.
          It may  seem   odd  to see   the final clause  ­  "to benefit others"   - in a  rubric  inspired  by  research   on
innovation in the business world, but through the writings of Doug Engelbart, and research by our colleagues at
SRI  on   the social  aspects of    innovation,  we  have   come  to   understand   that  its importance    ­   from   social,
cognitive, and, frankly, practical perspectives. From the business perspective, as noted, an innovation is only as
significant as the problem it solves. And that significance does not belong to the innovator but to the owner of
the problem ­ the customer. It's not an innovation unless, and until, it "adds value" for the customer. But that's
not the end of the story. In problem identification, a particularly powerful use of cognitive diversity is "seeing
the  problem    through the  eyes   of the intended     beneficiary." Moreover,     as Page   points out,   while   cognitive
diversity trumps expertise, goal diversity (diversity in "utility" or "goodness" metrics on potential solutions)
wreaks  havoc   on    collaborative problem-solving.     Externalizing  the  beneficiary  provides   a   transparent   ­  and
validatable ­ approach to achieving commonality of "goodness" metric across all the collaborators, and enabling
the development of a trust network among participants. All of these inform our view of the role of externalizing
benefits of innovation.
          We observe that a deeper view of innovation would distinguish a CSCL of innovation from a CSCL
that purely focuses on "shared meaning" or a "community of practice" as well as from more generic accounts of
21st century skills. We suggest that further developing a CSCL of innovation would more strongly address issues
of policy and practice.

Assessment: A Key Challenge on the Road Ahead
To develop a CSCL that more tightly links to innovation and the economy, we believe that CSCL researchers
will have to focus on developing assessments that capture the qualities of "Human Capital" we are developing
beyond academic knowledge and skills.            For example,   CSCL    researchers    need   to continue   developing    and
refining assessments to capture student capacities for collaborative problem finding and problem solving. Some
of  these assessments    need  to   be summative     in  nature for   accountability   purposes,    but  others need   to  be
formative,   providing  meaningful     feedback  to  teachers,  students, and  designers    of   learning  environments    to
improve   their on-going  practices.   Additionally,    these assessments    need   to be able   to capture  not   only  pre-
determined set of student knowledge, skills, and abilities, but also their emerging capacities as they engage in
CSCL. Two lines of work are particularly noteworthy to further advance this effort. First is "preparation for
future learning" (PFL) approach to assessments. This approach reconceptualizes the idea of transfer from direct
application of well-defined routines and facts to students' abilities to learn in a new setting with greater agility
and success (Schwartz & Bransford, 1998; Schwartz, Lindgren, & Lewis, 2009). To accomplish this, learning
environments    must  balance  goals   of  "efficiency"  and  "innovation"   (Schwartz,   Bransford,     &  Sears,  2005)  in
order  to help  learners become     "adaptive   experts"  (Hatano,    1988). Schwartz,    Bransford,    and Sears   not  only
theorized about innovation and efficiency, but they also introduced a measurement paradigm for "preparation
for future learning," allowing measurement of the extent to which an environment prepares students for future
learning. Assessments based on the PFL approach may provide opportunities for students to try out hunches to
"find" or "frame" a problem, receive feedback, and revise their work using the feedback. Such assessments may
also focus   on learning  process   and    trajectories by, for example,     evaluating  the  sophistication    of  questions
learners ask about a topic or assumptions that they reveal in their discussions (Bransford et al., 2006). Data from
such assessments are likely to provide better linkage between learning and innovation.
          A second line of work that is noteworthy is the ongoing work by Knowledge Forum researchers to
develop computer-assisted content analysis tools to visualize group cognition (Sha, Teplovs, & van Aalst, 2010;
Teplovs & Scardamalia, 2007). This work employs Latent Semantic Analysis and Social Network Analysis to
create  a visual  representation    of student-generated    notes in   terms  of  their  structural  as  well   as  semantic
relationships. Uniqueness of this approach lies in its focus not only on the surface relation between student
actions (i.e., note reading and writing) but also on the relation between student ideas. The approach also takes
advantage    of computer-automated      processes    to  reduce  labor  intensity   required   for  this  type  of  analysis.
Resulting visualizations enable one to assess how student online discussions are unfolding in terms of shared
mean making and weather their ideas are becoming more coherent with one another over time. Moreover, the
tools enable an examination of similarities between student discourse and the curriculum guidelines or expert
discourse.

Conclusion
In this paper, we asked what it might take for CSCL researchers to operate more deeply in Pasteur's Quadrant,
with   foundational   advances   in understanding    of  collaborative  learning    and   important  policy     and   practice
advances   with  respect to  developing    human    capital for the   evolving economy.     We    noted   that  it is easy to
superficially advocate a constellation of collaboration and technology as relevant to the future, but more difficult

© ISLS                                                                                                                     547
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                 Volume I: Long Papers

to establish  an actual causal   chain from    the kind  of research  we do   to the pressing questions    of  policy and
practice.
          We have argued that for CSCL to link education to the economy, the field could productively focus on
the optimal adaptivity corridor ­ the balance between goals of innovation and efficiency in the approaches we
advocate. This focus would downplay a view of CSCL as a means only to achieving higher mean knowledge
gains or to reduce standard deviations in knowledge and thus further standardize our stock of human capital.
When trying to show a statistically significant effect, a large standard deviation is bad. But not all cholesterol is
the same, and neither is all spread among learners to be minimized; indeed respecting and growing cognitive
diversity may be one of the most important factors in increasing the innovativeness of a society.          Thus a future
CSCL    might  downplay     rankings  as the   key  measure   we  seek  to influence   and instead   provide   alternative
measures   of  the cognitive   diversity we    are nurturing  and growing,   as  well  as the growth    in collaboration,
teamwork, and problem solving skills which are much desired by employers. We suggest a concurrent need to
focus our efforts longitudinally and beyond school.
          We   have   highlighted that   this pathway   for  CSCL  is  grounded   in  established  foundations   through
approaches like Knowledge Building, tools like Group Scribbles, and instructional sequences like Productive
Failure. Further, we have argued that insights from research on innovation in the workplace could more strongly
influence and direct the future of CSCL. For example, we have suggested a definition for innovative tasks that
has emerged across multiple projects at SRI: innovative tasks require students to adapt resources and expertise
and to  define  and   solve challenging  problems    for the  benefit others. We   have   further suggested    that a key
challenge  for   a CSCL     of innovation   is to  advance   assessments   so that   we can   better measure    students'
longitudinal growth in innovation capacity.
          We see the opportunity for this conference in Hong Kong to mark a turning point in the relevance of
CSCL to policy and practice. As our contribution to doing so, we suggest that CSCL needs to acknowledge the
strength of its past, but also move beyond a CSCL that is merely about learning gains on standardized tests,
increased shared meaning among dyads and enculturation in to a disciplinary community of practice. We need
to move towards a CSCL of innovation that respects cognitive diversity, emphasizes longitudinal development
of human capacities, and connects more deeply to insights about how "innovation" is more than a generic 21st
century skill. By doing so, we could give policy makers theory, tools, and exemplars of what it would mean to
truly  prepare students   for  their future   and  give practitioners insights   about  how   to balance   the  needs for
efficiency and innovation in their students' learning.

References
Bowles, S., & Gintis, H. (2002). Schooling in capitalist America revisited. Sociology of Education, 75(2), 1­18.
Brown,    A.  (1992).  Design   experiments:    Theoretical   and  methodological     challenges  in  creating  complex
          interventions in classroom settings. The Journal of Learning Sciences, 2(2), 141-178.
Bruner, J. (1999). Postscript: Some reflections on education research. In E. C. Lagemann & L. S.
Shulman (Eds.), Issues in education research: Problems and possibilities (pp. 399-409). San Francisco: Jossey-
          Bass Publishers.
Carlson, C. R. and W. W. Wilmot (2006). Innovation: the five disciplines for creating what customers want.
New York: Random House.
Dewey, J. (1938). Logic: The theory of inquiry. New York, NY, Henry Holt.
Ehrenreich, B. (1990). Fear of falling: The inner life of the middle class. New York: Perennial.
Goldin & Katz (2008). The race between education and technology. Cambridge, MA: Harvard.
Grubb,  W.   N.  (2008).  Multiple   resources,    multiple outcomes:  Testing   the  "improved"   school   finance   with
          NELS88.     American   Educational    Research    Journal,  45(1),  104-144.Hanushek,      E. A.  (1989).   The
          impact of differential expenditures on school performance. Educational Researcher, 18(4), 45­62.
Hawkins, J., & Pea, R. D. (1987). Tools for bridging the cultures of everyday and scientific thinking. Journal
          for Research in Science Teaching, 24, 291-307.
Kapur, M. (2008). Productive failure. Cognition and Instruction, 26(3), 379-424.
Lave, J. (1987). Cognition in practice. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Lewis,  W.   (2004).  The   power of  productivity:  Wealth,   poverty, and   the threat  to global  stability. Chicago:
          University of Chicago Press.
Ng, F.K, Looi, C.K., & Chen, W.L. (2008). Rapid collaborative knowledge building: Lessons learned from two
          primary science classrooms. Proceedings of ICLS 2008, Utrecht, Netherlands.
Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development, OECD. (2006). The economics of knowledge: why
          education is key for Europe's success. Paris: OECD.
Page, S. (2007). The difference: How the power of diversity creates better groups, firms, schools, and societies.
Princeton University Press, NJ.
Roschelle, J., Tatar, D., Chaudbury, S., Dimitriadis, Y., Patton, C., & DiGiano, C. (2007). Ink, improvisation,
          and interactive engagement: Learning with tablets. Computer, 40(9), 42-48.

© ISLS                                                                                                                 548
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                              Volume I: Long Papers

Roschelle, J., Rafanan, K., Estrella, G., Nussbaum, M.& Claro, S. (2009). From handheld collaborative tool to
         effective classroom module: Embedding CSCL in a broader design framework. Proceedings of the 9th
         international conference on CSCL.
Roschelle, J.,  Bakia,  M., Toyama,    Y., &   Patton, C. (forthcoming). Eight  issues  for learning scientists about
         education and the economy. Journal of the Learning Sciences. Accepted for publication.
Scardamalia, M., & Bereiter, C. (2006) Knowledge building: Theory, pedagogy, and technology. In K. Sawyer
         (Ed.), The    Cambridge     handbook   of the  learning    sciences (pp.  97-117). Cambridge:   Cambridge
         University Press.
Scardamalia,   M.,    Bereiter, C., Brett, C., Burtis, P.J., Calhoun,  C.,   & Smith   Lea, N. (1992).  Educational
         applications of a networked communal database. Interactive Learning Environments, 2(1), 45-71.
Schwartz, D. L., Bransford, J. D., & Sears, D. L. (2005). Efficiency and innovation in transfer. Transfer of
         learning from a modern multidisciplinary perspective, 1-54.
Schweinhart, L.J., Montie, J., Xiang, X., Barnett, W.S., Belfield, C.R., and M. Nores. (2005). Lifetime effects:
         The High/Scope Perry Preschool study through age 40. Ypsilanti: High/Scope Press.
Sha, L., Teplovs, C., & van Aalst (2010). A visualization of group cognition: semantic network analysis of a
         CSCL community. ICLS '10 Proceedings of the 9th International Conference of the Learning Sciences.
Stokes, D. (1997). Pasteur's quadrant: Basic science and technological innovation. Washington, DC: Brookings
         Institution Press.
Teplovs,  C.,  Donoahue,    Z.,  Scardamalia,  M.  and  Philip,  D. (2007).  Tools for Concurrent,   Embedded,   and
         Transformative Assessment of Knowledge Building Processes and Progress. Demonstration presented
         at CSCL 2007.
U.S. Department of Education. (2010). Transforming American education: Learning powered by technology.
         DRAFT        National    Education    Technology    Plan    2010.    Retrieved  May     17,   2010,    from
         http://www.ed.gov/technology/netp-2010.

Acknowledgments
We thank   our  colleagues      who  participated with  us   in the Learning   Sciences and  the Economy   project,
particularly Marianne Bakia. In addition, thanks to Manu Kapur for spending time with us in Singapore.

© ISLS                                                                                                             549
