CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                Volume I: Long Papers

Technology-mediated Reflection and Peer-exchange: Supports for
                Teacher Professional Development Communities
   Cheryl Ann Madeira, James D. Slotta, University of Toronto, 252 Bloor Street West, Toronto, ON, Canada
                            Email: cheryl.madeira@utoronto.ca, jslotta@oise.utoronto.ca

         Abstract:    This  design-based    research study   investigates the development    of   pedagogical
         content knowledge (PCK) among nine teacher-participants in three design phases. PCK is a
         particular type of teacher knowledge that addresses not only the teacher's understanding of the
         content to be instructed, but also ways of how to teach that content effectively. This paper
         offers a detailed perspective on how teachers developed PCK with their engagement in lesson
         planning and enactment of a project-based technology-enhanced lesson in relationship to their
         actions in    the class. The    study includes   two  specific  interventions designed   to  enhance
         teachers' development of PCK: (1) scaffolded reflection, and (2) peer-exchange. The findings
         presented    in this paper  focus  on  the impact  of the  peer  exchange  intervention, which   was
         achieved     through  an  online   community,    combined   with  face-to-face  meetings.    Results
         demonstrate a positive impact of such exchanges on the quality of teachers' lesson designs
         and enactments.

Introduction and Objectives
How can teachers be supported as they develop their expertise and craft knowledge? Judith Warren Little (2002,
p 2) comments, "Long-term observers of educational innovation and school reform have argued that reform
might more productively be seen as a problem of learning than as a problem of implementation. That is, the
progress  of  reform   appears    to reset  in crucial  ways   on  the  capacity of teachers,  both   individually and
collectively." Often, teacher learning happens in workshops where the topics are selected in a top-down fashion
by school boards and ministries of education and lack any explicit connections to what teachers may already
know, or any clear approach to engaging them in learning about their practice. In recent years, many educational
and cognitive researchers have identified the pivotal role that teacher knowledge and expertise plays in student
learning  within an   inquiry-based   environment   (Davis   &  Krajcik,  2005;  Driver, Asoko,   Leach, Mortimer,   &
Scott, 1994;  Fishman,     Marx,  Best,  &  Tal,  2003).  How   can  CSCL   technologies  and  methods   support   their
exchange of ideas, strategies and artifacts about their practice? This paper presents a longitudinal study of a
technology-enhanced environment that supported teachers in the online exchange of their ideas and experiences,
strengthening their learning of complex practices and their development of community. This design-based study
investigated a teacher professional development community and the role that scaffolded reflections and peer-
exchange has in teachers' growth of professional knowledge and practices.
         Traditionally, teachers have tended to learn through isolated and informal circumstances, disconnected
from dialogue or discussion with peers. However, in the Web 2.0 era, social exchanges play a more central role
in learning, and  technology    has   changed   the ways  in   which learners make   sense  of the   world  (Collins &
Halverson,   2010).   The   research   literature identifies   two  important   mechanisms   for  teacher   knowledge
development ­ namely reflection and peer exchange. Reflection is a cognitive process that helps learners to
construct their  own     coherent understandings    (Davis,  2006;  Linn  & Slotta, 2006).   Through   peer  exchange,
teachers can share ideas and experiences that lead to insights they may not otherwise have recognized (Davis,
Smithey,  &  Petish,   2004).  Technology    can  offer new  ways   for teachers to reflect on their  practices as they
engage in complex activities (Collins & Halverson, 2010) and new ways to interact within a community of peers
(Slotta & Linn, 2009) as it provides a temporal space for the exchange of lesson plans, enactment strategies and
epistemological understandings about student knowledge and learning.
         This   research   examines    a computer-supported     teacher   community    where   members    co-designed,
enacted,  and revised    project-based,  technology-enhanced      science lessons.  The  teachers were   scaffolded  in
online  and  face-to-face  reflections   and   exchanges  that were  designed   to connect  directly  to their  relevant
professional practices (i.e., lesson planning and lesson enactment). The impact of scaffolded reflections was
examined during three stages: (1) teacher lesson planning, (2) enactment, and (3) revision of lesson. The impact
of peer  exchange     was  investigated  by  establishing a  co-design  and discussion   process  for lesson planning,
enactment and revision. Using a wiki layer and accompanying Web site, these two interventions (reflection and
peer exchange) were studied through multiple design iterations. This paper provides a rich description of how
individual teachers developed understandings within this context, contributing to our understanding of situated
collaborative learning, and offering insight to models of teacher professional development.

© ISLS                                                                                                               558
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                 Volume I: Long Papers

Theoretical Foundations

Teacher Knowledge and Professional Development
Teachers' Pedagogical Content Knowledge (PCK), critical to the successful adoption of any innovative methods
or materials,   is defined   as   the blend   of  the their  understanding   of  content   within subject   domain,  the
epistemological characteristics of learning within their subject domain, and the specific pedagogical practices
and characteristics   of  their  subject  domain  (Shulman,  1986,  1987;    Borko  & Putnam,    2002;  Gess-Newsome,
1999; Loughran, Berry, & Mulhall, 2006). While the tacit nature of PCK, as connected to complex teacher
actions within the classroom, hinders efforts to assess or evaluate it, there are several factors that are thought to
influence its development, including teacher lesson planning (Magnusson et al., 1999), and teacher reflection
(Park & Oliver, 2008).     Recently, another form of teacher knowledge, namely technology pedagogical content
knowledge (TPCK), has been advanced to describe knowledge that enables the navigation through the complex
relationships of content, pedagogical and technology knowledge (Koehler, Mishra & Yahya, 2007). Teacher
knowledge    can   be  difficult  to measure   in the  course of   any  study   of classroom   practice or  professional
development. There are some metrics that have been used to document teacher perceptions and beliefs about
their own teaching and instructional practice (Loucks-Horsley & Matsumoto, 1999; Stuessy & Metty, 2007).
Across a wide spectrum of research on teaching practices, two kinds of interventions have been seen are seen as
effective in  both  monitoring    and    influencing teacher learning:  reflection and  peer-exchange   (Slota &  Linn,
2009). The next two sections of the paper provide a brief review of such research, which sets the context for our
own study of these two important interventions.

Scaffolded Reflection
A  substantial  body   of professional    development   literature has  focused on  reflective practice  as a  means of
enabling the growth or development of teacher knowledge (Barnett & Coate, 2005). Schön (1983, 1987) offered
a theoretical perspective about the growth of teacher knowledge during the course of professional practices,
where the silent reflections occurring within the context of classroom activities make knowledge construction
tacit. For example, if something catches a teacher's attention during class (e.g., a student misinterpretation of a
concept), the teacher may recognize that moment as being significant and ponder on possible changes for the
next class or the next iteration of the lesson. While such tacit reflections are likely an integral part of many
teachers' practice (McNamara, 1990), limited time is provided for teachers to engage in deliberate reflections
that are explicitly linked to classroom events, such as in reflecting about why some lessons are successful and
why some are not (Raines & Shadow, 1995). This study recognizes the limitations in reflective practice and uses
technology to scaffold and structure reflections that target various teaching practices of planning, enactment and
revising of lessons. This type of reflective practice draws on an understanding of scaffolding for reflection, a
general  process   where  learners    are supported   with  technology-based    prompts  or tools that  enable  them to
achieve knowledge that might otherwise be ignored (Slotta & Linn, 2009; Fishman et al., 2003).

Teacher Communities and Peer-Exchange
The notion of a peer community suggests opportunities for social interaction, mutual dependence, and group
identification, with (in the case of teachers) possible connections to classroom events (Westheimer & Kahne,
1993).  Such  a structure,   should   it ever be  achieved,  could be   seen as reflecting Lave   and Wenger's   (1991)
notion of a Community of Practice, in which participants' knowledge of practice is rehearsed both explicitly and
implicitly.  Palinscar et al. (1998) have suggested that if learning, thinking, and knowledge construction are
inextricably  connected   to  social  contexts,  then providing opportunities   for teachers to   engage in meaningful
deliberation, interaction, and reflection within a community of peers would help to nurture their practice and
professional development.
          Following other approaches to establishing online communities, such as MERLOT (McMartin, 1997),
Tapped    In (Schlager    et al., 2004)   and   MSPnet  Hub   (Falk   &   Drayton,  2004),  this  study  defined online
community as a persistent space for teachers to share approaches and interact with peers, serving not only as a
digital resource, but a virtual space for collaborations (i.e., in lesson planning) and reflection (i.e., regarding
lesson  enactment).    Participation     or engagement   within    such a community    can  be   measured   in terms of
contributions of materials (e.g., lesson plans, reflections or comments) and engagement in peer exchange (e.g.,
adding comments to one another's postings).           Such online resources can help teachers to connect with peers
across physical distances and asynchronously, allowing access for a wide range of participants.           In the present
study, the community consisted of a wiki, with an accompanying website, providing a space for persistent and
continuous knowledge for the teachers to draw upon.

Methodology
This three-year, iterative, design-based study investigated teacher professional development as it occurs in the
rich context of a curriculum-design community, where nine science teachers (N=9) each designed, enacted, and

© ISLS                                                                                                               559
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                    Volume I: Long Papers

revised a technology-enhanced project-based lesson.           The lessons were designed according to a generic set of
characteristics  for  Project-Based    Learning    (Laffey   et al., 1998;  Blumenfeld    et al., 1991)  and  used   various
technologies   including    productivity    software  (e.g., Microsoft    Office), visualization   tools (e.g., Inspiration)
social technologies (e.g., wikis or blogs) and interactive learning environments (e.g., WISE: The Web-based
Inquiry Science Environment). This study focused on the role of two primary forms of intervention in teacher's
development    of    PCK:   reflections   and  peer-exchange    within   a  community.    Iteration 1 included   scaffolded
reflection and limited community. In Iteration 2, design improvements included improved scaffolded reflection
(more deliberate to project-based learning and content), and introduced peer-exchange.

Participants
There were nine science teacher participants (N=9)
with    a  range     of   experience    and    disciplinary
expertise    (i.e.,  physics,    biology,   chemistry,   or
general   science).   Figure  1   illustrates  participants'
teaching   experiences    and    subject  expertise.  They
were selected based on their expressed interest and
content knowledge, and were surveyed about their
initial understandings     of  project-based     instruction
and  technology.     Teachers    came    from   5 different
schools   located    in a  large    urban   city  in North
America    and  had   access  to  a  fairly wide  range  of
technology    supports    (i.e.,  as  provided    by  their
schools).    The teachers and research-mentor formed
a  co-design    team.       The     research-mentor     was   Figure 1. Teacher Participants      - Years of Experience and
doctoral     student    who   also   had    17    years  ofexperience teaching in secondary science classes.Subject Expertise.

Materials
Pre-survey    and   Interview:   In order   to establish a measure    of teachers' background     and pedagogical    content
knowledge, a pre-survey was administered to all teachers, followed by an interview for purposes of clarification
and  to orient  the  teacher   to the study.   The   following  questions   were   among  those   given  to teachers before
starting the research project: (1) What are some of your best learning experiences and why do you think they
were important?; (2) What are some of your visions within your science classroom?; (3) What are some of your
previous project-based lessons that you have conducted?
          Lesson Plan Template: A wiki site was designed with specific scaffolding categories for the teacher to
design their new technology-enhanced project-based lesson.               Some sample categories were (1) "Determining
Topic", (2)   "Challenges for students in science topic?", and (3) "How can technology help?".
          Teacher Lesson Designs: Teachers co-designed a technology-enhanced project-based lesson using the
scaffolded wiki-template with the research-mentor and their peers in the community.               These lessons targeted a
project-based   learning    pedagogy     and   include   a variety   of  technology tools    and  materials.    The  lessons
themselves were a focus for analysis. The table below provides an overview of the basic science topics and
technology-enhanced project-based lesson themes selected by each teacher.

Table 1: Technology-enhanced project-based lessons.

     Teacher         Grade                     Science Concept                   Technology-enhanced PB Lessons
   Participant       Level
        Bill           10     Chemistry Indicators                               Photo Journal/Wiki/Poster of Experiment
       Merle           12     Physics ­ interdisciplinary; several concepts      Wiki/Podcast Walking Tour of Science
                                                                                 Exhibits
     Charlie           11     Physics ­ Sound, Electromagnetism, Newton's        Wiki/Video/Experiment Segment of
                              Laws                                               concept
     Maddie            11     Physics ­ Newton's Laws, Renewable Energy          Wiki/Video/Experiment Segment of
                                                                                 concept
        Frank         7/8     Ecology ­ Wolves management program                Wiki/WISE/Video Wolves Ecology
                                                                                 Commercial
     Placido          7/8     Earth and Space    ­ Earth's Crust project         Wiki//Video/Powerpoint Presentation
        Alex          7/8     Earth and Space    ­ Earth's Crust project         Wiki//Video/ Powerpoint Presentation
        Olga           12     Chemistry ­ interdisciplinary; several concepts    Wiki/Poster/Debate-Presentations
        Daryl           9     Biology ­ Reproduction; Physics ­ Reusable         Wiki/ Powerpoint Presentation
                              Energy

© ISLS                                                                                                                   560
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                            Volume I: Long Papers

          Reflection Questions: A wiki site and specific scaffolded reflection prompts were designed to capture
teachers' understandings about pedagogical content. Reflection questions were asked at three different points in
each teacher's lesson planning and enactment process:
·   Prior to the lesson planning: (1) What are the goals of your lesson? (2) What are your thoughts about the
    student ideas? (3) What are some of the key elements in your project-based design?
·   After the lesson planning: (1) Where do you think the students will be challenged? (2) What will you try to
    do with your time, during the lesson? (3) What are some of the follow up concepts that require set up during
    lesson?
·   After the lesson enactment: (1) Did you find the students had more or less difficulty than you expected? (2)
    What is one change or addition you would like to put into place for next time? (3) What was one advantage
    in using the technology within the project-based activity?
          Community:     The peer community within this project includes both offline and online components.
The teachers had periodic community meetings where they exchanged ideas and shared their stories about the
project-based enactment, which served to establish a personal relationship between community members. The
online component of the teacher community consisted of a website and a wiki site, developed to collect personal
statements from teachers about their background and philosophy, as well as to collect details of lesson plans,
and all reflections.
          The online community supported peer exchanges, reviewed lesson plans and fostered discussions about
the enactments. Upon completing the lesson plan an update of the `lessons learned' and the `things I hope to add
to the lesson next time' was added to the wiki lesson page. Teachers in a community were asked to connect to
their peers by asking questions and commenting to this additional wiki page. The wiki site for lesson design and
reflection played a significant role in supporting socially constructed knowledge.     It enabled teachers and the
mentor  to make  their   knowledge  visible for themselves and  all members   of the   community.  These on-line
artefacts became an    assets for reference by  all members  of the community.   Figure  2   displays the Website
interface of the on-line community (left) which linked to Figure 3, the wiki space (right).

          Figure 2. Teacher Web Interface.              Figure 3. Teacher Wiki-community Site.

Procedure
This paper reports on nine science teachers' development of PCK and their experiences during 3 design phases
of  curriculum design    and  enactment.  There  were  three main   teacher activities that occurred    within each
iteration: (1) Lesson design, (2) Classroom enactment, and (3) Revision of lesson design. Data sources include
teacher surveys, interview questions, wiki lesson plans, scaffolded reflections (captured in a wiki), videotaped
classroom enactments, field notes, student artifacts and wiki responses, teacher peer-exchanges (on a wiki and
in group meetings).
          The first design phase of the study included four teachers (n = 4) who worked individually with the
researcher-mentor to co-design, enact and reflect on a science lesson. The second design phase added five more
science teachers (n=5), increasing the community to a total of nine teachers and one researcher. Consistent with
the design-based     research paradigm,  improvements   were made   on the  reflective  prompts  (i.e., connecting
reflection prompts to lesson planning and enactment) and community elements (face-to-face and online), which
marked the beginning of the second design phase. The third phase of the design study continued to refine the
scaffolded reflection and community exchange connecting teacher activities of lesson planning and enactment
deeply with student prior knowledge, project-based learning and technology implementation.

Analysis and Findings

Community Exchange of Content
The online teacher community helped to make teacher ideas and actions more visible, accessible, and persistent,
fostering scaffolded discussions about how to revise lesson plans and helping to focus teachers' thinking on
issues of student learning. Figure 5 shows a screen capture of one teacher's (Charlie) lesson plan and Figure 6

© ISLS                                                                                                           561
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                            Volume I: Long Papers

shows a sample of a student artifact that he posted for his peers: a digital resource he had created, consisting of a
wiki page to support students' planning for a video project. Such sharing allowed other teachers to see how their
peer had set up lesson plans and how his lesson had taken form in students' hands. The community was able to
read Charlie's lesson plan and his reflections about it, and add their own comments (Figure 7). The teacher-
participants could follow the changes that Charlie made to this lesson from Iteration 1 to Iteration 2, as well as
his rationale for those changes, and see the resulting impact on student work.

Figure 5. Charlie's Lesson Plan--Iteration 1.         Figure 6. Student Wiki-template Iteration 2; with LessonDesign Improvements Including Student Reflection.

                        Figure 7. Community Reflections on Lesson Plans (comm27/08/08).

         In the community meetings, Charlie described how his video project had allowed students to express
their own understanding of physics topics, but also detailed where the lesson design activity had fallen short in
engaging them. As he planned his second iteration, he published his improvements to the community Website.
He introduced wiki logbooks to help students make sure that they documented what they were doing throughout
the process. After enacting this version twice, Charlie made substantive revisions in Iteration 3, introducing
improvements  to his    wiki  support materials (for students) to help make    the lesson design more visible  to
students as well as to his peers in the community.

Teacher Engagement
Teachers  who had     entered this project with limited understandings  of technology  were  able to experience,
through their own engagement within the online environment, how the use of the various technology tools could
have potential benefits within their classrooms. The use of the Website as a portal for the community allowed

© ISLS                                                                                                          562
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                     Volume I: Long Papers

teachers    to easily follow    lesson plans,  reflections, and video    clips of  their   peers' enactment.   It    offered an
effective means of organizing teachers' artifacts and reflections and supporting their participation.
         Teachers' participation within both the online and face-to-face community elements was coded from 1
(lowest) to 4 (highest) based on a rubric that examined three aspects of community engagement: (1) Did the
participants   provide   or find  strategies  for project-based     learning?  (2) Did     the participants provide     or find
effective uses of technology? (3) Did the participants provide or find strategies for promoting student inquiry
and learning? Other areas such as content sharing and reflection were seen as implicitly fitting within those
three elements.    Thus, teachers scored highly on this rubric when they had provided lesson plans and student
artifacts, discussed their strengths and limitations with peers, reflected on the challenges and strengths of their
enactments, and shared their assessment and lesson revisions. Teachers scored lower when they contributed
little to the reflections or comments within the online space or face-to-face meetings. A score of 1 was awarded
as the lowest possible measure, acknowledging that all participants did have some level of social engagement -
at least with the mentor. The face-to-face community involvement was scored and ranked in a manner similar to
the scoring used for online participation, providing a simple qualitative measure of participation in meetings or
online tasks. Table 2 provides all scores and gives a brief explanation of the teachers' participation in online and
face-to-face activities.

Table 2: Community engagement (averaged time of involvement with the study).
     Teacher-      Face-to-face    Online         Total     Comment about Participant Engagement in Community
     Participant   Engagement      Engagement     Score     (evaluated the number of times attending and items
                                                            contributed in the community)
                   High     Low    High      Low
    Charlie           4                4              8     Attended every community meeting, and always participated
                                                            online; shared artefacts, assessments, and reflections
    Merle             4                4              8     Attended every community meeting, and always participated
                                                            online; shared artefacts, assessments, and reflections
    Maddie            4                4              8     Attended every community meeting, and always participated
                                                            online; shared artefacts, assessments, and reflections
    Olga              3                3              6     Attended 3 community meetings, and always participated
                                                            online; shared artefacts, assessments, and reflections
    Alex              3                3              6     Attended 3 community meetings, participated online, shared
                                                            artefacts and reflections and participation online; shared
                                                            some assessments
    Frank                     2               2       4     Attended only 1st community meeting, and limited
                                                            participation online; shared artefacts, assessments, and
                                                            reflections (no job next term)
    Bill                      1               1       2     Attended only 1 community meeting, video taped himself for
                                                            one community meeting, limited participation online; limited
                                                            sharing
    Placido                   1               1       2     Attended only 1 community meeting, very limited
                                                            participation online; shared artefacts, assessments, and
                                                            reflections
    Daryl                     1               1       2     Never attended community meetings, no participation online;
                                                            shared artefacts, assessments, and reflections (before online
                                                            community).

         Figure 8 positions places teachers along a
two-dimensional     grid  of    online  and  face-to-face
participation in the study. Each teacher's position is
obtained from Table 2, and represents the level of
participation observed in each dimension. Further,
an overall     engagement   score   for  participation  or
engagement      in community      can    be  obtained   by
summing     the  two    dimensions. It   is interesting to
note   that those  teachers  who    scored   low  in  one
form of community (e.g., online) also scored low
on the   other   (e.g., face-to-face).   In other words,
teachers either appear in the lower left or the upper
right quadrants.                                                        Figure 8. Online and Face-to-Face Engagement.

© ISLS                                                                                                                       563
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                Volume I: Long Papers

         While the two-dimensional grid may seem arbitrary, it offers a depiction of how well teachers engaged
in  the community     intervention. This  measure   can   also  be  used to  validate the  scoring of   the Community
elements  in the   next   section. The   data  sources   for the Community      elements  were   from   scaffolded   wiki
reflections, interviews, and field notes. These could be viewed as more subjective and had a quality score. The
community    engagement    score   was a numerical   value    of participation. For  the purposes  of this  paper,   only
Community element with lesson planning will be described.

Community Impact on Lesson Planning
To evaluate the impact of the community intervention, we developed a coding scheme and scoring rubric that
captured teachers' participation relative to the available community supports (i.e., in any given design phase of
the study). Peer exchange influenced lesson planning, as teachers became aware of other teacher-participants'
projects and discussed lesson planning during community meetings. They were able to access lesson plans from
the wiki  site,   observe student   artefacts, and read   their  peers'  reflections about  enacting  the   lessons. The
Community elements within the Lesson Planning rubric focused on explicit interactions with mentor and peers.
Indeed, one element in the rubric was called "Interaction with mentor," and the other was called "Influence of
community" (see Figure 9). Each of these elements was scored according to the rubric on a 1 (lowest) to 3
(highest) scale. The following ranked excerpts illustrate the different coding scores for the element "Interaction
with mentor."
         Rubric: Score of 1. Response indicates limited mentor influences. Answer has limited use of mentor
for technology.
         Excerpt: [Participant wrote not applicable] N/A (Daryl 301107)
         Rubric:    Score  of 2.   Response    indicates some   use of  mentor  influences.  Answer   has   some use  of
mentor for technology.
         Excerpt: Sharing ideas[with technology], cooperation and working together, team building, working
together[with wiki], and trusting that everyone (teachers and mentors) participates and puts an effort. (Frank
280508)
         Rubric: Score of 3. Response indicates strong use of mentor influences. Answer has strong use of
mentor for technology.
         Excerpt: I would not have been able to consider the changes to the lesson or even trying this video
project-based lesson without the community, without you [researcher-mentor], so it has changed me and my
perspectives giving    me  things  to think   about...student-peer  exchange    and   scaffolding their  understanding.
(Charlie 291008)
         The average Community score was tallied for all teachers across their two iterations. Figures 9 and 10
show that this community score correlates with the lesson planning overall score for Iteration 1 and Iteration 2,
respectively. These correlations were both marginally significant, with F < 0.05, and F < 0.07, respectively. This
provides some evidence of a link between teachers' community influence during lesson planning and the quality
of their lesson design process. This suggests that teachers can improve in lesson planning by engaging in peer
exchange. Given that reflection was also seen to impact on lesson planning, the combined effects of reflection
and community should be an even more effective means of professional development.

        Figure 9.  Correlation of Lesson Planning Score and          Figure 10.   Correlation of  Lesson  Planning Score
        Community Average Score Iteration I.                         and Community Average Score Iteration 2.

Conclusions
Through the use of CSCL tools like scaffolded reflections and peer exchanges, teachers in this study gained a
deeper understanding about project-based instruction and translated it into practice within their classrooms. The
technologies used     within this  study offered   ways   for  teachers  to exchange   their reflections, lesson   plans,
strategies and student artefacts. The technology also supported the design-based methodology of this study, as

© ISLS                                                                                                                564
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                       Volume I: Long Papers

teachers were able to progress between iterations in reference to their wiki-based lesson plans and templates.
This allowed for more informed improvements to the lesson plans, and also allowed for the iterative refinement
of the scaffolded      reflections and  peer-exchange     prompts   and  activities. This  research    provides  support for a
model for professional development that engages teachers through active reflection and exchange of ideas and
experiences     with   peers, supporting      their  understanding   of  new   practices   and   their development    of   peer
communities.

References
Barnett, R., & Coate, K. (2004). Engaging the curriculum in higher education. Maidenhead, England: McGraw-Hill/Open
           University Press.
Blumenfeld,   P., Soloway,    E., Marx,  R.,  Krajcik, J. S., Guzdial, M., &   Palincsar, A. (1991).   Motivating project-based
           learning: Sustaining the doing, supporting the learning. Educational Psychologist, 26(3/4), 369­398.
Borko, H., & Putnam, R. T. (1996). Learning to teach. In D. C. Berliner & R. C. Calfee (Eds.), Handbook of educational
           psychology (pp. 673­708). New York, NY: Macmillan.
Collins, A. & Halverson, R. (2010). Rethinking Education in the Age of Technology: The Digital Revolution and Schooling
           in America. New York: Teacher College Press.
Davis, E. A., & Krajcik, J. S. (2005). Designing educative curriculum materials to promote teacher learning. Educational
           Researcher, 34(3), 3­14.
Driver, R., Asoko, H., Leach, J., Mortimer, E., & Scott, P. (1994). Constructing scientific knowledge in the classroom.
           Educational Researcher, 23(7), 5­12.
Gess-Newsome, J. (1999). Pedagogical content knowledge: An introduction and orientation. In J. Gess-Newsome & N. G.
           Lederman (Eds.), PCK and science education (pp. 3­17). Dordrecht, the Netherlands: Kluwer Academic.
Falk, J., & Drayton, B. (2004). State testing and inquiry based science: Are they complementary or competing reforms?
           Journal of Educational Change, 54(4), 345­387.
Fishman, B., Marx, R., Best, S., & Tal, R. (2003). Linking teacher and student learning to improve professional development
           in systemic reform. Teaching and Teacher Education, 19(6), 643­658.
Koehler, M. J., Mishra, P., & Yahya, K. (2007). Tracing the development of teacher knowledge in a design seminar:
           Integrating content pedagogy & technology. Computers & Education, 49, 740­762.
Laffey, J., Tupper, T., Musser, D., & Wedman, J. (1998). A computer-mediated support system for project-based learning.
           Educational Technology Research and Development, 46(1), 73­86.
Lave,  J., &    Wenger,  E.  (1991). Situated   learning:  Legitimate  peripheral participation. New    York,  NY:   Cambridge
           University Press.
Little, J.W. (2002) Locating learning in teachers' professional community: Opening up problems of analysis in records of
           everyday work. Teaching and Teacher Education 18 (8), 917-946.
Loucks-Horsley,    S., &   Matsumoto,   C.   (1999). Research  on professional development   for teachers   of mathematics and
           science: The state of the scene. School Science and Mathematics, 99(5), 258­271.
Loughran,   J., Berry,  A., &   Mulhall, P.   (2006).  Understanding   and developing  science teachers'  pedagogical  content
           knowledge. Rotterdam, Netherlands: Sense.
Magnusson, S., Krajcik, J., & Borko, H. (1999). Nature, sources, and development of pedagogical content knowledge for
           science teaching. In J. Gess-Newsome & N. G. Lederman (Eds.), Examining pedagogical content knowledge: The
           construct and its implications for science education (pp. 95­132). Dordrecht, the Netherlands: Kluwer Academic.
McMartin, F. (2008). Open education through open educational resources. In T. Iiyoshi & M. S. V. Kumar (Eds.), Opening
           up   education:  The   collective advancement   of  education through  open    technology,  open content, and open
           knowledge (pp. 135­178). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
McNamara, D. (1990). Research on teachers' thinking: Its contribution to educating student teachers to think critically.
           Journal of Education for Teaching, 16(2), 147-160.
Palincsar, A. S., Magnusson, S., Marano, N., Ford, D., & Brown, N. (1998). Designing a community of practice: Principles
           and practices of the GIsML community. Teaching and Teacher Education, 14(1), 5­19.
Park, S., & Oliver, J. S. (2008). Revisiting the conceptualization of pedagogical content knowledge (PCK): PCK as a
           conceptual tool to understand teachers as professionals. Research in Science Education, 38, 261­284.
Raines, P., & Shadiow, L. (1995). Reflection and teaching: The challenge of thinking beyond the doing. The Clearing
           House, 68(5), 271­274.
Schlager, M. S., & Fusco, J. (2004). Teacher professional development, technology, and communities of practice: Are we
           putting the cart before the horse? In S. Barab, R. Kling, & J. Gray (Eds.), Designing virtual communities in the
           service of learning (pp. 120­153). New York, NY: Cambridge University Press.
Schön, D. (1983). The reflective practitioner. New York, NY: Basic Books.
Schön, D. (1987). Educating the reflective practitioner. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Shulman, L. (1986). Those who understand: Knowledge growth in teaching. Educational Researcher, 15(1), 4­14.
Shulman, L. (1987). Knowledge and teaching: Foundations of the new reform. Harvard Educational Review, 57(1), 1­22,
           57(1), 1­22.
Stuessy, C. L., & Metty, J. S. (2007). The learning research cycle: Bridging research and practice. Journal of Science
           Teacher Education, 18, 725­750.
Slotta, J.D. & Linn, M.C. (2009). WISE science: Web-based inquiry in the classroom. New York, NY: Teachers College
           Press.
Westheimer, J., & Kahne, J. (1993). Building school communities: An experience-based model. Phi Delta Kappan, 75(4),
           324­328.

© ISLS                                                                                                                      565
