CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                    Volume I: Long Papers

 Critical Moments of Knowledge Co-construction: Reconsidering
         Meaning-making of Postings in Online Group Discussion
          Hsiu-Mei Chang, Graduate Institute of Learning & Instruction, National Central University,
                                                  auroraspp@gmail.com
Fei-Ching Chen, Graduate Institute of Learning & Instruction, National Central University, fcc@cc.ncu.edu.tw
Kai-Tien Cheng, Graduate Institute of Atmospheric Sciences, National Central University, joseph0220@me.com
Ren-Yow Tzeng, Graduate Institute of Atmospheric Sciences, National Central University, ren@atm.ncu.edu.tw

         Abstract: This study attempts to investigate the critical moments in online knowledge co-
         construction. We analyzed the episodes of the dynamic group discussion by reconsidering the
         meaning-making      of  each   posting   in order to  gain  a  full contextual   understanding    of  how
         collective knowledge developed. The results identified three critical moments: "confusion and
         hesitation",  "from     stick around  to  move  forward"    and    "making   justification and   breaking
         through". Unlike using the single posting or adjacent pairs of postings as the unit of analysis,
         this study claims that linking backwards to earlier turns is as important as linking forwards to
         later turns   for discovering    a complete   picture   of how  online  group    members    co-construct
         knowledge.    The  nuance     of dealing  with the time    dimension   across   different  approaches    in
         CSCL is also discussed.

Introduction
Learning through knowledge co-construction is increasingly regarded as having a significant effect (e.g., Stahl,
2009).  Ideally, through   observing    and  responding  to each     other,  group members     establish  a focus    for their
discussion and maintain a heterogeneous environment of revision and complement within which knowledge is
deepened and augmented. Practically, however, it is not easy to achieve a positive effect. In the process of group
collaboration, members     encounter    a lot  of problems, such    as:  having different    levels of domain   knowledge,
becoming   distracted   from  on-topic    discussion,  struggling   in  coordination  with    other members,     logging   on
sporadically etc. The quality of the knowledge co-construction in group discussion is therefore decreased.
         To investigate this online knowledge building phenomenon, many researchers used the "single posting"
as the unit of analysis (Suthers, Dwyer, Medina & Vatrapu, 2007) to more easily scrutinize visible messages in
order to identify the quality of knowledge co-construction in group discussion. Others treated the "each thread"
as the unit of analysis in order to capture the response relationship in the group discussion, the formation of the
sub-thread, the lifespan of a thread, the frequency and type of certain behavior of the group members, and so on
(e.g., Hewitt, 2005). This study extends this line of research by exploring exactly how the "whole thread" is
analyzed and what aspects of knowledge co-construction can be discovered.
         In this study, we analyze the discussions in the Learning Atmospheric Sciences via InterNet, LAIN, an
independent and voluntary discussion forum. Unlike the related literature, we purposely use both the "single
posting" and "the whole thread" as units of analysis in order to compare and contrast the distinct differences
found in capturing the relationships between the members, and the roles of the group members, respectively.
With these, we then attempt to address the following issues: First, to identify the critical moments of knowledge
co-construction   in  heterogeneous    online  group  discussion,   and  second,   to determine     how the    heterogeneous
group members collaboratively accomplish knowledge co-construction.

Analytical Approaches to Knowledge Co-construction
"Knowledge co-construction" is a promising issue addressed by different parties with similar terms in the CSCL
field. For example, knowledge building (Scardamalia, 2002), knowledge convergence and collaborative learning
(Jeong & Chi, 2007) and group cognition (Stahl, 2010). Knowledge building communities have to tackle the
difficult problem of handling complexity and reaching a common understanding. By the same token, approaches
to knowledge building groups or communities are also diverse and multi-voiced. Two issues have been the focus:
1) proposing elements in capturing the phenomenon of knowledge co-construction, and 2) proposing analytical
approaches in analyzing interaction among knowledge co-constructors.
         First, rather than strive to understand the process by which knowledge co-construction developed, most
previous  studies  on   knowledge      co-construction  attempted    to  investigate     the elements   of  knowledge     co-
construction.  In particular,    these studies explored    those that   contributed   to the  success  or  failure of  group
collaboration  and    identified certain  elements:  question    and response   construction,    engagement    in  the group
process (Zhou, 2009), knowledge sharing and the willingness to revise (Chiu, 2008), the focus of discussion, the
connection between     old  and  new    ideas, the   association of  the discussion   with   the topic  (e.g., Aalst,  2009),
knowledge convergence and knowledge divergence (Jeong & Chi, 2007), the heterogeneous group member (e.g.,
Scardamlia & Beretier, 2006), the peer as each member's reader or writer (e.g., Dennen & Wieland, 2007), the

© ISLS                                                                                                                      80
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                Volume I: Long Papers

application of information, and references or authoritative materials (Scardamalia & Briereter, 2006; Hmelo-
Silver, 2006;  Stahl, 2008). Such lists are helpful in grasping partially the knowledge co-construction in group
discussion. However, we argue that an authentic process of knowledge co-construction in heterogeneous group
discussion could be represented not just as isolated incidents in interaction episodes, but also as a mixture of
coherent and incoherent processes. It is unlikely to be possible to separate knowledge co-construction from the
process of dynamic interaction when all elements in this context are so thoroughly intertwined. In the present
study, we therefore attempt to broaden our view in order to capture the critical moments and the contextually
situated processes of group knowledge co-construction.
         Second, many researchers have devoted a great deal of effort to analyzing the quality of knowledge co-
construction. We therefore trace the development of the analytic method during the last decade: In the early
period, previous research adopted the following analytic methods to measure learning in discussion forums: (a)
restricting subject   behaviors; (b)  setting certain variables;  (c) coding  and  counting     the content of  "single
posting",   "adjacency  pairs"   and "taking  turns";  and   (d) the  quantitative-statistics. Lately, however,   some
researchers claim that the above methods hinder appreciation of sequential structure and ignore the nature of
collective group growth (e.g., Suthers, Dwyer, Medina & Vatrapu, 2007). Besides which, the order, sequentiality
and timing typically play a significant role in how the postings are understood (Stahl, 2010). Therefore, from the
perspective of sequential and situated interaction, researchers have developed particular concepts and methods,
such as statement analysis, interaction analysis, episode analysis (e.g., Jeong & Chi, 2007; Zhou, 2009; Reimann,
2009), uptake analysis (Suthers, 2006), CORDTRA Diagrams (Hmelo-Silver, Chernobilsky, & Mastov, 2006),
inter-subjectivity and  group  cognition  (e.g., Stahl, 2010)    and prior posting (Diggelen,    Janssen, &  Overdijk,
2008). Some have used the multi-threads or cross threads as the unit of analysis in order to understand the
formation, structure, growth, and lifespan of the thread, and the synergetic interaction and the interaction pattern
between the threads (e.g., Schrire, 2006; Hewitt, 2005). Along with this line of research approach, our analytic
method focuses on the sequence of contextual events, and on the meaning-making of individual postings in the
process of knowledge co-construction in heterogeneous online group discussion.
         Specifically, in an attempt to highlight the distinct difference in the effect of capturing the nature of
knowledge co-construction between the "contextual-situated process" and the "single posting", we purposely
apply two different units of analysis to the same dataset. First, using the "single posting" as the unit of analysis,
we identify the level of group members' role-behaviors; then by using the "whole thread" as the unit of analysis,
we recognize the relationship between the current posting, the postings of earlier turns (Chen & Chiu, 2008),
and the postings of later turns; and finally, by comparing and contrasting the results of the above two kinds of
units of analysis, we interpret our findings in a dialectic way.

Research Method

The Context
487 voluntary   participants  attended  a 6-week   inquiry   learning  in  LAIN, in  which     they were  divided into
different groups as determined by the topics in which they are interested. Group members in this inquiry activity
collectively justify a hypothesis and complete the task.
         The  members    of group    C2 were  selected  to be our  research  subjects. The C2    group  consisted of 6
members whose postings totaled 389 and whose online presence frequency totaled 526 (Table 1). The main
topic of the C2 group discussion was "Fog".

Table 1: The frequency of postings and online presence totals of C2 group members.

                                 ID                   Posting                Online
                               010124                   150                    182
                               Milkbottle               123                    119
                               Cathyjudy                53                       94
                               Icebox                   34                       60
                               Snowlove                 28                       70
                               Beer                        1                       1
                                                        389                    526

         Since we     were interested in  how  knowledge     co-construction developed,  we     focused on  the longer
threads, and chose the 15th as the sample discussion thread. The 15th thread consisted of 69 postings which were
posted by the 4 members during the second week. Icebox and Beer had not participated in this 15th thread. The
long thread provides us a better opportunity to discover the progress and the dynamic interaction in the C2
group discussion.

© ISLS                                                                                                               81
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                Volume I: Long Papers

Data Collection and Analysis
The data log of the discussion forums served as the main resource of data analyses. Data were analyzed to
determine   each  member's   participation   level and  learner-role behavior.  In  addition to the  frequency    of total
postings and weekly postings, and the timing of the postings; the content of the postings, the interrelationships
between them, and the weekly diary of inquiry process were also collected. Two kinds of unit of analysis were
used: "single posting" and "the whole thread".
          First, the "single posting" was used as the unit of analysis to recognize and identify the level of group
members'    role-behaviors.  We    adopted Waters    and Gasson's    (2006) approach         "the classification  of  the
primary learner-role behaviors"  to examine the contribution of the participant's behavior in the online forum.
The eight learner-role behaviors are: Passive-learner, Knowledge-elicitor, Contributor, Vicarious-acknowledger,
Closer,   Facilitator, Initiator, and Complicator   (Table 2). The   classification further provided   a framework    for
three  levels of  involvement:      participation, involvement,   and  social   engagement.   This   classification  was
accomplished by 1) identifying the contribution of each posting through comparing the relationship of prior
postings to the current one in order to recognize the level and the contribution of the posting, and 2) counting the
classification of each posting of each group member, and 3) selecting the highest frequency as the most fitting
classification to define the participation level of each group member.

Table 2: The classification of primary learner-role behaviors.

            level                     Form of Behavior             Milkbottle     Cathyjudy     010124      Snowlove
 I. Participation            Passive-learner
                             Knowledge-elicitor                          1              3
                             Contributor                                                          13     *
 II. Involvement             Vicarious-acknowledger                      1              1            1
                             Closer                                      7                           1
 III. Social engagement      Facilitator                                 19   *         8   *        1            1
                             Initiator                                   2
                             Complicator                                                                          3   *
                                                         Total           30            12         16              4
PS. The result of the classification of each member is indicated with *.

          From the results showed in Table 2, most of the members fell into the III. social engagement level.
Milkbottle and Cathyjudy were classified as the Facilitators and Snowlove as the Complicator. 010124 was the
only person to be classified as the Contributor and fell into the I participation level. It seemed that Snowlove,
Milkbottle  and   Cathyjudy  made     a higher level  of contribution   to  the group  discussion,  while  010124    was
deemed to have contributed to this group at a relatively superficial level. Interestingly, although 010124 was the
most active person in this group in terms of the number of postings, the nature of her postings in thread #15 was
more that of a contributor. Table 3 summarized a profile of each member from our online observation notes.

Table 3: Observation of the characteristics of the learners in the C2 group.

     ID       Form of behavior                                       The characteristics
Milkbottle    III  Facilitator        Actively  participates   in  group   discussion,   and   often   integrates  other
                                      members' opinions into one posting.
Cathyjudy     III Facilitator         Actively  asks    questions,   shares   her   thoughts,   and    triggers   other's
                                      participation in the discussion.
010124        I   Contributor         Actively responds to others with authoritative content via "copy and paste".
Snowlove      III Complicator         Contributes fewer postings to the group but is quite aware of the context of
                                      the discussion and points out the problems.

          In addition to using Waters and Gasson's approach, we purposely reexamined the contribution of each
participant by using "the whole thread" as the unit of analysis (Figure 1). In this way, we were able to trace the
evolution of the whole 15th thread by referring to both the backward and forward postings and by selecting
isolated postings with similar focus within the thread. The time dimension emerged as a pivotal issue to deal
with   in knowledge     co-construction.  In order   to  represent the   meaning    of every  "single  posting"   in  the
accomplishment    of   knowledge    co-construction  in  online discussion,  domain    experts  and  learning   scientists
collaboratively analyzed the 69 postings with these characteristics in mind: 1) the depth of domain knowledge of

© ISLS                                                                                                                 82
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                               Volume I: Long Papers

the posting, 2)  the  evolution  of the  concept's physical property,  3) the   flow of the  group discussion,  4) the
interrelationship between the postings, 5) the participation features of the group member, 6) the timing of the
posting and the atmosphere of the group discussion, and 7) the nature of the response of group members. The
results of the second approach provide a distinctively different picture of group knowledge co-construction from
those of the first approach but these two viewpoints are dialectically interrelated.

                 The backward postings                                    The forward postings

                                               The current posting
                Figure 1. The Analytic Structure for "The Whole Thread" as the Unit of Analysis.

         Using the emergence of these particular convergent postings as an index, #21 and #49 were determined
to be the watersheds at which to divide the 69 postings into 3 separate pieces for detailed analysis of knowledge
co-construction. The 3 separate pieces represented the different meaningful-activities and showed the different
phrase existed in the 15th thread. And we found that each posting came from the prior postings and had the effect
on the forwards postings. For example, the posting #48 is not just the result of the prior postings #1~#47, but
also has the effect on the forward postings #49~#69.

Research Findings
These three episodes contain different stories about how the "whole thread" as the unit of analysis revealed
deeper understanding of knowledge co-construction than the "single posting" could. To be specific, the present
study demonstrated that the second approach not only interpreted the learning situation of the group discussion
differently, but also contrasted sharply with the first approach on the contribution of group members.

Confusion and Hesitation
The first episode shows that the progress of the group discussion had gotten into a confusing condition by using
the "single  posting"  as the unit  of  analysis. However,  using  "the whole    thread"  as the unit of analysis, we
discovered that the group members were simply waiting for next opportunity to clarify the problem.
         The   phenomenon     of knowledge    co-construction  could   be  a slow    process and  could  have   a  pre-
condition.  An authentic  situation  for knowledge     co-construction to develop   is in response to encountering  a
confusing   situation.  The following    excerpt   is an example.    Milkbottle  came   up   with  a  hypothesis(#11),
Cathyjudy tried to clarify the question(#12), Milkbottle and 010124 not only responded to Cathyjudy but also
became mired in confusion thinking about an uncertainty (#13~15).

        No.       ID                                             Content
        11    Milkbottle    (......)I have an idea about the hypothesis: Fog occurs in the interface of warm
                            and cold air masses. When atmospheric convection is not efficient, the cold and
                            warm air masses come in contact with each other.
        12    Cathyjudy     What does it mean that atmospheric convection is not efficient?      Does it mean
                            there is no wind??
        13    Milkbottle    It might not be possible that there is no wind when cold and warm air contact
                            each other in an air mass within the specific area. I don't know. Can anyone
                            respond to this?
        14    010124        No matter whether it is breezy or windy, lower atmosphere is always flowing.
                            The  solar  energy is  the source of all activities in the atmosphere.   The air is
                            heated, expanding and drifting upward and the low air occurs at the surface. It is
                            impossible to have no wind because warm air goes up; cool and height-density air
                            replaces the warm air and thereby generates the wind. Therefore it is not possible
                            to happen in a situation with no wind.
        16    010124        I don't know if my response was correct. Keep thinking about it.
        31    Cathyjudy     The example that the car and the glasses should not be related to the concept of
                            convection.

         The appearance of confusion might be invalid in knowledge co-construction. Group members mixed up
the concepts of "convection" and "wind". They all felt frustrated and shifted discussion to another topic after
#16.   Using the "single  posting"  or  "adjacent  pair" as unit of  analysis,  one  might   consider this episode  as
ineffective and exclude it from knowledge co-construction. However, using "the whole thread" as the unit of
analysis, we discovered that the messy conception had become less unclear. Cathyjudy started to clarify the idea
of "convection" in #31, which is far from the earlier turns. That is, linking backwards to earlier turns is as

© ISLS                                                                                                               83
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                    Volume I: Long Papers

important as forward to later turns in investigating the process of knowledge co-construction.
         Furthermore,     the  discontinuity    between    smoothness   and    stagnation     would   be  regarded    as  an
opportunity for evoking growth or new turns. In the first episode, group members appeared to change to another
topic because they could not discuss the present topic any further. Later on, we noticed that the group members
still cared about  the  question   and kept  it in mind.   They   engaged   more  and  associated    relevant   ideas to  the
previous answer. Were we to assume that there was no progress in this episode of group discussion, we might
misinterpret their pondering time as valueless in knowledge co-construction. But by putting together pieces of
puzzle, that is, related postings of earlier turns as well as of later turns, we discovered that the group members
cross  from   discontinuity and  stagnation  to  renewal   of  progress as  a  result of an   apparently    imperative time
period of confusion and hesitation.

From Stick Around to Move Forward
The second episode would appear that the group was engaged in a warm and well-focused atmosphere when
using the "single posting" as the unit of analysis. However, using "the whole thread" as the unit of analysis, we
found that although the two Facilitators actively developed their ideas and presented a sustained discussion, the
discussion    was  not really  making   further   progress    and had  lapsed   into  stagnation.    Moreover,  it  was   the
Contributor who eventually advanced the group discussion "from stick around to move forward".
         Knowledge      co-construction  deals    with  the   development    of collective     and   public  knowledge.   It
therefore involves negotiation and a bid for currency of each other's ideas. The ones who contribute more in the
discussion forum seem to have a higher level of social engagement, and this results in greater contributions to
knowledge     co-construction. The   interaction   between    the two  facilitators,  Cathyjudy    and   Milkbottle,  in  the
second  episode    was  identified as  consisting  of  effective  postings  using the  "single     posting"  as the  unit of
analysis. Interestingly, in some cases "effective discussion" might actually cease growing. In contrast it was the
contributor,  010124,   who   made  group   progress    in knowledge    co-construction.     Earlier by  using  the  "single
posting" as the unit of the analysis in identifying the roles of group members, Cathyjudy and Milkbottle were
identified as Facilitators who engaged in and contributed more to the discussion, while 010124 was regarded as
a Contributor who engaged in and contributed less to the discussion because her postings (#37, #38, and #40)
mainly consisted of copying and pasting references and never conveyed her own independent opinions.
         However, the above interpretation of the roles of group members was overthrown by using "the whole
thread"  as   the unit of analysis  in  recognizing   the  roles  the members   played.      Since 010124    came   close to
Cathyjudy and Milkbottle in the creation and assimilation of knowledge over a long period of time, she paid a
great deal of attention to Cathyjudy and Milkbottle's postings, and at the same time, she proceeded to diagnose
and   justify Cathyjudy   and  Milkbottle's  postings.     In the  process  of  following     Cathyjudy  and    Milkbottle's
discussion,   010124   seemed  to  play the  role  of a semi-outsider,  but  010124    participated   in and  observed    the
group discussion in a salient fashion. When Cathyjudy and Milkbottle developed a series of 16 postings about
the topic of "the relationship between Fog and Wind", 010124 found them to be unfocused. Apparently the 16
postings seemed to go deeper than earlier; 010124 noticed a knowledge gap which stopped the discussion from
growing. She therefore tried to speak up and present her opinion.            As Lave (1991) claimed from a situated
learning perspective: "This is the time that they (members) feel that they belong enough to carry the message"

        No.        ID                                               Content
        37    010124        Fog occurs more easily in a low-lying area!!!
        38                  Fog occurs over the land more easily than over the sea.
        39    Milkbottle    Low-level cold air should be left behind by the cold front, so it has not enough
                            energy to raise warm air up.
        40    010124        Fog takes place at night easier than during the day
        41    Milkbottle    010124! Give the reasons of your hypothesis or you will not be able to convince
                            anyone.
        42    Milkbottle    Rain in Spring is too light to be felt. Is it a kind of drizzle?
        43    010124        Wind at high altitude is stronger than at lower altitude, so I proposed the first
                            hypothesis. Wind over the sea is stronger than over the land, so I proposed the
                            second one. The reason of the third one is that wind is always stronger during the
                            day than at night.
        48    Cathyjudy     According to #15-42       According to 010124, can we summarize them all into a
                            hypothesis? The occurrence of fog is related to wind, because only one key point
                            that 010124 mentioned is wind......

         Engagement     including   inviting and   accepting    the   ideas of  others is    important   in the process   of
knowledge co-construction. 010124 avoided joining in the discussion about "the relationship between Fog and
Wind"   in  which  Cathyjudy   and  Milkbottle    were  actively  involved.  Instead,  010124    subtlely   joined them   by

© ISLS                                                                                                                    84
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                   Volume I: Long Papers

initiating  a title about   "hypotheses involving     the factor of  fog"   (#37, #38  and   #40). Although   010124's  3
postings were mainly authoritative information forwarded from websites, these 3 postings did evoke negotiation
within the group.
           The subtlety of the value of a posting is not dependent upon its having the appearance of being a "copy
and paste" contribution, but on its timing and the need it filled during knowledge co-construction. Using the
"single posting" approach, postings such as "copy and paste" are defined as a superficial contributions. However,
using "the whole thread" approach, the contribution of such postings changed. In our case, Milkbottle noticed
these  3 information-based    postings, and  negotiated    a bid   for  them  (Wenger,  1998)   (#41).  Then,  Milkbottle
invited 010124 to elaborate more upon her opinion. As a result of Milkbottle's invitation, 010124's posting was
able to increase in value and become used as a bargaining chip, adopted by other group members (Zhou & Stahl,
2008). At this moment, 010124's long engagement did clearly produce the positive effect of acquiring more
knowledge. 010124 used the knowledge that was learned from tracking the history of the evolution of the group
discussion to validate and support her opinion (#43). Then, Cathyjudy and Milkbottle adopted 010124's opinion
(#48) and it became legitimate knowledge in the group discussion. In the above mentioned case, we can see that
Cathyjudy and Milkbottle's willing adoption created an opportunity for 010124, who played a crucial role in
bringing about opportunities for group success. 010124 took advantage of an opportunity to justify and produce
a dramatic shift which improved group discussion, as a result of which, Cathyjudy and Milkbottle made an
adjustment    which   led the group  discussion    toward  greater  progress  and  away   from  its stymied  state  ­ thus
expanding the lifespan and longevity of threads. In this second episode, we can see and understand how groups
maintain their continuity of interaction across discontinuities.

Doing Justification and Breaking Through
The  third  episode   showed  that the  Complicator's     opinion  was   more  powerful   and  the  Contributor's  posting
weaker in the group discussion when using the "single posting" as the unit of analysis. However, when using
"the   whole    thread" as  the unit of  analysis,    we  found    that nobody    but the Contributor   cared  about   the
Complicator's     opinion.  Again, the  Contributor    justified and    supported the correctness   of the Complicator`s
opinion by copying and pasting. In this process of justification, the Contributor clarified misconceptions in the
group discussion, and affected the direction of the group discussion.
           The Contributor who was regarded as demonstrating a lower level of contribution, may play a critical
role with the Complicator in knowledge co-construction. In the third episode, group members seemed to exhibit
a great deal of commonality and consensus; but the condition was actually somewhat ambiguous at this stage.
           The concept of "wind" as the main hypothesis(#43) was started back in #18, and went through 25
postings (#18~43), eventually to be accepted and integrated in the group hypothesis for the group member who
had engaged more over a long period of time. But, the Complicator, Snowlove, who always remained silent in
the group,    at this stage broke  her silence    and submitted  3  postings  (#45~47)    to address the question   of the
concept of "wind" as the main hypothesis and one that was in her opinion justified, specifically "advection fog
is not restricted by wind speed, but the advection of warm and wet air.......". When we identified Snowlove's 3
postings using "single posting" as the unit of analysis, we had considered them as deeper and more contributive
to  the  group   discussion.  However,  we   found    that the   3 postings   had  different meaning-making     for   other
members in the process of discussion when using "the whole thread" as unit of our analysis. The 3 postings'
meaning for other members is as follows.

         No.          ID                                             Content
        45        Snowlove      This is used data...... I thought radiation fog took place on land mostly and the
        46                      weather must be less wind. ...... advection fog is not restricted by wind speed,
        47                      but the advection of warm and wet air....... Maybe other teams study radiation
                                fog and advection fog, so can we start from another point of view, like looking
                                for some materials of other kinds of fog, then discussing?
        48        Cathyjudy     According to #15-42.      According     to 010124, can  we   summarize   all into a
                                hypothesis? The occurrence of fog is related to wind, because of only one key
                                point that 010124 mentioned is wind......
        49~50     Milkbottle    The conditions of formation of fog: 1. low temperature, 2 high humidity, 3. less
                                wind, and condensation nuclei.
        51, 52,   010124        frontal fog, fog, fog, Upslope fog,  Spring fog in early morning is a sign of clear
        55,                     sky. Summer fog in early morning,    Heavy rain in the afternoon (All the contents
        57~60                   forwarded from the website were omitted due to the limited space )
        53        Milkbottle    Frontal fog, fog.
        62        Cathyjudy     The main hypothesis. When the cold and warm air contact each other, fogs take
                                place at where the large temperature difference, more humid warm air, and more
                                condensation nuclei. I specially point out the humidity of warm air...

© ISLS                                                                                                                  85
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                    Volume I: Long Papers

       65        Milkbottle    The main hypothesis. In nature, cold air is below warm air when cold and warm
                               air  contact  each  other. A   big   temperature   difference means    the difference
                               between the temperature of cold air and warm air. More temperature difference,
                               suitable wind speed, higher humidity and more nuclei in the air, then fog forms
       67                      easily. ...... The main hypothesis. Humidity of warm air
       68        Cathyjudy     The explanation for the main variable. The main variable is not just humidity,
                               but the humidity of warm air. If the humidity of warm air is not high enough and
                               the saturated water vapor pressure becomes lower, it does not reach saturation.

          Although the Complicator, Snowlove's opinion was strong (#45~47), the group members had given it
an unfriendly reception, in contrast to that which they gave to the Contributor, 010124. We could see a decrease
in postings and a silent and conflicted atmosphere when Snowlove attempted to raise a point counter to the
direction of the current group discussion. The Faciliator, Cathyjudy, tried to counter Snowlove's opinion by
using 010124's previous opinion (#48). The Faciliator Milkbottle kept summarizing group members' opinions
but excluded Snowlove's proposal from the "the summarization of hypotheses postings" and did not respond to
Snowlove. At this point, Snowlove's posting was ignored by the group members.
          We    recognize  a   bid  to negotiate   interactively    between   the  facilitator and  the   Contributor:   the
Contributor   010124    justified  the Complicator,    Snowlove's,       posting to  help  build a bridge   between   their
conflicting opinions.   It appeared    that nobody  cared    for Snowlove's    argument   (#45~47),   but 010124  did  pay
sufficient attention  to it.  Instead  of using   personal   internal  resources  to  judge  the opinions  of other  group
members, 010124 sought an external resource to evaluate Snowlove's claim. 010124 took Snowlove's opinion
and looked for authoritative references to check it, then copied and pasted seven authoritative references (#51,
52, 55,   57~60)  to   justify Snowlove's     opinion  as    right.   In this way,   01024's   posting eventually  evoked
negotiation within group. The group members renewed negotiation of the value of Snowlove's claim. Milkbottle
also sought out the external resource to justify Snowlove's posting (#53) and then, convinced of its validity,
supported Snowlove's argument. Snowlove's argument became legitimate knowledge for the group members.
The    Facilitators,  Cathyjudy    and Milkbottle,    adopted    the  Complicator,    Snowlove's,   opinion   to make    an
adjustment to the direction of group discussion (#62~68). We could see that the vindication of this view revived
the progress of group discussion which then went forward again toward knowledge co-construction.

Discussion and Conclusion
Our study introduces new ideas for knowledge co-construction. First, previous research explored the frequent
"give and take" of the success dialogue of episodes. The present study shows that the occurrence of knowledge
co-construction may start right in the process of confusion when "give and take" goes less smoothly among the
group members. If we don't recognize the "confusion and hesitation" stage of group discussion, we may not
capture and recognize that starting moment and arrive at a complete picture of knowledge co-construction.
          Second, most related research has focused on the predominant group members, such as the leaders or
the active ones, and has tried to capture the learning process from their dialogue interaction. In the present study,
we uncover the complex dynamics of group practice in ways that might further illuminate the phenomenon that
weaker and less active members do bring about a turning point in knowledge co-construction. If we had not
focused equally on the role of ordinary people in the group discussion, we would have achieved merely a partial
understanding of the knowledge co-construction.
          Insights into knowledge co-construction are developed by re-considering the analytic method for group
discussion. We compare and contrast the results of analysis by using the "single posting" and "the whole thread"
as the unit of analysis. We first adopted the "single posting" as the unit of analysis for recognizing the content of
each   posting, classified each   posting,  and   identified the  classification  of  the primary  learner-role  behaviors.
Then, we adopted "the whole thread" as the unit of analysis for interpreting the meaning of the current posting
by  carefully   investigating  both the   earlier and the  later  ones.   Using  this compare-and-contrast    method,    we
demonstrated    that  most of  the  meaning   differed from      that determined   before,  and  that the classification of
primary learner-role behaviors was modified.
          As with any other research, certain limitations of our findings must be noted. First, the sampling of the
group. Lain was a naturalistic virtual setting in which participants in this study were able to withdraw, intermit,
wander, or engage at will and at their own pace. C2 was selected from the 64 groups because the members had
more focused and on-topic discussion, and members participated more equally in the discussion. We considered
knowledge co-construction to be more recognizable in this group. The findings therefore need to be viewed with
caution as they would not be representative of other types of online group collaboration. Second, the sampling
of the thread. In analyzing co-construction among group members, we purposely selected the thread with the
longest lifespan, the 15th thread. Future studies with short threads would be useful to verify our findings.
          The results of this study have implications for analytic methods to examine knowledge co-construction.
In conventional analytic methods, previous research ignored the significance of the time dimension in group

© ISLS                                                                                                                   86
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                 Volume I: Long Papers

discussion   when   quantifying  data   in  classifying the  role  of   each group   member     and in recognizing    the
relationships between group members. In contrast to the conventional view, we argue that we must necessarily
focus on contextually-situated processes and the time dimension of the process of knowledge co-construction,
and must    avoid making    unwarranted    assumptions  about   the role  of group   members.   We  suggest    using "the
whole thread" as the unit of analysis in tracking critical moments and identifying the contribution of members in
knowledge co-construction. From "the whole thread as the unit of analysis" perspective, we further suggest that
both linking backwards to earlier turns and linking forward to later turns were equally important in determining
the meaning of a posting, and result in a more complete picture of knowledge co-construction.

References
Aalst,  J.V.   (2009).  Distinguishing     knowledge-sharing,     knowledge-construction,     and   knowledge-creation
          discourses. The International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning (ijCSCL), 4 (3), 259-287.
Chen,   G.,  &  Chiu,   M.M.    (2008). Online  discussion     processes:   Effects  of earlier messages'   evaluations,
          knowledge content, social cues and personal information on later messages. Computers & Education,
          50(3), 678-692.
Chiu, M.M. (2008). Flowing toward correct contributions during group problem solving: A statistical discourse
          analysis. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 17(3), 415­463.
Dennen, P.V., & Wieland, K. (2007). From interaction to intersubjectivity: Facilitating online group discourse
          processes. Distance Education, 28(3), 281-297.
Diggelen,   W.V., Janssen,  J., & Overdijk,   M.   (2008).  Analyzing   and  Presenting  Interaction  Data: A   Teacher,
          Student and Researcher Perspective. Paper presented at the International Conference of the Learning
          Sciences (ICLS), Utrecht, Netherlands.
Hewitt, J. (2005). Toward an understanding of how threads die in asynchronous computer conferences. Journal
          of the Learning Sciences, 14(4), 567-589.
Hmelo-Silver,   C.E.,  Chernobilsky,    E., &  Mastov,   O.    (2006).  Representations   for analyzing    tool-mediated
          collaborative learning. Paper presented at the 7th International Conference of the Learning Sciences,
          Mahwah, NJ.
Jeong, H., & Chi, M.T.H. (2007). Knowledge convergence during collaborative learning. Instructional Science,
          35, 287-315.
Lave, J., & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning: Legitimate peripheral participation. Cambridge: Cambridge
          University Press.
Reimann,    P. (2009). Time  is  precious:  Variable-   and event-centred    approaches  to process  analysis  in CSCL
          research. International Journal of Computer-supported Collaborative Learning, 4(3), 239-257.
Scardamalia,   M.   (2002). Collective  cognitive  responsibility   for the  advancement   of knowledge.    In B. Smith
          (Ed.), Liberal education in a knowledge society (pp. 67-98). Chicago: Open Court.
Scardamalia, M., & Bereiter, C. (2006). Knowledge building: Theory, pedagogy, and technology. In K. Sawyer
          (Eds.), Cambridge handbook of the learning sciences (pp. 97-118). New York: Cambridge University Press.
Schrire,  S.   (2006).  Knowledge   building    in asynchronous     discussion groups:    Going     beyond  quantitative
          analysis.   Computers  & Education,    46, 49­70.
Stahl, G. (2008). Chat on collaborative knowledge building. QWERTY, 3(1), 67-78.
Stahl, G. (2009). Studying virtual math teams. New York, NY: Springer.
Stahl, G. (2010). Social practices of group cognition in virtual math teams. In S. Ludvigsen, A. Lund, & R. Saljo
          (Eds.), Learning  in  social  practices. ICT   and   new  artifacts: Transformation   of  social and  cultural
          practices. London: Pergamon.
Stahl, G. (2010).   How  I  view  learning  and thinking    in CSCL    groups. Research   and   Practice in Technology
          Enhanced Learning (RPTEL), 1-23.
Suthers, D.D. (2006). Technology affordances for intersubjective meaning-making: A research agenda for CSCL.
          International Journal of Computers Supported Collaborative Learning, 1(3), 315-337.
Suthers,  D.D.,   Dwyer, N., Vatrapu,   R., &  Medina,   R.    (2007).  An  abstract transcript notation   for analyzing
          interactional  construction   of  meaning   in  online   learning.   Paper  presented  at  the 40th   Hawai`i
          International Conference on the System Sciences (HICSS-34),Waikoloa, Hawai`i.
Waters, J., & Gasson, S. (2006). Social Engagement in an Online Community of Inquiry. Paper presented at the
          27th International Conference on Information Systems (ICIS 2006), Milwaukee, WI.
Wenger, E. (1998). Communities of practice: Learning, meaning, and identity. Cambridge: University Press.
Zhou, N. (2009). Question co-construction in VMT chats. In G., Stahl (Ed.). Studying Virtual Math Teams. New
          York, NY: Springer Press.

Acknowledgements
This work was supported, in part, by National Science Counsel Grants NSC 97-2511-S-008 -002 -MY3 and
NSC    99-2631-S-008-001-.

© ISLS                                                                                                                 87
