CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                     Volume I: Long Papers

    Learning Science through Knowledge-Building and Augmented
                                              Reality in Museums
             Susan A. Yoon, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, yoonsa@gse.upenn.edu
                      Karen J. Elinich, The Franklin Institute, Philadelphia, PA, kelinich@fi.edu
        Christopher Steinmeier, Joyce Wang, Sean Tucker, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA
              Email: cst@dolphin.upenn.edu, joyce.s.wang@gmail.com, tuckers@med.upenn.edu

         Abstract: Although learning science in non-school settings has shown great promise in terms
         of  increasing  interest   and   engagement,    few  studies   have   systematically  investigated      and
         produced evidence of improved cognitive gains and higher order inquiry skills. Furthermore,
         little is known about what and how students learn through the digital technologies that are
         increasingly   being    used in these  non-school    settings. Through    an experimental     design,   this
         study   compared     four  conditions    for  learning    science concepts     with augmented      reality
         technologies    in   a  science    museum.    Using  knowledge-building        scaffolds  known    to   be
         successful in formal classrooms, we hypothesized that students would show greater cognitive
         gains and higher order inquiry skills than when scaffolds were not used. Through the use of
         digital augmentations,     the   study   also provided    information    about how   such    technologies
         impact learning in informal environments.

Introduction
The issue of declining participation by America's youth in science, technology, engineering, and math (STEM)
education and careers has received a great deal of attention over the last few years from industry, government,
and education    sectors (Business     Roundtable,     2005;  Domestic     Policy  Council,  2006;    U.S.  Department      of
Education, 2007). Experts predict that the availability of STEM jobs will continue to increase such that, by
2012, the number of positions in science and engineering will have outpaced the number of qualified people to
fill them by 26% and 15% respectively (NSF, 2006). Additional pressures on workforce development exist with
the emphasis on 21st century skills (Partnership for 21st Century Skills, 2007) by which learning from and using
digital technologies both for developing conceptual knowledge and process skills must figure prominently in
education. As new scientific and technological developments continue to impact people's lives, there is further
interest in providing educational opportunities that will increase general levels of scientific and technological
literacy. Given this enormous need, there is increasing recognition that STEM education can no longer be the
sole responsibility of formal schooling. The recent National Research Council (NRC) report on learning science
in informal  environments     (Bell   et al., 2009)  examines    the potential  that  non-school   settings   such    as zoos,
aquaria, and museums have for engaging large portions of the population in real-world scientific investigation.
Furthermore,   the    report notes,   where   NCLB     requirements  have     limited the  amount     of in-school    science
instructional time, informal programs actually serve as essential venues for learning. However, the report and
others (Rennie et al., 2003) also highlight the need for systematic studies of learning designs in order to realize
the potential for the field of informal science to contribute to STEM education and career development.
         This study investigated three related critical gaps in understanding of informal learning, as outlined in
the NRC report. First, while there is ample evidence of increased levels of interest and engagement, evidence for
improved  cognitive    gains  is less  convincing.    This is partially  due   to the free  choice,   episodic   structure  of
activities characteristic of informal environments. Second, as more educational technologies are being used to
assist in the development of conceptual knowledge, little is known about how digital platforms improve the
learning experience in these settings. Finally, while designed interactive activities have been shown to increase
important   scientific  skills--such     as   manipulating   and   observing--higher     order  inquiry    skills--such     as
reflection, making predictions, drawing conclusions, constructing generalizations, and argumentation--are less
frequently demonstrated. This study considered these critical gaps together by investigating the effects of digital
platforms in an informal environment on cognitive gains, with particular emphasis on higher order inquiry skills.
Using   knowledge-building       scaffolds    for  peer-to-peer    discursive   interaction  and      collective  knowledge
construction (Scardamalia,      2002),   the  study aimed  to    determine whether    and  how    learning  through    digital
platforms might be enhanced through a knowledge-building design, which had not previously been applied in
informal environments.       The research   was   conducted   at a premiere   science   museum     in a large  urban   city in
northeast USA using augmented reality visualization technologies. The specific questions investigated were: 1)
In what  ways    do   digitally  augmented    visualizations  of   scientific phenomena     assist learners   in developing
conceptual understanding in a museum environment? 2) To what extent do knowledge-building scaffolds added
to visualizations improve higher order inquiry skills? and 3) How can knowledge-building scaffolds, that are
highly successful in sustained and continuous classroom activities, be adapted to support single-visit episodic
and free choice engagement in museums?

© ISLS                                                                                                                       9
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                      Volume I: Long Papers

Theoretical Considerations
The following three areas of research in STEM education and the learning sciences informed the study's goals.
Digital Augmentations       and  Visualizations:   Augmented     reality applications  or   digital augmentations     of real-
world phenomena have increased in formal education and other knowledge domains such as medicine over the
last few years (John & Lim, 2007; Klopfer & Squire, 2008). Digital projections are programmed to enhance an
object or environment in order to simulate or visualize information that is not normally observed. For example,
in one   game   called   Environmental     Detectives,   students   can  access   virtual   underground     water  sources   to
determine impacts of a toxic spill (Klopfer & Squire, 2008). Visualization tools in science education research
have been found to produce positive learning gains such as challenging and correcting misconceptions (Tasker
&  Dalton,   2008),   concretizing   abstract  theories  (Dori &    Belcher,  2005),  and   understanding    scale   of agents
within systems (Sengupta & Wilensky, 2009). Although one group of researchers found positive outcomes in
terms  of  interest and  engagement     when   using  augmented     reality devices   in  a museum     setting   (Waite  et al.,
2004), little is known about cognitive impacts. Knowledge Building and Scaffolds:               With respect to improving
conceptual understanding and promoting higher order inquiry skills, one pioneering program of research in the
learning sciences involves computer-supported intentional learning environments (Hewitt & Scardamalia, 1998;
Scardamalia    &  Bereiter,  1994).   Both  the  technological   application  and  associated   pedagogy     use  educational
scaffolds   to enable    public, collective   contributions   that  shape   the knowledge     constructed    in  the  learning
community.     Such   scaffolds  include  prompts   for  consensus   building,   generalizations,   differentiation  between
evidence and theories, peer evaluation, and argumentation. For example, a prompt such as "My theory is..."
encourages     students  to use   evidence    to construct   a more    general   understanding    of   a class   of  scientific
phenomena.     Similarly,   the act of  creating  a "rise  above"   note provides  students   with   opportunities    to think
across diverse ideas and to offer conclusions about how the collective community views a scientific issue such
as the benefits of genetic engineering (Yoon, 2008). Learning in Informal Environments:                As noted in the NRC
report, learning in informal spaces is fluid, sporadic, and participant driven--characteristics that are thought to
increase   engagement    over   highly  structured  formal   classroom   experiences. Often    learning   activities occur   in
single-visit episodes    (Falk  & Dierking,    1992)  where    individuals  learn on  their  own    with  little follow-up   or
reflection.  To date,   knowledge-building     programs    have  been    used in  formal  classroom     environments     where
there  are   opportunities  for   extended,    recurring   investigations--opportunities     that   informal     environments
generally   lack. However,      there  is some   evidence    from   museum    visitor studies,    that  significantly   greater
cognitive   gains   can  be achieved    when   objects   are  accompanied     by  interpretive    labels (a  simple   form   of
scaffolding)   than when    there is  no  structure provided   (Allen,   1997;  Borun    &  Miller, 1980),   suggesting     that
common ground between the two environments may exist. These results, and the positive impact of knowledge-
building activities when coupled with computational tools, provide the rationale for undertaking this study.

Methodology

Participants and Context
Study participants were recruited from 6th and 7th grade classes who attended the museum on a field trip. This
grade band was chosen deliberately. By middle school, most children are developmentally able to theorize about
scientific  phenomena.    Furthermore,     the study's   scientific content   was  electricity,   which   local  standardized
curriculum covers in grade 4. Thus, all students would have some prior knowledge to access. The classes came
from three schools within a high needs urban school district with an average of 92% of students qualifying for
free or reduced price lunch. 119 students participated, with a gender ratio of 55% female to 45% male. While
this was not the first time these students had visited the museum, it was the first time they had been invited to
participate in learning research with the museum's educators.
          The  study    leveraged   a currently  funded    large scale   National Science    Foundation     informal    science
education   project   in which    the  central   goal is  to design,   integrate, and    increase   the  use of   educational
technologies within the museum experience. Several tools are under construction including digitally augmented
exhibit devices.    While   the  larger project  focuses   on  the  viability of  using   digital technologies    in informal
settings, the present study extended this focus by investigating what and how scientific concepts were learned
through such applications. The investigation used a prototype exhibit device called "Be the Path" that illustrated
electrical conductivity and circuits (see Figure 1). The students had no previous access to this device which
consisted of two metal spheres on a table, approximately one foot apart, with one connected by a wire to a
battery and the other connected to a light bulb. The students attempted different configurations to complete the
circuit and light the bulb by touching the balls. Once the circuit was completed, a projected visualization of
electrons flowing around the complete loop appeared. The instructions on the device provided little direction,
simply suggesting "try to complete the circuit."
          Students were grouped into four conditions such that each of the three participating schools had some
students encountering each of the four conditions so that each condition analyzed below includes students from
three  schools. The   conditions    were  constructed   to represent increasing   use    of scaffolds   for learning  through

© ISLS                                                                                                                       10
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                Volume I: Long Papers

digital augmentations and knowledge-building structures. Condition 1 (C1) served as the control group with no
digital augmentations or knowledge-building structures. Condition 2 (C2) represented the device with the digital
augmentation but no other scaffolding. This condition was designed to represent the average museum visitor
who participates mainly through hands-on sensory experiences or trial and error (Bell et al., 2009). Condition 1
and 2 also directly address the first research question, which is to understand the impact of digital augmentation
on conceptual understanding. Condition 3 (C3) featured some scaffolding in which the equivalent of labels in
the form   of directed  questions   were posted  in  the  room   for  participants  to reference. This  condition    was
designed to represent the ideal scenario for exhibit designers as they provide labels, signs, and explanations with
the expectation that visitors will read them. The posted questions were: What happens when you touched both
metal spheres? When you touched only one? What happened to make the light bulb light up? What does the
projection show?      What are  you supposed  to learn   by  using   this device?  Condition  4   (C4) represented   the
condition in which both digital augmentation and knowledge-building applications were used. Students were
instructed to work as a group of three. Each group was given the same questions as students in condition 3 and
additionally asked to brainstorm possible answers, give reasons for each, decide as a group, and write their
collective response on a worksheet. These directions were listed in a small box at the top of the worksheet.
Other knowledge-building scaffolds were added to the worksheet questions in the form of directed prompts such
as "Our hypothesis is..." and "Our theory is..." Students also had access to a bank of completed worksheets
which were posted on the wall in order to evaluate their own ideas against others through two more knowledge-
building scaffolds: "Others have said..." and "We agree/disagree with them because..." Conditions 3 and 4 were
constructed to respond directly to the second two research questions, which investigated whether knowledge-
building scaffolds increased higher order thinking and how a knowledge-building process might be adapted to
informal  environments.    Students in  conditions  1, 2, and   3 completed    the  worksheet  individually after    they
finished playing  with  the  device while  students  in  condition  4 actually  completed   the   worksheet during   the
experience.

                             Figure 1. Be the Path Device with Digital Augmentation.

         Students were randomly assigned to each condition. As the study was embedded in a whole class trip to
the museum,    we wanted    all students to  participate  in the  activity. However,   logistical factors subsequently
caused  variation in   the number   of participants analyzed  in  each  condition.  Some  students  lacked  authorized
consent to participate forms. Other students were absent for the pre-test data collection. See Table 1 for the
number of participants in each condition.

Table 1: Number of participants in each condition.

                                       Condition          Number of Participants
                                          1                           18
                                          2                           22
                                          3                           31
                                          4                  16 groups of 3 (48)

Data Sources and Analyses
Four data sets were collected and analyzed through a mixed-methods approach.
1.  A   conceptual    knowledge   survey  was   administered     to students  in   each group   before  and    after the
    intervention. The    survey  posed  five general   multiple  choice   questions related to  the scientific topic  of
    electrical conductivity and circuits such as, "Which class of elements best conducts electricity?" An open-
    ended question on the survey also solicited responses that demonstrated knowledge directly related to the
    device experience, i.e., "Think about an electric circuit that supplies electricity to a light bulb. What parts

© ISLS                                                                                                                 11
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                  Volume I: Long Papers

     make it work so that the bulb lights up?" These responses were coded on a five point Likert-scale from no
     understanding (0) to complete understanding (4). Collectively, the highest possible score on the conceptual
     knowledge   survey   was   nine.  A  paired-samples     t-test was  conducted  to determine     whether there   was  a
     statistically significant gain in conceptual knowledge within each condition. A repeated measures ANOVA
     was conducted on the data set to determine whether there was a statistically significant difference between
     the mean gains.
2.   With   respect to  worksheet    responses,  the last question,   "What  are  you  supposed   to learn  by  using this
     device?"  was    intended    to elicit responses   that   demonstrated    generalized  higher-order   thinking,  i.e.,
     understanding    of  electrical circuits and  how    the  human    body functioned  as a  conductor   in   the device
     experience. Responses      were  scored  on  a  four point   Likert-scale from no   understanding  (0)  to  complete
     understanding (3). A response that demonstrated complete understanding satisfied the following criteria:
         Level 3 Description:
          ·   Student identified that the human body can complete a circuit to conduct electricity.
          ·   Student identified both concepts (completed circuit and conductivity).
          ·   Student    demonstrated   accurate  understanding      of both concepts, even   if the  terms
              "circuit" or "conduct" are not explicitly used.
          ·   Student correctly used simile or metaphor to explain concepts.
          ·   Even if student identified all components, if a part of the answer is wrong or contains
              a misconception, it cannot count as complete understanding.
     An  ANOVA        was conducted    on   the data set  to  determine   whether  there was   a  statistically significant
     difference in responses between the conditions and a post-hoc Tukey analysis was conducted to determine
     the source of the difference.
3.   In order to investigate    how   knowledge-building      scaffolds  impacted  the nature  of the  museum     visit, 10
     groups  (30 students)     in condition   4 were   randomly     selected for short interviews.   Questions    solicited
     responses from     students  to  determine   the  utility of   worksheet  questions   and   the knowledge-building
     scaffolds in helping them learn about the scientific topic. Responses were summarized and used to identify
     which scaffolds were more or less effective. Responses of scaffold helpfulness were tallied and a chi-square
     test was conducted on the frequencies in each scaffold category.
4.   The last data source integrated observation field notes and anecdotal reflections from the five researchers.
     These notes and reflections were used to triangulate findings from the other data sources and also to provide
     plausible rationales and further hypotheses that might explain the results we obtained.
For  the  open-ended      questions  on  the    conceptual   knowledge    survey  and  the  worksheet,   the    data were
qualitatively and systematically mined by the researchers (Strauss & Corbin, 1998). Codes were established, a
categorization manual was constructed, two external graduate students were trained on the coding scheme, and
inter-rater reliability  was   obtained  on   20%   of the   data   (35 mixed  pre- and  post-intervention      open-ended
responses and 18 worksheet responses). In both cases, greater than 90 percent agreement was obtained.

Analysis

Conceptual Knowledge Survey
Figure 2 shows the mean raw scores obtained for pre- and post-intervention conceptual knowledge surveys in all
four conditions. Over     all, across pre-  and  post-intervention    surveys, the  means  were   low,  ranging   between
2.6250 to 3.6818. Students in C2 (the condition with just the digital augmentation) had the greatest gains and the
highest raw score on the survey.

                           Figure 2. Means of Raw Scores for Pre- and Post-Intervention
                                  Conceptual Knowledge Surveys for Conditions 1-4.

© ISLS                                                                                                                    12
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                             Volume I: Long Papers

         Table 2 shows the results of paired-samples t-test conducted within each condition. The table shows
that gains in all conditions except C1 were statistically significant. However, the repeated measures ANOVA
showed   no significant    differences between the  mean gains.  From  the observation  field notes  and      anecdotal
reflections, researchers identified some difficulties students had in referring to and completing the worksheet
questions and the post-surveys in C3 and C4. These students wanted to rush through the activity in order to
participate in the rest of the field trip and appeared to put less effort into the post-intervention surveys.

Table 2: Results of paired-samples T-Test comparing means within conditions.

               Condition     Mean Difference        SD           t         df        Sig. (2-tailed)
                      1           .38889          1.81947       .907       17            .377
                      2           .72727          1.07711      3.167       21            .005*
                      3           .67742          1.83280      2.058       30            .048*
                      4           .56250          1.41280      2.758       47            .008*
             * p<0.05

Worksheet Responses
The analysis of worksheet responses that evaluated students' abilities to generalize about electrical circuits and
conductivity yielded some positive results toward understanding the impact of the different study conditions.
Figure 3 shows an increasing trend from C1 to C4 in the means obtained of generalized higher-order thinking.
Out of a possible score of 3--which indicated a complete understanding--students in C4 scored the highest with
a mean   score of     2 (representing  the category of Partial  Understanding)  while   students in  the      remaining
conditions scored between 1 (Little Understanding) and 1.5.

         Figure 3. Mean Scores of the Generalized Higher-Order Thinking Analysis for Conditions 1-4.

         An ANOVA showed a significant difference between the means of the four conditions, F(3)=4.560,
p=.005. A post-hoc Tukey analysis showed that the difference was attributable to the higher mean of C4 which
was significantly higher than C1 (p=.004) and C2 (p=.028), and marginally higher than C3 (p=.077). Sample
responses from students in C4 along with their codes compared to responses from students in other conditions
illustrated these results:
         Student 1 (C4):     I learn the body can act like wires to connect stuff and there are electric
                             charges in the body. (score = 3)
         Student 2 (C4):     How our body transported electricity through the circuit into the metal
                             spheres to make the bulb and images appear. (score = 3)
         Student 3 (C2):     You have electrical currents in your body. (score = 1)
         Student 4 (C3):     How energy flows through your body. (score = 2)

Interview Responses
In the small group interviews, condition 4 students were asked to provide responses about whether they believed
the following five categories of worksheet and knowledge-building scaffolds were helpful: worksheet questions;
directions on how to work in a collaborative group listed at the top of the worksheet; collaborating in a group;
knowledge-building      prompts; and   a bank of answers from   other groups. Figure  4 shows  a  graph       of student
responses in each of the categories. There was unanimous agreement that collaborating in a small group was
helpful while the directions at the top of the worksheet were least often identified as helpful. Greater than 50
percent of the students said that the remaining three categories of scaffolds were helpful. When asked what they

© ISLS                                                                                                                13
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                Volume I: Long Papers

thought was the most and least helpful scaffold, 100 percent of the students identified collaborating in a group as
most helpful. The least helpful scaffolds were identified as the knowledge-building prompts (57 percent) and the
directions (37 percent). However, there is some evidence to suggest that students had difficulties understanding
why the prompts were included. For example, one student said, "We didn't even know what they was about,
like, but we just put an answer that others have said, like on the board." When students did understand the
rationale behind   including   the prompts,   their   helpfulness increased. For  example,    one  student answered,
"Because we knew what we was supposed to give. Like the hypothesis, what we believe it is, and the theory is
what we think it is." Other students said that they weren't accustomed to answering questions like that. Thus,
responses    to whether    or not students  felt the   knowledge-building   prompts   were  helpful   appeared  to be
influenced by their familiarity or understanding of the prompt vocabulary such as "hypothesis" and "theory."
Similarly, with the directions, some students stated that they didn't read them because they were just focused on
answering the questions. The following interviewer and group exchange illustrated this point:

          Interviewer: Alright, remember these directions in the box. OK? Did these directions help
                        you figure out how to come up with the best answer?
          Student #1: Didn't read them.
          Interviewer: You didn't read them?
          Student #1: Nope.
          Student #2: I didn't see it.
          Interviewer: What about you?
          Student #3: I didn't read nothing.
          Interviewer: You didn't read them. OK. So why did you guys not read this?
          Student #1: I don't know, it's just like...
          Student #2: `Cause we was studying. We was focused on the questions.

          Comments in the researcher field notes and anecdotal reflections support this finding. After a longer
interaction with the device than the other three conditions, some students appeared to be anxious to complete the
worksheets and had a "just get it done" disposition. Still, considering students in condition 4 showed greater
ability to generalize from the experience (Figure 3), the worksheet and knowledge-building scaffolds seemed to
provide some utility in terms of learning the content. A chi-squared analysis revealed a statistically significant
difference between the frequencies found in the five categories, x2 = 9.96, p=.0411.

                  Figure 4. Frequency of Student Responses Indicating Helpfulness of Categories
                                  of Worksheet and Knowledge-Building Scaffolds.

Discussion
The explanation and implication of study findings are discussed in order of the three research questions.
          1) In   what  ways  do  digitally augmented    visualizations of scientific phenomena    assist learners in
developing conceptual understanding in a museum environment?
          The   results of the conceptual   knowledge   survey that  tested  for increases in   general knowledge  of
electrical conductivity and circuits showed that only students in condition 1 (no digital augmentation) did not
demonstrate a significant increase in their understanding after manipulating the device. This finding suggests
that the  digital augmentation    did  have an impact   on conceptual   knowledge.    The  fact that students had  the
greatest gains in condition 2 (just digital augmentation and no other scaffolds) suggests that other scaffolds may
not have been necessary to increase learning of these general concepts. However, the results found an increased
higher order thinking from students in condition 4, suggesting that scaffolds might be necessary to reach more

© ISLS                                                                                                              14
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                      Volume I: Long Papers

advanced learning. Both findings are consistent with other research. For example, Klopfer and Squire (2008)
found that students were basically able to solve the simple problem, but required additional teacher supports to
resolve more complex issues. Similarly, John and Lim (2007) found that although students learned from the
medical training augmentations, the learning gains were enhanced when combined with pedagogical scaffolds.
There are other plausible explanations for why differences in learning outcomes between the conditions were
found in the conceptual knowledge survey. In research meetings, one researcher on the team discussed the idea
that the scaffolds may have overly formalized what was supposed to be an informal experience, e.g., reading
worksheets, following directions, and filling them in. This researcher was the main observation field note taker.
She recalled that the feeling in the room was markedly different between the conditions. Students in condition 2
were generally more playful and experimenting on their own--much like students would normally behave on
the museum floor. Students in conditions 3 and 4, however, were more serious and referred to the questions to
dictate their next steps thereby missing the important concepts--much like traditional classroom instruction.
Another explanation that may be related to this over-formalization is the fact that students in conditions 3 and 4
spent more time with the device and the post-intervention survey questions were the last thing standing in the
way of running off to participate in other nearby museum exhibits such as the Sports Challenge. Thus, their
rushed responses may not be an accurate indication of what they learned.
         2)  To  what    extent  do  knowledge-building      scaffolds   added  to visualizations     improve   higher   order
inquiry skills?
         As  noted    earlier, while  there   appeared   to be no   significant effect  of   the  worksheet  and knowledge-
building scaffolds    on   increasing  learning  of   concepts,   students'  abilities to  generalize  from    their hands-on
experiences, which we have interpreted as a higher order inquiry skill, showed differences across the conditions.
The increasing   trend   in  Figure  3 appears   to   be related  to the   number  and  kinds     of scaffolds students  were
exposed to while manipulating the device. Students in condition 4 (with all scaffolds available) were better able
to generalize their understanding than the other condition participants and the ability to generalize also appeared
to relate to the presence of scaffolds. This finding is relevant to the field of informal science learning in that we
provide some evidence that indicates that a modified knowledge-building approach may be useful in helping
students learn  science    beyond    simply   manipulating     and  observing   phenomena        (NRC,  2009).  Furthermore,
through our investigation of a kind of learning design, we believe that this study responds to the call for more
systematic  research   that    identifies how  learning     science  in informal   science   environments    can impact    the
broader goals of STEM education (Rennie, 2003).
         3)  How   can   knowledge-building      scaffolds,   that  are  highly successful     in sustained  and continuous
classroom activities, be adapted to support single-visit episodic and free choice engagement in museums?
         Although the results for question #2 were encouraging, we were also interested in identifying which
scaffolds were most helpful in terms of learning science in the museum. From the interview data analysis, it
appears that the findings were mixed. Overall, students identified the ability to collaborate with each other as the
most helpful scaffold, which is consistent with other knowledge-building studies (e.g., Yoon, 2008) and studies
on collaborative learning (Dillenbourg & Schneider, 1995; O'Donnell & O'Kelly, 1994). One of the important
design  constraints   that challenged     the research   team  during   construction   of  the   condition activities was  the
notion of deep investigation over an extended period of time that is characteristic of successful knowledge-
building classrooms (Scardamalia, 2002). We were concerned that the single-visit episodic nature of museum
learning experiences would greatly inhibit the ability for students to knowledge build. To be clear, we are not
claiming  to have     achieved  knowledge     building   in  this  study.  Rather, we   are  addressing    the  ability to use
knowledge-building scaffolds to promote learning in informal environments. Those scaffolds were represented
by the directions to collaborate, the collaboration itself, knowledge-building prompts, and the bank of other
group responses intended to simulate the use of "rise aboves."             From the interview data, there is evidence to
suggest that there is some utility when students are familiar with the terms and processes. However, to ensure
that all students receive the intended learning benefits of knowledge building, more time needs to be devoted to
learning the terms and processes which would take longer than one activity during a single visit affords. This
constraint in addition to our hunches about the over-formalization of informal activities and the increased higher
order skills in the last condition has led the team to conclude that further investigation is warranted.

Conclusions and Future Research
Results of the study suggest that digital augmentations can help in conceptual development of science content.
They   also suggest   that   higher  order    thinking with   respect   to being   able   to generalize    from the   museum
experience can be improved through the use of worksheets and knowledge-building scaffolds. While students
unanimously   said    that collaborating   in  small   groups  was   helpful  and  a   majority   of  students  said  that the
worksheets were helpful, the utility of the other scaffolds is inconclusive. Preparations for another study are
underway with the following modifications. For C4, since it was not clear that students had actually read the
directions, they will be read aloud. Rather than a suggestion, students will be required to consult the bank of
previous  answers     before   they construct   their  own.  Students   will also  be   instructed   briefly about   what  the

© ISLS                                                                                                                       15
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                Volume I: Long Papers

knowledge-building prompts mean and, finally, the post-intervention surveys will be administered the day after
their museum visit rather than immediately after the activity. To address the issue of over-formalization, another
condition will be added between conditions 3 and 4 in which we will post the worksheet questions but with the
directions, knowledge-building      prompts,  and  the bank    of  previous group  answers  added.  In  this condition,
students will also work in small groups but will not be required to fill in the worksheet while they are interacting
with the device.

References
Allen, S. (1997). Using scientific inquiry activities in exhibit explanations. Science Education,81(6), 715-734.
Bell, P., Lewenstein, B., Shouse, A., & Feder, M. (Eds.). (2009). Learning Science in Informal Environments:
         People, Places and Pursuits. Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
Borun,   M. &  Miller,    M. (1980).  What's  in a name?     A study of  the effectiveness of explanatory   labels  in a
         science museum. Philadelphia: Franklin Institute.
Business   Roundtable     (2005).  Tapping  America's    Potential: The  Education   for Innovation    Initiative. [Web
         Resource] Available online. www.businessroundtable.org/publications.
Dillenbourg,  P.,  &   Schneider,   D.  (1995).  Mediating     the mechanisms    which   make  collaborative    learning
         sometimes effective. International Journal of Educational Telecommunications, 1, 131­146.
Domestic    Policy Council    (2006).  American    Competitiveness   Initiative. Office  of Science   and  Technology
         Policy: Washington, DC.
Dori, Y. & Belcher, J. (2005). Learning electromagnetism with visualization and active learning. In J. Gilbert
         (Ed.) Models and Modeling in Science Education, vol. 1 (pp. 187-216). Dordrecht, The Netherlands:
         Springer.
Falk, J., & Dierking, L. (1992). The Museum Experience. Washington, DC: Whalesback Books.
Hewitt,  J. &    Scardamalia,   M.    (1998).  Design  principles   for  distributed knowledge     building  processes.
         Educational Psychology Review, 10(1), 75-96.
Klopfer, E. & Squire, K. (2008). Environmental detectives - the development of an augmented reality platform
         for environmental simulations. Education Technology Research and Development, 56, 203-228.
John,  N.   & Lim,     I.  (2007).  Cybermedicine   tools    for   communication   and   learning. Journal   of    Visual
         Communication in Medicine, 30(1), 4-9.
National   Science    Foundation.   (2006).   America's   pressing   challenge:  Building   a stronger  foundation,    a
         companion to science and engineering indicators. Arlington, VA: Author.
O'Donnell,   A.  M.,  &    O'Kelly, J. B.  (1994). Learning    from  peers:  Beyond  the rhetoric  of  positive results.
         Educational Psychology Review, 6, 321­349.
Partnership for 21st Century Skills (2007). The Intellectual and Policy Foundations of the 21st Century Skills
         Framework. Tucson, AZ 1-24.
Rennie, L. J., Feher, E., Dierking, L.D. & Falk, J. H. (2003) Towards an agenda for advancing research on
         science learning in out-of-school settings. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 40(2), 112-120.
Scardamalia, M. & Bereiter, C. (1994). Computer support for knowledge-building communities. Journal of the
         Learning Sciences, 3(3), 265­283.
Scardamalia, M. (2002). Collective cognitive responsibility for the advancement of knowledge. In B. Smith
         (Ed.), Liberal Education in a Knowledge Society (pp. 67-98). Chicago: Open Court.
Sengupta, P. & Wilensky, U. (2009). Learning electricity with NIELS: Thinking with electrons and thinking in
         levels. International Journal of Computers, Math and Learning, 14, 21-50.
Strauss, A.   L. &    Corbin,  J.  M.  (1998). Basics  of    Qualitative Research:   Techniques    and Procedures    for
         Developing Grounded Theory (2nd edition), Sage, Newbury Park, CA.
Tasker, R. & Dalton, R. (2008). Visualizing the molecular world ­ design, evaluation, and use of animation. In
         J. Gilbert, M. Reiner, M. Nakhleh (Eds.), Models and Modeling in Science Education, vol. 3 (pp. 103-
         131). Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Springer.
U.S.   Department  of  Education    (2007). Report  of   the Academic    Competitiveness   Council. Washington,     DC:
         Author.
Waite,  T., Kirkley,   J., Pendleton,  R. &   Turner,  L. (2004).   MUSEpad:     Supporting   information  accessibility
         through mobile location-based technology, TechTrends, 49(3), 76-82.
Yoon,   S. A. (2008).   An   evolutionary  approach   to  harnessing  complex    systems thinking  in  the science   and
         technology classroom. International Journal of Science Education. 30(1), 1-32.

Acknowledgment
This material is based upon work supported by the National Science Foundation under Grant No. 0741659. Any
opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Science Foundation.

© ISLS                                                                                                                 16
