CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                     Volume I: Long Papers

Socially Constructive Interaction for Fostering Conceptual Change
Moegi Saito, Naomi Miyake, Consortium for Renovating Education of the Future, University of Tokyo, Japan
                         Email: saitomoegi@coref.u-tokyo.ac.jp, nmiyake@p.u-tokyo.ac.jp

         Abstract: In order to guide the design and assessment of successful intentional conceptual
         change    at school,  we  examined    third  graders' learning   processes     using a  series  of lessons
         taught by    a highly  experienced    teacher.   The  lesson   unit  consisted  of   11 problems    whose
         answers    were   to  be predicted  and  discussed    one at   a time.    All  21 students  in   the class
         successfully learned the target concept.      Our analysis revealed that they started by confirming
         their rudimentary ideas taken from daily experiences, and then gradually developed theory-
         like concepts     by  repeatedly  discussing  their predictions   to be   confirmed   with  experiments.
         Toward the end of the unit, individual students could express their understanding in their own
         words,    indicating   that  they  successfully   integrated   their folk   knowledge      with  scientific
         thinking.      Further   analysis  of the   dialogue   contents     indicated  that  some   small-group
         discussions    were   effectively  monitored    and   utilized   by  the  rest of  the  class,  to  assure
         achievement of the entire class.

Introduction
This   presentation   aims to  clarify the  structures  of successful   classroom    discussion   that  support  learners in
changing their folk knowledge into scientific understanding.         It has been suggested that sequential cumulative
discussion across students has strong positive effects in helping learners adaptively expand their understanding
(e.g., Hatano and     Inagaki, 1991;   Schwartz   and  Martin,  2004;   Miyake,    2008).   However, the details of such
classroom discussion have rarely been analyzed fully to explore whether a specific structure leads to adaptive
conceptual  change.     In this   paper, we   report  the  results of   our   analysis  of  classroom    discussions  of  12
consecutive lessons of a third-grade class of 21 students, regarding their understanding of the physical identity
of objects (the inability of two objects, like air and water, to share identical physical space).         The lessons were
conducted according to the framework of Hypothesis-Experiment-Instruction (HEI) (Hatano and Inagaki, 1991;
Miyake, 2008).   Overall, our analysis revealed that the students' discussion developed according to a specifiable
structure, which   we   could   formulate  as  a  socially expanded     version   of two-person     constructive interaction
(Miyake, 2008). This analysis should help develop better CSCL systems for promoting collaborative learning in
daily classroom practices.

Research Context: Hypothesis-Experiment-Instruction
In this section, we explain the framework of HEI, created by Itakura in 1963, and the target content of the "Air
and  Water"   unit  (Itakura,  2000)   used as   our research  context.     HEI   is a  strategy to  teach  basic scientific
concepts.   An HEI lesson consists of a set of strategic procedures for discussion and a problem. The students
predict and discuss the answer to this problem, which is revealed as a result of a relevant experiment at the end
of the discussion.    An HEI unit consists of multiple problems, or experiments, carefully ordered to guide the
development of scientific concepts underlying the problem set.            To practice a unit, a teacher uses a problem
sheet  for each experiment,     which    explains the  experiment   and   possible   answers.    Students are expected to
integrate the results of the experiments in their own way to formulate individualized hypotheses, or rudimentary
scientific concepts owned by individual students.
         For a typical HEI problem, students follow the four steps (Itakura, 1997).
1) The  teacher demonstrates      the  procedure  of the  experiment,   and   the  students   write their predictions  of its
   outcome by choosing one of the alternatives.        The results of the choices are made explicit when the teacher
   counts and writes on the blackboard the number of students who chose each alternative.
2) Students   openly   explain  their  choices to  the  class, so  that all  class members     can  hear  the explanations.
   During this discussion, the students are allowed to express their ideas at will, including staying silent, and to
   change their choices if they wish to do so.
3) When this discussion naturally comes to an end, the experiment is conducted either by the teacher or by the
   students in small groups.
4) After the experiment, students write comments individually.
         These four steps are repeated in a unit, in the order of the problems.         All the HEI units were developed
by Itakura and his core group, and have been tried out and refined by teachers in real classrooms.

The "Air and Water" Unit
The "Air and Water" unit consists of the 11 problems presented in Fig. 1, with explanations in Table 1.

© ISLS                                                                                                                     96
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                                   Volume I: Long Papers

                      Problem 1  Problem 2         Problem 3  Problem 4         Problem 5  Problem 6

                      Problem 7   Problem 8  Problem 9   Problem 10        Problem 11

                      Figure 1. Depictions of the 11 Problems in the "Air and Water" HEI Unit.

Table 1: Wording of the 11 problems in the "Air and Water" HEI unit.

Problem 1. When an empty glass is pushed into water upside down, will the water come into the glass?
Problem 2. If you place a crumpled piece of paper in the glass and do the same as in Problem 1, will the paper
            get wet?
Problem 3. An upside-down glass with water inside is in the water.           When you lift it up through the surface of
            the water, what will happen to the water in the glass?
Problem 4. What will happen when you suck air through a straw from an upside-down glass in the water?
Problem 5. Which dropper sucks more water, one whose tip is deep in the water or one whose tip is shallow?
Problem 6. Can water be sucked through a 1m straw?
Problem 7. A can of juice has just one hole on top.       When the can is turned upside down, will some juice
            come out of it?
Problem 8. Will some juice come out of a can that has two holes on its top and is turned upside down?
Problem 9. Suppose you put the can used in problem 8 deep into the water, keeping your finger tight on one of
            the holes.   Will some water go into the can?
Problem 10: What will happen to the can in problem 9 if you let your finger go?
Problem 11: Will some soy sauce come out of its container if you put your finger onto the hole on its top?

         These 11 problems can be classified into two subsets, Problem 1 (P1) to P6, and the rest.            The first set
includes problems whose answers are justifiable with daily experiences.               Their answers are easy to imagine
because the problems ask for direct sensing, as "visible" bubbles (P1, 2, 3, and 5) or "sense of mouth" (P4 and
6).  In contrast, the  situations  of P7    to P10 are  difficult   to imagine because    they do not   often occur in the
students' daily lives.  These problems require learners to rely on their newly formed hypotheses, from predicting
and observing the experiment results in the previous problems.            The last problem, P11, can be answered by
relying on either daily experiences or newly learned understanding, or both.
         The problems in a unit are ordered so that answering the latter problems encourages active integration
of  the experiences   gained    through the    preceding  problems.      The hypotheses    required  to answer  the  latter
problems require higher-order abstractions of the experiences gained through the former problems.                 Miyake
(2009) proposed a four-stage model of conceptual change (Table 2), where              the concepts at both levels 1 and 2
could be formed based on individual experiences, while those at levels 3 and 4 require integration of different
perspectives socially distributed among different individuals.         According to this model, in the "Air and Water"
unit, P1 to P6 can be answered with understanding at levels 1 and 2, while answering problems after P7 requires
integration of different perspectives among learners.

Table 2: Four-stage model of conceptual change.

Level 4    Scientific concept, created and shared in the scientific community
Level 3    Confirming explanation by integrating many ideas, including "textbook" scientific concepts
Level 2    Rules of thumb created by accumulating one's own (yet many) perspectives from different situations
Level 1t   Explanation or "theory" like folk concept based on one incidence

© ISLS                                                                                                                   97
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                             Volume I: Long Papers

Hypotheses
Judging from the model in Table 2, we hypothesized that answering problems after P7 required level 3 and up
collaborative integration of one's own multiple experiences and those of others.     In order to test this hypothesis,
we analyzed the predictions made before and after the discussion, accuracy of the predictions, and number of
utterances  made    by  the class as   well as  by each   individual student  during  the discussion    and after the
experiments, for each of the 11 problems.      More specifically, we tested whether the students' predictions of the
experimental results for P1 to 6 were different from those for P7 to 11.   While the prediction of correct answers
tended to be high for P1 to P6 even before the discussion, it could be low for the earlier problems of the latter
set (P7 and 8), and gradually increase toward P11. The predictions would also be more discrepant before and
after  the discussions  for the latter set  of problems.  We  also tested whether we  could   identify  collaborative
construction of abstracted concepts of level 3 and up in the discussion of the problem set of P7 to P11.

Data Analysis and Results

The Data
The data came from the "Air and Water" unit in an HEI class conducted in May and June of 2002.          Twenty-one
third graders participated in 12 lessons taught by a highly experienced HEI teacher, Yuko Saito, who voluntarily
kept records of the students' answers and discussions using hand-written notes and voice recordings.
           Figure 3 indicates the shift of predictions over the 11 problems.  Each box corresponds to a problem in
the unit, in order.   In each  box, the  white  bars indicate the  number  of choices made   before  discussion;  the
choices included the alternative answers of A, B, C, and D; the circled one (e.g., B for P1), is the correct answer.
The black bars indicate the number of choices made after the discussion but before the experiment.

Predictions of Answers
For P1 to P4, the students tended to choose the correct alternative from the beginning and to stay with it after
discussion (Fig. 3).   For P5 and 6, they experienced a slight discrepancy between the two choices, but tended to
choose the correct answer after discussion.     This difference between P1 to P4 and P5 and 6 may be due to the
ease   of  finding reliable reasons for choices:   P1 to  4 could  have been  answered    by remembering    ordinary
experiences at home (e.g., taking a bath).     In P5 and 6, the problem situation shifted away from such familiar
scenes to those using tools often found in a science class.   With P7, the pattern suddenly changed, with no one
choosing the correct answer even after discussion. The same phenomenon happened again for P8; however, with
P9, the students recovered and were once again able to predict correctly how the experiment would turn out.
They were shaken again on P10; however, they were all able to predict the correct answer to the last problem,
P11.   The overall pattern indicates that at the end of the unit, all the students in this class somehow successfully
formed a rudimentary concept of physical identity, at least with regard to whether or not air and water could
share the same physical space.    The shift pattern matched what we hypothesized in Section 2.

        Problem 1             Problem 2           Problem 3          Problem 4     Problem 5            Problem 6

                              Problem 7         Problem 8      Problem 9       Problem 10          P.11

       Fig. 2. Student's Choices of Alternative Answers for Each Problem in the "Air and Water" HEI Unit.

Shift Pattern of Predictions
If the shift pattern of predictions matched our hypothesis (1), we could expect to observe a corresponding trend
in the number of level 3 and up utterances in our model in Fig. 2.        We analyzed the contents of the student

© ISLS                                                                                                             98
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                               Volume I: Long Papers

discussion  to  test  this hypothesis.   For  an  utterance  to be classified  as level 3 and  up,  it had to include
expressions about the inability of air and water to share the same physical space (e.g., "The seal stops the air.
When the air can't move, the water won't move, either" for P11).        An utterance such as "I have tried such an
experiment with a wash bowl in the bath" for P1 would not be level 3 or above.            The correspondence rate of
coding by two coders was 94%.
         Figure 3 depicts the pattern we observed.     The bars for each problem indicate the number of utterances
at all levels. The black bars at the bottom indicate the number of level 3 and up utterances for each problem.
As we hypothesized, for P1 to P6 the students did not talk much at level 3 or up, though some could express
such understanding as early as P1.     For P7, again as we expected, the number of level 3 and up utterances was
close to zero, with only two students expressing such understanding.     Thereafter, the number rose sharply for P8
but decreased toward the end of the unit, as the total number of utterances also decreased.        This trend differed
from our expectation, yet the level 3 and up utterances for P7 to 11 totaled 63, which was much higher than the
total of 38 for P1 to 6.   The average number of such utterances was 6.3 for P1 to P6, and 12.7 for P7 to P11.

               Figure. 3. Number of Students' Utterances during Discussion in the "Air and Water" HEI Unit.
         This trend could be interpreted as indicating that most of the students succeeded in changing their folk
theory (i.e., rule of thumb based on everyday experiences) into more scientific theory-like understanding by
bridging two different types of problems.        However, level 3 and up utterances existed even at P7 (though the
owners  did    not make    the correct prediction), and  at  P8 nobody  could  predict  correctly  even though many
utterances were coded as level 3 and up.       Thus, this quantitative whole-class analysis did not seem to provide
enough information to confirm our hypotheses.       To go one step further, we analyzed each student's utterances.

Coding of Discussion Patterns in Terms of Role Exchange
In order  to   identify  a pattern among     the discussions, we   used the   framework   of  constructive interaction
developed and tested for a two-person joint problem.      According to this framework, role exchange of task-doing
(uttering ideas) and monitoring (listening) appears to be responsible for abstracting understanding (Shirouzu et
al., 2002). It has been proposed that this mechanism happens socially to induce collaborative conceptual change
(Miyake, 2008), or to help learners collaboratively change their folk theory into a scientific concept, as indicated
in the model described above (Miyake, 2009).          In order to test this idea, we coded the patterns of turn-taking
during the discussion of the 12 lessons into two categories of role exchange: individual sequence and group
dialogue, defined as follows.
         Individual      sequence      Learners  take  turns to express  their ideas  in  succession.   Illustratively,
utterances would move as A>R>F>C>H....           This is a linear successive role exchange in which a single person's
verbalization is handed down sequentially to the next person.      Though there is not much chance for constructive
interaction  among    the  speakers,   this process assures  an  equal  chance for  all class members,    and thus  is
sometimes preferred by teachers (CoREF, 2010).
         Group     dialogue    Role  exchange can happen socially,  involving groups.    In a class discussion, a small
group  of   two to   three students  may    engage  in a positive  discussion, exchanging    roles of  task-doing and
monitoring among them for a while.       Yet at the same time this group as a whole could be assuming the role of
task-doing to the whole class, possibly working as a core or leading group of the lesson, whose discussion can
be monitored by the other students in the class.      When this group's discussion comes to a halt for some reason,
a different group of students takes over the task-doing role by starting their own discussion to be monitored by
the rest of the students.  Such a shift of speakers exhibits a pattern, such as A>B>A>B followed by C>D>C>D,
then by B>D>E>F>D>F.
         Which pattern leads the class to a more successful conceptual change?            If teachers' preferences are
relevant, we would expect to observe more individual sequences in successful lessons such as those we analyze

© ISLS                                                                                                               99
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                              Volume I: Long Papers

here.   A prediction   based    on the rigid  formulation  of the  constructive interaction  framework     also favors
individual sequences because it requires each participant to experience both roles.          Yet we can also expect
group dialogues to lead to successful learning, as we observe a small group of selected class members engage in
a long  heated class   discussion,  which  is monitored   rather positively by the  other members.     If our analysis
identifies this group-based pattern, this result may lead to new understanding of how to design and support such
activities more positively than before.

Analysis of Role-exchange Patterns in Group Discussion
We analyzed the role-exchange pattern in discussions with the following two procedures.
         Procedure     1 We  counted   the utterances  of  each  individual student who   participated in our  data, to
determine if any bias existed in the frequencies of role exchange. The students were assigned letters A to U
based on the number of utterances, where the most frequent talker was A.
         Procedure 2 For each of problems P7 to P10, we tabulated the shift to the task-doing role identified as
a talker of her/his opinion. We also analyzed utterances relevant to conceptual change.
         The  data    consisted of  263 utterances,  9 of  which   were uttered  by   the teacher.  Because     all her
utterances were made in an effort to control the progress of the student discussion (e.g., "We don't have enough
time. Let's experiment"), they were not coded, leaving 254 student utterances for this analysis.

Role-exchange Frequencies
Figure 4 lists the number of utterances for each student in the class, from the one who talked the most (top) to
the one who talked the least (bottom).     Students are identified alphabetically.    Figure 5 indicates the order of
students who talked for each problem.      It is possible to identify the role exchange pattern (individual-based or
group-based),  with    demographic   information  on whose    comments  were   followed   by whom,  when,    and    how
often.   In order   to identify the  interaction patterns, we looked  for   sequences in  which two    to four persons
iterated their utterances, and coded them as group dialogues (denoted with black cells in the graph).           During
these group-based exchanges, we assumed that some constructive interaction occurred among the members, by
exchanging roles of task-doing and monitoring.        This iterative pattern was identified not only by the orderly
exchange  of  utterances  but   also by content   continuity.   Utterance   numbers  17  to 26 of  P8,  skipping    M's
utterance at number 18, is such a case.    The white cells indicate no apparent group dialogue, thus representing
individual sequences.

Figure. 4. Number of Utterances for Each Student.             Figure. 5. Role-exchange Patterns for Each Problem.

         We infer from the data in Fig. 4 that if any group-based task-doing occurred, the chances were high
that the group included students A, B, and C, and possibly D and E.          The graph in Fig. 5 also indicates that
during these 11 collaborative problem-solving lessons everyone talked; thus, every student played a task-doing
role at least once.

© ISLS                                                                                                              100
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                               Volume I: Long Papers

         In Fig. 5, the percentages of black cells in each column are lower for P1 to P6 (44.8% for P1, 35.1% for
P2, 33.3% for P3, 23.8% for P4, 25% for P5, and 0% for P6) than for P8 to P11 (44.1%, 39.1%, 0%and 40%).
This result may indicate that for this class, it was necessary for the students to accumulate different perspectives,
or expressions based on individually different experiences in the former phase, in order to move on to more
constructive group-based interaction regarding a focused sharable topic on which selected members exchanged
roles, possibly leading them to raise their understanding (Shirouzu et al., 2002).     This group dialogue could have
worked as group-based task-doing, whose discussion was monitored by the rest of the class members.
         To analyze the distribution patterns of the black cells in Fig. 4, we must rely more on our observations
and interpretation of constructive dialogues.    With some caution, we made the following conclusions.      Because
P7 was a new problem for everyone, each student expressed her/his own ideas, resulting in a long sequence of
individual sequences.     During P8, after watching what happened to the juice in the can with one hole when it
was turned upside-down, the same students appeared to be able to focus on selected aspects of the phenomenon,
thus starting some group dialogue on such topics.      Two such group discussions could have been highly positive,
judging from the number of people involved and the length of the discussions.        However, this group task did not
seem to have worked fully to adaptively deepen the understanding of the members in the group or the rest of the
class, because none of them correctly predicted the result of the experiment (Fig. 2).     For P9, students A and C
again engaged in group dialogue, as if they had picked up on their interaction for P7, providing a task-doing
group for the class to monitor.  Because most of the class members were able to answer P9 correctly, this group
task-doing could have been effectively monitored by the class members; most of them understood the content of
the discussion,  and   possibly integrated   it to  deepen their understanding.     After this socially implemented
constructive interaction between the core groups who were doing the task and the other members who were
monitoring, each individual student was ready to express her/his own understanding in her/his own expressions,
which led to sequential individual sequences (P10 column in Fig. 5).

Content Analysis of P7 to P10 Discussions
We examined the contents of utterances during the student discussions of P7 to P10, to confirm whether the
contents would fit our interpretation of the Fig. 5 patterns.

Table 3: Excerpts of typical utterances during the discussion session of P7.

          3    J      I want the juice to come out fast.
          ...  ...    ...
          7    A      The can has only one hole so the air can't escape.
          8    B      When I punched a small hole in a milk carton, the milk dripped out continuously.
          ...  ...    ...
(N.B.  Numbers in the left-most column are orders of the utterances in this session. The letters in the second-to-the-left
column denote students, as in Fig. 4.)

         In this phase,   as indicated   in Table  3, students expressed   their ideas independently, literally in the
fashion of "one after the other."      The third and eighth utterances appear to have been based on the speakers'
daily experiences.

Table 4: Excerpts of group-based dialogues during the discussion session of P8.

          1st Group-based dialogue
          11   A      The juice in the can would block the air from coming in.
          12   E      I think the air would enter from both holes and block the juice.
          13   B      The air would enter from both holes and pass through the juice in the can.
          14   A      Oh yes! The air will turn into bubbles and pass through the juice!
          15   E      If the air blocks both holes, where can the juice come out from?
          16   B      When the air enters into the can, the juice would come out. But I don't know how.
          2nd Group-based dialogue
          17   C      The air won't enter the can because it is filled with juice.
          18   M      Oh! I got it!
          19   B      C didn't  listen   to me.   I said, "The   air passes  through     the juice in   thecan."
          20   A      The can has no space.       It is filled with juice.

© ISLS                                                                                                             101
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                             Volume I: Long Papers

          21   C      The can is filled with juice. So the air can't break into the can.      Why doyou think the air can enter the can?
          22   B      The can has some space on top.
          23   C      I don't think cans of juice have any space.
          24   A      Yes, I think so, too.
          25   B      Even a little space is enough for the air to enter.
          26   C      The can is filled with juice. So the air will never break into the can!

         In both of these group dialogues, the group members clearly shared a focus of discussion, taken not
directly from their daily experiences but from their observation and interpretation of previous experiments(see
Table4).  Furthermore, we observed that while the first discussion tended to be about general movements of the
air and the juice, the topic of the second discussion was more focused, with more vividly imagined details of the
possible phenomena.     Judging from this shift of content, we assumed that the students engaged in the second
discussion already shared a basic understanding of the target scientific concept that air and water cannot share
the same physical space.   We also assumed that this discussion was monitored by the other class members, and
that each of them     compared and  integrated  the discussion expressions   and their own  thoughts.  During this
phase, the listeners monitored the discussion, while students A, B, C, and E expressed and assessed their own
understanding.

Table 5: Excerpts of a group-based dialogue during the discussion session of P9.

             5   C     Half of the air would escape from the can when it lies sideways.
             6   A     I think that air tends to rise. So air won't escape from the hole punched onthe lower side of the can.
             7   D     What do you mean?
             8   C     The can will be put deeply into the water. So I think we don't have toworry about the position of the hole.
             9   A     The base of the can would push back the water.
           10    C     When we tipped the glass in <Problem 2>, I remember, the glass was filledhalfway with water.
           11    A     The can with a hole doesn't have a wide mouth like the glass.
           12    C     Small bubbles can pass through even a small hole of the can.
           13    A     Anyway,    I think   the position of  the can  has    nothing   to do with theamount of water.
           14    C     I think that all the air would escape from the can when it stands up. Sohalf of the air would escape from the can when it lies sideways.

         Again the students discussed concrete aspects of the problem situation (e.g., whether the can would be
standing  up or lying   sideways, and  the  position of the hole)(see Table5).   Such details were not explicitly
expressed in the problem statements; therefore, the students created detailed, concrete images to clarify how
much they understood.     This activity also appears to help both the students who were discussing as task-doers
and those who were listening as monitors, as they went back and forth between scientific abstract expressions
(e.g., "air escapes" and "water fills") and concrete images (e.g., of the can, the juice, and the water), as if they
were tying their scientific understanding to their daily life experiences.

Table 6: Excerpts of typical utterances during the discussion session of P10.
        1  K    The can has two holes. So the water will replace the air that filled the can.
        4  A    The air will escape from one hole, and the water will come in from the otherhole.
       14  J    The air will powerfully block the movement of the water.
       17  B    The air will escape from the two holes. After the movement of the air, the water willcome in from the two holes.

© ISLS                                                                                                           102
CSCL 2011 Proceedings                                                                               Volume I: Long Papers

         For P10, the students chose to express their understanding individually(see Table6).       Not only students
A and B, who served as core task-doers by phrasing and rephrasing their ideas, but also students K and J, who
were relatively silent, verbally predicted (K) or made some causal-like expressions (e.g., student J's implication
that air has power).      Group-based dialogues that occurred in P8 and 9 discussions were monitored by these
students, and possibly helped them integrate and abstract their own and others' ideas; as a result, their ideas
came closer to scientific concepts.
         Here  we     summarize   our interpretation of the  socially constructive  interaction  we  observed   in the
protocol. During the P7 discussion, as we inferred from the role-exchange pattern in Fig. 5, students expressed
their individual observations, because the problem situation was new and they did not share a common focus.
When    they moved    on  to  P8, after exchanging   different ideas expressed  in  various  ways  and observing   the
correct answer to the previous problem, some students (e.g., A) were able to express their rules of thumb rather
abstractedly, in a top-down fashion (e.g., "Water cannot come out because there is air outside.").      When such a
statement was questioned by another student, a group dialogue or possibly constructive interaction between the
two occurred; the rest of the class monitored this interaction as group task-doing. As the situation progressed,
another student, who thought through concrete images of the juice in the can and of the water surrounding it,
challenged the abstracted expression and asked for more concrete images.           The result was more group task-
doing, which was also monitored by the class.        This monitorable constructive interaction between A and C,
between the abstraction and the concrete images of the set of air-water exchange phenomena, helped each class
member    integrate   the discussion  with her/his own  ideas   toward the end   of P9,  leading  them all   to correct
answers.  For P10, all the students were able to express their individual understanding or concept in their own
styles, rather sequentially.  This pattern was the same as for P6 and P7, but the levels of the content according to
the conceptual  change     model  in  Table 2  were  different.  The  students'  utterances  contained more     level 3
expressions during P10 discussion than during P6 and 7 discussions.

Discussion
In the discussion protocols of 21 third graders going through 11 carefully ordered HEI problems in an "Air and
Water" unit, we observed successful socially constructive interaction among both individuals and small groups.
We also found that the role exchange of task-doing as speakers and monitoring as listeners supported the entire
class to raise each individual's understanding of the scientific concept, the target of the learning, as predicted
from   two-person   constructive  interaction studies.  The  21  students in the  class, in  a  facultative atmosphere
where everybody felt free to talk, expressed diverse individual ideas on encountering new problems.          The same
students could also argue on a topic of focus after sharing some common experiences.         When they argued about
a selected topic, a small group of two to four members engaged in constructive interaction to form a task-doing
group whose discussion was monitored by the class and sometimes integrated by some monitoring members.
This group-based constructive interaction occurred several times, with different core members engaging in the
task that was monitored by the rest of the class.  The class exhibited high performance with everybody correctly
answering the last question at the end of this highly social constructive interaction. This result indicated that
such complex collaboration is an effective and enjoyable practice that promotes scientific conceptual change.
         We plan to analyze similar sets of class discussion data taken from other units of HEI classes and other
collaborative classes, in order to understand the conditions for successful discussion, in an effort to design better
technological  support    for the promotion   of intentional conceptual   change,  as well   as collaborative learning
skills.

References
CoREF , (2010) A summary report of CoREF at University of Tokyo, Year 2010. CoREF,              December, 2010.
Hatano, G. & Inagaki, K. (1991). Sharing cognition through collective comprehension activity. In Resnick, B.
         Levine, J. M. &Teasley, S. D. (Eds.). Perspectives on socially shared cognition. 331-348. APA
Itakura, K.  (1997).   Kasetsu-Jikken-Jugyo    no  ABC,   Dai   4 han.  (The  ABC     of the Hypothesis-Experiment-
         Instruction: Invitation to enjoyable classes, Ver.4.) Tokyo: Kasetsu-Sha. [in Japanese]
Itakura, K. (2000). The workbook of Hypothesis-Experiment instruction <Air and Water>.Tokyo:Kasetsu-Sha.
Miyake, N. (2008). Conceptual change through collaboration. In S. Vosniadou, (Ed.) International Handbook of
         Research on Conceptual Change. 453-478. New York: Routledge.
Miyake , N. (2009). Conceptual change through collaboration, Paper presented at AERA 2009, San Diego.
Schwartz, D.M. & Martin, T. (2004). Inventing to prepare for learning: The hidden efficiency of original student
         production in statistics instruction. Cognition & Instruction, 22, 129-184.
Shirouzu, H. & Miyake, N.,& Masukawa, H. (2002). Cognitively active externalization for situated reflection.
         Cognitive Science, 26, 469-501.

© ISLS                                                                                                               103
