 Developing Undergraduates’ Collective Epistemic Agency through
                    Reflective Assessment
                   Yuqin Yang, Central China Normal University, yangyuqin@ccnu.edu.cn
             Xueqi Feng, Southern University of Science and Technology, fengxueqi@hotmail.com
                   Gaoxia Zhu, Nanyang Technological University, gaoxia.zhu@nie.edu.sg
                            Kui Xie, The Ohio State University, xie.359@osu.edu

         Abstract: To examine the effect of reflective assessment on fostering undergraduates’
         collective epistemic agency, this study adopted a quasi-experimental design. The experimental
         class included 40 undergraduates conducting inquiries in a KB design enhanced by reflective
         assessment, while the comparison class included 38 undergraduates experiencing a regular KB
         design. Students’ online Knowledge Forum discourse were collected and analyzed using
         discourse analysis and social network analysis. The results suggest that undergraduates in the
         experimental condition took significantly greater levels of collective epistemic agency than the
         undergraduates in the comparison condition. Groups with different contribution levels can all
         benefit from reflective assessment within the experimental condition, although they manifest
         different developmental trajectories. Statistical analysis revealed significant differences in
         higher-level epistemic and metacognitive actions between high and low contribution groups.
         These results provide implications for designing technology-rich environments and reflective
         assessment strategies to support undergraduates’ higher-level competencies in Knowledge
         Building and other computer-supported collaborative inquiry approaches.

Introduction
An important goal of higher education is developing students’ high-order competencies to prepare them for the
ever-changing knowledge society. Developing these competencies (e.g., metacognition, inquiry, collaboration,
and knowledge creation) benefits students’ academic performance in the short term and lays solid foundations for
their lifelong development (Snell & Lefstein, 2018; Yang et al., 2020a). Computer-supported collaborative inquiry
is an influential inquiry model for productive learning and may help students develop these higher-order
competencies (Scardamalia & Bereiter, 2014). This model requires students to take high-level collective epistemic
agency—students’ collective actions for advancing knowledge with intentionality and sustainability (Damşa,
2014; Damşa et al., 2010). However, many students generally take low-level collective epistemic agency when
they are not supported. Therefore, developing strategies to promote students’ enactment of high-level collective
epistemic agency in collaborative inquiry is crucial.
           Collective epistemic agency emerged from epistemic agency but was extended by Damsa et al. (2010).
Epistemic agency is conceptualized as collective cognitive responsibility to advance knowledge (Scardamalia,
2002). Collective epistemic agency consists of individual and collective intentional, goal-directed and sustained
efforts for generating and advancing knowledge with a focus on the collective level (Damsa, 2014; Stahl, 2006;
Yang et al., 2020b). This study mainly focused on the collective level of collective epistemic agency. Collective
epistemic agency drives students to invest efforts to advance knowledge in collaborative inquiry contexts
intentionally. Damsa et al. (2010) suggested that collective epistemic agency includes the epistemic and
metacognitive aspects and identified a set of relevant endeavors. The epistemic aspect demands students’
intentional and substantial efforts in working with knowledge-related work and engagement in epistemic actions
such as generating inquiries, alleviating lack of knowledge, tackling disagreement among diverse ideas, and
building joint theory (Borge et al., 2018; Damşa, 2014; Damşa et al., 2010; Oshima et al., 2020; Yang et al., 2019,
2020b). The metacognitive aspect demands students’ engagement in a set of metacognitive actions such as setting
common goals and creating a joint plan, monitoring object advancement, coordinating object-related activities,
and reflections (Damşa, 2014; Damşa et al., 2010; Oshima et al., 2020; Scardamalia, 2002; Yang et al., 2019,
2020a).
           Reflective assessment is promising to support students’ development of collective epistemic agency in
collaborative inquiry learning because it incorporates the metacognitive components (e.g., goal setting and
planning, monitoring, reflection, and regulation) into students’ inquiry. Research has suggested the positive effects
of reflective assessment on students’ engagement in collaborative inquiry (Yang et al., 2020a, 2020b). However,
relatively few studies have researched how to help undergraduates develop collective epistemic agency by using
reflective assessment in computer-supported collaborative inquiry. The current study aimed to address this
research gap in Knowledge Building (KB), an influential computer-supported collaborative inquiry approach. KB




CSCL2022 Proceedings                                     99                                                   © ISLS
advocates transforming schools and classrooms into knowledge-creating communities so that students can
practice the above-mentioned competencies on the daily basis (Scardamalia & Bereiter, 2014). To aid students’
reflective assessment, we designed visualizations of students’ online discourse using Knowledge-building
Discourse Explorer (KBDeX, Oshima et al., 2012), a learning analytics tool. This study designed a quasi-
experimental study to examine the impacts of reflective assessment on the development of undergraduates’
collective epistemic agency in KB. We addressed the following research questions.
          1. Did the KB design enhanced by reflective assessment benefit students more in collective epistemic
               agency than the regular KB design?
          2. Did different contribution groups in the KB design enhanced by reflective assessment condition
               differ in developmental trajectories and collective epistemic agency?

Methods

Research context and participants
This study was conducted in a compulsory core course of literal education titled Scientific Inquiry and Knowledge
Creation at one research-intensive university in Central China. The course is composed of various theories and
practices on developing a set of core competencies (e.g., argumentation, critical thinking, metacognition, and
regulation) involved in engaging in scientific inquiry and knowledge creation. It aimed to help undergraduates
develop knowledge and high-level competencies of scientific inquiry and knowledge creation, such as taking
agency and self-directing their scientific inquiry. The course lasted 18 weeks and had two consecutive 45-minute
lessons each week. The participants were 78 undergraduates from 13 faculties who had limited knowledge and
skills on how to engage in scientific inquiry and knowledge creation. This study used a quasi-experimental design;
the experimental class (40) conducted KB inquiries in a KB design enhanced by reflective assessment. The
comparison class (38) was involved in a regular KB design. Both classes were taught by the course instructor who
had expertise in designing KB environments and guiding students in KB inquiries.

Pedagogical design
We designed a four-components co-directed inquiry model with a set of principle-based activities to help the
undergraduates progressively develop high-level collective epistemic agency in KB inquiries. The four phases
were: (1) culture for cultivating self-directness and collaborative inquiry (component 1, Weeks 1-3); (2) enacting
collective epistemic agency by reflective assessment using group-level visualizations and data (component 2,
Weeks 4-9); (3) enacting collective epistemic agency by reflective assessment using community-level KBDeX
data (component 3, Weeks 10-13); and (4) developing higher-level collective theories and collective epistemic
agency through pervasive reflective assessment (component 4, Weeks 14-18). Our design was informed by the
three-phased KB process model (Yang et al., 2020b) and the computer-supported group regulation framework
(Borge et al., 2018).

Instruction in the comparison class
The comparison group of undergraduates conducted the same KB inquiries with the support of the same instructor
as that of the experimental group. In Component 1, they conducted the same activities and tasks at the same pace.
In Components 2 and 3, the experimental class used KBDeX visualizations and data to conduct reflective
assessment. However, the comparison group was guided to enact collective epistemic agency by conducting
collective portfolio assessment (van Aalst & Chan, 2007) using their own group’s notes in Component 2. In
Component 3, they used their own and other groups’ notes. In Component 4, the comparison undergraduates were
encouraged to conduct the portfolio assessment to further synthesize and rise above their theories. Otherwise, the
two classes experienced the same KB tasks and activities.

Data sources and analysis
The experimental and comparison class generated 1,689 and 1,082 Knowledge Forum notes were the main data
source to understand the characteristics and development of undergraduates’ collective epistemic agency. We
argued that their competency reflects the undergraduates’ collective epistemic agency to improve their collective
KB discourse. Creating higher-level ideas and engaging in higher-level epistemic and metacognitive actions to
advance community knowledge represents their higher-level collective epistemic agency in KB inquiries.
          We first pre-processed undergraduates’ Knowledge-Forum notes into different discussion threads
through thematic analysis. A discussion thread is a cluster of notes targeting the same principal problem (Zhang
et al., 2007). Next, we conducted content analysis of all notes within each inquiry thread using the coding




CSCL2022 Proceedings                                   100                                                 © ISLS
framework presented in our previous work (Yang et al., 2019; Yang et al., 2020b). We included different
categories that illustrated epistemic and metacognitive actions. The first author and another researcher who had
expertise in analyzing KB notes independently coded 600 notes of the experimental class (n = 600, >30%). The
two researchers reached inter-rater reliability (Cohen’s kappa) of .83 for epistemic actions and .84 for
metacognitive actions.

Results
Impacts of reflective assessment on undergraduates’ collective epistemic agency
To investigate the effects of reflective assessment on undergraduates’ collective epistemic agency, we first
examined the differences in collective knowledge advancement between the experimental and comparison class,
followed by examining the difference of Knowledge-Forum notes coded as epistemic and metacognitive actions.
We proposed that undergraduates’ collective epistemic agency was characterized by collective knowledge
advancement through epistemic and metacognitive KB actions.

Differences and changes of collective knowledge advancement
The state of collective knowledge is reflected by a network of ideas created by students (Oshima et al., 2012).
Therefore, the increasing number of meaningful links between ideas is a measure of collective knowledge
advancement. In social network analysis, degree centrality indicates cumulative path lengths by which a node is
linked to other nodes in a network; hence, a higher Total Degree Centrality (TDC) represents a denser social
network. For instance, an increased TDC for note network over time denotes how students collectively worked
on key ideas. Therefore, TDC derived from KBDeX has become a common tool to assess collective knowledge
advancement (Oshima et al., 2017; Oshima et al., 2018). Based on this assumption, we compared the increase in
the TDC of both classes to assess the differences in collective knowledge advancement.
          Figure 1 shows the increasing TDC of note networks over time, indicating how students collectively
worked on their Knowledge Forum discourse. In Stage 1, a one-way ANOVA showed no significant difference
of the collective knowledge advancement between the experimental and comparison classes, (F(1, 8) = 1.89, p
= .207, η2 = .19). In contrast, significant differences were observed in favor of the experimental class in Stage 2
(F(1, 12) = 8.20, p = .014, η2 = .41) and in Stage 3 (F(1, 4) = 165.42, p < .001, η2 = .98) when the reflective
assessment intervention was implemented. These results indicated that the experimental class engaged in higher-
level collective knowledge advancement with the support of reflective assessment compared with the comparison
class.

Figure 1
Total degree centrality of discourse network for experimental and comparison classes over time

               1000

                 800

                 600

                 400

                 200

                   0
                        W1   W2    W3       W4   W5   W6   W7    W8    W9 W10 W11 W12 W13 W14 W15
                                  Stage 1                             Stage 2                 Stage 3

                                            Experimental class                  Comparison class
         Note. Here, W = Week; Week 1 started from the beginning of note writing on Knowledge Forum.

Class differences in undergraduates’ epistemic and metacognitive actions
To examine the differences of epistemic and metacognitive KB actions between the experimental and comparison
classes, we calculated the portions of each KB action and conducted a Chi-square test to assess the differences
between the two classes. Table 1 compares the metacognitive and epistemic actions of the two classes.




CSCL2022 Proceedings                                         101                                            © ISLS
         There were significant differences between the experimental and comparison classes regarding the
portions of different epistemic and metacognitive actions [c2 (df = 1, n = 5542) = 90.56, p < .001]. The
experimental class took more higher-level epistemic actions than the comparison class. For example, they engaged
in more developing shared understanding (39.25% vs. 35.03%), engaging problem-centered uptake (25.40% vs.
16.82%), building a joint theory (4.97% vs. 3.14%), and synthesizing and rising above community ideas (4.50%
vs. 2.50%) than the comparison undergraduates. Also, the experimental undergraduates conducted more
collectively regulating inquiry (12.26% vs. 5.82%), and more higher-level actions of constructing reflective
synthesis notes, including meta-theory and meta-conversation (3.02% vs. 1.48%) than the comparison
undergraduates. These results suggested that reflective assessment exerted positive impacts on undergraduates’
epistemic and metacognitive actions.

Table 1
Classroom differences in epistemic and metacognitive actions: Frequency and percentages of actions by the
experimental and comparison classes

                                                          Experimental Class            Comparison Class
                                                          f           % (f/1689)        f          % (f/1082)
 Epistemic actions
 Creating inquiry awareness                               62          3.67              57         5.27
 Alleviating lack of knowledge                            328         19.42             277        25.60
 Negotiating a fit                                        47          2.78              126        11.65
 Developing shared understanding                          663         39.25             379        35.03
 Engaging problem-centered uptake                         429         25.40             182        16.82
 Building a joint theory                                  84          4.97              34         3.14
 Synthesizing and rising above community ideas            76          4.50              27         2.50
 Metacognitive actions
 Collectively regulating inquiry                          207         12.26             63         5.82
 Generating brief introduction                            13          0.77              6          0.55
 Generating meta-cognition                                25          1.48              4          0.37
 Contributing meta-theory                                 15          0.89              4          0.37
 Contributing meta-conversation                           36          2.13              12         1.11


Differences in collective epistemic agency among different contribution groups
Developmental trajectories of collective knowledge of different contribution groups
To further reveal the group differences in collective epistemic agency, we selected a high-, medium-, and low-
contribution group in the experimental class and examined their development trajectories of collective knowledge
by using KBDeX discourse networks to track their Knowledge Forum notes. The high, medium, and low-
contribution groups were differentiated by the extent to which their Knowledge Forum notes added value to the
TDC of the whole class.
          Figure 2 presents the changing word networks of a high-, medium-, and low- contribution group,
respectively. The red circles represent the keywords discussed, while the yellow circles denote words not
discussed. The figure shows that each contribution group contributed more in Stage 2 than in Stage 1 and 3. For
example, the high-contribution group increased the TDC value from 51.81 in Stage 1 to 151.00 in Stage 2, and
finally to 202.82 in Stage 3. These findings were consistent with the paired-samples t-tests results (RQ1),
suggesting undergraduates’ greater contributions to collective knowledge advancement in Stage 2 with the support
of reflective assessment. Specifically, in Stage 1, when the undergraduates deepened their knowledge building
inquiries with group-level KBDeX data, the high-contribution group presented a centralized network of red circles,
demonstrating their ability to connect subtopics. The medium-contribution group showed a marginal network of
red circles, displaying their relatively weak ability to conceptualize the subtopics across the whole community.




CSCL2022 Proceedings                                   102                                                 © ISLS
Furthermore, the low-contribution group showed distributed clusters of red circles, suggesting they explored
different subtopics but made limited connections between the subtopics. In Stage 2, with the support of reflective
assessment using community-level KBDeX data, all the three groups obviously advanced their collective
knowledge compared with Stage 1. Specifically, the high-contribution group effectively conceptualized the
community ideas, while the medium and low contribution groups began to map collective ideas. In Stage 3, all
the three groups constantly contributed to collective knowledge advancement to varying degrees, showing their
ability to advance collective knowledge even though the corresponding tools were withdrawn. These results
suggest the role of reflective assessment in scaffolding different contribution groups for collective knowledge
advancement.

Figure 2
Changing networks and group contributions to collective knowledge advancement of the experimental class over
stages




Epistemic and metacognitive actions used by different contribution groups
Figure 3 presented the percentage of epistemic actions and metacognitive actions by different contribution groups
of the experimental class. We regrouped all the undergraduates in the six working groups into three contribution
groups based on the extent to which their Knowledge Forum notes added value to the TDC of the whole class:
high-rank group (13 undergraduates), medium-rank group (14), and low-rank group (13).
          Figure 3 shows that all the contribution groups manifested the ability to take higher-level epistemic
actions including developing shared understanding (E4, around 40%), engaging in problem-centered uptakes (E5,
around 25%), building joint theories (E6, around 5%), and synthesizing and rising above community ideas (E7,
around 5%). We also found that all the contribution groups displayed the same ability in collective regulation of
KB inquiry (M1, around 70%), but different abilities in taking other metacognitive actions. Notably, the high-
rank group showed a higher level of contributing meta-theory (M4, 8.40%) than the medium-contribution group
(5.00%), while the low-contribution groups rarely contributed meta-theory (0.00%). In contrast, the low-rank
groups contributed more than two times of meta-conversation (M5, 22.08%) than the high-contribution groups
(9.24%). These results suggest that all contribution groups, even the low-rank group, could engage in higher-level
epistemic and metacognitive actions to collectively advance their KB inquiry and ideas with the support of
reflective assessment.




CSCL2022 Proceedings                                   103                                                 © ISLS
          A one-way MANCOVA was then adopted to examine the differences of the epistemic and metacognitive
actions by the three contribution groups, revealing a significant difference, F(22, 54) = 1.82, p = .038, Wilks’ Λ
= .33; partial eta2 = .43. Follow-up univariate ANOVAs show significant differences in developing shared
understanding (F(2, 37) = 6.18, p = .005, partial eta2 = .25) and contributing meta-theory (F(2, 37) = 9.48, p < .001,
partial eta2 = .34). Post hoc statistical results indicate that the high-rank group displayed significantly higher
values of epistemic action of developing shared understanding (p = .007) and metacognitive action of contributing
meta-theory (p < .001) than low-rank group, as well as higher values of developing shared understanding (p = .022)
than medium-rank group. These results suggest that the high-rank group engaged in more higher-level epistemic
and metacognitive actions.
          To sum up, the undergraduates could engage in epistemic and metacognitive actions with the support of
reflective assessment. The high-rank group engaged more in higher-level epistemic and metacognitive actions
than their counterparts.

Figure 3
Percentages of epistemic and metacognitive actions by different contribution groups in the experimental class




Notes. Metacognitive actions: M1=collectively regulating inquiry; M2=generating brief introduction;
M3=generating meta-cognition; M4=contributing meta-theory; M5=contributing meta-conversation. Epistemic
actions: E1=creating inquiry awareness; E2=alleviating lack of knowledge; E3=negotiating a fit; E4=developing
shared understanding; E5=engaging problem-centered uptake; E6=building joint theory; E7=synthesizing and
rising above community ideas.


Discussion
Increasing students’ collective epistemic agency is one key goal of KB and scientific practice. Reflective
assessment has the potential to facilitate undergraduates’ collective epistemic agency because it incorporates the
metacognitive components of planning, monitoring, reflection and regulation into students’ inquiry. This study
aimed to examine the impacts of reflective assessment on undergraduates’ collective epistemic agency and the
dynamics of how reflective assessment support collective epistemic agency by adopting a quasi-experimental
design. The undergraduates in the experimental condition engaged in a KB design enhanced by reflective
assessment while the students’ in the comparison class experienced a regular KB design.




CSCL2022 Proceedings                                    104                                                   © ISLS
Impacts of reflective assessment on undergraduates’ collective epistemic agency
This study shows that the experimental undergraduates engaged in a significantly higher level of collective
knowledge advancement and epistemic and metacognitive actions than the comparison undergraduates. This
result suggests the positive impacts of reflective assessment on students’ development of collective epistemic
agency in KB. Similarly, previous research suggests the positive effects of reflective assessment on students’
epistemic agency (Yang et al., 2019, 2020b), higher-level competencies, and domain understanding (Borge et al.,
2018; Yang et al., 2016, 2020a).
          The analysis of the trajectories of collective knowledge of different contribution groups suggested all the
groups could make contributions to collective knowledge advancement over time, particularly in the reflective
assessment process, though their development paths differ. They sharply advanced collective knowledge with the
support of reflective assessment and still manifested the ability to advance collective knowledge when the
reflective support faded out later. These results indicated the scaffolding function and transformative role of
reflective assessment in collective knowledge advancement for all contribution groups. These results are
consistent with prior studies examining the role of reflective assessment on students with varying academic
performance (Yang et al., 2016, 2020a).
          All the contribution groups could engage in high-level epistemic and metacognitive actions. However,
the high-contribution group engaged significantly more in developing shared understanding and contributing
meta-theory. Notably, the low-contribution group contributed significantly more meta-conversation than the high-
contribution group. Also, both high and medium-contribution groups took more higher-level epistemic actions
compared, which might explain why the undergraduates could still advance collective knowledge after the
reflective assessment process. These results suggested that the contribution groups took different levels of
epistemic and metacognitive actions, though all the contribution groups could take higher-level actions with the
help of reflective assessments. Particularly, low-contribution groups obtained greater net gains in terms of the
ability to generate meta-conversations, the highest level of metacognitive actions, providing further evidence of
the scaffolding role of reflective assessment for students with relatively lower performance (White & Frederiksen,
1998). Partially aligned with previous studies (Li et al., 2020), this study indicated that different contribution
groups did not differ in generally low-level epistemic and metacognitive actions but showed significant
differences in higher-level actions. The high performer could regulate their efforts in a way that maximizes
outcomes with the least effort rather than stay highly engaged in the whole learning process (Li et al., 2020).

Implications for Educational Practices to Help Students Enact Epistemic Agency.
The study provides several implications for educators to design technology-rich environments to foster students’
collective epistemic agency in collaborative inquiry. First, the extent to which students can benefit from reflective
assessments, particularly at the initial stage, relies on their opportunities to engage in meta-level talks. These meta-
level talks, which integrate face-to-face group level reflections with online Knowledge Forum inquiry, benefit
students’ successful reflective assessment. Second, in collaborative inquiry, teachers should allow the presence
of relatively lower-level metacognitive actions that is an integral part of students’ everyday inquiry practices.
Moreover, higher-level metacognitive actions are critical for productive collaborative inquiry and do not often
take place naturally, so appropriate scaffolding strategies are needed to promote them. Third, the provision of data
from learning analytics can help students develop a deep understanding of their inquiry. Reflective prompt sheets
designed for productive use of learning data are also fundamental, which help students gradually internalize the
metacognitive model embedded in the prompt sheets. Therefore, even when reflective assessment support fades
out, students can still engage in metacognitive activities and advance their collective knowledge.

Limitations and Implications for Future Research
This study has several limitations that need to be addressed in future research. First, the study did not investigate
undergraduates’ domain understanding changes. The study revealed the positive effects of reflective assessment
on the undergraduates’ collective epistemic agency in Knowledge Building inquiry, but whether those changes
are transferable is not clear. Future research can examine whether and how reflective assessment and KB empower
students to develop domain understanding and other future-ready competencies self-directedness.
          Second, the undergraduates’ epistemic agency analysis relied on their written Knowledge Forum notes.
Further research may explore the use of wearable devices and eye-tracking to understand undergraduates’
epistemic agency even when they do not write. Moreover, much work remains to be done particularly from the
educational neuroscience perspective, to unpack the mechanisms of epistemic agency and its collection to
performance, engagement, and learning.




CSCL2022 Proceedings                                      105                                                    © ISLS
References
Borge, M., Ong, Y. S., & Rosé, C. P. (2018). Learning to monitor and regulate collective thinking processes.
          International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 13(1), 61-92.
Damşa, C. I. (2014). The multi-layered nature of small-group learning: Productive interactions in object-oriented
          collaboration. International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 9, 247-281.
Damşa, C. I., Kirschner, P. A., Andriessen, J. E. B., Erkens, G., & Sins, P. H. M. (2010). Shared epistemic agency:
          An empirical study of an emergent construct. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 19, 143-186.
Li, S., Du, H., Xing, W., Zheng, J., Chen, G., & Xie, C. (2020). Examining temporal dynamics of self-regulated
          learning behaviors in STEM learning: A network approach. Computers & Education, 158, 103987.
Oshima, J., Oshima, R., & Matsuzawa, Y. (2012). Knowledge Building Discourse Explorer: a social network
          analysis application for knowledge building discourse. Educational technology research and
          development, 60, 903-921.
Oshima, J., Ohsaki, A., Yamada, Y., & Oshima, R. (2017). Collective knowledge advancement and conceptual
          understanding of complex scientific concepts in the jigsaw instruction. In B. K. Smith, Borge, M.,
          Mercier, E., and Lim, K. Y. (Ed.), Making a difference: Prioritizing equity and access in CSCL, 12th
          International Conference on Computer Supported Collaborative Learning (CSCL) 2017 (Vol. 1, pp. 57-
          64). International Society of the Learning Sciences.
Oshima, J., Oshima, R., & Fujita, W. (2018). A mixed-methods approach to analyze shared epistemic agency in
          jigsaw instruction at multiple scales of temporality. Journal of Learning Analytics, 5(1), 10–24.
Oshima, J., Oshima, R., & Saruwatari, S. (2020). Analysis of students’ ideas and conceptual artifacts in
          knowledge-building discourse. British Journal of Educational Technology, 51(4), 1308-1321.
Scardmalia, M. (2002). Collective cognitive responsibility for the advancement of knowledge. In B. Smith (Ed.),
          Liberal education in a knowledge society (pp. 67-98). Chicago, IL: Open Court.
Scardamalia, M. (2002). Collective cognitive responsibility for the advancement of knowledge. In B. Smith (Ed.),
          Liberal education in a knowledge society (Vol. 97, pp. 67-98). Open Court.
Scardamalia, M., & Bereiter, C. (2014). Knowledge building and knowledge creation: theory, pedagogy, and
          technology. In R. K. Sawyer (Ed.), The Cambridge handbook of the learning sciences (2nd ed., pp. 397-
          417). New York, NY: Cambridge University Press.
Snell, J., & Lefstein, A. (2018). ‘‘Low Ability,’’ participation, and identity in dialogic pedagogy. American
          Educational Research Journal, 55, 40-78.
Van Aalst, J., & Chan, C. K. K. (2007). Student-directed assessment of knowledge building using electronic
          portfolios. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 16, 175–220.
White, B., & Frederiksen, J. (1998). Inquiry, modeling, and metacognition: Making science accessible to all
          students. Cognition and Instruction, 16, 3-118.
Yang, Y. (2019). Reflective assessment for epistemic agency of academically low-achieving students. Journal of
          Computer Assisted Learning, 35, 459–475.
Yang, Y., van Aalst, J., & Chan, C. K. K. (2020a). Dynamics of reflective assessment and knowledge building
          for academically low-achieving students. American Educational Research Journal, 57(3), 1241–1289.
Yang, Y., Chen, Q., Yu, Y., Feng, X., & van Aalst, J. (2020b). Collective reflective assessment for shared
          epistemic agency by undergraduates in knowledge building. British Journal of Educational Technology,
          51(4), 1136–1154.
Yang, Y., van Aalst, J., Chan, C. K. K., & Tian, W. (2016). Reflective assessment in knowledge building by
          students with low academic achievement. International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative
          Learning, 11, 281–311.
Zhang, J., Scardamalia, M., Lamon, M., Messina, R., & Reeve, R. (2007). Socio-cognitive dynamics of knowledge
          building in the work of 9-and 10-year-olds. Educational Technology Research and Development, 55(2),
          117-145.

Acknowledgment
This study was supported by National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 62107020) and Ministry
of Education of the People’s Republic of China (Grant No. 21YJA880078).




CSCL2022 Proceedings                                   106                                                  © ISLS
