Designing Courses as Sustainable Learning Communities: A STEM
     Teacher Candidate Course Extending into K-12 Teaching
                               Marvin Evans, Ashlyn Pierson, Menglin Xu
                  evans2464@osu.edu, ashlyn.e.pierson@gmail.com, menglin.xu@osumc.edu
                                        The Ohio State University

         Abstract: This study investigates the design of effective and sustainable social media learning
         communities (here, an anonymous Subreddit) embedded in Teacher Candidates’ (TCs) courses.
         In surveys, TCs discussed course design and discussing problems of practice in our LC, and our
         analysis showed that TCs initially valued: anonymity, voting, peer feedback, collaboration,
         support, and permanent access to resources. As the semester progressed, TCs found value in
         shared discussions, increased in collective efficacy and technology acceptance, and stated that
         if our community remained active, it would continue to add value to their professional practice.

Motivation and Research Question
The development of ongoing online communities was one of the promises of the early Internet (Glassman, 2016).
Open virtual discussion forums where individuals share information and co-create knowledge (Kim et al., 2013)
continue to hold great promise, particularly for education (e.g. shared exploration and problem solving; Krutka &
Greenhalgh, 2021). Such communities could address the alienation that teacher candidates (TCs) often face, which
has been intensified by COVID-19 (Mutton, 2020). Moreover, social media learning communities (SMLCs) could
address another problem– that concepts and strategies taught in university courses are abstract, not transferable
(Walton & Rusznyak, 2020) – by allowing TCs to connect and discuss problems of practice with peers and content
experts. Active educational online communities are rare (an exception is #edchat on Twitter) and have had limited
success in maintaining authentic problem-solving spaces (Krutka & Greenhalgh, 2021). In response, we designed
a CSCL environment that includes a wide variety of artifacts (e.g., technological, instructional; Stahl et al., 2014)
to stimulate collaborative learning. We used a Vygotskian theoretical framework to design the course, prioritizing
opportunities for TCs to create and share artifacts while developing transferable professional skills (Stahl et al.,
2014). This included TCs collaboratively creating technology tutorials, videos, lesson plans, and online learning
modules with embedded technologies that they shared with their peers (Yoon et al., 2017). Activities that took
place on Reddit, such as peer feedback (Yarovoy, 2020), positioned TCs as expert-like, because TCs collaborated
on artifacts to advance their collective knowledge (Borge & Mercier, 2019). By sharing these artifacts in the
learning community, we aimed to demonstrate that knowledge and artifacts should not be seen as the cognitive
property of individuals, but as an outcome of group collaboration (Glassman et. al. 2021). In this paper, we analyze
TCs’ pre-surveys and mid-semester evaluations in order to answer: What principles or features can make an online
learning community feel productive as a forum for teacher candidates to discuss problems of practice?

Method
The study comprises quantitative and qualitative data analysis from our STEM technology course, which used
Reddit for course activities. The class consisted of 35 TCs (12 male, 23 female). The average age was 21.6 years
(SD = 2.2), the majority were White (n = 30, 76.9%), and 33.4% had a bachelor's degree. 60% indicated that they
interacted with technology often – they most frequently used Instagram (91.4%) and Twitter (68.6%). Reddit was
new to more than half. To understand TCs’ experiences with technology, the collective efficacy scale (Glassman
et al., 2021), which measures how TCs collectively use technology, and the technology acceptance model (TAM;
Venkatesh & Davis, 2000), which looks at comfort with SMLCs in classrooms, were administered. Mid-semester
reflections were analyzed with inductive coding (Charmaz, 2006) to understand TCs’ experiences with the SMLC.

Findings
Our pre-surveys and mid-semester evaluations helped to identify features that could make SMLCs effective. On
the pre-survey, responses focused on collaboration and support; thirty-two teacher candidates expressed a desire
to belong in a community. For example, TCs wrote that they wanted to “be a part of a community that I can learn
from and contribute to.” Within the community, some TCs mentioned a preference for anonymity to support
meaningful interactions where they could have “free reign and ability to converse without required prompts so
the interactions will be much more organic” in order to “bounce ideas back and forth and share experiences”. TCs
expected to embrace the “anonymity [which] helps a lot when sharing sensitive issues or giving feedback”. Even




CSCL2022 Proceedings                                    575                                                   © ISLS
so, some TCs shared doubts about using SMLC to foster community – “a community for pre-service and in-
service teachers alike. I'm not sure [how] necessary or realistic it is”. From the quantitative data in our pre-survey,
most TCs demonstrated an interest in developing collective efficacy through shared knowledge creation in our
SMLC. TAM composite scores showed that TCs saw participation in the SMLC as relevant to their future teaching.
The collective efficacy scale showed that TCs saw potential for engagement, collaboration, and augmentation of
learning at both the community and individual levels. The Pearson correlation showed that TCs’ gender (female)
is significantly related to job relevance (r = .341, p = .045), suggesting that females are more likely to perceive
the SMLC as relevant to teaching, and therefore productive in a teacher education course.
          Our mid-semester evaluations demonstrate a shift in TC’s perceptions of the SMLC; twenty-nine TCs
appreciated the SMLC as a place to share resources. For example, one TC wrote, “It’s nice to have all of the
resource and reflections in one place.” Nine TCs focused specially on benefits of Reddit, such as “it is organized
and easy to use.” Another TC wrote that they now “prefer using Reddit for discussions/posts over the [university
canvas] discussion board.” Thirty-three TCs described the anonymity of the platform as a strength as they were
able to “give constructive criticism without fear,” and participate in a way that “feels much more authentic.” On
the mid-semester evaluation, TCs also shared feedback for improving the SMLC. Twenty-seven TCs mentioned
a need for more opened-ended discussions. For example, one TC wanted “more free and open conversations about
different aspects of STEM education.” TCs also described time constraints as limiting these types of conversations.
Another shared, “TCs post things only when they are required and therefore building connections is difficult.” To
address this concern, we proposed an “access when needed” approach to sustainable learning communities in
which users (TCs, and later, in-service teachers) can access the SMLC even after the semester ends. TC saw
potential in this– eight TCs commented that “it becomes a very valuable resource going forward.”

Conclusions and Implications
This study explores the value of supporting teacher learning by using a SMLC in STEM education teacher
preparation courses. From the data collected, we determined that TCs found value in the shared discussions,
participating in a sustainable community and the design features such as voting, anonymity, and peer reviews that
can help to create an active and sustainable SMLC. The potential of SMLCs goes far beyond technology
integration and STEM; for our full study, we intend to explore the impact of adding new cohorts to our current
community and further research is needed to determine the impact of these types of sustained SMLCs across
different platform and courses and how they can be applied to help all educators improve teaching and learning.

References
Borge, M., & Mercier, E. (2019). Towards a micro-ecological approach to CSCL. International Journal of
         Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 14(2), 219-235.
Charmaz, K. (2006). Constructing grounded theory: A practical guide through qualitative analysis. sage.
Glassman, M. (2016). Educational psychology and the internet. Cambridge University Press.
Glassman, M., Kuznetcova, I., Peri, J., & Kim, Y. (2021). Cohesion, collaboration and the struggle of creating
         online learning communities: Development and validation of an online collective efficacy scale.
         Computers and Education Open, 2, 100031.
Kim, Y., Glassman, M., Bartholomew, M., & Hur, E. H. (2013). Creating an educational context for Open Source
         Intelligence: The development of Internet self-efficacy through a blogcentric course. Computers &
         Education, 69, 332-342.
Krutka, D., & Greenhalgh, S., (2021) “You can tell a lot about a person by reading their bio”: lessons from
         inauthentic Twitter accounts’ activity in #Edchat", Journal of Research on Technology in Education.
Mutton, T. (2020) Teacher education and Covid-19: responses and opportunities for new pedagogical
         initiatives, Journal of Education for Teaching, 46:4, 439-441, DOI: 10.1080/02607476.2020.1805189
Stahl, G., Ludvigsen, S., Law, N. et al. (2014). CSCL artifacts. Intern. J. Comput. Support. Collab. Learn. 9, 237–
         245. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11412-014-9200-0
Venkatesh, V., & Davis, F. D. (2000). A theoretical extension of the technology acceptance model: Four
         longitudinal field studies. Management science, 46(2), 186-204.
Walton, E., & Rusznyak, L. (2020). Cumulative knowledge-building for inclusive education in initial teacher
         education. European Journal of Teacher Education, 43(1), 18-37.
Yarovoy, A., Nagar, Y., Minkov, E., & Arazy. O. (2020). Assessing the Contribution of Subject-matter Experts
         to Wikipedia. ACM Trans. Soc. Comput. 3, 4, Article 21. https://doi.org/10.1145/341685
Yoon, S. A., Miller, K., Richman, T., Wendel, D., Schoenfeld, I., Anderson, E., & Shim, J. (2020). Encouraging
         collaboration and building Community in Online Asynchronous Professional Development: designing
         for social capital. International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 15(3).




CSCL2022 Proceedings                                     576                                                   © ISLS
