  Tuvatar: An Avatar-Mediated Small Group Learning Environment
                     Erica Ho, The University of Sydney, Australia, erica.ho@sydney.edu.au

         Abstract: Using the metaphor of the theatre, Goffman describes people as actors who perform
         roles according to the social situations. From this perspective, our behaviours and reactions are
         influenced by how we think others perceive us and how we want to be perceived by others. As
         collaborative learning is a social interaction, this research uses Goffman’s perspective to
         develop a framework and design a novel learning platform with the aim of understanding and
         facilitating collaborative learning.

Introduction and the SARA framework
Collaborative learning is considered to be an effective educational approach (Laal & Ghodsi, 2012), but its
effectiveness can be hampered when students are not meaningfully engaged in group activities. For example,
Bowen and colleagues (2012) observed the issue that students were reluctant to express honest opinions or tended
to give non-critical (friendly but unconstructive) comments to their peers. Without exchanging genuine thoughts
and ideas with group members, students are not having meaningful peer interaction and collaborative learning
cannot take place. Since collaborative learning is a social interaction, this research aims to understand and address
this issue through the lens of social psychological theories.
          Goffman (1959) views social interactions as theatrical performances and suggests that we need to keep
our audiences separated from each other, otherwise a “staging” problem will appear when we handle different
audiences at the same time. It is true that most people behave differently in front of different audiences such as
their parents, friends, romantic partner, children, colleagues, and strangers. For the same reason, students may
have difficulty deciding who they should be (e.g., a friend, a learner, or a peer reviewer to evaluate other students’
work) during group learning activities. Therefore, from Goffman’s dramaturgical perspective, non-meaningful
peer interaction is caused by the staging problem. Since Goffman’s work has been used to understand people’s
behaviours online (e.g., Bullingham & Vasconcelos, 2013), this research applies his metaphor of the theatre to
online learning environments and develops a framework called SARA (Stage, Audience, Role, Appearance). This
work summarises the essential elements and show how they can guide the design of peer learning platforms.

Designing a novel collaborative learning environment
To address the staging problem in peer interaction, the online learning environment should keep different
Audiences in different Stages (the first two elements in the SARA framework). Superficially, anonymity in online
environments can be a solution – when students do not have to reveal their real-life identity, they can ask any
questions or give critical peer comments to their classmates without the fear of looking stupid or unfriendly.
However, anonymous interaction could result in insults or create an unproductive group atmosphere
(Christopherson, 2007). From the dramaturgical perspective, a proper appearance is the factor that contributes to
the success of the role performance. Therefore, the online learning environment should give students an
Appearance that could tell them their Role (the last two elements in the SARA framework) and guide them to
play out their role (e.g., a learner or collaborator) during small group learning activities.
          In online environments, avatars (graphical representations of users) are one’s appearance which directly
provides identities and attitudes of the person-in-communication. Research studies on avatar-mediated
communication (e.g., Yee et al., 2011; Yee & Bailenson, 2007) found that avatar users conformed to behaviours
that match the identity or characteristic of their avatar. Furthermore, Oh and colleagues (2016) found that an
avatar’s facial expressions (e.g., smiling) affected its user’s communication experience. Moreover, since the
online environment is shown to each user separately through his/her computer screen, the same avatar can be
rendered differently among users to match their perceptions of a specific role or situation. Therefore, using avatars
with specifically designed role or identity cues and characteristics (e.g., suitable outfits together with positive
traits and facial expressions) may induce positive peer interactions within small group learning contexts.

Tuvatar: An avatar-mediated learning platform
Tuvatar (tuvatar.com) is developed to demonstrate the feasibility of implementing the SARA framework and to
explore the potential of student-customised avatars with appearance rendering. On Tuvatar, teachers can set up
different virtual spaces (Stage) such as a teamwork space or a peer tutoring space to organise group activities.
Teachers can also assign different roles (Role) such as the role of collaborator or the role of tutor to students.
Students’ real-life identity is unknown to their group members (Audience) so they will not be distracted by their




CSCL2022 Proceedings                                     581                                                   © ISLS
real-life social relations, and they will be prompted to select or create an avatar (Appearance) before participating
in group activities. On Tuvatar, students can create avatars that have a name, gender, physical appearance, and
personality different from their own (see Figure 1a). In addition, students can create and maintain multiple avatars
in a single account, so that they can tailor their identity and appearance by using an appropriate avatar to work as
a team in a teamwork space, or to play the role of tutor/tutee in a peer tutoring space.
           To give students a proper appearance to perform their role within small group learning contexts, their
avatars would be shown wearing an outfit that fits their role or the situation. For example, students in a teamwork
space would see their avatars wearing their self-customised team uniform, and since the avatar appearance is
shown to each student separately, each student would see all other team members’ avatars wearing the exact same
uniform of his/her choice (see Figure 1b) while the fact is each member may have designed a different uniform.
By that means, group members’ clothing could be unified to create a team atmosphere while individual preference
and perception are retained. In addition, to convey behaviour expectations to students, their avatars always have
positive (such as friendly and enthusiastic) facial expressions, and only positive personality traits related to
learning and collaboration (such as inquisitive and cooperative) are available for students to choose from.

           Figure 1
           Avatars on Tuvatar are customisable (a) and students in a teamwork space with the same uniform (b)




                                        (a)                               (b)

Discussion and outlook
The development of Tuvatar demonstrates how the SARA framework can be implemented in the design of an
online collaborative learning environment. At present, Tuvatar can be used by researchers to understand students’
perceptions of a particular role (e.g., tutor) or situation (e.g., learning STEM subjects). By analysing the student-
customised avatars (e.g., avatars’ gender, race, and personality traits), students’ perceptions and stereotypes can
be identified. For example, it is possible to examine if students tend to create and use male avatars to be the tutor
in a math tutoring session. Tuvatar is an ongoing project and one of the future directions is to enrich the group
identity cues by further unifying (or diversifying) group members’ avatar appearance (e.g., hair and skin colour),
so surface-level diversity (e.g., based on race) in groups could be customised for research or learning purposes.

References
Bowen, G. M., Farmer, R., & Arsenault, N. (2012). Perspectives on the Use of “Anonymous” Discussion Forums
         in Undergraduate Education Courses. Canadian Journal of Learning and Technology, 38(2).
Bullingham, L., & Vasconcelos, A. C. (2013). ‘The presentation of self in the online world’: Goffman and the
         study of online identities. Journal of Information Science, 39(1), 101–112.
Christopherson, K. M. (2007). The positive and negative implications of anonymity in Internet social interactions:
         ‘On the Internet, Nobody Knows You’re a Dog’. Computers in Human Behavior, 23(6), 3038–3056.
Goffman, E. (1959). The presentation of self in everyday life. Doubleday.
Laal, M., & Ghodsi, S. M. (2012). Benefits of collaborative learning. Procedia - Social and Behavioral Sciences,
         31, 486–490.
Oh, S. Y., Bailenson, J., Krämer, N., & Li, B. (2016). Let the avatar brighten your smile: Effects of enhancing
         facial expressions in virtual environments. PLoS ONE, 11(9).
Yee, N., & Bailenson, J. (2007). The proteus effect: The effect of transformed self-representation on behavior.
         Human Communication Research, 33(3), 271–290.
Yee, N., Ducheneaut, N., Yao, M., & Nelson, L. (2011). Do men heal more when in drag? Conflicting identity
         cues between user and avatar. Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
         Systems, 773–776.

Acknowledgments
The author wishes to thank the anonymous reviewers and Peter Reimann for their comments, and Derek Liu for
his programming assistance. Also, special thanks to Eleni Smyrnis and John Vulic for their editorial support.




CSCL2022 Proceedings                                    582                                                   © ISLS
