     ILDE+ D-TIPS: an Integrated Learning Design Environment to
            support Design Thinking in Primary Schools
                            Patricia Santos, Khadija El Aadmi-Laamech, Nicolas
                    Gutierrez{patricia.santos,khadija.eladdmi,nicolas.gutierrez}@upf.edu
                                          Universitat Pompeu Fabra
               Selam Mebrahtu, selam@strategicdesignscenarios.net, Strategic Design Scenarios

         Abstract: Equipping teachers with appropriate tools and methods to impart innovative teaching
         practice and support their competence profile development is of high priority according to
         European educational policies. Previous studies have shown the benefits of integrating design
         thinking in educational settings as a teaching practice, but also it has been shown the need to
         support teachers in this process. This paper presents the D-TIPS platform aimed to build a
         transnational community of teachers and schools with interest in collaboration, (co)creation and
         exchange of knowledge about design thinking.

Introduction: the ILDE+ D-TIPS platform
Design Thinking (DT) promotes the ability to use a systematic process to understand people and situations, define
problems, and come up with innovative solutions (Luka, 2014). But, as Hennessey and Mueller discuss in (2020),
while DT is being readily adopted in education, little is known about how teachers integrate DT across the
curriculum, or the challenges faced by educators. In this context, D-TIPS (Design Thinking in Primary School) is
a three year (2019-2022) Erasmus+ project focused on understanding teachers’ needs and empowering them with
tools to apply DT in education. The project is rooted on research that clearly demonstrates that the competences
in the core of the DT mindset are critical to the integral development of learners and to their success (Johansson‐
Sköldberg et al 2013). Our approach is based on building an online community (OC) of teachers interested in DT.
Previous studies have shown that OCs provide a source of continuous professional development for teachers as
they are able to deliver authentic and personalized opportunities for learning (Gutierrez-Paez et al, 2021). The
data collected so far (Rogers et al, 2020) has been used to propose a prototype: ILDE + D-TIPS
(https://ildeplus.upf.edu/DTIPS/). This is a minimum viable product based on ILDE (Hernández-Leo et al, 2018).
ILDE + is aimed to support (co)creation, collaboration and sharing of learning designs (LDs). The following
sections present the innovative features of this platform:
      Figure 1 (a) D-TIPS toolbox (b) My project journey an authoring tool to document learning designs




DTIPS Toolbox and My Project Journey authoring tool
The ‘D-TIPS toolbox’ (Figure 1a) is aimed to provide access to a collection of editable canvases including a wide
range of DT activities to run in the classrooms. The tools can be used in My project Journey (Figure 1b) to
(co)create customized learning designs (LD) by using a dynamic template with: metadata ‘The essentials’ and
‘Descriptors’; DT phases with the corresponding tools, reflections and self-assessment (after implementation);




CSCL2022 Proceedings                                   553                                                  © ISLS
and the ‘Designer Journal’ aimed to attach evidences. The design can be edited along different periods of time,
saved as a private draft or be shared publicly with the D-TIPS community under a Creative Commons license.

Community and Repository
All members of the community (Figure 2a) have access to features such as a: follow/unfollow, like, and design
counters of contributions (projects created within the platform), total number of followers and total number of
following. Users are able to access the individual profiles of the community members and explore a brief
biography and the projects they have created. A notifications’ system allows users to be updated about new
available content or actions performed within the platform, as for instance actions happening in the repository
(Figure 2b) such as: like a design (liked LDs are automatically saved in ‘my personal space’); duplications of
designs, comments and views.

           Figure 2 (a) Members of the community section (b) Repository with two learning designs,




2 Conclusions and future work
We want to analyze how users behave with the system and especially how they (co)create LDs using the resources
and features of the platform. In order to guarantee a preliminary collection of data, our plans include the
organization of pilots in four different European countries: Spain, Belgium, Romania and Lithuania. In addition,
this will give us the opportunity to understand how the transnationally online community of teachers/educators
with interest in DT is built and used.

References
Luka, I. (2014). Design thinking in pedagogy. The Journal of Education, Culture, and Society, 5(2), 63-74.
Gutiérrez-Paez, N., Rodríguez, P. S., & Hernández-Leo, D. (2021, July). Understanding participants' motivational
          factors for the design of a teacher community platform. In 2021 International Conference on Advanced
          Learning Technologies (ICALT) (pp. 132-134). IEEE.
Rogers, H., Martínez-Moreno, J., Santos, P., Tabacaru, M. Mebrahtu Kidanemariam, S., Zinkevičiūtė, G., Dragt,
          E. Bol, E., Varanauskas, A., Gouache, C. (2020) Addressing the gaps and needs of primary school
          teachers when designing the D-TIPS Toolbox. D-TIPS report, available online:
          https://bit.ly/DTIPSneeds
Hennessey, E., & Mueller, J. (2020). Teaching and Learning Design Thinking (DT): How Do Educators See DT
          Fitting into the Classroom?. Canadian Journal of Education, 43(2), 499-521.
Hernández-Leo, D., Asensio-Pérez, J. I., Derntl, M., Pozzi, F., Chacón, J., Prieto, L. P., & Persico, D. (2018). An
          integrated environment for learning design. Frontiers in ICT, 5, 9.
Johansson‐Sköldberg, U., Woodilla, J., & Çetinkaya, M. (2013). Design thinking: past, present and possible
          futures. Creativity and innovation management, 22(2), 121-146.

Acknowledgments
This work has been partially funded by the Erasmus + programme (Proj. nº 2019-1-ES01-KA201-064651),




CSCL2022 Proceedings                                   554                                                  © ISLS
