        Illuminated Devices: A Sociotechnical System to Broaden Access
                              to Digital Assistance
       Dana Pontious, Kirk Thelen, Briana Bettin, Kelly S. Steelman, Leo C. Ureel, Charles Wallace
                      {dpontiou,klthelen,bcbettin,steelman,ureel,wallace}@mtu.edu
                                   Michigan Technological University
        Abstract: User training and support are crucial factors in bridging the digital divide. The
        Illuminated Devices sociotechnical system, inspired by our experiences providing online
        support during COVID-19, will provide personal digital tutoring, accessible anywhere, even
        with limited prior technology experience. System development leverages a human-centered,
        design-based research approach. The project will culminate in a pilot rollout and evaluation at
        three community sites.
Continuous instruction and mentoring are essential but underemphasized components in our efforts to narrow
the Digital Divide. Digital newcomers and other learners gain confidence and competence from personal, situated,
interactive sessions with human tutors (Winstead et al. 2013, Woodward et al. 2013). Libraries and other
community centers can provide means of access to this learning (Xie & Bugg 2009), but not all those in need
have regular access to the physical locations of these institutions. Our goal is to reach learners in a ubiquitous
fashion, whenever and wherever they need help. Our project Illuminated Devices seeks to make the personal,
interactive nature of a community-based tutoring program available anywhere, by connecting learners to tutors
directly through common digital devices. The Illuminated system is a sociotechnical framework, blending digital
technology and human interaction. It comprises a portal application that allows an immediate face-to-face
connection between the user and tutor, and a sociotechnical network of tutors and learning resources.
          Since 2011, our group has run an outreach program that pairs technologically savvy students at our
institution with community members seeking help in navigating computing technology (King et al., 2013;
Atkinson et al., 2016). Wider-scope problem solving strategies, more transferable between tasks, are emphasized
in our program. Strategies allow users to explore (understand the full space of affordances available to them) and
tinker (understand how their actions affect the system state) in a safe, methodical way. Exploration and tinkering
are enabled by a set of certain attitudes on the user’s part, including confidence, creativity, attentiveness, and
perseverance. Together these strategies and attitudes provide a foundation for lifelong, independent learning.
Social Cognitive Theory (Bandura, 1977) provides guiding principles for our community program (Steelman et
al., 2017): Tutors model problem solving and exploration, work with learners to articulate goals, and put the
learner in the driver’s seat as much as possible to build self-efficacy.
          The COVID-19 pandemic revealed both the limitations of our model and opportunities to extend its reach.
Since we could no longer offer face-to-face tutoring, we pivoted to providing our program online through Zoom;
we set up a phone-based “switchboard” through which we helped patrons connect to Zoom and then passed them
to tutors in breakout rooms. Although an effective ad hoc tactic, the phone-based approach was not effective for
those who need the assistance most: those without the knowledge or confidence to independently connect to the
internet, download an app like Zoom, or join a meeting. At the same time, the new remoteness revealed
opportunities. By reaching patrons in their home, we were able to help individuals in their own space and with
tethered technologies such as printers, cable modems, wi-fi routers, and smart TVs, which have been challenging
or impossible to address in face-to-face tutoring sessions. This inspired us to conduct a Design Thinking workshop
among past and present community tutors to reimagine our program and how it is delivered. The concept of this
current work emerged during that workshop.
          Our Illuminated system has two components: the Illuminated Portal, and a social subsystem comprising
the human tutors, community, procedures, and tasks associated with the tutoring program. The Illuminated Portal
is a lightweight application that integrates video communication with a human tutor as well as access to common
solutions that can help resolve problems independently. The Portal has a low barrier for access, requiring only a
single button press to activate the device, connect to the internet, and initiate the Portal application and a face-to-
face tutoring session therein. Once connected, the Portal will provide a continuous view of user activity across
applications and convey tutor input to learners in a way that minimizes distraction and maximizes flow. Examples
of tutor-learner interaction via the Illuminated Portal are depicted in Figure 1.
          In developing the Illuminated system, it is imperative that we understand our users and define the system
goals (Easterday, Rees Lewis, Gerber, 2014). We are following a human-centered research approach called
Design-Based Research, which emphasizes producing theories of learning and teaching in naturalistic contexts
using interventionist and iterative design approaches (Barab and Squire, 2004). Our partnering organizations in
this process include two local libraries and an employment aid office helping local job seekers.




CSCL2022 Proceedings                                     587                                                   © ISLS
                   Figure 1: Use cases of tutor-learner interaction via the Illuminated Portal.
         Beyond the technical aspects of the Illuminated system, what remains to be developed is the social
component of the sociotechnical system. How can the Portal be put to use in ways that leverage our best practices
from ten years of BASIC tutoring (Steelman et al., 2017)? For instance, what does observational learning and
modeling look like when tutor and learner are connected virtually rather than in person? How can goals best be
negotiated without physical proximity? Physical distance necessitates putting learners in the driver’s seat, but how
then can tutors best handle the moments when in-person they would temporarily take the wheel? Libraries and
other organizations will also need a protocol for how to connect tutors with learners. These support resources will
be developed concurrently with the technical subsystem, informed by the consultants in our three partnering
community organizations.
         Our design-based research approach facilitates always thinking of next steps, next goals, and next
improvements. As stakeholders navigate and suggest modifications to the technical system, these interactions can
also inform aspects of the social subsystem that were previously hidden. Further, as the Portal is used across
contexts, stakeholders and those learning with the Portal may identify key areas to direct future work. For example,
while the Portal is meant to help with general technology literacy, specialized help for topics related to navigating
employment or library services with a device may be frequently requested. Such requests may lead us to refactor
the social subsystem with additional types of tutors, or methods for aiding with these specialized needs.
Acknowledgment. This material is based upon work supported by the National Science Foundation under Grant
No. BCS- 2122034. Any opinions, findings and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are
those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Science Foundation.

References
Atkinson, K., Barnes, J., Albee, J., Anttila, P., Haataja, J., Nanavati, K., Steelman, K.S., Wallace, C. (2016).
        Breaking barriers to digital literacy: An intergenerational social-cognitive approach. ACM SIGACCESS
        Conference on Computers and Accessibility, Reno NV.
Barab, S., & Squire, K. (2004). Design-based research: Putting a stake in the ground. Journal of the Learning
        Sciences, 13(1), 1-14.
Bandura, A. (1977). Social Learning Theory. Englewood Cliffs NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Easterday, M. W., Lewis, D. R., & Gerber, E. M. (2014). Design-based research process: Problems, phases, and
        applications. Proceedings of International Conference of the Learning Sciences, ICLS, 317-324.
King, H., Kumar, S., Ureel, L.C., Wallace, C. (2013). Lessons from our elders: Identifying obstacles to digital
        literacy through direct engagement. International Conference on Pervasive Technologies Related to
        Assistive Environments, Rhodes, Greece.
Steelman, K.S., Tislar, C.L., Ureel, L.C., Wallace, C. (2017). Eliciting best practices in digital literacy tutoring:
        A cognitive task analysis approach. HCI International Conference, Vancouver BC.
Winstead, V., Anderson, W.A., Yost, E. A., Cotten, S.R., Warr, A., Berkowsky, R.W. (2013). You can teach an
        old dog new tricks: A qualitative analysis of how residents of senior living communities may use the web
        to overcome spatial and social barriers. Journal of Applied Gerontology 32(5).
Woodward, A. T., Freddolino, P. P., Wishart, D. J., Bakk, L., Kobayashi, R., Tupper, C., Panci, J., & Blaschke-
        Thompson, C. M. (2013). Outcomes from a peer tutor model for teaching technology to older adults.
        Ageing & Society, 33, 1315.
Xie, B. & Bugg, J.M. (2009). Public library computer training for older adults to access high-quality Internet
        health information. Library & Information Science Research 31: 155-162.




CSCL2022 Proceedings                                    588                                                   © ISLS
