   Exploring Pedagogical Strategies for Promoting Student Epistemic Agency
     through the Transfer of Cognitive Authority in an Online Science Class
                                 Jooeun Shim, Noora F. Noushad, Susan A. Yoon
                            jshim@upenn.edu, noora@upenn.edu, yoonsa@upenn.edu
                                           University of Pennsylvania

         Abstract: Promoting epistemic agency in science classrooms benefits student learning. One
         critical variable in the development of epistemic agency is the activation of intrinsic motivation
         that can happen when cognitive authority is shared between teachers and students. With the
         recent pivot to online teaching, opportunities to engage in such learning environments have
         been challenging using online platforms. We investigate one teacher’s implementation of a
         science unit that was delivered online. While the unit was specifically constructed to build
         epistemic agency with students in in-person classes, using various instructional design choices,
         this teacher was able to cede cognitive authority over to his students by engaging them in
         activities that improved intrinsic motivation. We describe those choices, such as, using
         unmonitored scaffolds to enable student autonomy, and leveraging familiarity with their local
         context through peer-led collaborations. We then discuss implications for this research in
         support of better learning and engagement in online environments.

         Keywords: Epistemic agency, online synchronous instruction, self-determination theory,
         online science class, computer-supported collaborative learning, COVID-19

Introduction
Promoting student agency has been identified as an important precursor to activating intrinsic motivation and
fostering students' deeper engagement with learning (Miller et al., 2018). In science classrooms, fostering student
agency enables students to actively participate in decision-making roles during the production and use of scientific
knowledge inside and outside classrooms (Ballard et al., 2017; Miller et al., 2018). When students engage with
epistemic agency, they display ownership of the knowledge-building process and share the cognitive authority
with teachers with respect to directing science inquiry (Hardy et al., 2020; Miller et al., 2018; Stroupe et al., 2018).
Furthermore, when epistemic agency is supported, it propels a shift from students mimicking “correct” canonical
science information to adopting strategies that empower them to develop their own ideas (Hardy et al., 2020;
Miller et al., 2018; Stroupe et al., 2018). This helps fulfill the larger need of engaging students in disciplinary
practices as advocated by the Next Generation Science Standards (NGSS) (NRC, 2012).
          In terms of mechanisms that can promote epistemic agency, some researchers have highlighted the
importance of attending to the elements of intrinsic motivation, such as those components in Deci & Ryan’s (2004)
Self-Determination Theory (SDT), i.e., students need to be provided autonomy in their choices; they need to
experience competence in their mastery of knowledge; and they need to feel a sense of relatedness through
interactions with others. Furthermore, studies have found that students engage with epistemic agency when they
contribute to the knowledge-building process through practices such as argumentation and experimentation, as
opposed to simply replicating the practices modeled by the teacher (Haverly et al., 2020; Zimmerman et al., 2018).
However, the success of these models is largely dependent on the teacher’s instruction and the space the teacher
provides for students to negotiate ownership of ideas by relinquishing some of the teacher’s cognitive authority
(Haverly et al., 2020; Stroupe et al., 2018). Enabling epistemic agency and transferring of cognitive authority has
been especially difficult due to the recent pivot to online environments, caused by the COVID pandemic, that has
resulted in increased teacher-centered instruction through lectures and individual work and a decrease in
collaborative student activities (Means & Neisler, 2021). Furthermore, global reports have revealed that since the
pivot, teachers have experienced challenges in a number of ways including capturing and maintaining student
attention and creating engaging learning tasks (Chiu, 2021; UNESCO, 2020).
          One way to address these challenges is through the construction of knowledge-building communities,
such as Knowledge Forum, that provide teachers with computer-supported collaborative platforms with built in
cognitive scaffolds that simultaneously reduce a teacher’s cognitive authority while supporting students to build
epistemic agency (Miller et al., 2018; Scardamalia, 2002). However, the adoption of such knowledge-building
platforms in schools has been limited due to their inherent reliance on specialized technologies and professional
development (PD) to understand how to implement the tools and pedagogies (Scardamalia & Bereiter, 2021).
Given that teachers had no time and little PD to make the pivot to online instruction, they needed to make do with




CSCL2022 Proceedings                                      51                                                     © ISLS
what was available to them, which was most commonly Zoom or Google Classrooms (Means & Neisler, 2021).
Our paper explores how epistemic agency in online instruction can be supported without specialized tools and
pedagogies. Using the lenses of three degrees of distribution of epistemic authorities (Haverly, 2020) and SDT,
we examine how one teacher implemented a problem-based learning unit both in-person before the pandemic and
then online during the pandemic using Zoom and Google Classroom, illustrating how epistemic agency and
cognitive authority was enabled in the different modalities. We ask the following research questions: 1) How did
the teacher adapt in-person units to retain instructional strategies that promoted student’s epistemic agency in an
online class? 2) What factors led students to engage actively with the opportunities created for epistemic agency
by the teacher?

Conceptual Framework

Teaching for epistemic agency
Recent science education studies have found that any learning environment that can support the development of
epistemic agency should be contextualized in ways that value students’ ideas as resources in producing useful
knowledge in the curriculum (Stroupe et al., 2018; Schwartz et al., 2018). This kind of teaching requires
pedagogical strategies that leverage students' ideas for a knowledge production process within classrooms and
activate student’s intrinsic motivation (Brown, 2017; Miller et al., 2018). One of the important teaching
characteristics that relates to epistemic agency is the emphasis on a student's cognitive authority over what counts
as knowledge within an activity (Erikson & Lindberg, 2016; Haverly et al., 2020). This kind of teaching requires
teachers to notice students’ “status and positioning” in groups as well as their “individual student histories” inside
and outside of class (van Es et al., 2017, p. 266). Teachers must be disposed to notice such nuances within the
classroom (Hand, 2012). For example, Miller et al. (2018) detail four opportunities to unpack epistemic agency
within the NGSS and argue for these to be specified in the design of the lesson to provide opportunities: 1) to
solicit and build on student knowledge as a resource for learning; 2) for students to build knowledge; 3) for
students to build a knowledge product that is useful to them; and 4) to change structures that constrain and support
action. Likewise, Stroupe et al. (2018) recommend an instructional model, where the cognitive authority is
constantly negotiated between students and teachers. Teachers give cognitive authority to students by enabling
them to frame arguments and allowing them to evaluate the efficiency of methods employed by the teacher.
          Depending on the degree of shared cognitive authority, instructional strategies can be conceptualized
across three degrees of distribution of epistemic authorities; (a) co-constructed practices where the teacher and
students share epistemic authority, (b) teacher-constructed practices where the teacher retains epistemic
authority, or (c) student-constructed practices where epistemic authority shifts entirely to students (Haverly, 2020;
Scardamalia, 2002). Teachers use different instructional strategies depending on the degree of epistemic authority
they choose to distribute or retain in classrooms (Haverly et al., 2020). For instance, teachers who intentionally
share (i.e., co-construct) epistemic authority with students will create more opportunities for students to share
their understanding and leverage these responses to direct thinking (González‐Howard & McNeill, 2020; Haverly
et al., 2020). They will also distribute the teaching authority by referring student questions to their peers instead
of being the primary person who validates understanding inside classrooms. Conversely, teachers who retain
epistemic authority (i.e., use teacher construct practices) might reign control over the thinking being developed in
class by using teacher-centered scaffolds such as modelling, asking close-ended questions or leading students to
an answer that the teacher has decided is the right one (Schoerning et al. 2015; Erikson & Lindberg, 2016). In
classrooms that employ student-constructed pedagogical practices, where the epistemic authority completely
shifts to students, is limited within existing literature in formal science classrooms (Haverly et al., 2020; Stroupe,
2014).
          The pedagogical recommendations for co-constructed and student constructed strategies are difficult to
implement in online settings due to a lack of control over instructional materials, challenges in monitoring student
engagement, little flexible pacing support as students perform, and few opportunities to provide emotional support
because of a lack of in-person interaction (Carter et al., 2020). Consequently, these limitations make it difficult to
activate students' intrinsic motivation and to have them develop epistemic agency (Deci & Ryan, 2020). In this
study, we use the three degrees of epistemic authority to identify the instructional moves adopted by Eric (the
focal teacher in our study) to create opportunities for students to participate in his online class. We then use the
three aspects of SDT, detailed below, to identify how students became intrinsically motivated to respond
positively to the opportunities created by Eric.

Self-determination theory




CSCL2022 Proceedings                                     52                                                    © ISLS
Self-Determination Theory is a theory of motivation which asserts that people constantly integrate internal and
external information to persist in completing activities based on three psychological factors: Autonomy,
Relatedness, and Competence. (Deci & Ryan, 2004). Autonomy is defined as a need to feel in control of one’s
own behaviors and goals. Competence is defined as the need to gain mastery over knowledge and skills. When
students feel that they have the skills needed for success, they are more likely to take action that will help them
achieve their goals. Relatedness is defined as a desire to feel connected to others. This is about a personal need to
experience a sense of belonging and attachment to other peers. According to the theory, these three needs can be
satisfied when one identifies personal goals, feels empowered in their own learning, and receives appropriate
guidance and competence-relevant feedback (Chiu, 2021; Van Petegem et al., 2011). Also, research has shown
that meeting these needs can positively influence an individual's engagement and critical thinking (Taylor et al.,
2014).
          To develop these needs in the classroom, as expected, teachers play a pivotal role. In classrooms where
teachers are able to create opportunities for students to direct their own learning, students demonstrate increased
motivation to learn and take action (Ahn et al., 2021; Roth et al., 2007). Furthermore, the mechanisms that support
this improved motivation are related to different aspects of student learning and engagement. Perceived
relatedness has been shown to be a primary predictor of student engagement; perceived competence has been
shown to be the most important predictor of cognitive engagement; and finally, perceived autonomy has been
shown to be a significant factor in student engagement (Chiu, 2021). However, according to Lam et al. (2009),
most K-12 students have fewer autonomy needs and more relatedness needs when learning online because the
space is less supervised and often lacks human interaction. Although studies have shown that the teachers' role
and pedagogies are critical to enhance student motivation, there has been limited studies that focus on how
instructional practices foster intrinsic motivation to undertake complex tasks, such as for problem-based learning
(Jeong et al., 2019).

Methodology
Context
This study is part of a larger project aimed at constructing curriculum that integrates bioinformatics concepts into
the high school biology classroom through a problem-based learning unit that was designed to be implemented as
an in-person curriculum in 2019 that spanned approximately 20 hours of instruction. The curriculum consisted of
three parts: In the first part (6 hours), students explored the issue of high asthma rates in their local community
due to low air quality in urban cities. In the second part (8 hours), students are provided with sensors and phones
to measure air quality in different locations of their community and asked to analyze the data using Google Sheets.
In the third part (6 hours), based on an analysis of collected data, students are asked to design interventions to
address the air quality issue in their neighborhood. Due to the pandemic in 2020, teachers had to revise the in-
person curriculum designed for student mobility and collaboration in a physical space to be delivered online.

Teacher and student participants
We study one teacher named Eric who was nominated as an expert teacher by the director of science in the school
district. When he joined the teacher PD workshop in July 2019, he had 15 years of teaching experience and was
a biology teacher in a public magnet school in the northeastern U.S. During his second year with the project, he
partnered with our research team as a design collaborator to revise the PD and bioinformatics curriculum. He
participated in the PD in July 2020 as a teacher facilitator whose role was to support the next cohort of teachers.
Eric taught 9th-grade biology in both year 1 and 2. Eric implemented the first iteration in-person where we
observed ways in which he was successful in activating students' epistemic agency by employing teacher co-
constructed strategies (Noushad et al., 2021). In the second iteration, Eric pivoted the classes online due to the
pandemic. In this paper, we focus mainly on the second-year iteration. This class consisted of 20 students (11
female, 9 male), who self-reported to be 30% White, 20% African American, 15% Asian or Pacific Islander, 30%
others or multiple ethnicities, and 5% Latinx. The classes were hosted on Zoom. The implementation ran across
approximately 22.7 hours and students logged in from various locations in and around the States.

Data sources and analysis
We collected and analyzed three data sources: online class recordings, classroom observation notes, and student
focus group interviews. Eric’s synchronous online class was observed 11 times, each observation lasting 60
minutes on average (ranging between 39 - 106 minutes, including double periods). Observations included a
description of the classroom context and reports of the instruction and activities taking place, including the types
of instruction and the teachers’ strategies to support students’ epistemic agency. Finally, we interviewed four




CSCL2022 Proceedings                                     53                                                   © ISLS
students in his class where we probed their experiences with the curriculum and the online synchronous sessions.
Students were interviewed four times throughout the unit to capture their understanding of the content and learning
experiences as they emerged over time. The interviews lasted 20 minutes on average (ranging between 14 - 43
minutes).
          To analyze the data, the online classroom recordings from the second year and the in-person
implementation from the first year were organized to group instances that were reflective of Miller et al.'s (2018)
epistemic opportunities which were built into the in-person curriculum. These recordings were examined to
observe the changes made by Eric. Additionally, classroom observation notes were reviewed to understand the
rationale behind the changes he made. This transcribed data was then deductively coded to identify instances of
teacher constructed strategies, co-constructed strategies, and student constructed strategies (Haverly, 2020). They
were then qualitatively coded separately by the first two authors. Any discrepancies that occurred were negotiated
until consensus on the codes were reached. For example, the excerpts below from Eric’s in-person implementation
and online implementation were coded differently. During an investigation planning activity, in the in-person
class Eric says “So if you look up at the classroom, spreadsheet your group ideas here, research questions, data
collection time, locations, and link to put to the map. I need this before I let you get out tomorrow.” This was
coded as a co-constructed strategy because he provided students with choices in selecting the context of data
collection and identifying investigation questions, but he retained the ultimate authority when students asked him
for permission to pursue the investigation. However, in the online class, Eric introduced the same activity by
stating that “Today is an asynchronous day. You guys should work on one of three things. If you want to use this
time to work on the planning in a breakout room with your group, feel free.” This instance was coded as a student-
constructed strategy because Eric let students plan their route to collect data and make a decision on how to
conduct the investigation without his supervision. Further explanations with illustrative instances are included in
the findings.
          To understand students’ intrinsic motivation, we examined student focus group interviews and extracted
the data that related to the rationale behind their engagement in the class. The segments of data were further
deductively coded using the three factors of SDT. For example, the following quote, “I enjoyed the independent
aspect of it and I also really enjoyed being able to just go out. And it was really nice during this year too because
it gave me the opportunity to go out and walk around my neighborhood with my friends and stuff. So, I thought
that was really nice, especially when we haven't really been able to do that at all.” was coded as autonomy because
the student refers to a feeling of ownership and freedom to direct her own learning in the project. We triangulated
the student focus group interviews data with the classroom observation codes to affirm the supporting epistemic
agency and instances of students reporting on the cognitive authority being shared in online classrooms. Through
repeatedly reading the codes and iterative discussions, we continually refined the codes.

Findings
The findings are organized to first illustrate how the teacher adapted the in-person units to the online environment
through an epistemic agency and cognitive authority lens. The second half of the findings examine how students
responded to these adaptations specifically through an SDT lens.

Curating opportunities for shared cognitive authority
In the first year, during in-person instruction, Eric was able to support the development of his students’ epistemic
agency through myriad structures (both embedded in the design of the curriculum and modified using his own
professional judgement) that transferred his cognitive authority to them. This included allowing students to select
the context of data collection (where they wanted to collect air-quality variables); setting their own investigation
questions (asking questions pertaining to their neighborhood), directing students to use peers as resources when
working with their data, and positioning his students as people whose opinions and interpretations were worthy
of being challenged by their peers (asking students to collaborate on data analysis and come to consensus on their
group’s claims). Below we detail differences in the levels of cognitive authority afforded to students between the
in-person and online classes and the revisions he made to the online implementation that allowed for similar
student-constructed opportunities to occur (i.e., strategies that shifted the cognitive authority entirely to students).

Legitimizing student autonomy
In online instruction, Eric created multiple opportunities for students to take ownership of designing their science
inquiry process without his explicit supervision. We observed that Eric curated more opportunities where students
were given complete authority to determine the nature of tasks using group consensus in his absence, as compared
to in-person classes. He allowed students the freedom to host group discussions in his absence, giving them the
choice to consult with him or continue working independently in groups. For example, in the in-person




CSCL2022 Proceedings                                      54                                                     © ISLS
implementation of the lesson where students planned their data investigation process, the whole class worked in
smaller groups to design their data investigation proposals detailing the data they intended to collect and analyze
around the school. Students were asked to submit their research questions and investigation plans so that Eric
could review and approve the trip to the outdoor data collection. Here although the cognitive authority of deciding
the nature of the final project was negotiated between Eric and students, the final approval of the project design
was made by Eric. Hence, the in-person instructional strategy was reflective of a co-constructed teaching strategy
allowing for sharing instead of student owned or student-constructed epistemic agency.
         However, in the online class, Eric revised this unit to introduce studio sessions every week. These studio
sessions were unmonitored asynchronous sessions where students were asked to plan their route to collect data
around their neighborhood and decide how to conduct the investigation within a group. He invited students to join
the class link and also provided them with the freedom to create their own Zoom or Google Hangout link to
connect with each. While he was always on call for consulting purposes, students who didn't use this opportunity
were not penalized, instead, this independent organization was encouraged. In the class observation notes, the
researcher details this interaction as captured below,

         Eric opens the class, “You guys should work on one of three things. If you want to use this time
         to work on the planning in a breakout room with your group, feel free [...] You guys should
         work on planning your data collection trial run, collecting the data or the asynchronous
         assignment that I just posted this morning.” [...] During the debrief Eric mentioned that one of
         his students shared the idea of virtual data collection in the previous class and decided to
         introduce this way to the entire class (5/6/2021).

In the above excerpt, Eric ceded his authority for students to organize their work without his detailed supervision.
He also proposed adopting the idea of virtual data collection to the whole class, a suggestion that came from the
student. This shows the shift from the in-person instruction’s co-constructed pedagogy to a more student-
constructed classroom in the online environment, allowing students to not only share the cognitive authority but
to own it, allowing for a higher degree of epistemic agency to occur. This was echoed in student responses that
followed. For example, one student said, “We got a lot of independent time in asynchronous periods to work on
our own and with our friends. So, I think we got a substantial amount of freedom.” Another student agreed, “I
think we're given an ample amount of time. I think that being able to just kind of have some flexibility as to when
we should do it so we can figure it out on our own schedules when collecting data would work. I think that was
useful.” In these responses, the group makes a reference to the substantial amount of freedom provided by the
studio sessions, where they had the liberty to plan the final project’s line of inquiry to align with their schedule
and interests. Students also referenced the affordability of conducting an open-ended line of inquiry in a flexible
manner, for example, a student said, “I did like that the project was very open-ended. So, we were able to just use
what we knew and come up with a research question about something that applied to us.”

Unmonitored collaborative scaffold
Eric was also successful in adapting the in-person lesson to allow for more opportunities for student’s epistemic
agency during the part of the curriculum that required student’s physical mobility–specifically, the part where
students were asked to collect data outside off of the school’s grounds. In the in-person implementation, Eric had
students work in groups of four where they were assigned specific roles (e.g., sensor manager, time manager,
navigator, observation, note taker). He also distributed worksheet templates with detailed prompts to guide
students' data collection process. In the online class, however, Eric adopted instructional strategies that allowed
students more freedom to design their investigation plan. Because of the COVID pandemic, Eric was not able to
monitor the selection of data collection sites due to the different locations that students were logging in from.
Thus, Eric used an alternate strategy where he grouped students based on their geographical proximity to each
other and allowed students the complete freedom to select and negotiate the sites, the routes, and the process of
data collection. He communicated to the students that this investigation is under their control as he was less
familiar with the sites near the student’s homes. This made it easier for students to negotiate the data investigation
process with their peers (as opposed to with Eric) due to their shared familiarity with their own neighborhoods.
In the observation field note, the researcher captured the following student discussions,

         Bella starts the conversation, “The only thing I can think of is like going to different parks
         because some parks will be [located] near streets or on busier streets.” Melody likes the idea.
         Bella adds, “we could maybe add playground stuff and like dog parks.” Bella says, “I kind of




CSCL2022 Proceedings                                     55                                                    © ISLS
         wish I could bring the device here cuz it will be interesting to see how the air quality is in the
         middle of nowhere compared to the city. I didn’t bring the device so that’s too bad.” (5/14/2021).

In the research planning, this group of students selected four different parks and wrote a supporting rationale for
their site selections. For example, they selected Garden [A] and wrote “we think this will be the busiest location
since it’s close to a busy section of South street. We have been there as children, sometimes on field trips.” Another
site they selected was Garden [B], and they documented “We think this location will be somewhere in the middle
when it comes to the air quality readings, since the street can be somewhat busy, but it really depends. Some of
us used to go there after school with my friends a lot.”
          The above excerpts demonstrate that students chose their data collection sites and planned the routes
based on the proximity of the location to their homes as well as their familiarity of the locations from their
childhood. Their research hypothesis was, “If a park is located on a busier street, then the air quality readings will
be higher than a park on a less busy street. It is more likely that the locations located in busier areas will have
higher readings.” It is important to note that both their hypothesis and research plans were constructed and carried
out independently, with little to no input from Eric. This group continued to initiate frequent meetings over Zoom
unprompted by Eric. In this interaction, the cognitive authority was completely owned by students and hence
indicates the presence of an entirely student-constructed learning environment and strong evidence of the student's
epistemic agency.

Students’ intrinsic motivation to develop epistemic agency
In this section, we discuss possible reasons why students responded positively to the epistemic opportunities
created by Eric. We provide evidence of a) activation of autonomy; b) development of relatedness; and c)
enhanced need for competence.

Activation of student’s autonomy
Eric’s instructional move to introduce student-run studio hours helped activate student autonomy, which
consequently led them to stay on task and to direct their learning. Autonomy refers to the need to feel in control
of one’s own behaviors and goals. This sense of being able to take control over one’s own learning plays a major
part in helping students feel intrinsically motivated to engage actively with opportunities and to share cognitive
authority in class (Haverly, 2020; Stroupe, 2018). On multiple occasions across student groups, we noticed that
students referenced “freedom” in the design of studio hours provided. For example, one of the students referring
to the studio time, mentioned the following, “We got a lot of independent time in asynchronous periods to work
on our own and with our friends. So, I think we got a substantial amount of freedom. And of course, since we had
to take the data outside of class and do that independently, then I think that gave us a lot of freedom too.” Similarly,
another student commented, “I felt like we were given enough freedom to direct our own learning in this class
and I also think it was a good balance because we were given the subject question, and then we went off on our
own and decided our locations and decided what direction we wanted to take in interpreting the data and what
improvements we'd like to make.” In these excerpts, we interpret Eric’s studio hours design as a space where
student autonomy was legitimized and activated.

Leveraging student’s relatedness
Eric’s decision to group students based on their geographic proximity and to cede cognitive authority in
determining the data collection locations provided them with an opportunity to leverage their familiarity with their
local contexts and with their peers. In other words, it allowed students to meet the personal need of relatedness.
Relatedness refers to the desire to feel connected to others. This is about a personal need to experience a sense of
belonging and attachment to other peers. For example, one group self-organized the data collection process to
include a group member who couldn’t physically join them due to the pandemic restrictions, saying in the student
focus group, “Well, Sinthia is going to be at the beach, so she's going to FaceTime. Me and Rose live in South
[City], Center [City] area, and Bella is going to come out here and we're going to go from a little park right near
our house and then to the Italian market, and then to [river side].” Instead of choosing not to include the group
member who was positioned geographically away from the rest, the group opted to Facetime the peer to ensure
she was actively involved in the process of data collection. This was done independent of Eric’s mentorship. This
indicates that Eric’s instructional move of enabling unmonitored collaborative time may have created a space for
students to accommodate their need to experience a sense of belonging and attachment to their peers, which
consequently influenced students' decisions to respond positively to the space of cognitive authority being shared
by Eric.




CSCL2022 Proceedings                                      56                                                     © ISLS
Heightened sense of student’s competence
Eric’s instructional move of legitimizing student cognitive authority and allowing for unmonitored peer
collaboration created a space where students felt a heightened sense of mastery. Students displayed confidence in
using data collection and analysis tools (e.g., Google Sheet) with little guidance from Eric. They also demonstrated
a sense of transfer, where they felt capable of applying the skills learned in class outside classroom settings. For
example, one of the students commented, “I think just generally when I look at stuff, I think it makes it a little
easier to understand certain things because I have better knowledge of that [data].” In addition, another student
mentioned, “on a more general scale, everything we've been learning about Google Sheets is going to be really
helpful [...] in other places, learning how to look at data and how to sort it and stuff is going to be helpful [...] If
I’m reading a news article, sometimes there’ll be a graph or a chart and so being able to understand that is
definitely useful.” In these excerpts, students discussed potential applications of data literacy in their daily lives.
Students referred to being able to read graphs and better comprehend data representations in external sources,
such as news articles. This shows that Eric’s instructional move to adopt student co-constructed instructional
strategies activated competence, resulting in students' enhanced intrinsic motivation to engage actively with the
concepts underlying the curriculum unit.

Discussion
In this paper, we advance the notion that negotiating the knowledge building process of directing science inquiry
can be adapted and, in some cases, even thrive in online learning spaces through adoption of instructional practices
that support shared cognitive authority. This, in turn, can support the development of student epistemic agency in
synchronous online classrooms. Eric’s instructional moves of using unmonitored collaborative scaffolds, hosting
student run studio time, grouping students based on geographical proximity allowed for opportunities where the
instructor ceded complete cognitive authority to students, which in turn, were actively engaged with by the
students. SDT provides a framework to understand how the instructional moves supported student engagement
and learning (Ryan & Deci, 2020). Our data demonstrates that these instructional moves may have been successful
as they met the three needs of activating students’ intrinsic motivation to engage actively, i.e., autonomy,
relatedness, and competence. While previous studies have shown that students often have fewer autonomy needs
and more relatedness needs when learning online because learning spaces are less supervised and lack physical
human interaction (Chiu, 2021), our study indicates that autonomy and relatedness needs must be equally
emphasized, if online spaces are to be leveraged to support students' epistemic agency. Findings in this study also
provide examples of instructional moves that can be adopted during synchronous online sessions (e.g., self-
organized studio sessions) to activate students' epistemic agency. A limitation of this study is that we report on
the perceived mastery or competency of students conceptual understanding. While our findings indicate a high
perceived level of mastery, we are limited in our ability to determine the extent to which the perceived mastery
of concepts reflects a concrete understanding of concepts. Another limitation is the case-study method sued in this
study, the findings of this study would be specific to the data set analyzed within the setting observed and hence
need to be cautiously generalized to other settings.

Reference
Ahn, I., Chiu, M. M., & Patrick, H. (2021). Connecting teacher and student motivation: Student-perceived teacher
          need-supportive practices and student need satisfaction. Contemporary Educational Psychology, 64,
          101950.
Ballard, H. L., Dixon, C. G., & Harris, E. M. (2017). Youth‐focused citizen science- Examining the role of
          environmental science learning and agency for conservation. Biological Conservation, 208, 65–75
Brown, J. C. (2017). A metasynthesis of the complementarity of culturally responsive and inquiry‐based science
          education in K‐12 settings: Implications for advancing equitable science teaching and learning. Journal
          of Research in Science Teaching, 54(9), 1143-1173.
Carter Jr, R. A., Rice, M., Yang, S., & Jackson, H. A. (2020). Self-regulated learning in online learning
          environments: strategies for remote learning. Information and Learning Sciences, 121(5/6), 321-329.
Chiu, T. K. (2021). Applying the self-determination theory (SDT) to explain student engagement in online
          learning during the COVID-19 pandemic. Journal of Research on Technology in Education, 1-17.
Deci, E. L., & Ryan, R. M. (Eds.). (2004). Handbook of self-determination research. University Rochester Press.
Erikson, I., & Lindberg, V. (2016). Enriching ‘learning activity’ with ‘epistemic practices’–enhancing students’
          epistemic agency and authority. Nordic Journal of Studies in Educational Policy, 2016(1), 32432.
González‐Howard, M., & McNeill, K. L. (2020). Acting with epistemic agency: Characterizing student critique
          during argumentation discussions. Science Education, 104(6), 953-982.




CSCL2022 Proceedings                                      57                                                     © ISLS
Hardy, L., Dixon, C. & Hsi, S. (2020). From data collectors to data producers: Shifting students’ relationship to
         data. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 29(1), 104-126.
Haverly, C., Calabrese Barton, A., Schwarz, C. V., & Braaten, M. (2020). “Making Space”: How novice teachers
         create opportunities for equitable sense-making in elementary science. Journal of Teacher Education,
         71(1), 63-79.
Jeong, H., Hmelo-Silver, C. E., & Jo, K. (2019). Ten years of computer-supported collaborative learning: A meta-
         analysis of CSCL in STEM education during 2005–2014. Educational research review, 28, 100284.
Lam, S. F., Cheng, R. W. Y., & Ma, W. Y. (2009). Teacher and student intrinsic motivation in project-based
         learning. Instructional Science, 37(6), 565-578
McNeill, K. L., & Vaughn, M. H. (2012). Urban high school students’ critical science agency: Conceptual
         understandings and environmental actions around climate change. Research in science education, 42(2),
         373-399.
Means, B., & Neisler, J. (2020). Suddenly online: a national survey of undergraduates during the COVID-19
         pandemic. Digital Promise.
Miller, E., Manz, E., Russ, R., Stroupe, D., & Berland, L. (2018). Addressing the epistemic elephant in the room:
         Epistemic agency and the next generation science standards. Journal of Research in Science Teaching,
         55(7), 1053–1075.
National Research Council. (2012). A framework for K-12 science education: Practices, crosscutting concepts,
         and core ideas. National Academies Press.
Noushad, N. F., Shim, J., Yoon, S. A., & Cottone, A. M. (2021). Are community relevant PBL supports enough
         to promote epistemic agency? Exploring variation in epistemic pedagogical practices in science
         classrooms. In Proceedings of the 15th International Conference of the Learning Sciences-ICLS 2021.
         International Society of the Learning Sciences.
Roth, G., Assor, A., Kanat-Maymon, Y., & Kaplan, H. (2007). Autonomous motivation for teaching: How self-
         determined teaching may lead to self-determined learning. Journal of educational psychology, 99(4),
         761.
Ryan, R. M., & Deci, E. L. (2020). Intrinsic and extrinsic motivation from a self-determination theory perspective:
         Definitions, theory, practices, and future directions. Contemporary Educational Psychology, 61, 101860.
Scardamalia, M. (2002). Collective cognitive responsibility for the advancement of knowledge. Liberal education
         in a knowledge society, 97, 67-98.
Scardamalia, M., & Bereiter, C. (2021). Knowledge building: Advancing the state of community knowledge. In
         International Handbook of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning (pp. 261-279). Springer, Cham.
Schoerning, E., Hand, B., Shelley, M., & Therrien, W. (2015). Language, access, and power in the elementary
         science classroom. Science Education, 99(2), 238-259.
Stroupe, D., Caballero, M. D., & White, P. (2018). Fostering students’ epistemic agency through the co‐
         configuration of moth research. Science Education, 102(6), 1176-1200.
Taylor, G., Jungert, T., Mageau, G. A., Schattke, K., Dedic, H., Rosenfield, S., & Koestner, R. (2014). A self-
         determination theory approach to predicting school achievement over time: The unique role of intrinsic
         motivation. Contemporary Educational Psychology, 39(4), 342-358.
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization. (2020). COVID-19 impact on education data.
         COVID-19 education disruption and response. Paris, France: The United Nations Educational, Scientific
         and Cultural Organization, UNESCO.
van Es, E. A., Hand, V., & Mercado, J. (2017). Making visible the relationship between teachers’ noticing for
         equity and equitable teaching practice. In Teacher noticing: Bridging and broadening perspectives,
         contexts, and frameworks (pp. 251-270). Springer, Cham.
Van Petegem, S., Beyers, W., Vansteenkiste, M., & Soenens, B. (2011). Association between adolescent
         autonomy and psychosocial functioning: Examining decisional independence from a self-determination
         theory perspective. Developmental Psychology, 48(1), 76-88.
Zimmerman, H. T., & Weible, J. L. (2018). Epistemic agency in an environmental sciences watershed
         investigation fostered by digital photography. International Journal of Science Education, 40(8), 894-
         918.

Acknowledgement
This work was funded by grants from the U.S. National Science Foundation DRK12 (#1812738)




CSCL2022 Proceedings                                    58                                                  © ISLS
