 A web-based tool for participatory science learning in the context
                 of human psychology research
                      Suzanne Dikker, New York University, suzanne.dikker@nyu.edu
              Lucy Yetman-Michaelson, New York University, lucy.yetmanmichaelson@nyu.edu
                Yury Shevchenko, University of Konstanz, yury.shevchenko@uni-konstanz.de
                         Kim Burgas, independent researcher, burgaska@gmail.com
                       Kim Chaloner, Grace Church School, kchaloner@gcschool.org
                      Marc Sole, East Side Community High School, marcs@eschs.org
                    Ido Davidesco, University of Connecticut, ido.davidesco@uconn.edu
                         Rebecca Martin, New York University, rem265@nyu.edu
                          Camillia Matuk, New York University, cmatuk@nyu.edu

         Abstract: We describe MindHive (www.mindhive.science), an online citizen science platform for human
         brain and behavior research that uses a participatory science learning approach to engage learners in the
         full spectrum of scientific inquiry. Building on an open science philosophy, it features a collaborative
         study design environment comprising an experiment builder, a catalogue of validated tasks and surveys,
         and a public-facing study page; a peer review center where students can engage with and reflect on studies
         designed by peers from their own schools and schools around the globe; and GDPR-compliant data
         collection, data management, and data visualization and interpretation functionality. We describe research
         generated during the COVID-19 pandemic by students to illustrate how the platform supports student-
         teacher-scientist community partnerships for participatory learning in authentic inquiry.

Background and objective
Human brain and behavior science is increasingly recognized for its potential to address issues in e.g., public
health (Van Bavel et al., 2020), climate change (Van Lange et al., 2018), poverty (Nobel et al., 2015), and crisis
resilience (Masten & Motti-Stefanidi, 2020). A citizen science approach to human brain and behavior inquiry—
which involves members of the public as partners in the full inquiry process—can thus empower the public to
identify and address issues that are both personally and socially meaningful (Eitzel, 2017). Many citizen science
initiatives, however, focus on physical and life sciences such as astrology and ecology, and merely exploit the
public to collect or process data. Here, we explore the potential for citizen science to engage learners in brain and
behavior research, and moreover, to involve them as partners alongside scientists in generating research questions
and interpreting findings of relevance to themselves and their communities. To this end, we designed and
implemented a citizen science platform that engages students, teachers, scientists, and community members in
collaborative inquiry around human brain and behavior. A co-design effort by a team of learning scientists, brain
and behavior scientists, high school science teachers, and technology designers and developers, the platform and
curriculum support students in the design, peer review, and implementation of original research studies focused
on personally and socially relevant questions, with the aim of broadening participation in science (Kapon et al.,
2018). The learning activities and functionalities support a scientist-teacher-student (STS) partnership model
(Rahm et al., 2003), and are aligned with a participatory science learning approach, which emphasizes learning
through authentic problem solving and the social negotiation of understanding (Barab & Hay, 2001; Koomen et
al., 2018; Lave & Wenger, 1991; National Research Council et al., 2012; NGSS Lead States, 2013).

A collaborative inquiry environment
The platform consists of tools for learners and scientists to develop original research studies; give and receive
peer reviews, collect, and analyze research data; and communicate with other users: scientists, participants, and
teachers and students both within the classroom and across schools. Inthe Discover area (Figure 1, top) students
can explore, preview, and participate in studies designed by students and scientists. While the Develop area
(Figure 1, bottom) enables learners to build and implement their own, authentic brain and behavior studies, and
to collaborate on these studies with scientists and other students. The Proposal tab comprises collaborative, text-
based “cards,” each containing prompts focused on a different section of the study proposal (e.g., research
question, background, procedure, participants, etc.) that students can assign to themselves and each other. Students
can also provide and receive comments on proposal cards from their teachers, peers, and scientists. The
collaborative capabilities and pre-organized sections are designed to provide the scaffolding necessary to navigate
the complexities of study design in a stepwise fashion. In the Study Builder, learners can create a workspace to
build a study procedure using tasks and surveys from a public database, reflect on feedback on their studies by
other students in the Review tab, and manage study data via the Collect and Analyze tabs.




CSCL2022 Proceedings                                        495                                                       © ISLS
            Figure 1
            Screenshots from MindHive’s Discover and Develop areas (top and bottom, respectively)
            Examples come from student engagement.




Data and analysis
To understand the learning opportunities and challenges associated with engaging students in authentic brain and
behavior research, we collected artifacts of high school students who participated in the program in 2020 and
2021, which included their research questions, study designs, peer reviews, end-of-unit reflections. We further
carried out interviews with 8 students across 2 schools, and with 4 teachers across 4 schools. Our analyses focused
on describing the value of enabling students to contribute to the inquiry process with scientists, the insights they
gleaned from participating in the peer review process, and the new research questions that arose from seeing the
questions and results of other participants. For findings pertaining to students’ learning from the study design and
review process, see Matuk et al. (2021; in revision) and Dikker et al. (2021; 2022). Below, we describe student-
initiated research generated during the COVID-19 pandemic to illustrate how our citizen science platform can
support iterative, authentic inquiry in student-scientist research partnerships.

Student-led brain and behavior citizen science inquiry during a pandemic
In Spring 2020, at the height of the pandemic, 18 juniors and seniors in an Environmental Science elective at a
private New York City high school, participated in a 12-day unit taught by one of our teacher partners, in which
they learned to use human brain and behavior research methods to understand youth's experiences during the
pandemic. Students designed studies to explore the relationships between youth's pandemic experiences and
mental health, remote learning, personality traits, and group dynamics. Professional scientists then translated
students’ research questions into a study titled “How do you cope during the pandemic?”
(mindhive.science/studies/covid), obtained ethical approval from their institution’s International Review Board,
and collected responses over the course of the 2020-2021 school year.
     Results from 206 undergraduate students who completed the study showed that students with more agreeable
personalities (John & Srivastava, 1999) reported a greater ability to personally connect with their classmates in a
remote format. Students who were more likely to seek emotional support as a coping strategy were also more
likely to report connectedness with their peers and teacher in remote learning formats. Meanwhile, students more
prone to personal distress (Kessler et al., 2002) reported greater connectedness to their teacher and peers in in-
person rather than remote formats. These findings support teachers’ subjective accounts and resonate with
published findings that remote learning increases the learning gap for vulnerable students (e.g., Dorn et al., 2020a).
However, other findings from this study seem to counter the narratives told of remote learning (e.g., Dorn et al.,
2020b). For example, some students reported faring better during remote learning than in in-person formats.
Additionally, a great majority of students indicated that they would have preferred an asynchronous remote model
although they were only offered synchronous remote classes. While these findings merit further investigation,
they underscore the importance of including students as stakeholders in decisions about how they should learn,
particularly under rapidly changing crisis situations that challenge commonly held beliefs about student needs.




CSCL2022 Proceedings                                     496                                                   © ISLS
         Figure 2
         The platform promotes a collaborative citizen science model where students and scientists co-
         create and iterate on each other’s research studies (left), e.g., asking how high school students
         have coped with various aspects associated with the COVID-19 pandemic.




In Spring 2021, as part of their participation in the curriculum, 150 new high school students from 4 schools
participated in the “How do you cope during the pandemic?” study and reflected on its questions and tasks (Figure
2). Many of these students also extended this initial research question through their own study designs (e.g., “How
has the pandemic affected different age groups' mental health?”, “Is it easier to focus online or in-person?”), which
have been added to the platform for future students and scientists to implement and build upon. However, unlike
Spring 2020, many studies designed by students in Spring 2021 centered on topics other than COVID-19, such as
climate change and political beliefs. They branched out their research questions to include other socially
personally relevant research questions, including Has the Pandemic Changed the Environmental Impact of
People’s Eating Habits? and Let’s Argue! Hearing Hot Topics: Does Political Affiliation Affect How We Interact
with and View Others?)

            Figure 3
            Examples of students’ study designs during the Spring 2021 semester.




Significance
The human brain and behavior citizen science platform described here provides a sandbox for both students and
scientists to pursue student-driven inquiry, and to contribute scientific understanding of socially relevant issues.
It shows how such a platform can give students agency to inquire about issues that matter to them, and as such
gain important STEM research skills.




CSCL2022 Proceedings                                    497                                                   © ISLS
References
Barab, S. A., & Hay, K. E. (2001). Doing science at the elbows of experts: Issues related to the science
          apprenticeship camp. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 38(1), 70–102.
Dorn, E., Hancock, B., Sarakatsannis, J., & Viruleg, E. (2020a). COVID-19 and learning loss—disparities grow
          and students need help. McKinsey & Company, December, 8, 224-228.
Dorn, E., Hancock, B., Sarakatsannis, J., & Viruleg, E. (2020b). COVID-19 and student learning in the United
          States: The hurt could last a lifetime. McKinsey & Company, 1.
Eitzel, M.V., Cappadonna, J.L., Santos-Lang, C., Duerr, R.E., Virapongse, A., West, S.E., Kyba, C., Bowser, A.,
          Cooper, C.B., Sforzi, A., & Metcalfe, A.N. (2017). Citizen science terminology matters: exploring key
          terms. Citizen science: Theory and practice, 2(1).
Dikker. S., Shevchenko, Y., Burgas, K., Chaloner, K., Sole, M., Yetman-Michaelson, L., Davidesco, I., Martin,
          R., & Matuk, C. (2022). MindHive: an online citizen science tool to support students and communities
          in authentic human brain and behavior science inquiry. Connected Science Learning.
Dikker, S., Shevchenko, Y., Burgas, K., & Matuk, C. (2021, November). MindHive: A Community Science
          Platform for Human Brain and Behavior Research. In TMS Proceedings 2021. PubPub.
John, O. P., & Srivastava, S. (1999). The Big Five trait taxonomy: History, measurement, and theoretical
          perspectives. Handbook of personality: Theory and research, 2(1999), 102-138.
Kapon, S., Laherto, A., & Levrini, O. (2018). Disciplinary authenticity and personal relevance in school
          science. Science Education, 102(5), 1077-1106.
Kessler, R.C., Andrews, G., Colpe, L.J., Hiripi, E., Mroczek, D.K., Normand, S.L., Walters, E.E., & Zaslavsky,
          A.M., (2002). Short screening scales to monitor population prevalences and trends in non-specific
          psychological distress. Psychological medicine, 32(6), pp.959-976.
Koomen, M. H., Rodriguez, E., Hoffman, A., Petersen, C., & Oberhauser, K. (2018). Authentic science with
          citizen science and student-driven science fair projects. Science Education, 102(3), 593–644.
Lave, J., & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated Learning: Legitimate Peripheral Participation. Cambridge U Press.
Masten, A. S., & Motti-Stefanidi, F. (2020). Multisystem resilience for children and youth in disaster: Reflections
          in the context of COVID-19. Adversity and resilience science, 1(2), 95-106.
Matuk, C., Martin, R., Vasudevan, V., Burgas, K., Chaloner, K., Davidesco, I., Sadhukha, S., Shevchenko, Y.,
          Bumbacher, E., & Dikker, S. (2021). Students Learning About Science by Investigating an Unfolding
          Pandemic. Aera Open, 7, p.23328584211054850.
Matuk. C., Yetman-Michaelson, L., Martin, R., Vasudevan, V., Burgas, K., Davidesco, I., Shevchenko, Y., &
          Dikker, S. (in revision). Open science in the classroom: Impacts on students’ study design and peer
          review abilities in human brain and behavior research. Instructional Science.
National Research Council, Division of Behavioral and Social Sciences and Education, Board on Science
          Education, & Committee on a Conceptual Framework for New K-12 Science Education Standards.
          (2012). A Framework for K-12 Science Education: Practices, Crosscutting Concepts, and Core Ideas.
          National Academies Press.
NGSS Lead States. (2013). Next Generation Science Standards: For States, By States. National Academies Press.
Noble, K.G., Houston, S.M., Brito, N.H., Bartsch, H., Kan, E., Kuperman, J.M., Akshoomoff, N., Amaral, D.G.,
          Bloss, C.S., Libiger, O., & Schork, N.J. (2015). Family income, parental education and brain structure
          in children and adolescents. Nature neuroscience, 18(5), pp.773-778.
Rahm, J., Miller, H. C., Hartley, L., & Moore, J. C. (2003). The value of an emergent notion of authenticity:
          Examples from two student/teacher–scientist partnership programs. Journal of Research in Science
          Teaching: The Official Journal of the National Association for Research in Science Teaching, 40(8),
          737-756.
Sandoval, W. A., & Bell, P. (2004). Design-based research methods for studying learning in context:
          Introduction. Educational psychologist, 39(4), 199-201.
Terry, G., Hayfield, N., Clarke, V., & Braun, V. (2017). Thematic analysis. The SAGE handbook of qualitative
          research in psychology, 2, 17-37.
Van Bavel, J. J., Baicker, K., Boggio, P. S., Capraro, V., Cichocka, A., Cikara, M., ... & Willer, R. (2020). Using
          social and behavioural science to support COVID-19 pandemic response. Nature Human Behaviour, 4(5),
          460-471.
Van Lange, P. A., Joireman, J., & Milinski, M. (2018). Climate change: What psychology can offer in terms of
          insights and solutions. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 27(4), 269-274.

Acknowledgments
This project is funded by the National Science Foundation, Award No. 1908482.




CSCL2022 Proceedings                                   498                                                 © ISLS
