  Contrasting analytical approaches to trace collaborative learning
                      with knowledge objects
               Hanni Muukkonen, University of Oulu, hanni.muukkonen@oulu.fi (Organizer)
                   Crina Damşa, University of Oslo, crina.damsa@iped.uio.no (Organizer)
              Anouschka van Leeuwen, Utrecht University, A.vanLeeuwen@uu.nl, (Organizer)
                         Jeroen Janssen, Utrecht University, J.J.H.M.Janssen@uu.nl
   Mladen Raković, Danijela Gašević, Dragan Gašević, Monash University, mladen.rakovic@monash.edu,
                        danijela.gasevic@monash.edu, dragan.gasevic@monash.edu
   Rachelle Esterhazy, Monika Nerland, Andres Araos, University of Oslo, rachelle.esterhazy@iped.uio.no,
                               m.b.nerland@iped.uio.no, a.a.a.m@iped.uio.no

                                     Discussant: Davinia Hernández-Leo,
                       Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Spain, davinia.hernandez-leo@upf.edu

         Abstract: Social, discursive and regulatory aspects of collaborative learning have been
         examined extensively. Yet, there is less research and systematic analysis on how the
         collaboratively constructed knowledge objects introduce and structure the conditions for
         collaborative processes and learning. In this symposium, we share and contrast methods and
         approaches to analyzing collaboration activities that involve digital knowledge objects being
         developed jointly (i.e., essays, posts in online discussions, versions of a product) in four
         different educational contexts in tertiary education. The four contributions, from Netherlands,
         Australia, Norway and Finland present a range of analytical approaches, collaboration analytics
         and qualitative interpretations of collaborative learning with knowledge objects. The
         contributions are part of an overarching effort to develop analytics-based approaches,
         frameworks and instruments that allow to systematically capture the complexities of the
         collaborative process, for further use in research and for supporting educational practice.

General Introduction
Collaborative, small group activities are strategies that provide learners with the opportunities to work with
knowledge contents and advance collaborative competence through discussions, negotiation, writing or creating
together, and managing joint work. Often, such collaborative work involves activities with knowledge objects.
These can be artefacts such as shared workspaces or tools within a group’s collaborative environment, e.g.,
representational tools or visualizations, but can also be groups’ shared products (e.g., students’ assignments,
reports, data). Social, discursive and regulatory aspects of collaborative learning have been examined extensively
(e.g., Järvelä et al., 2019; Trausan-Matu & Slotta, 2021; Wise & Chiu, 2011). Similarly, the knowledge building
theory and empirical research offers a principle-based pedagogy of how ideas, treated as conceptual artifacts, are
subject to continual refinement in a knowledge building community (Scardamalia & Bereiter, 2006). However,
there is a need for further research on collaborative processes that particularly focus on digital knowledge objects
as developing entities open for negotiation, revisions, and co-creation. In this symposium, we share methods and
approaches to analyzing collaboration activities that involve digital objects being developed jointly (i.e., essays,
posts in online discussions, versions of a product, digital format presentations) in four different educational
contexts in tertiary education. The four contributions present a range of analytical approaches, including mixed
methods analysis, analytics of online collaboration and qualitative interpretations of small-group activities and
collaboration on knowledge objects. The contributions are part of an overarching effort to develop analytical,
technology-enhanced approaches, frameworks and instruments that allow us to capture, in a systematic way, the
complexities of the collaborative process, for further use in research and for supporting educational practice.
          The integrative point of this symposium is an analytical elaboration of central processes in collaboration
and particularly those linking collective efforts around knowledge objects, artefacts and the processes of
improving these outcomes. Hence, the significance of the symposium contributions is centrally related to an
internationally shared analytical agenda addressing antecedents, processes, and consequences of collaboration
with knowledge objects. The first symposium presentation introduces these concepts and, further, focuses on the
process with an analysis of group size and regulation. The second presentation introduces innovative
computational approaches to automatically analyze key terms and linguistic complexity of discussion posts, to
unveil how these characteristics affect the volume of subsequent exchange and course performance. The third
presentation presents how knowledge objects are co-created by student groups through collaborative




CSCL2022 Proceedings                                    509                                                  © ISLS
programming and three sensitizing notions for interpreting (emergence, object function, assemblage) the nature
of these object-oriented processes. The fourth presentation investigates the position the shared objects take in
collaboration and how competence in collaboration around digital knowledge objects was displayed. Taken
together, the presentations advance integrated conceptualizations and methods for analyzing CSCL in future
research designs.
          The symposium engages the audience to contribute through online questions and commenting (in a
selected digital tool) as well as live discussions during the symposium. The presentations will each contribute a
position and empirical evidence on one or several of the following questions for the audience. 1. Analytical
perspectives: What is required of analytical methods to trace collaborative learning around digital knowledge
objects? What is omitted if the focus is solely on digitally traceable collaboration? What should the future
(automated analysis) solutions include to overcome this gap? 2. Outcomes of collaboration: What are learning
designs that invite students to collaboratively engage ideas, strategies and challenges? How does the focus on
knowledge objects in collaboration change the expectations about outcomes of collaboration? How to become
explicit about the antecedents, processes, and consequences of collaboration with knowledge objects?

Understanding digital traces of collaborative learning with knowledge objects:
Investigating antecedents, processes, and consequences of collaboration
Anouschka van Leeuwen & Jeroen Janssen, Utrecht University, The Netherlands

Introduction and aims
Knowledge objects (i.e., students’ assignments, essays, reports) play an important role during collaborative
learning: they evolve as representations of students’ collective or individual knowledge and thus provide a window
on students’ understanding. Furthermore, knowledge objects can serve as resources for conversation during
collaboration (Suthers et al., 2003). Research on collaborative learning can often be characterized as either effect-
oriented research (e.g., Does requiring students to produce a knowledge object affect student achievement or
understanding?) or process-oriented research (e.g., How can group members’ interaction while collaborating on
a knowledge object be characterized?). We argue that to gain an understanding of collaborative learning with
knowledge objects it is necessary to study – simultaneously – the antecedents, processes, and consequences of
collaboration with knowledge objects (cf. Janssen et al., 2010; Janssen & Kirschner, 2020; Stodolsky, 1986). The
antecedents of collaboration refer to student-, group-, task-, or technological characteristics that affect the way
students collaborate. The processes of collaboration refer to descriptions and qualities of the interactions between
group members when they collaborate. Finally, the consequences of collaboration refer to resulting effects of the
antecedents and processes of collaboration (e.g., individual achievement, group performance, perceived efficacy).
          The aim of this contribution is to illustrate how studying the antecedents, processes, and consequences
may further our understanding of collaboration with knowledge artifacts, in comparison to studying one of these
aspects in isolation. Using data from university students’ online collaboration, we will highlight qualitative and
quantitative approaches to analyze (a) how group size (antecedent) affects students’ online discussion (process),
and their written texts (consequence and knowledge object), and (b) how students reference and involve their
written texts during the (social) regulation of their collaborative process (process) and how this affects the quality
of their written texts (consequence). We will discuss opportunities and challenges of these kinds of analyses.
          Research questions:
          (1) What is the relation between group size (dyads versus quartets) and students’ discussions during
          CSCL?
          (2) What role do knowledge objects play during groups’ regulation of the collaborative process?
          (3) How does regulation of the collaborative process relate to the quality of the collaboration outcome?

          The sample consisted of 155 students in Higher Education, of which 115 were female. The range in age
was 20 to 52 years (M= 26.7, SD= 6.5). The study included individual and collaborative elements. For the
collaborative elements, students were randomly assigned to a dyad or quartet, resulting in 16 quartets and 41
dyads. Due to some students’ absence, there were also 3 triplets, which were removed from the data and not taken
into account in the analyses.
          Table 1 displays the general procedure of the data collection. After signing informed consent, students
filled in questionnaires concerning demographics and a number of background variables (which will not be
included in the analyses), as well as a pretest. Students then read information about genetically modified food
(GMF), either disadvantages or advantages. After reading, students started the collaborative assignment, which
was to discuss whether or not GMF is a good idea. Students were divided into dyads and quartets. All groups had




CSCL2022 Proceedings                                     510                                                   © ISLS
to write a short essay with arguments for their opinion. In each group, there was an equal number of students that
read about advantages and disadvantages of GMF. Students collaborated via a CSCL environment (Etherpad),
including a chat-tool and a shared text editor. After the assignment, students filled in questionnaires about their
experiences during the assignment (these questionnaires are not included in the analyses) and a posttest.

Table 1
Outline of data collection
 Informed     Questionnaires     Pretest   Reading         Collaborative               Questionnaires      Post-test
 consent                                   individual      assignment
                                           information     (In dyads or quartets)

 10 min       10 min             5 min     10 min          45 min                      10 min              5 min

          In the analyses, we will focus on the difference between the dyads and quartets and the role of the
collaborative object by examining the chat conversations and the quality of the written essays. The findings of the
study will help illustrate how studying the antecedents, processes, and consequences may further our
understanding of collaboration with knowledge artefacts, in comparison to studying one of these aspects in
isolation.

Automatic text analysis of collaborative knowledge construction
Mladen Raković, Danijela Gašević & Dragan Gašević, Monash University

Educators widely utilize collaborative discussion tasks in digital learning environments. In these tasks, students
are often afforded the opportunity to more deeply engage with course content and construct new knowledge of a
domain, while exchanging discussion posts with their peers (Hew & Cheung, 2011; Lan et al., 2012). Students
thus select, synthesize and reflect upon information they learned during the course, and share this new knowledge
in an online discussion board with their peers (Han & Ellis, 2019; Tsai & Tsai, 2013).
          In this context, the discussion post contributes to the quality of the overall online discussion and
understanding that students collaboratively create. For this reason, discussion posts are critical to advance a
collective knowledge object in online discussions. To create quality discussion posts, students need to properly
integrate (often isolated) parts of course information and clearly communicate this new knowledge to their peers,
initiating a productive topic-oriented exchange (Raković et al., 2020) that, in turn, boosts learning achievements
in the course (Zheng & Warschauer, 2015). Students thus need to engage in high levels of knowledge construction
while composing their posts to fully benefit from these tasks. This, however, remains a challenge to many students
(Holland, 2019).
          Researchers have documented that the analysis of linguistic characteristics of discussion posts can reveal
1) what parts of course content are embedded into the post, 2) how these parts of knowledge are bound together
in the post, and 3) how clearly this new knowledge is conveyed to peers (e.g., Fu et al., 2016; Huang et al., 2019).
The results from these analyses promise to inform future instructional interventions to help students engage in
more productive knowledge construction in online discussions.
          Adding to this line of research, our contribution explores the viability of using innovative computational
approaches to automatically analyzing key terms and linguistic complexity of discussion posts and to unveiling
how these characteristics affect the volume of subsequent exchange (i.e., number of replies a post receives) and
course performance (i.e., exam scores). We analyzed a substantial sample of online discussion posts created by
the university students. Specifically, we aimed at answering the following research questions: 1. To what extent
the number of glossary terms in a post and linguistic complexity of a post can predict the number of replies a post
received? 2. To what extent the number of glossary terms in a post and linguistic complexity of a post can predict
the student performance on the exam?
          We analyzed online discussion posts of 81 students enrolled in the epidemiology course at a large
Australian university. The students were aspiring public health practitioners. The discussion assignment lasted for
5 weeks and one specific course topic was discussed every week. In each week, the students were required to
create one original post and respond to the posts of two other peers. In the original post, students were prompted
to reflect on topic knowledge that was new to them during that week and reflect on how this new knowledge
helped them improve their skills as public health practitioners. In these discussions, the students could also reflect




CSCL2022 Proceedings                                     511                                                   © ISLS
on the way they planned, researched and developed an argumentative essay, a major assignment in this course,
administered in parallel to the online discussion assignment.
          The students created a total of 1,787 posts with a mean length of 342 words (SD=260). Of these, the
words “essay”, “paper” or “assignment” (including their morphological variants) were found in 81 post students
mentioned. We excluded these posts from the dataset prior to analysis and focused our analysis on the posts in
which students reflected on a newly constructed topic knowledge (and not on the essay assignment).
           Data preparation will include the following steps:
          Linguistic complexity of an original post. We will compute the linguistic complexity of an original post
for each student. To this end, we will use the Coh-Metrics tool (Graesser et al., 2004) to calculate lexical diversity
(i.e., number of unique words), average number of rhetorical connectives and average sentence complexity of a
post. For each post, these three indices will be added together. This value will be averaged across all the posts,
per student.
          • Linguistic complexity of an original post. We will compute the linguistic complexity of an original
              post for each student. To this end, we will use the Coh-Metrics tool (Graesser et al., 2004) to
              calculate lexical diversity (i.e., number of unique words), average number of rhetorical connectives
              and average sentence complexity of a post. For each post, these three indices will be added together.
              This value will be averaged across all the posts, per student.
          • Linguistic complexity of a reply post. We will compute the linguistic complexity of a reply post for
              each student following the same procedure as for original posts above.
         •    Mean number of glossary terms. We will also compute the average number of course specific terms
              provided in each post, per student. The terms will be listed in the course textbook glossary.
         • Mean number of replies. We will obtain the average number of replies each student received.
         • Exam achievement. We will obtain scores students received on the exam that tested their knowledge
              of the discussed topics.
         To answer RQ1, we will conduct the regression analysis to investigate to what extent the mean linguistic
complexity of original posts and the number of glossary terms in a post predicts the number of replies that a
student received. Similarly, to answer RQ2, we will conduct the regression analysis to investigate to what extent
the mean linguistic complexity of original and reply posts and the mean number of glossary terms in a post predicts
student performance on the exam.
         Our findings can provide support to or challenge existing theoretical assumptions about knowledge
construction in collaborative learning tasks (e.g., cf. Weinberger & Fischer, 2006). Moreover, our findings can
inform the development of innovative computational approaches to monitoring the quality of student posts and
timely identifying students who need support to improve the quality of knowledge construction and conveyance
in online discussions.

Assemblage, emergence and objects - empirically sensitive concepts in
qualitative analysis of undergraduate collaborative learning
Crina Damşa, Rachelle Esterhazy, Monika Nerland and Andres Araos, University of Oslo, Norway

This study presents a qualitative analytical approach applied to Software Engineering undergraduate studentsʼ
collaborative development of software. To arrive to generate software solutions, students must learn how to make
sense of and engage with programming and programming resources. Our study examines how students use
programming strategies and collaborate to co-construct a shared knowledge object, i.e., the code/software. It
presents and discusses an analytical approach applied to processes of learning through collaboration and co-
creation of shared knowledge objects in an undergraduate software engineering program.
         Research has shown that learning situations should offer students the opportunity to address open and
complex problems, collaborate and interact to generate new meaning and knowledge that involves sophisticated
solutions and knowledge objects (e.g., Damsa & Ludvigsen, 2016; Muukkonen et al., 2010). Fewer studies,
however, attempted to elucidate the empirical conditions under which the products of collaboration—knowledge
objects in this particular case—emerge from these processes and how these objects impact further learning.
Reasons for these limited insights could be that such processes are complex and require specific analytical effort.
The current study aims to provide a better understanding of: a) how knowledge objects are co-created by student
groups through collaborative programming; and b) what analytical approaches (or strategies) have potential to
unveil the nature of these object-oriented processes.




CSCL2022 Proceedings                                     512                                                   © ISLS
          Knowledge objects (or artifacts) are a prominent feature of the programming field. In this context, for
students, the challenges emerge to construct a solid understanding of the domain-specific knowledge often through
work aimed at creating concrete digital objects, such as software programs, games, applications, websites, etc.
Knowledge objects are developing entities and can be addressed in collaborative settings by negotiating, drafting,
developing and materializing new ideas and solutions. Rheinberger (1997) distinguishes technological
object/objects as instruments, i.e., clearly defined and finished objects with an instrumental role, from the
epistemic or knowledge objects, which are question-generating, open to transformation, and have the potential to
open new lines of inquiry. For the analytical purpose of this study, it is exactly this dual potential of the knowledge
objects, which can allot the object the role of mediating tool or object of inquiry: either as an amalgam of material
and conceptual (ideatic) resources, which activate a set of opportunities when they are employed (Markauskaite
& Goodyear, 2017), or as knowledge objects, which makes them more processes and projections rather than
definitive things.
          As part of a larger research project examining quality of teaching and learning in higher education, this
study was conducted in a Software Engineering bachelor’s degree program in the engineering and information
technology at a university of applied sciences. Two first-year courses were included, one on Web Design and
Development (A) and Software Development (B). This study capitalizes on the intensive follow-up of sixteen
students/4 groups (2 female, 14 male) in one course and fifteen students/4 groups (all male) in the second. The
courses contained varied learning and instructional strategies: lectures, bi-weekly lab sessions, group tutorials;
and a collaborative development project that required student groups to develop, in course A, a functional webpage
and in course B, a digital board game.
          We collected a rich set of data: interaction data (video recordings of group meetings, online
communication), knowledge objects (notes, mock-ups, versions of the products), course materials and resources
the groups used. The micro-level qualitative analysis involved a thematic mapping of interactional data and
objects/resources groups used. The analytical strategy opened up for the inclusion of what is emergent, new and
unexpected in the examined collaborative processes. In the first phase of the analytic process, we repeatedly
viewed/read transcripts of the interaction data, indexed topics, and annotated (verbal) activities. This was aimed
at identifying emerging themes that might require further scrutiny (Braun & Clarke, 2006); it also resulted in a
mapping of the objects/resources used by the groups. In a 2nd second phase, we employed an interpretative
approach and three sensitizing notions for interpretation: emergence - for how meaning is created when bringing
ideas, knowledge from sources and concrete actions (e.g., gestures, writing/coding) together; object function -
emerging activities that accounted for how developing objects were dealt with; and assemblage - gathering and
organizing heterogeneous relations and knowledge resources.
          The student groups worked through their collaborative programming task by employing structured set of
steps, individual coding and frequent discussions of coding strategies, and an iterative trial-and-error strategy.
The group discussions frequently raised new issues and questions, which contributed to advancing both the inquiry
and the knowledge product groups were working on. The collaborative development work was supported by easily
accessible coding strategies and guidelines, procedural structures, validation standards and tools, shared or derived
from professional collections of resources. The students identified the resources, but in order to assemble a set of
relevant knowledge and actions they first had to ‘decode’ the historically developed, encoded knowledge, then
meanings could be contextualized and adapted to the specific task. Programming could then take place, and
through that, new sense was created through the knowledge product. We frame the entire process as a sequence
of necessary actions consisting of: assembling resources – unpacking their meaning – adapting the knowledge to
the task purpose – generating knowledge. But these findings also indicate that the challenges lie, for students, in
engaging in a meaningful manner with these procedures and knowledge of programming, instead of simply using
ready-made procedures (as technical objects) and without trying to understand their underlying logics.
          The study’s findings emphasize the necessity for students to collaboratively engage ideas, strategies and
challenges when pursuing programming solutions. Collective trialing of developing code enabled groups focusing
the discussion and the developing efforts, productive both for learning and for engaging challenges. The analytical
approach employed allowed gaining in-depth insights into both collaborative actions aimed to advance the shared
object and to address challenges. The role and the value of the shared object can be identified and qualified through
a double-step analysis, and the use of a data-driven but theory- informed analysis. The study also yields
implications for education programs that attempt to employ knowledge co-creation elements in the learning
activities. From a general research perspective, this study opens up further lines for investigation and analysis that
can provide deeper insights into strategies that enable students to participate meaningfully and become competent
in constructing knowledge objects.




CSCL2022 Proceedings                                     513                                                    © ISLS
Qualities of shared objects, collaboration processes, and related competence
gains
Hanni Muukkonen, University of Oulu, Finland

          A key feature in present work-life is constant change. To manage and anticipate this change, knowledge
workers need to respond to the growing complexity and dynamic nature of tasks (Benoliel & Somech, 2015) and
constitute practices for renewal of knowledge, establish best practices and acquire collaboration competence
(Fenwick, Nerland, & Jensen, 2014). How students in tertiary education are directed to engage in such activities
is instrumental for competence development (Goodyear & Dimitriadis, 2013; Damsa & Muukkonen, 2020).
However, the relationship of students’ collaboration around digital epistemic knowledge objects and related
competence gains remains not well understood.
          Prior research in both educational and professional contexts has examined the articulation of mediating
conceptual and tangible artefacts (Miettinen & Paavola, 2018). Such shared knowledge objects are at the core, for
instance, in new product development, the production of research articles, or new guidelines for procedures.
Students should learn how various tools, artefacts, and conceptual and practical knowledge are manipulated in
knowledge work processes. How students experience such collaboration tasks framed by shared digital knowledge
objects and related competence learning needs to be investigated further.
          This study investigates two courses in higher education to describe the position the knowledge objects
took in collaboration and how students describe the process and outcomes. The following research questions were
addressed: 1. What kinds of benefits and problems the students described related to collaboration on knowledge
objects? 2. How did the students self-evaluate their knowledge work competence learning? 3. How did the group-
level learning outcomes relate to students’ self-evaluated competence learning?
          Case A, a master’s degree level course involved collaboration in groups by means of writing a group
essay as an outcome and teaching the content to the other students through holding a presentation of their group
essay. Case B, a course for first year bachelor students in educational sciences (including various degree
programs). Both courses (5 ECTS) involved seven teacher lead lectures and a collaboration outcome, group or
dyad essay.
          This study employs a multiple case study design (Yin, 2013) with both qualitative and quantitative
methods. Students answered the Collaborative Knowledge Practices (CKP) questionnaire (Muukkonen et al.,
2020; Karlgren et al. 2020), including 7 scales (27 items) and three open questions, about their learning of
collaborative knowledge practices and course experiences. In all, 95 students participated (female N=82, male
N=13, mean age 26, Case A students were on average 4.9 years older).
          Answers to open-ended questions were analyzed using thematic content analysis (Braun & Clarke, 2006).
Statistical analyses compared student mean scores on the seven CKP questionnaire scales and their relation to the
group-level course grades. A t-test compared mean scores and effect sizes (Cohen’s d) of CKP scales.
          The duration of collaboration and the role of the knowledge object were different. In Case A, the object
largely structured the collaboration: students (3-4 person groups) were guided to pose a research question to guide
their inquiry, to carry out a literature search and use their shared expertise to construct research-based explanations
to their (revised) questions. In Case B, the dyads were instructed to take a real-world challenging example (e.g.,
a behavioral or learning problem in educational context) and use concepts and research from the course literature
to explicate it. The object had more the role of facilitating investment in reading the literature and identifying
theory-practice relations with a peer.
          To understand how students experienced the collaboration on shared objects, positive and problematic
aspects were analyzed in the open-ended answers. In Case A, the most frequently described positive aspects were:
Expertise through learning content and its application, Collaboration atmosphere, Collaboration and reflection,
Type of course work and teaching, and Scientific co-authoring. In Case B, these were Type of course work and
teaching and Expertise through learning content and its application. Aspects of collaboration received few
mentions. In Case A, students most often mentioned as problematic: Combining interests and delineating
objectives, Scheduling, and Collaboration coordination. In Case B, these were Getting overview of content
learning, Scheduling, and Type of course work and unclear expectations.
          Students in the two cases reported significantly different learning on four scales of the CKP: Collaborate
on objects, Integrate efforts, Feedback, and Persistent development, with Case A inquiry course generating higher
learning (see Table 2). Analysis of the relationship of grades and self-reported learning is in progress.
          On the exterior the two courses held many similarities in type of course work and collaboration activities
around the knowledge object. In the course carried out as a longer-term inquiry process, Case A, the students
reported more positive experiences related to collaboration atmosphere, the reflection of collaboration, and




CSCL2022 Proceedings                                     514                                                    © ISLS
scientific co-authoring. In addition, they reported significantly higher learning on integrated efforts in
collaboration, learning of feedback practices, and persistent development of shared objects. The students in Case
B, the lecture course with a less engaging knowledge object and shorter collaboration, reported more about the
type of course work and learning content expertise as positive aspects.

Table 2
Self-assessed competence development on the Collaborative Knowledge Practices scales
   Scale                         Scale     Case A: Inquiry        Case B: Lecture
                                 alpha

                                            M          SD          M           SD          T 93       Cohen’s d

   Collaborate on objects         .78      4.04        .55        3.69         .63        2.846*          .59

   Integrate efforts              .76      4.03        .66        3.56         .54      3.801***          .78

   Feedback                       .86      3.80        .65        2.71         .78      7.391 ***        1.52

   Persistent development         .74      3.82        .46        3.11         .59      6.544 ***        1.34

   Various disciplines            .63      2.86        .67        2.79         .68         .536           .10

   Interdisciplinary              .75      2.43        .95        2.12         .77        1.757           .36
     collaboration

   Exploit technology             .82      2.87        .89        2.93         .71         -.407          .07
  *
     p < .05; ***p < .001, M = Mean, SD = Standard deviation.
          Particularly interesting in terms of competence development were those aspects described as problematic.
The Case A students described the challenge of combining collaborators’ interests and delineating the objectives
for the group essay. These require intensive negotiation and coordination effort both in the epistemological and
regulatory sense to ensure coherence of the knowledge object. Scheduling was emphasized, which is a typical
challenge in collaboration. Students were at different stages of their studies, which is a limitation that could
influence self-evaluations of competence learning. However, the comparison suggested that prolonged activities
and designed feedback practices promoted competence in collaboration around knowledge objects. This can guide
the design of analytics-based approaches with embedded scaffolds for collaboration.

References
Benoliel, P. & Somech, A. (2015). The role of leader boundary activities in enhancing interdisciplinary team
         effectiveness. Small Group Research, 46(1), 83–124.
Braun, V., & Clarke, V. (2006). Using thematic analysis in psychology. Qualitative Research in Psychology, 3(2),
         77–101. https ://doi.org/10.1191/14780 88706 qp063oa
Damşa, C. I., & Ludvigsen, S. R. (2016). Learning through interaction and co-construction of knowledge objects
         in teacher education. Learning, Culture and Social Interaction, 11, 1-18. doi: 10.1016/j.lcsi.2016.03.001
Damșa, C., & Muukkonen, H. (2020). Conceptualising pedagogical designs for learning through object-oriented
         collaboration in higher education. Research Papers in Education, 35(1), 82-104.
Fu, E. L., van Aalst, J., & Chan, C. K. (2016). Toward a classification of discourse patterns in asynchronous
         online discussions. International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 11, 441-478.
Goodyear, P. & Dimitriadis, Y. (2013). In medias res: reframing design for learning. Research in Learning
         Technology, 21. http://dx.doi.org/10.3402/rlt.v21i0.19909
Graesser, A. C., McNamara, D. S., Louwerse, M. M., & Cai, Z. (2004). Coh-Metrix: Analysis of text on cohesion
         and language. Behavior Research Methods, Instruments, & Computers, 36(2), 193-202.
Han, F., & Ellis, R. A. (2019). Identifying consistent patterns of quality learning discussions in blended learning.
         The Internet and Higher Education, 40, 12-19.
Hew, K. F., & Cheung, W. S. (2011). Higher-level knowledge construction in asynchronous online discussions:
         An analysis of group size, duration of online discussion, and student facilitation techniques. Instructional
         Science, 39(3), 303-319.




CSCL2022 Proceedings                                    515                                                     © ISLS
Holland, A. A. (2019). Effective principles of informal online learning design: A theory-building metasynthesis
          of qualitative research. Computers & Education, 128, 214- 226.
Huang, C. Q., Han, Z. M., Li, M. X., Jong, M. S. Y., & Tsai, C. C. (2019). Investigating students' interaction
          patterns and dynamic learning sentiments in online discussions. Computers & Education, 140, 103589.
Janssen, J., Kirschner, F., Erkens, G., Kirschner, P. A., & Paas, F. (2010). Making the black box of collaborative
          learning transparent: Combining process-oriented and cognitive load approaches. Educational
          Psychology Review,22, 139–154. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10648-010-9131-x.
Janssen, J., & Kirschner, P. A. (2020). Applying collaborative cognitive load theory to computer-supported
          collaborative learning: towards a research agenda. Educational Technology Research and Development,
          68, 783-805. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11423-019-09729-5
Järvelä, S., Järvenoja, H. & Malmberg, J. (2019). Capturing the dynamic and cyclical nature of regulation:
          Methodological Progress in understanding socially shared regulation in learning. International Journal
          of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 14, 425–441. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11412-019-
          09313-2
Karlgren, K., Lakkala, M., Toom, A., Ilomäki, L., Lahti-Nuuttila, P., & Muukkonen, H. (2020). Assessing the
          learning of knowledge work competence in higher education – cross-cultural translation and adaptation
          of the Collaborative Knowledge Practices Questionnaire. Research Papers in Education, 35(1), 8-22.
Lan, Y. F., Tsai, P. W., Yang, S. H., & Hung, C. L. (2012). Comparing the social knowledge construction
          behavioral patterns of problem-based online asynchronous discussion in e/m-learning environments.
          Computers & Education, 59(4), 1122-1135.
Markauskaite, L., & Goodyear, P. (2017). Epistemic fluency and professional education: Innovation,
          knowledgeable action and actionable knowledge. Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Springer.
Miettinen, R., & Paavola, S. (2018). Beyond the distinction between tool and sign: Objects and artifacts in human
          activity. In Cambridge Handbook of Sociocultural Psychology (pp. 148–162). Cambridge University
          Press.
Muukkonen, H., Lakkala, M., Kaistinen, J., & Nyman, G. (2010). Knowledge creating inquiry in a distributed
          project management course. Research and Practice in Technology-Enhanced Learning, 5, 73–96.
Muukkonen, H., Lakkala, M., Lahti-Nuuttila, P., Ilomäki, L., Karlgren, K., & Toom, A. (2020). Assessing the
          development of collaborative knowledge work competence: Scales for higher education course contexts.
          Scandinavian Journal of Educational Research, 64 (7), 1071–1089.
Raković, M., Marzouk, Z., Liaqat, A., Winne, P. H., & Nesbit, J. C. (2020). Fine grained analysis of students’
          online discussion posts. Computers & Education, 157, 103982.
Rheinberger, H. J. (1997). Toward a history of epistemic things. Stanford: Stanford University Press.
Scardamalia, M., & Bereiter, C. (2006). Knowledge building: Theory, pedagogy, and technology. In R. K. Sawyer
          (Ed.), The Cambridge Handbook of the Learning Sciences (pp. 97–115). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
          University Press.
Stodolsky, S. S. (1984). Frameworks for studying instructional processes in peer work-groups. In P. L. Peterson,
          L. C. Wilkinson, & M. Hallinan (Eds.), The social context of instruction: Group organization and group
          processes (pp. 107–124). Orlando, FL: Academic Press Inc.
Suthers, D., Girardeau, L., & Hundhausen, C. (2003). Deictic roles of external representations in face-to-face and
          online collaboration. In B. Wasson, S. Ludvigsen, & U. Hoppe (Eds.), Designing for Change in
          Networked Learning Environments (pp. 173-182). Springer, Dordrecht. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-94-
          017-0195-2_23
Trausan-Matu, S. & Slotta, J.D. (2021). Artifact analysis. In U. Cress, C. Rosé, A.F. Wise., & J. Oshima (Eds.),
          International Handbook of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning (pp. 551-567). Computer-
          Supported Collaborative Learning Series. Springer, Cham.
Tsai, P. S., & Tsai, C. C. (2013). College students' experience of online argumentation: Conceptions, approaches
          and the conditions of using question prompts. Internet and Higher Education, 17, 38–47.
Weinberger, A., & Fischer, F. (2006). A framework to analyze argumentative knowledge construction in
          computer-supported collaborative learning. Computers & Education, 46(1), 71-95.
Wise, A.F., & Chiu, M.M. (2011). Analyzing temporal patterns of knowledge construction in a role-based online
          discussion. International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 6, 445–470.
          https://doi.org/10.1007/s11412-011-9120-1
Zheng, B., & Warschauer, M. (2015). Participation, interaction, and academic achievement in an online discussion
          environment. Computers & Education, 84, 78-89.




CSCL2022 Proceedings                                   516                                                 © ISLS
