  Spiral Model of Collaborative Lesson Design: A model to develop
    TPACK and TEL design competency in pre-service teachers
                                         Jesmine S.H. Tan, Wenli Chen
                                jesmine.tan@nie.edu.sg, wenli.chen@nie.edu.sg
                 National Institute of Education, Nanyang Technological University Singapore

         Abstract: Designing Technology-Enhanced Learning (TEL) lessons for 21st century learning
         has become an integral part of teacher education. However, developing pre-service teachers to
         design quality TEL lessons can be challenging as they need to keep up with the rapid
         proliferation of ICT tools. Besides, the competency to align technology with the relevant
         pedagogy and content knowledge can be overwhelming. Hence, this study presents a framework
         Spiral Model of Collaborative Lesson Design to scaffold pre-service teachers in designing TEL
         lessons. An exploratory study was conducted to examine this model. Informed by the Script
         Theory of Guidance, this model liberated on the five phases of the Spiral model of collaborative
         knowledge improvement collaborative script to engage participants in a collaborative lesson
         design session. Results showed that pre-service teachers’ TPACK and their TEL design
         competency had improved. The proposed model will contribute significantly to the professional
         development of pre-service teacher education.

Introduction
The influx of technology worldwide has propelled the need for teachers to be fully comfortable with using digital
tools to engage learners in this digital age (Bogusevschi, Maddi & Muntean, 2019; Demirkan, 2019). Given the
COVID-19 pandemic, education worldwide has evolved to depend highly on technology to deliver education.
Preparing pre-service teachers with the competency for TEL design is inarguably relevant in teachers’ education.
In essence, pre-service teachers ought to know how to use technology as a tool to integrate it with their fields and
combine it with the most suitable pedagogical approach (Demirkan, 2019). However, preparing pre-service
teachers to design effective technology-integrated lessons is an ongoing challenge (Baran & Uygun, 2016). Most
scholars working with technology for effective teaching agree that traditional technology training methods for
teachers such as workshops and courses are ill-suited to produce a deep understanding of technology in helping
them become intelligent users of technology for pedagogy (Koehler, Mishra & Yahya, 2007). In fact, designing
TEL lessons for 21st century learning is not easy as they need to keep up with the rapid proliferation of ICT tools
inevitable (Koh, Chai, Benjamin & Hong, 2015). Besides understanding the technology affordances, integrating
the components of technology, pedagogy and content are critical for effective lesson delivery. Known as TPACK
(Technological, Pedagogical, and Content Knowledge), this framework had been acknowledged as a dependable
guide to scaffold and help build teachers' TEL design competency (Chai, Koh, Tsai & Tan, 2011). Therefore,
developing teachers to be TPACK competency is important to help them blend well into the future classrooms.
          Despite leveraging a dependable framework to serve as a guide to TEL design, this process is generally
messy and complex (Koehler & Mishra, 2005). Every potential solution developed has its competing solutions,
and deciding between the possibilities is not easy (Mishra & Koehler, 2003). Therefore, Mishra and Koehler
(2003) stipulated that design should best be learned through the active process of creating and doing rather than
being taught by lectures and demonstrations. Hence, this study attempted to develop pre-service teachers’ TPACK
and their competency by involving them in a collaborative lesson design process. This approach could offer them
the opportunities to explore and play within the relatively consequence-free zone of a classroom (Mishra &
Koehler, 2003). Given the benefits of computer-supported collaborative learning (CSCL), the Collaborative
Lesson Design was reckoned as a reliable approach to help pre-service teachers make better connections among
content, pedagogy, and technology (So & Kim, 2009). To enable an effective collaborative learning process, the
collaborative lesson design is supported via a collaboration script named the Spiral Model of Collaborative
Knowledge Improvement (SMCKI) (Chen, Tan & Pi, 2021) to structure the collaborative process. By combining
the strengths of the CSCL and the collaboration script SMCKI, we derive the Spiral Model of Collaborative
Lesson Design (SMCLD) model to scaffold pre-service teachers in developing their TPACK and building their
competency to design TEL using the TPACK framework as the design principle. Hence, we present an exploratory
case study to understand better the developmental process of the pre-service teachers’ TPACK and their TEL
design competency. The following research question was crafted for this study:
          Does the SMCLD help to develop pre-service teachers’ TPACK and their competency in TEL design?




CSCL2022 Proceedings                                    91                                                   © ISLS
Literature Review
Integrating technology in education has increasingly become an important concern globally (Agyei & Voogt,
2012). The need to develop pre-service teachers’ competency in designing TEL lessons is pertinent. Towards this
goal, TPACK is used as the theoretical framework to analyze, evaluate refine their acquired expertise (Chai, Koh,
Tsai & Tan, 2011). However, despite the inclusion of TPACK into the many pre-service courses, having mere
knowledge acquisition does not necessarily equip them to become creative or innovative in their thinking about
using technology for pedagogical purposes (Koehler et al., 2011).
          Past studies have shown that the collaborative design of TEL supports teachers in becoming TPACK
competent (Papanikolaou, Makri & Roussos, 2017). This approach was deemed a promising strategy for
developing teachers’ learning (Voogt et al., 2013). Specifically, when pre-service teachers come together, they
can share expertise and work collaboratively to improve their skills (Bos & Engel, 2016). Divergent thinking is
achieved when the design processes are operated collaboratively (Brown & Wyatt, 2010). Hence, by engaging
pre-service teachers in collaborative lesson design, we can be assured that the lesson design will not be a simple
cut and paste or transportation of information but rather through providing opportunities to question, manipulate,
reformulate, and interact to foster thinking competency (Cañabate et al., 2019). In a nutshell, collaborative lesson
design could enable pre-service teachers to intimately connect the relationship among content, pedagogy, and
technology in a collaborative way (So & Kim, 2009). Besides, when participants are engaged in social
metacognition activities such as agreements, disagreements, and questioning, these interactions can influence the
paths of the subsequent discussions, stimulating the generation of correct new ideas (Chen, Chiu & Wang, 2012).
          Learning by design is one collaborative learning approach that focuses on having teachers work in groups
as designers and producers of educational technology (Mishra & Koehler, 2003). This approach fit the current
context as it is an environment that is created for participants to confront educational technology naturally
(Koehler & Mishra, 2005). When the participants participate in the collaborative lesson design process, they get
to build something sensitive to their subject matter instead of learning the technology in general. Therefore, every
act of the TEL design process weaved together components of technology, content, and pedagogy (Koehler &
Mishra, 2005). This approach differs from a traditional workshop or technology class where teachers are trained
to be a consumer of tools with the hope that they can apply them to their practice. Past research studies have
advocated that pre-service teachers’ pedagogical beliefs affect how they integrate technology into their lesson
design (Voogt et al., 2013). Therefore, by engaging pre-service teachers in learning by design, they can learn in
ways that tie their content knowledge to the pedagogy and technology for its intended educational use (Mishra &
Koehler, 2003). This process helped better develop their pedagogical beliefs.
          Despite the benefits of collaborative lesson design, survey findings reported that pre-service teachers
generally do not prefer to collaborate during their learning process (Ruys, Van Keer & Aelterman, 2010). Such
attitude would indubitably lead to ineffective collaborative learning with challenges like freeriding, which are still
common in higher education (Arashpour, Lamborn & Farzanehfar, 2019). In view of that, providing a
collaboration script to scaffold the CSCL activities whilst working in the Web-based collaborative board was
deemed feasible to prevent hampering the effectiveness of collaborative learning (Hämäläinen & Häkkinen, 2010).
Given that the context of this study was set within an authentic classroom, the concept of Rapid Collaborative
Knowledge Improvement (RCKI) was drawn in to support the collaborative learning lesson. Initially proposed by
Looi, Chen and Patton (2010), RCKI dictates an environment where knowledge improvement is situated within a
short period of a class session. Specifically, RCKI “seeks to harness the collective intelligence of the group to
learn faster, envision new possibilities, and to reveal latent knowledge in a dynamic live setting, characterized by
rapid cycles of knowledge building activities in a face-to-face setting” (Looi, Chen & Patton, 2010, p. 26). In this
study, we leveraged the collaboration script SMCKI to regulate collaborative learning in an RCKI environment.
The SMCKI script entails five phases. By respecting and encouraging cognitive diversity, the first phase
encourages the creation of diverse ideas. The subsequent phases tap on this idea diversity to seek synergy of ideas
and a phase of convergence and consensus-seeking that leads to knowledge convergence and advancement. Phase
five Individual achievement refers to an individual reflection and consolidation process, where each participant
reflects and recollect their learnings across the collaborative phases for individual knowledge improvement. This
model fitted the intended objective of the two basic types of learning outcomes in this study. The objectives fitted
the crux of examining the CSCL processes and outcomes at the group level and individual level (Kollar, Wecker
& Fischer, 2018). The following describes the model proposed for this study.

Theoretical Framework
According to the Script Theory of Guidance, there are two main factors to a collaboration script, namely the
internal and external script (Fischer et al., 2013). While an internal script is dynamically configured by the learner
during the CSCL process, it is not manipulatable and hence will not be considered in this study. The SMCKI




CSCL2022 Proceedings                                     92                                                    © ISLS
script is premised upon the concept of external collaboration scripts where representations serve to guide CSCL
practices by facilitating the participants. Informed by the SMCKI script, the proposed Spiral Model of
Collaborative Lesson Design (SMCLD) integrates the components of SMCKI into the CSCL collaborative lesson
design environment, undergirded by the RCKI to support a live classroom setting. Table 1 list the external script
components, their definitions and how it defines the SMCLD.

Table 1
Alignment between Script Theory of Guidance and SMCLD
 Script Theory of        Component Definition                         SMCLD model
 Guidance component
 Play scaffold           Prompts that provide general task            The process of collaboration undergirds by the
                         definitions such as the main goal of the     five-phases SMCKI script
                         collaboration
 Scene scaffold          The sequence of activities the individuals   The procedures in which the participants engage in
                         engage in during the CSCL process            each phase of the SMCLD
 Role scaffold           Roles assigned to the participants at each   The roles assigned to each when they are engaged
                         scene scaffold                               in the collaborative phases
 Scriptlet scaffold      Prompts given to participants to help them   Prompts such as sentence starters, questions to
                         engage during each scene scaffold            guide the participants during each SMCLD phase.

                                  Figure 1
                                  Spiral Model of Collaborative Lesson Design




          Figure 1 shows the embedment of the five phases of SMCKI (play scaffold) from phase one to phase
five within the SMCLD. The participants will be engaged in the activities as stipulated with the specific phase
(scene scaffold) within each phase. For example, each participant will contribute their individual ideas during
phase one in preparation for phase two synergy. During phase two, the group members will scrutinize each group
member's ideas to rise above a group idea that represents the best quality within the group. In phase three, each
group will visit the group ideas of other groups and provide constructive feedback. These feedback comments
will be reviewed during phase four, where refinements will be made in response to the feedback. Finally, phase
five allows every participant to recollect their learning across the collaborative learning phase. This phase can
take the form of a reflection or rise above an individual product that surpasses the phase one version.
          During the collaborative learning phases, the role distribution (role scaffold) ensured positive
interdependence among group members. During phase two, each participant could be assigned to critique the
ideas of another group member. In addition, role assignments such as timekeeping could also help to manage the
logistics within the group. In phase three, different group members can be assigned to view specific segments of
the different groups. At the same time, the assignment of different members to view different groups can also
promote a wider range of knowledge sharing and knowledge contribution. At phase four, different members can
be assigned to view different segments of peer comments before group discussion and refinement. During the
entire collaborative lesson design, question prompts or sentence starters (scriptlet scaffold) can guide the




CSCL2022 Proceedings                                      93                                                      © ISLS
participants with the collaborative work. This scriptlet scaffold may be considered as a micro script (Kollar et al.,
2018). According to Dillenbourg and Jermann (2007), micro-script scaffolds tend to directly inﬂuence the
interactions of group members by giving more speciﬁc instructions. In this study, these scaffolds are the design
guidelines that are specific to the TEL design task.

Methodology

Research participants and context
An exploratory study was employed in this study. Convenience sampling was applied to gain initial primary data
to validate the SMCLD framework for TEL design. Forty pre-service Chinese language teachers participated in
this study. They were enrolled in a course titled “The use of ICT in Character and Citizenship Education and
Chinese Language Learning” during their one-year Postgraduate Diploma in Education programme with the
National Institute of Education, Nanyang Technological University Singapore. Of the 40 participants, 98% are
female, 2% male; 25% are between 20 – 25 years of age, 48% between 26 – 30 years old, and the rest are above
30 years old. All participants had at least a bachelor’s degree, with 10% having a Master degree or PhD degree.
The lecturer, who is the first author of the paper, has three years of experience in teacher education at the time of
the intervention. The 40 participants were divided into ten small groups of four members in each group. Chapman
et al. (2006) reported that self-selected groups might simulate “real-world” workgroups more closely than
randomly assigned groups. Evidence had suggested that self-selected groups led to better group dynamics and
yielded better group collaborative work results (as cited in Chapman et al., 2006, p. 560). Hence, the groups were
self-formed by the participants.
          The course was carried out in twelve face-to-face (F2F) lessons. The task was to collaboratively design
a TEL lesson for Chinese language teaching and learning targeting at primary schools in Singapore. To ascertain
the validity of the SMCLD framework, an exploratory study was conducted. As part of the participants’ course
work, they were taught Content knowledge (CK) about their subject mastery. Prior to the collaborative lesson
design lesson, each group selected a reading text within the primary school syllabus of the Singapore national
curriculum TEL design task. The first four phases of the SMCLD took place within a class session of one hour.
Phase five was taken out-of-class, allowing the individual participants to complete an individual TEL design based
on their learnings across the first four phases. The final phase five work was handed to the lecturer one week later.
Figure 2
The procedure of the study




The TPACK coding scheme
The TPACK coding scheme was derived referencing the TEL lesson assessment rubric TPACK for meaningful
learning with ICT (Koh, 2013) to evaluate the TEL lesson ideas. Figure 3 shows the codes and their scale
dimension. Apart from analyzing the data on the lesson ideas generated, it is also important to examine if an idea
refinement (phase four) is improved based on the comments from the inter-group critique (phase three). The
statistical discourse analysis was adopted to harvest this information to analyze the cognitive and social
metacognitive (Chiu, 2013) aspects of each comment given to each group. According to Chiu (2013), social
metacognitive components can aid or hinder students’ ideas and explanations. By coding inter-group data under
this domain, we can better understand how the peer comments contributed to idea improvement at phase four.
Based on the explanatory variables suggested by Chiu (2013), Chiu and Fujita (2014), the peer critique coding
scheme was derived (Table 2). This coding scheme aimed to establish how informal cognition (opinions,
anecdotes, elaborations) or social metacognition, in the form of questions and different opinions at phase three
facilitated formal cognition (new information and theoretical explanations) at phase four (Chiu & Fujita, 2014).
The unit of analysis for SMCLD-TPACK and SMCLD-SDA is illustrated in Table 3.
               Figure 3




CSCL2022 Proceedings                                     94                                                   © ISLS
              Rubric for assessing TPACK for meaningful learning with ICT




Table 2
Peer critique coding scheme
 Code               Definition                                        Scale 3                Scale 2             Scale 1
 Cognitive          Refers to knowledge acquisition, building     Opinion with             Opinion with          Opinion
                    shared understanding, constructing meaning   Elaboration and           Elaboration            only
                    (Molenaar & Chiu, 2014)                         Anecdotal
                                                                     evidence
 Social             Defined as group members’ monitoring and     Different opinion      Ask for explanation        Ask
 metacognition      control of one another’s knowledge,              (include          (include clarification)   about use
                    emotions, and actions (Chiu & Kuo, 2009)       suggestions)

Table 3
Coding scheme and unit of analysis
 SMCLD Phase                         Phase 1 & 5                     Phase 2 & 4                         Phase 3
 Coding scheme                         TPACK                          TPACK                           Peer critique
 Unit of Analysis               Individual lesson ideas           Group lesson ideas              Individual comments

Data Analysis
To answer the research question, content analysis was conducted on the TEL artefacts based on the TPACK
coding scheme. To understand the type of knowledge shared by the participants leading to TEL improvement, the
peer comments were counted and coded according to the peer comment coding scheme.

Results
Figure 4 illustrates an incremented improvement of TEL design measured by TPACK score over phases one, two,
four and five for all the ten groups. These results suggested that the SMCLD could help pre-service teachers
improve their TPACK and competency. Further analysis was conducted on the ten groups by sorting their TPACK
scores at phase four, which is the final phase of the F2F session during class. Two trends were surfaced with
TPACK between the scale 2 to 3 as trend one and scale 3 to 4 for trend two. Coincidently, there are five groups
within each trend. Figure 5 shows the two different outcomes of how participants appropriate SMCLD in their
collaborative lesson design over the TEL design phases. Trend one TPACK score is lower than trend two across
phases one, two, four and five. However, the incremental improvement of TPACK score for trend one is shown
by the mean difference score from phase one to two (MD = 0.2), from phase two to four (MD = 0.3), and from
phase four to five (MD = 0.8) suggests that when individuals have a lower TPACK capacity, the collaborative
learning phases could help them build up their individual capacity exponentially. The greater improvement from
phase two to phase four could be when ideas are exhausted at the group level. The class-wide peer critique
provided multiple perspectives, which elevated knowledge that brought about greater improvement at phase four
compared to phase two. For trend two, the higher mean difference from phase one to two (MD = 0.6) than phase




CSCL2022 Proceedings                                       95                                                       © ISLS
two to four (MD = 0.3) suggests that the higher individuals’ prior knowledge aids with the knowledge co-
construction at the group level during phase two. The same mean difference between the groups in trends one and
two suggest that the knowledge shared during class-wide peer critique is evenly distributed among the groups,
resulting in the same degree of improvement.

 Figure 4                                                  Figure 5
 TPACK competency improvement                              TPACK Improvement Trend




         Figure 6 shows the number of comments received during the class-wide inter-group peer critique phase.
Comments received by groups in trend two is higher than in trend one. Figure 7 shows the type of comments
generated. For both cognitive and social metacognitive comments, trend two groups received a higher count
compared to trend one. Since the degree of improvement is the same for both trends, this result suggests that the
number of comments has no influence over the degree of improvement. The quality of improvement is relative to
the phase two quality. x
 Figure 6                                                  Figure 7
 Number of peer comments                                   Peer comment by cognitive and social metacognitive




 Figure 8                                                     Figure 9
 Depth of peer comments elaboration                           Participants’ perception of SMCLD




         Figures 8 shows the depth of the peer comments elaboration measured by the three scales (Table 2).
More in-depth elaborated comments were received by groups in trend two than in trend one, suggesting that
elaborated comments could support higher quality TPACK improvement. A survey was conducted for all the
participants at the end of the collaborative lesson design session. 92% of the participants agreed that the different




CSCL2022 Proceedings                                     96                                                   © ISLS
phases of SMCKI help to scaffold a fruitful collaboration process. In addition, the participants mostly agreed that
the different scaffolds (Play, Scene, Scriptlet and Role) supported the process of collaborative lesson design.

Discussion and Conclusion
This study proposed a scripted collaborative lesson design model Spiral Model of Collaborative Lesson Design
(SMCLD), to support pre-service teachers in developing their TPACK and competency by designing TEL lessons.
The presented results show that the proposed SMCLD could help pre-service teachers improve their TEL design
across the collaborative learning phases from one phase to the next. Results had shown that by leveraging on the
scripts within SMCLD to scaffold the collaborative lesson design, pre-service teachers’ competencies in designing
TEL lessons had improved. This result corroborated with the recent study that participants improved in their
TPACK when working in groups as peers (Njiku, Mutarutinya & Maniraho, 2021). The building and learning
were deep and strong, which was at best through collective successes and mistakes (Rigelman & Ruben, 2012).
This collaborative learning process helped complement each other’s strengths and helped in overcoming
challenges inherent in individuals’ professional competencies (Njiku, Mutarutinya & Maniraho, 2021).
          This study has theoretical contributions. Engaging pre-service teachers in collaborative lesson design is
not new. However, providing a scripted process guided by an external script could provide new insights to
leveraging the inherent capacity of each individual and group synergy to elevate the degree of improvement within
a short class time duration. By providing a scripted scenario through the different scaffolds, the participants were
fully engaged in the process of knowledge co-construction, enabling the full potential of collaborative learning to
be activated across the SMCLD phases. The improved outcome at the group and individual level illustrated that
when the participants appropriated the script according to its design, the intended outcome could be achieved.
This positive result could contribute to future collaboration script design and further enhancement of existing
scripts (Tchounikine, 2016). Practically, this study provides a pedagogical approach to developing pre-service
teachers’ TPACK and competency in an authentic learning environment.
          Some limitations exist in this study. Being a small-scale study, there is no control group to ascertain that
the improved results at the group and individual levels are attributed to scripted SMCLD processes. Moreover, a
more in-depth qualitative analysis could be conducted to establish how the individuals’ knowledge shared during
phase one were uptaken during phase two group synergy; and how phase three comments helped with the
improvement during phase four; and how the collaborative learning phases supported the phase five individual
improvement in the TEL design.

References
Agyei, D. D., & Voogt, J. (2012). Developing technological pedagogical content knowledge in pre-service
         mathematics teachers through collaborative design. Australasian Journal of educational
         technology, 28(4).
Arashpour, M., Lamborn, J., & Farzanehfar, P. (2019, January). Optimising collaborative learning and group work
         amongst tertiary students. In International Structural Engineering and Construction Conference 2019.
         ISEC Press.
Baran, E., & Uygun, E. (2016). Putting technological, pedagogical, and content knowledge (TPACK) in action:
         An integrated TPACK-design-based learning (DBL) approach. Australasian Journal of educational
         technology, 32(2).
Bogusevschi, D., Maddi, M., & Muntean, G. M. (2019). Teachers’ Impact and Feedback Related to Technology
         Enhanced Learning in STEM Education in Primary and Secondary Schools.
Bos, B., & Engel, T. (2016). Designing Elementary Mathematics Games using Effective Mathematics Teaching
         Practices. In Handbook of Research on Transforming Mathematics Teacher Education in the Digital
         Age (pp. 406-432). IGI Global.
Brown, T., & Wyatt, J. (2010). Design thinking for social innovation. Development Outreach, 12(1), 29-43.
Cañabate, D., Serra, T., Bubnys, R., & Colomer, J. (2019). Pre-service teachers’ reflections on cooperative
         learning: Instructional approaches and identity construction. Sustainability, 11(21), 5970.
Chai, C. S., Koh, J. H. L., Tsai, C. C., & Tan, L. L. W. (2011). Modeling primary school pre-service teachers’
         Technological Pedagogical Content Knowledge (TPACK) for meaningful learning with information and
         communication technology (ICT). Computers & Education, 57(1), 1184-1193.
Chapman, K. J., Meuter, M., Toy, D., & Wright, L. (2006). Can’t we pick our own groups? The influence of group
         selection method on group dynamics and outcomes. Journal of Management Education, 30(4), 557-569.
Chen, W., Tan, J. S., & Pi, Z. (2021). The spiral model of collaborative knowledge improvement: an exploratory
         study of a networked collaborative classroom. International Journal of Computer-Supported
         Collaborative Learning, 16(1), 7-35.




CSCL2022 Proceedings                                     97                                                    © ISLS
Chen, G., Chiu, M. M., & Wang, Z. (2012). Social metacognition and the creation of correct, new ideas: A
         statistical discourse analysis of online mathematics discussions. Computers in Human Behavior, 28(3),
         868-880.
Chiu, M. M. (2013). Statistical discourse analysis of an online discussion: Cognition and social metacognition.
         In Productive multivocality in the analysis of group interactions (pp. 417-433). Springer, Boston, MA.
Chiu, M. M., & Fujita, N. (2014, March). Statistical discourse analysis of online discussions: Informal cognition,
         social metacognition and knowledge creation. In Proceedings of the fourth international conference on
         learning analytics and knowledge (pp. 217-225).
Chiu, M. M., & Kuo, S. W. (2009). Social metacognition in groups: benefits, difficulties, learning and teaching.
         In Metacognition: New research developments (pp. 117-136). Nova Science Publishers, Inc.
Demirkan, O. (2019). Pre-Service Teachers' Views about Digital Teaching Materials. Educational Policy Analysis
         and Strategic Research, 14(1), 40-60.
Dillenbourg, P., & Jermann, P. (2007). Designing integrative scripts. In Scripting computer-supported
         collaborative learning (pp. 275-301). Springer, Boston, MA.
Fischer, F., Kollar, I., Stegmann, K., & Wecker, C. (2013). Toward a script theory of guidance in computer-
         supported collaborative learning. Educational psychologist, 48(1), 56-66.
Hämäläinen, R., & Häkkinen, P. (2010). Teachers' instructional planning for computer-supported collaborative
         learning: Macro-scripts as a pedagogical method to facilitate collaborative learning. Teaching and
         Teacher Education, 26(4), 871-877.
Koehler, M. J., Mishra, P., & Yahya, K. (2007). Tracing the development of teacher knowledge in a design
         seminar: Integrating content, pedagogy and technology. Computers & Education, 49(3), 740-762.
Mishra, P., & Koehler, M. J. (2003). Not “what” but “how”: Becoming design-wise about educational
         technology. What teachers should know about technology: Perspectives and practices, 122, 1-28.
Koehler, M. J., & Mishra, P. (2005). What happens when teachers design educational technology? The
         development of technological pedagogical content knowledge. Journal of educational computing
         research, 32(2), 131-152.
Koehler, M. J., Mishra, P., Bouck, E. C., DeSchryver, M., Kereluik, K., Shin, T. S., & Wolf, L. G. (2011). Deep-
         play: Developing TPACK for 21st century teachers. International Journal of Learning Technology, 6(2),
         146-163.
Koh, J. H. L. (2013). A rubric for assessing teachers' lesson activities with respect to TPACK for meaningful
         learning with ICT. Australasian Journal of Educational Technology, 29(6).
Koh, J. H. L., Chai, C. S., Benjamin, W., & Hong, H. Y. (2015). Technological pedagogical content knowledge
         (TPACK) and design thinking: A framework to support ICT lesson design for 21st century learning. The
         Asia-Pacific Education Researcher, 24(3), 535-543.
Kollar, I., Wecker, C., & Fischer, F. (2018). Scaffolding and scripting (computer-supported) collaborative
         learning. In International handbook of the learning sciences (pp. 340-350). Routledge.
Looi, C. K., Chen, W., & Patton, C. M. (2010). Principles and enactment of rapid collaborative knowledge
         building in classrooms. Educational Technology, 26-32.
Njiku, J., Mutarutinya, V., & Maniraho, J. F. (2021). Building Mathematics Teachers' TPACK through
         Collaborative Lesson Design Activities. Contemporary Educational Technology, 13(2).
Papanikolaou, K., Makri, K., & Roussos, P. (2017). Learning design as a vehicle for developing TPACK in
         blended teacher training on technology enhanced learning. International Journal of Educational
         Technology in Higher Education, 14(1), 1-14.
Rigelman, N. M., & Ruben, B. (2012). Creating foundations for collaboration in schools: Utilizing professional
         learning communities to support teacher candidate learning and visions of teaching. Teaching and
         Teacher Education, 28(7), 979-989.
Ruys, I., Van Keer, H., & Aelterman, A. (2010). Collaborative learning in pre‐service teacher education: an
         exploratory study on related conceptions, self‐efficacy and implementation. Educational Studies, 36(5),
         537-553.
So, H. J., & Kim, B. (2009). Learning about problem-based learning: Student teachers integrating technology,
         pedagogy and content knowledge. Australasian Journal of educational technology, 25(1).
Tchounikine, P. (2016). Contribution to a theory of CSCL scripts: Taking into account the appropriation of scripts
         by learners. International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 11(3), 349-369.
Voogt, J., Fisser, P., Pareja Roblin, N., Tondeur, J., & van Braak, J. (2013). Technological pedagogical content
         knowledge–a review of the literature. Journal of Computer Assisted Learning, 29(2), 109-121.




CSCL2022 Proceedings                                   98                                                  © ISLS
