        How to Teach Computer Science/Computational Thinking:
         Collaborative Online CS/CT professional Development
                         Jiyoung Kim, Indiana University Bloomington, jk142@iu.edu
                       Jacob Koressel, Indiana University Bloomington, jakoress@iu.edu

         Abstract: This design paper proposes an online computer science/computational thinking
         (CS/CT) professional development (PD) outline that utilizes collaboration tools and a
         community channel. Teachers actively participate in conversations and discussions using the
         collaboration tools that enable us to understand teachers’ perceptions of the work ahead and
         design subsequent workshop sessions. Using community channels, teachers can share ideas and
         pose questions to the group. We discuss how online PD can affect the development of teachers’
         understanding of CT/CS.

Introduction
          Recent years have shown growing enthusiasm and awareness of the need for K-12 computer science
(CS) education opportunities and, in particular, a need to engage students in CS ideas and practices to help
understand how computing is changing our world (Blikstein & Moghadam, 2019). Computational thinking (CT)
has been suggested as a path to addressing this need, particularly in younger grades, and is recognized as a
crucial skill set that every student should learn and develop (Wing, 2006). Despite the progress that has been
made in bringing CS/CT education to students across the United States, there is still a great deal of work to be
done, particularly in the elementary grades (Code.org et al., 2020). Moreover, there is relatively little research
on how to train elementary school teachers to teach computing (Rich et al., 2017). Researchers propose that
even though not all innovations are successful, by engaging teachers in fruitful professional development,
necessary changes in education can be achieved (Guskey, 1986). Providing support to practicing teachers in
integrating CS/CT into their subject areas and curricula is critical for promoting CS for All (Barr & Stephenson,
2011; Yadav et al., 2017). Also, many researchers have suggested ways for teachers to leverage computational
thinking in supporting their curricular and pedagogical needs within disciplinary content areas (Barr &
Stephenson, 2011; Weintrop et al., 2016; Yadav, Hong & Stephenson, 2016). Therefore, we decided to create a
workshop for K-5 teachers to help them understand how CS/CT could be integrated with other subject areas.

Online CS/CT professional development using collaboration tools and
community channel
          Given current constraints related to COVID-19 precautions, our PD will be conducted virtually. A
series of one- to two-hour PD sessions will be scheduled strategically across the school year. This will help to
ensure that teachers have an opportunity to apply what they have learned, reflect, and return to the professional
development environment to discuss experiences, successes, and challenges, develop plans for future
implementation, and continue their computer science learning.
          The professional development experience will focus on integrating computer science into one or more
disciplines (e.g., math, social studies). The goal is for the workshop to be broad enough to support a variety of
implementation preferences, but also contain enough specificity to give participants a solid foundation from
which they can implement their computer science integration strategy. Each session consists of collaborative,
active learning activities using an interactive platform (e.g., Padlet, Google jamboard, and Nearpod), which
gives equal opportunity to all participants in terms of engagement. We will also work to develop a strong
community of practice by creating a Slack channel where participants can share ideas and pose questions to the
group. Workshop facilitators will monitor the Slack discussion and provide resources and guidance where
appropriate. However, the Slack community is intended to be a sustainable strategy to foster ongoing support
and collaboration between participants. Lastly, after each session, participants will be asked to complete a
survey. The results of the survey will help the workshop facilitators understand participant perceptions of the
work ahead and design subsequent workshop sessions in a manner that addresses participant concerns and
needs.
          Teachers need and desire specific examples of how CS/CT can be included in their lesson planning and
instruction. Therefore, experiences are needed that can help K-5 educators understand how CS and CT are
relevant to their existing classroom practices and instructional goals. By creating our CS/CT professional
development for K-5 teachers, we hope to address the specific needs outlined above. Through this workshop,
teachers will be able to:




CSCL2022 Proceedings                                   545                                                 © ISLS
        •    Describe CS/CT and its importance in K-5 education
        •    Understand how CS/CT can be integrated into other content areas/disciplines
        •    Locate high-quality resources that support K-5 CS/CT instruction
        •    Identify optimal opportunities for CS/CT integration into the existing curriculum

    Conclusion
              Most online professional development, especially in the CS/CT subject area, is lecture-based and
    asynchronous, not enabling interaction with peers and instructors. However, to support elementary teachers in
    embedding CS/CT education in their existing curriculum, it is important to understand their perception and
    attitude of CS/CT in the learning process and support (Rich et al., 2019). Collaborative online CS/CT PD will
    demonstrate a promising design case that can help teachers extend their understanding of CT/CS and enhance
    teachers' self-efficacy to be more prepared and have more confidence to teach CT/CS through continuous
    interaction among teacher participants and between teacher participants and the facilitator(s). In the poster
    session, we will explain of design the online PD session with examples of activities.

    References
Barr, V., & Stephenson, C. (2011). Bringing computational thinking to K-12: What is involved and what is the role
         of the computer science education community? ACM Inroads, 2(1), 48-54.
         https://doi.org/10.1145/1929887.1929905
Blikstein, P., & Moghadam, S. H. (2019). Computing education: Literature review and voices from the field. The
         Cambridge handbook of computing education research. 56-78. https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108654555.004
Bower, M., Wood, L. N., Lai, J. W., Highfield, K., Veal, J., Howe, C., Listser, R., Mason, R., Highfield K., & Veal,
         J. (2017). Improving the computational thinking pedagogical capabilities of school teachers. Australian
         Journal of Teacher Education (Online), 42(3), 53-72. https://doi.org/10.14221/ajte.2017v42n3.4
Code.org, CSTA, & ECEP Alliance. (2020). 2020 state of computer science education: illuminating disparities.
         Retrieved from https://advocacy.code.org/stateofcs
Guskey, R. (1986). Staff development and the process of teacher change. Educational researcher, 15(5), 5-12.
         https://doi.org/10.3102/0013189x015005005
Rich, P. J., Jones, B., Belikov, O., Yoshikawa, E., & Perkins, M. (2017). Computing and engineering in elementary
         school: The effect of year-long training on elementary teacher self-efficacy and beliefs about teaching
         computing and engineering. International Journal of Computer Science Education in Schools, 1(1), 1-20.
         https://doi.org/10.21585/ijcses.v1i1.6
Rich, M., Yadav, A., & Schwarz, V. (2019). Computational thinking, mathematics, and science: Elementary
         teachers’ perspectives on integration. Journal of Technology and Teacher Education, 27(2), 165-205.
Weintrop, D., Beheshti, E., Horn, M., Orton, K., Jona, K., Trouille, L., & Wilensky, U. (2016). Defining
         computational thinking for mathematics and science classrooms. Journal of Science Education and
         Technology, 25(1), 127-147. https://doi.org/10.1145/2527189
Wing, M. (2006). Computational thinking. Communications of the ACM, 49(3), 33-35.
Yadav, A., Goode, J., Voogt, J., & Fisser, P. (2017). Computational thinking as an emerging competence domain. In
         M. Mulder (Ed.), Competence-based vocational and professional education (pp. 1051-1067). Springer.




    CSCL2022 Proceedings                                  546                                                 © ISLS
