  The “Architectures” of Successful Remote Collaborative Problem
       Solving: Exploring Commitment in Dyadic Interaction
               Johanna Pöysä-Tarhonen, University of Jyväskylä, johanna.poysa-tarhonen@jyu.fi
                     Nafisa Awwal, University of Melbourne, n.awwal@unimelb.edu.au

         Abstract: During successful collaborative problem solving (CPS), participants are expected not
         only to share and process information to solve the task, but also to show responsiveness and
         commitment to their partners. Accordingly, this exploratory study aims, via two contrasting
         cases, to acquire a preliminary understanding of how commitments and successful CPS come
         together in remote, dyadic interaction. To do so, the study relies on objective and subjective
         measures and combines group with individual levels of analysis on log files and cued interviews.
         The results revealed how commitments were interrelated with efficient coordination of
         interactions during CPS. Coordinated, well-communicated problem-solving trails, in turn,
         resulted in positive outcomes regarding the problem-solution. Thus, if commitments can reduce
         uncertainty of the partner’s actions, required in efficient coordination, to focus on the “anatomy”
         of commitments can provide us with a better understanding of what may (dis)favour successful
         CPS to take place in this context.

Introduction
This paper explores how commitment and successful, remote collaborative problem solving (CPS) processes
come together in dyadic interactions. Focusing on commitment during CPS is motivated by the expectations that
commitment can facilitate successful joint actions of multiple actors; e.g., by increasing the motivation to
contribute to shared goals and reducing the uncertainty often related to fulfilment of these goals (e.g., Michael &
Salice, 2017; Pacherie, 2013). Additionally, as successful socio-cognitive exchanges of CPS (e.g., Avry et al.,
2020; Graesser et al., 2018; Scoular et al., 2017; Zwiecki et al., 2020) are not given but require learning and
careful training, in order to guide a learner to become more competent participant in CPS, a broader understanding
of the “architectures” of social relationships (e.g., Perret-Clermont, 2015) regarding CPS is essential.
          Definitions of CPS routinely point out that for a dyad or group, there is a shared goal to be accomplished
through problem solving and that a single participant cannot solve the problem alone (Graesser et al., 2020).
Earlier studies have shown that for successful CPS to occur, participants need to intentionally organise themselves
to a coordinated activity (Barron, 2000); coordination referring to “the process of ordering of entities (events,
behaviours, and actions) in time, simultaneously or sequentially” (Baker, 2015, p. 461). Moreover, in successful
CPS, problem solvers are expected not only to share and process information to solve the joint task, but also, in
real-time interaction, to show responsiveness and commitment to their partners (e.g., Avry et al., 2020).
          In conventional definitions, commitments are thought to arise verbally through speech acts of promising
or making agreements (i.e., as explicit commitments): “If one social partner intentionally communicates to another
that he intends to do X, and the other acknowledges this, then they have common knowledge about this interaction,
and the first partner is committed to do X” (see Siposova et al., 2018, p. 192). Yet, the readiness to be jointly
committed can also be expressed without explicit verbal statements (such as “I promise to do X” or “I will do X”),
but more implicitly via expectations and motivations (Michael et al., 2016b), slight nuances of verbal
communication (Michael & Salice, 2017), or even nonverbally (Siposova et al., 2018). Thus, together with verbal
agreements, there are many situational factors that can give rise to a sense of commitment not recognised directly
by the conventional definitions (Michael & Salice, 2017; Michael et al., 2016b).
          Accordingly, Michael et al. (2016b, see also Michael & Salice, 2017) have proposed a minimal structure
in which commitment and a sense of commitment can arise, which includes (a) a situation where there exists an
outcome that an actor needs to achieve, or which is the goal of action that the actor is currently performing or
intends to perform; and (b) in this situation, the external contribution of a second actor is crucial to bringing about
the goal. This situation may elicit a sense of commitment on the part of one or two actors, or when both actors
desire to reach the goal, the commitment is mutual. What is seen as critical for commitments to arise is that the
goal of action is defined primarily in an agent-neutral manner (Michael et al., 2016b); that is, the goal or the
outcome is instructed to be brought about in the most efficient way irrespective of whose goal it is (see also
Butterfill, 2012).
          Suitably, to investigate commitment during successful CPS, the digital CPS environment and the tasks
employed in this study (see Assessment and Teaching of 21st Century Skills [ATC21S], http://www.atc21s.org;
e.g., Care et al., 2016) are expected to meet the requirements of the minimal structure of situations of commitments




CSCL2022 Proceedings                                      75                                                    © ISLS
and a sense of commitment to arise (Michael et al., 2016b). In the ATC21S environment, student dyads interact
remotely to solve shared, open-ended problems with impersonal goals. Most CPS tasks implement an overall
structure—an asymmetry of resources—which imposes the need for collaboration and requires participants to
pool their knowledge, information, and resources (Scoular et al., 2017). Thus, each individual action is only
effective if the other action is also performed, and to successfully solve a task requires both the participants’
commitment to the task and commitment to their partner (see Hesse et al., 2015; Scoular et al., 2017).
          However, the ATC21S environment does not provide preselected solution paths for the participants but
allows the flexibility of movements, which can result in a great variability in how the participants proceed through
the tasks (Scoular et al., 2017). When the partners lack definite problem solving strategies, the solution paths can
be more random and involve both significant and insignificant activities regarding their relevance to the task
completion (Vista et al., 2016). The possible moments of confusion can be challenging, as they require the dyad
to develop diverse strategies to clarify the uncertainties and to understand and accept the combined impact of their
refined intentions and actions to reach the shared goal (Barron, 2000; see also Michael & Pacherie, 2015). Yet,
commitments, if credible, are seen to have the potential to reduce uncertainties in joint actions (Michael &
Pacherie, 2015; Michael & Salice, 2017; Pacherie, 2013). This is important regarding successful CPS, as in joint
actions, uncertainties can undermine the mutual predictability required for efficient coordination to take place
(Michael & Pacherie, 2015).
          Consequently, the aim of this explorative study is, via two contrasting cases, to look more closely into
(1) how commitments and successful CPS processes come together in remote dyadic interaction (i.e., how
interactional events of the log files are related to each other in terms of the speech acts of promising or making
agreements; to the appearance of the task-specific CPS elements in these events; and the significance of CPS
events in this regard); and (2) what can lead the participants to act committed and expect the others do the same.
The strategy of interrelating two contrasting cases (e.g., Baškarada, 2014; Flick, 2004), based on different
perspectives as objective and subjective measures of the remote CPS processes in dyads (i.e., as log files, cued
retrospective reporting CRR interviews), is chosen as it is expected to make the process qualities and components
related to commitment and its role in successful CPS more salient and open.

Methods
Participants and study set-up
The two contrasting cases were drawn from a study of ten student dyads recruited from an initial teacher education
programme in a Finnish university. In the data gathering situation, the dyads focused in this paper were working
in two separate cognitive labs, and while completing the CPS tasks, their eye movements were recorded with
desktop eye trackers (screen-based; SensoMotoric Instruments [SMI] RED 250 Mobile). These data as eye gaze
video exports were used as a stimulus in the cued retrospective reporting (CRR) interviews (van Gog et al., 2005).
The log files from the CPS environment were automatically generated.

Digital CPS environment and task
When exploring CPS processes, the study takes the unique properties of the digital, game-like CPS assessment
environment ATC21S (e.g., Care et al., 2016; Scoular et al., 2017) as its point of departure. The CPS tasks of the
ATC21S environment have been designed for dyads following a comprehensive CPS framework by Hesse et al.
(2015, see also Care et al., 2016; Scoular & Care, 2020; Scoular et al., 2017). The framework covers both social
and cognitive elements of the CPS construct and amalgamates theoretical knowledge from social psychology and
problem solving. The framework involves three main strands of social elements (i.e., participation, perspective
taking, and social regulation) and two main strands of cognitive elements (i.e., task regulation and knowledge
building), which are all further divided into sub-elements (19 elements in total; Hesse et al., 2015). In the
environment, the defined problem space is presented through a graphical user interface, which enables users to
interact with the problem environment and with their collaborating partner (Vista et al., 2016). As a game-like
(e.g., Squire et al., 2003), dual interaction space (Zemel & Koschmann, 2013), the environment encompasses a
chat property as a free-form, synchronous interface and a space with actionable artefacts that have either a
symmetrical or asymmetrical outlook for the individuals. In a symmetrical task, stimulus content and actionable
artefacts are equal for the partners, whereas in an asymmetrical task, the dyad is given a unique subset of resources
for problem solving. Alternatively, the screen view can be identical, while the ability to move certain objects or
scroll the bars is divided between the partners. The success of one student depends on the behaviour of the other
and the reactions offered (Care et al., 2016).
          The task, focused on in this paper, is one of the ATC21S tasks named Plant Growth (Figure 1) (Awwal
et al., 2015; Scoular et al., 2017). The task has asymmetric resources for the participants and is presented in two




CSCL2022 Proceedings                                     76                                                   © ISLS
levels (Pages 1 and 2). On the first level (Page 1, Figure 1), each of two participants (Students A and B) can
control only one of the resources (temperature or light density) to manipulate the daily growth of plants. In the
screen view, students can view the choices made by their partners (without access to their partners’ controls) and
the effect of their selections on plant growth. They are required to observe if there is a consistent pattern of growth
based on variations in light (very dark, quite dark, quite bright, and very bright) and temperature (10, 20, 30, and
40) when applied together or in isolation. Participants are then asked a question regarding the mechanism of their
partners’ control, which requires an exchange of information with their partners. The task is thus divided into
processes in which, following initial exploration, problem solvers are required to go through stages to collect
information, identify patterns, form rules, test rules, generalise rules, and test hypotheses (Awwal et al., 2015).
On the second level (Page 2, Figure 1), the aim is to assess under which conditions the plant grows fastest or
slowest and to apply their understanding of the conditions to position the plant on the grid provided. The first
level operates as an exploration space for participants to learn and understand the problem space and the game
mechanics. The second level, in turn, tests whether participants understand the rules and can apply their learning
in a different context (Awwal et al., 2015).
                        Figure 1
                        Screen Captures from the Plant Growth Task (Pages 1 and 2)




                        Note. Student A Views (in Finnish)

Data
To better understand commitment and successful remote CPS processes in dyads, the current paper relied on both
objective (i.e., observations of interaction) and subjective measures (i.e., participants’ experiences of interaction).
The objective measures were based on the information embedded in automatically generated log files from the
CPS environment. The log files consisted of time-stamped information of the participants’ actions as movements
of artefacts and the communication stream via a free-form chat interface (Care et al., 2015). The log file from the
collaborative session included data on the collaborating team, the record index in the database, task and page,
activity events, and details of any onscreen activities along with the corresponding time.
           The subjective measures were acquired via cued retrospective reporting (CRR) interviews (e.g., van Gog
et al., 2005) of the individual participants. During CRR participants are invited to verbalise their thought processes
during the task performance, retrospectively based on a cue or cues of their performance (van Gog et al., 2005).
In this study, the CRR interviews were cued with eye gaze video exports as scan path visualisations, computed
from the eye-tracking data (e.g., Blignaut, 2009) with eye-tracking software SMI BeGaze. In the scan path
visualisations, the gaze positions and eye events are plotted on a stimulus video, based on the gaze coordinates
and duration. To guarantee the accuracy of the CRR data, interviews were conducted within a two-day time span
from the recorded CPS sessions. The videotaped interviews were transcribed for the analysis.

Data analysis
As a preliminary phase, to capture the general features of dyadic interaction during CPS, contributing to
commitment, quantitative summaries of the CPS activities were created. The summaries included the




CSCL2022 Proceedings                                      77                                                    © ISLS
quantification of the total number of dyadic activities captured from the automatically generated log files
(including chats and actions) and calculating the total time spent on the task. In the actual analysis, the focus was
on how commitments and successful CPS processes came together in remote, dyadic interactions and what could
lead the participants to act committed. Thus, the focus was on how interactional events of the log files (i.e., chats
and actions) were related to each other in terms of commitments, what was the appearance of the task-specific
elements of CPS in the interactional events, and what was the significance of these events regarding successful
CPS. The CRR reports were, in turn, analysed for individual participants’ verbal references to commitment. To
do so, a qualitative coding procedure was applied, which included the following phases: In the first phase, the
activities that were associated with explicit commitments (i.e., promising and making agreements) as verbal
references or moving of artefacts, were they related to (a) initiative (i.e., commitments) or (b) responsive actions
or chats (i.e., accepted commitments) were identified from the log file data (e.g., Siposova et al., 2018). In the
second phase, to contextualise these coded events, the process qualities of CPS interaction regarding the CPS
elements, as defined in the CPS framework (i.e., Hesse et al., 2015) were also identified from these data. That
was, to detect the behavioural indicators of the task-specific CPS elements (see Table 1) from the log file data
(i.e., Hesse et al., 2015), such as interaction, responsibility initiative, responsiveness and more. Simultaneously,
due to the lack of preselected solution paths in the ATC21S environment (Scoular et al., 2017), these interactional
events of CPS were also analysed in accordance with whether the events were significant or insignificant in their
relevance to task completion (Vista et al., 2016). Significant events in CPS are those where dyadic interactions
are coordinated and have a considerable positive effect on the progress towards the resolution of the problem.
Any explicit commitments shown through an initiation would generally be followed by a responsive act (i.e.,
chats or actions). Insignificant events are an indication of less coordinated CPS interactions. Dyads generally do
not systematically coordinate or respond to their partners and are often seen to work in isolation, the consequences
of which are most often damaging to their progress or in reaching a committed situation for reliance on one another.
Moreover, in the third phase, the verbal references to commitments, be they explicit or implicit (i.e., verbalised
motivations and expectations, expressions of trust, and more), were identified from the CRR interview data
transcriptions of the individual participants. Finally, to form an inclusive picture of the CPS interactions of dyads,
all three phases of the actual analysis were combined into episodes of the CPS processes, building on the log file
data, and notated with the evidence from the different phases of the analysis as well as different perspectives (i.e.,
dyad and individual levels). In this paper, the contrasting cases are exemplified via brief representative examples
(Tables 2 and 3), drawn from the full episodes of the CPS processes in dyads.
Table 1
The Task-Specific Elements Regarding the CPS Construct (Plant Growth Task)
 Skills                      Behaviour                                An example of data captured for assessment
 Interaction                 Interacting with partner.                Presence of chat during actions and processes.
 Responsibility Initiative   Taking responsibility for progress for   Realising the need to move to subsequent pages of the task,
                             parts of the group task.                 communicating with partner.
 Responsiveness              Responding to contributions of           Responding to partner’s specific queries before proceeding with
                             others.                                  other activities.
 Collecting information      Recognising the need for more            Undertaking activities with relevant and available resources.
                             information.
 Systematicity               Implementing possible solutions to a     Trial of different combinations of light density and temperature
                             problem.                                 options in search of plausible conditions.
 Solution                    Answering correctly.                     Placement of the plant in the correct position on the grid by
                                                                      Student A and B, respectively, as per the conditions given.


Results: Two contrasting cases
The preliminary phase of analysis on the log file data showed substantial differences in terms of the general
characteristics of CPS interaction of the two dyads (hereafter Dyad 1 and Dyad 2). Accordingly, the quantitative
summaries of the total number of activities completed during the Plant Growth task showed that, when comparing
the activities of Dyads 1 and 2, Dyad 1 had remarkably more actions (manipulating artefacts) than Dyad 2, both
in terms of the light and temperature inputs (64.7% of the number of light input actions and 79.7% of the
temperature input actions), whereas the number of chats (i.e., ‘Type message’) was more equal in the dyads (Dyad
1 wrote 55% of the total number of messages).
          Equally, the actual analysis of both the objective and subjective measures of the CPS processes (i.e., log
files and CRR interviews) showed discrepancies in the quality regarding the actualisation of the CPS process
concerning all the aspects of analysis, such as how the interactional events of the log files (i.e., chats and actions)
were related to each other in terms of explicit commitments, the appearance of the task-specific elements of CPS
during the task completion, and the significance of these activities. Furthermore, as subjective measures, the CRR




CSCL2022 Proceedings                                            78                                                              © ISLS
interviews shed more light on the agreements made between partners and how they expressed trust in their partners
(Dyad 2), for example. Taken together, the quality of the various aspects came together and was visible in the two
diverse, contrasting solution paths of the two dyads, named here as ‘Low coordination condition of CPS’ (Dyad
1) and ‘High coordination condition of CPS’ (Dyad 2).
          Next, based on the outcomes of the analysis, a brief depiction as an observational summary (Barron,
2000) of the CPS process characteristics of each pair is provided. The depictions are followed by brief excerpts
from the CPS interaction of the two dyads (it is not possible to portray the full event here), in which the notions
of the different phases and aspects of the analysis are embedded in and accompanied with the CRR data captions
of the individual students (Tables 2 and 3). The excerpts showcase how commitments, primarily explicit such as
making promises and agreements, came into existence (or did not) and were related to highly coordinated
conditions and to successful CPS in this context; whereas in less coordinated conditions and a less successful CPS
process, commitments, such as promises and agreements, were rare or missing (e.g., Michael & Salice, 2017;
Michael et al., 2016a,b; Siposova et al., 2018).

Low coordination condition of CPS (Dyad 1)
As visible in the excerpt (Table 2), Dyad 1 set out plans for solving the task (here, Student A was more active)
but did not systematically coordinate their actions in accordance with the plans, and explicit commitments, such
as promises and agreements, were not made (Michael & Salice, 2017; Michael et al., 2016b; Siposova et al., 2018).
Even though they did more trials than Dyad 2 and spent more time on the task, they were, to a large extent,
repeating similar, insignificant activities without acknowledging the solution path (for example, see lines 195,
197, and 201). It seems that they did not fully comprehend the task, and even when reaching the solution, it seems
that they did not at first recognise it. In the excerpt, only a few task-specific CPS elements can be observed (here,
“action” as the largest category, followed by “collecting information” by Student A,” perseverance” by Student
A, and “interaction”; see Hesse et al., 2015). In the CRR quote (in Table 2) from Dyad 1 (Students A and B), it is
observed that during their CPS process, their interactions had been mostly uncoordinated. They set out without a
clear conception of the given instructions for the task and did not coordinate well on what each of them could
view. Consequently, their actions were not synchronised with the other’s or in relation to the plan they had made.
Thus, their report during the interview suggests that they commenced the task without a comprehensive picture
of the problem or a plan on how to collaborate.
Table 2
Excerpt from the Full Problem Solving Episode of Dyad 1




CSCL2022 Proceedings                                     79                                                   © ISLS
High coordination condition of CPS (Dyad 2)
Over the course of solving the CPS process, as is also visible in the excerpt (Table 3), students constantly
interacted by sharing information to build a mutual understanding of the problem space. They set out a plan that
covered all the combinations of light and temperature inputs and retried them, proceeded systematically with the
trials, and made explicit, mutual commitments to coordinate the actions (Gilbert, 2009; Michael & Pacherie, 2015).
Regarding the task, they defined a hypothesis, tested it, reported the trials, and searched for the relationships
between the information achieved via testing. By communicating with one another, they could develop an
understanding of the relationships between the two controls as well as remarking on the variations in the growth
chart. Even though they spent less time on the task and did fewer trials (i.e., the total number of temperature or
light inputs is lower than that of Dyad 1), their activities consisted of a larger number of significant activities
regarding the efficient solution path. The students demonstrated a high level of tolerance for the ambiguity of the
task in which there was a lack of definition surrounding the most efficient solution path (see Scoular et al., 2017),
and from their CPS process traces, all the task-specific CPS skills could be identified (i.e., “interaction”,
“responsibility initiative”, “responsiveness”, “collects information”, “systematicity”, and “solution”). Dyad 2, as
noted in their CRR quotes (Table 3), started with an understanding of what was required of them as they guided
each other through the CPS process. From the beginning, they progressed systematically by sharing information
about their instructions, screen view, and understanding of the problem. They were well coordinated in all their
CPS interactions, demonstrating explicit commitment to their dyadic activities, which resulted mostly in
significant events during the CPS process. In short, their CRR reports suggested that they commenced the task
with a shared understanding and plan on how to proceed, evidenced through their coordinated CPS interactions
and well communicated symptomatic trials, and resulting in good progress and positive outcomes for the group
in finding a resolution to the problem.
Table 3
Excerpt from the Full Problem Solving Episode of Dyad 2




Discussion and conclusions
The aim of this explorative study was, via two contrasting cases, to acquire a preliminary understanding of how
commitments and successful CPS processes come together during remote interactions in dyads. The results
revealed how commitments were strongly interrelated with efficient coordination of interactions during CPS
processes. In example, the coordinated, well-communicated problem solving trails of Dyad 2 resulted in positive
outcomes regarding the problem solutions, whereas for Dyad 1, lacking systematically coordinated joint actions
and explicit verbal agreements, the solution path was less successful. Accordingly, when performing joint actions




CSCL2022 Proceedings                                     80                                                  © ISLS
together, which not only involves short-term temporal and precise action coordination (e.g., playing a piano duet
together), but requires more long-term thinking and communication about the joint activity, the role of language,
intentionality, and commitment become crucial (e.g., Vesper et al., 2010). These aspects are especially critical
when the participants are not aware of the details of the other participants’ actions or they are separated in time
or space from their partners (Vesper et al., 2010), as was the situation in this study.
         Moreover, processes related to successful CPS, such as a continuous and conjoined effort towards
elaborating a “joint problem space” (Baker, 2015) and expressions of shared intensions (Michael & Pacherie,
2015), can be vulnerable and uncertain, as also recognised here. However, at large, commitments⸻ if credible⸻
are seen to reduce the uncertainties often related to the fulfilment of joint goals and facilitating the planning and
coordination of joint actions (Michael & Pacherie, 2015; Siposova et al., 2018). Uncertainties can be in various
forms, including motivational (e.g., how convergent the partners’ intentions are with their own), instrumental (e.g.,
how the roles should be divided among partners to reach the shared goal), or common ground uncertainties (e.g.,
whether the motivations and plans to reach the shared goal are aligned with the partners) (Michael & Pacherie,
2015). As uncertainties can endanger mutual predictability and thereby efficient coordination of joint actions
(Michael & Pacherie, 2015) required in successful CPS, it is crucial to better recognise the various forms of
uncertainties related to remote CPS and how to support participants in overcoming them. For example,
encouraging participants to make commitments explicit can increase the possibility of reducing uncertainties
regarding common ground, which, in turn, concerns the very basis of successful collaboration and CPS (e.g.,
Baker, 2015). Taken together, as collaboration is not a state but a dynamic process, there is a quest for deeper
understanding of under what conditions participants agree to collaborate and what socio-cognitive exchanges
regarding CPS are more supportive and enable participants to perform actions together (see Perret-Clermont,
2015).
         Finally, the current study provides a starting point to deeper understanding of the “anatomy” of
commitments (Michael & Pacherie, 2015) and what function they perform in successful remote CPS in dyads.
The apparent complexity of the concept and the initial discoveries point to the need for considering study designs
and methodological choices that can capture longer stretches of time with a broader population of participants.
While the automatically generated log files incorporate multiple pieces of information from joint processes
(Graesser et al., 2018) with the CRR interviews, the subjective reports as free-form personal accounts, delayed in
time, were not fully applicable and sensitive enough to reach when implicit commitments were at place. Next, the
aim is, along with the objective measures of CPS interaction (e.g., as log files or video recordings), to capture
more detailed, session-specific subjective measures from the individual participants (i.e., intra-individual
measures; Tetzlaff et al., 2021, e.g., in forms of diaries) to acquire a deeper understanding of what, for example,
motivates participants to appreciate commitments or whether they contribute because they are only expected to
do so, and thereby to fulfil the social function of commitments (e.g., Gilbert, 2009; Michael & Pacherie, 2015;
Michael et al., 2016b).

References
Avry, S., Molinari, G., Bétrancourt, M., & Chanel, G. (2020). Sharing emotions contributes to regulating
          collaborative intentions in group problem-solving. Frontiers in Psychology, 11.
Awwal, N., Alom, M., & Care, E. (2015). Game design for learning to solve problems in a collaborative
          environment. In Munkvold, R., & Kolas, L. (Eds.). Proceedings of the 9th European Conference on
          Game-Based Learning (ECGBL) (pp. 25–33). Academic Conferences and Publishing International
          Limited.
Baker, M. J. (2015). Collaboration in collaborative learning. Interaction Studies 16(39), 451–473.
Barron, B. (2000). Achieving coordination in collaborative problem-solving groups. The Journal of the Learning
          Sciences, 9(4), 403–436.
Baškarada, S. (2014). Qualitative case study guidelines. The Qualitative Report, 19(24), 1–18.
Blignaut, P. (2009). Fixation identification: The optimum threshold for a dispersion algorithm. Attention,
          Perception, & Psychophysics, 71(4), 881–895. http://doi.org/10.3758/APP.71.4.881
Butterfill, S. (2012). Joint action and development. Philosophical Quarterly, 62(246), 23–47.
Care, E., Scoular, C., & Griffin, P. (2016). Assessment of collaborative problem solving in education
          environments. Applied Measurement in Education, 29(4), 250–264.
Care, E., Griffin, P., Scoular, C., Awwal, N., & Zoanetti, N. (2015). Collaborative problem solving tasks. Griffin,
          P., & Care, E. (Eds.). Assessment and Teaching of 21st Century Skills: Methods and Approach (pp. 85–
          104). Springer.
Flick, U. (2004). Design and process in qualitative research. In Flick, U., von Kardorff, E., & Steinke, I. (Eds.).
          A companion to qualitative research (pp. 146–152). Sage.




CSCL2022 Proceedings                                     81                                                  © ISLS
Gilbert, M. (2009). Shared intentions and personal intentions. Philosophical Studies, 144, 167–187.
Graesser, A., Greiff, S., Stadler, M., & Shubeck, T. (2020). Collaboration in the 21st century: The theory,
         assessment, and teaching of collaborative problem solving. Computers in Human Behavior, 104, Article
         106134.
Graesser, A., Fiore, S. M., Greiff, S., Andrews-Todd, J., Foltz, P. W., & Hesse, F. W. (2018). Advancing the
         science of collaborative problem solving. Psychological Science in the Public Interest, 19(2), 59–92.
Hesse, H., Care, E., Buder, J., Sassenberg, K., & Griffin, P. (2015). Framework for teachable collaborative
         problem solving skills. In Griffin, P., & Care, E. (Eds.). Assessment and Teaching of 21st Century Skills.
         Methods and Approach (pp. 37–56). Springer.
Michael, J. & Pacherie, E. (2015). On commitments and other uncertainty reduction tools in joint action. Journal
         of Social Ontology, 1(1), 89–120.
Michael, J. & Salice, A. (2017). The sense of commitment in human–robot interaction. International Journal of
         Social Robotics, 9(5), 755–763.
Michael, J., Sebanz, N., & Knoblich, G. (2016a). Observing joint action: Coordination creates commitment.
         Cognition, 157, 106–113.
Michael, J., Sebanz, N., & Knoblich, G. (2016b). The sense of commitment: A minimal approach. Frontiers in
         Psychology, 6(1968), 1–11.
Pacherie, E. (2013). Intentional joint agency: shared intention lite. Synthese 190(10), 1817–1839.
Perret-Clermont, A.N. (2015). The architecture of social relationships and thinking spaces for growth. In Psaltis,
         C., Gillespie, A., & Perret-Clermont, A. N. (Eds.). Social relations in human and societal development
         (pp. 55–70). Palgrave Macmillan.
Roschelle, J. & Teasley, S. D. (1995). The construction of shared knowledge in collaborative problem solving. In
         O’Malley, C. (Ed.). Computer supported collaborative learning (pp. 69–97). Berlin: Springer Verlag.
Scoular, C. & Care, E. (2020). Monitoring patterns of social and cognitive student behaviors in online
         collaborative problem solving assessments. Computers in Human Behavior, 104.
Scoular, C., Care, E., & Hesse, F. (2017). Designs for operationalizing collaborative problem solving for
         automated assessment. Journal of Educational Measurement, 54(1), 12–35.
Siposova, B., Tomasello, M., & Carpenter, M. (2018). Communicative eye contact signals a commitment young
         children. Cognition, 179, 192–201.
Squire, K., Jenkins, H., Holland, W., Miller, H., O’Driscoll, A., Tan, K. P., & Todd, K. (2003). Design principles
         of next-generation digital gaming for education. Educational Technology, 43(5), 17–23.
Swiecki, Z., Ruis, A. R., Farrell, C., & Williamson Shaffer, D. (2020). Assessing individual contributions to
         collaborative problem solving: A network analysis. Computers in Human Behavior, 104, Article 105876.
Tetzlaff, L., Schmiedek, F. & Brod, G. (2021). Developing personalized education: A dynamic framework.
         Educational Psychology Review, 33, 863–882.
Van Gog, T., Paas, F., van Merriënboer, J. J. G., & Witte, P. (2005). Uncovering the problem solving process:
         Cued retrospective reporting versus concurrent and retrospective reporting. Journal of Experimental
         Psychology: Applied, 11, 237–244
Vista, A., Awwal, N., & Care, E. (2016). Sequential actions as markers of behavioural and cognitive processes:
         Extracting empirical pathways from data streams of complex tasks. Computers & Education, 92–93, 15–
         36.
Zemel, A. & Koschmann, T. (2013). Recalibrating reference within a dual-space interaction environment.
         International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 8(1), 65–87.

Acknowledgments
This work is funded by the Academy of Finland (Grant no. 316836). We thank the participating students. We
highly appreciate the assistance of Sara Veistola, MA, and Suzanne Otieno, PhD, in collecting the data and the
support of Jarkko Hautala, PhD, in the eye tracking experiment design.




CSCL2022 Proceedings                                    82                                                  © ISLS
