           Effects of Multi-Attributional Student Diversity in CSCL
                          Jan-Bennet Voltmer1,2, jan-bennet.voltmer@fernuni-hagen.de
                         Natalia Reich-Stiebert1,2, natalia.reich-stiebert@fernuni-hagen.de
                             Jennifer Raimann1,2, jennifer.raimann@fernuni-hagen.de
                               Stefan Stürmer1,2, stefan.stuermer@fernuni-hagen.de
                               1
                                 Research Cluster D2L2, 2 FernUniversität in Hagen

         Abstract: Many online learning contexts are characterized by high student diversity in terms
         of both socio-demographic and task-related attributes. In 381 groups, we found that when multi-
         attributional task-related diversity was high, multi-attributional socio-demographic diversity
         was negatively associated with structural integration of the groups (i.e., communication patterns
         between group members). In turn, structural integration was positively related to subsequent
         information elaboration and shared mental models (i.e., a shared understanding of task-relevant
         aspects) of the groups, indicating targeted intervention opportunities.

Introduction
A growing number of distance education opportunities (Casey, 2008) in combination with trends towards lifelong
learning and globalization are leading to an increase in non-traditional (e.g., older, international) students (Sursock
& Smidt, 2010). As a result, group assignments in computer-supported collaborative learning (CSCL) contexts
are characterized by an increased multi-attributional student diversity. A better understanding of how this diversity
shapes CSCL groups’ collaboration processes is therefore needed. Social psychological research suggests that the
relative lack of individualizing cues in CSCL may amplify the influence of readily available categorical
information (such as gender) on impression formation and group functioning (e.g., Flanagin et al., 2002; Postmes
& Spears, 2002). Consistent with this, a recent study found multi-attributional socio-demographic diversity to be
negatively related to CSCL groups’ structural integration in CSCL, indicating that high diversity leads to lower
collaboration intensity. This effect was even stronger in groups with high task-related diversity (Voltmer et al.,
2022). The present study seeks to answer the following research questions: (1) Can the interactive effect of
diversity on structural integration be replicated? (2) Do information elaboration and shared mental models mediate
the relation between structural integration and group performance?

Method
The study was conducted in the context of a mandatory course on scientific reading and writing, in which
psychology freshmen of the FernUniversität in Hagen were assigned a nine-week CSCL task within which they
had to collaboratively summarize a psychological research paper. With currently more than 70,000 students
enrolled, the FernUniversität in Hagen is Germany’s largest public university, and one of the largest distance
education institutions worldwide. The data used for the present analyses were obtained from those 1995 students,
who participated in a pre- and post-quiz. The average number of students in the 381 CSCL groups was 5.2 (SD =
1.4). 73% (n = 1,382) of the students were female, 43% (n = 860) were 30 years or older, 17% (n = 330) reported
to be non-native German speakers, and 23% (n = 313) indicated a higher self-perceived socio-economic status.
         Multi-attributional socio-demographic diversity at T1 was operationalized as the variety of gender, age,
(non)native speaker status, and perceived socio-economic status in the groups using Blau’s index (Blau, 1977).
An average of these four diversity indexes was calculated for each group. Higher scores reflect higher diversity.
Multi-attributional task-related diversity at T1 was operationalized accordingly regarding prior university
education, experience reading scientific papers, experience working in virtual learning environments, and prior
attendance of the present course. Structural integration was calculated as the density of social networks (number
of students interacting bi-directionally divided by the number of all possible bi-directional interaction pathways;
Scott, 2017) based on intra-group forum interactions between T1 and T2 (first collaboration phase). Information
elaboration (Cronbach’s α = .91) was assessed at T2 using seven items (e.g., “My group members exchange a lot
of information about the task”; van Dick et al., 2008), calculating group-level averages of the individual item
averages. Shared mental models (α = .91) were assessed using three items developed by Santos et al. (2015, e.g.,
“In my group, group members had a similar understanding of each other’s roles and responsibilities.”). Group
performance was operationalized in a peer review procedure, where students blindly rated their peers’ assessments
along 20 criteria (e.g., “Is the submitted text structured and does it build on each other logically?”).




CSCL2022 Proceedings                                     555                                                    © ISLS
Results
First, we conducted a moderation analysis on group-level. Importantly, multi-attributional socio-demographic
diversity and multi-attributional task-related diversity had a negative interactive effect on structural integration, b
= -0.02, p = .048, β = -.11. An analysis of simple slopes revealed that socio-demographic diversity had a negative
effect on structural integration of the groups when task-related diversity was high (Figure 1). When task-related
diversity was low, this effect was nonsignificant. Second, to examine potential mediators of structural integration
on subsequent group performances, we conducted a series of mediation analyses. In the most plausible model
(Figure 2), direct positive relationships existed between structural integration and subsequent information
elaboration, information elaboration and subsequent shared mental models, and shared mental models and
subsequent group performance. These direct paths resulted in significant positive indirect effects of structural
integration on shared mental models via information elaboration, IE = 0.44, p = .001, β = .09, and of information
elaboration on group performance ratings via shared mental models, IE = 0.10, p = .04, β = .06.




 Figure 1. Simple slopes of the interactive        Figure 2. Path model with standardized path coefficients,
    effect of multi-attributional socio-        dashed lines for nonsignificant relationships, and double-headed
   demographic × task-related diversity.                      arrows for standardized covariances.
          **p < .01 (two-tailed).                        *p < .05. **p < .01. ***p < .001 (two-tailed).

Discussion
The results of this longitudinal study provide further evidence for the notion that CSCL groups’ multi-attributional
diversity, if not explicitly managed, can have negative effects on collaboration processes among students. Using
path analyses, we found that socio-demographic diversity was negatively related to groups’ structural integration
only when task-related diversity was high. The relation between structural integration, that is, communication
patterns between group members, and group performance was mediated in part by information processing and a
shared understanding of the task. One main practical implication of the present study is that CSCL groups may
benefit from active diversity management in the early phases of collaboration. This could be aimed at either
increasing the intensity of collaboration or facilitating more intensive elaboration of information within groups
(both through scaffolded communication, thus fostering information elaboration beyond mere exchange).

References
Blau, P. (1977). Inequality and heterogeneity: A primitive theory of social structure. Macmillan.
Casey, D. M. (2008). A journey to legitimacy: The historical development of distance education through
      technology. TechTrends, 52(2), 45–51. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11528-008-0135-z
Flanagin, A. J., Tiyaamornwong, V., O’Connor, J., & Seibold, D. R. (2002). Computer-mediated group work:
      The interaction of sex and anonymity. Communication Research, 29(1), 66–93. https://doi.org/10/df6gtj
Postmes, T., & Spears, R. (2002). Behavior online: Does anonymous computer communication reduce gender
      inequality? Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 28(8), 1073–1083. https://doi.org/10/bftdqr
Santos, C. M., Uitdewilligen, S., & Passos, A. M. (2015). Why is your team more creative than mine? The
      influence of shared mental models on intra-group conflict, team creativity and effectiveness. Creativity
      and Innovation Management, 24(4), 645–658. https://doi.org/10.1111/caim.12129
Scott, J. (2017). Social network analysis (4th edition). SAGE.
Sursock, A., & Smidt, H. (2010). Trends 2010: A decade of change in European higher education. European
      University Association.
van Dick, R., van Knippenberg, D., Hägele, S., Guillaume, Y. R. F., & Brodbeck, F. C. (2008). Group diversity
      and group identification: The moderating role of diversity beliefs. Human Relations, 61(10), 1463–1492.
Voltmer, J.-B., Reich-Stiebert, N., Raimann, J., & Stürmer, S. (2022). Direct, indirect and interactive effects of
      multi-attributional student diversity on computer-supported collaborative learning. Under Review.




CSCL2022 Proceedings                                     556                                                    © ISLS
