How Augmented Reality Transforms Learning and Inquiry Patterns
                  in 1-1 Remote Tutoring
                Iulian Radu1, Xiaomeng Huang1, Greg Kestin2, Zohal Shah1, Bertrand Schneider1
          iulian_radu@gse.harvard.edu, xiaomenghuang@gse.harvard.edu, kestin@fas.harvard.edu,
                         zshah@gse.harvard.edu, bertrand_schneider@gse.harvard.edu
                               1
                                 Harvard University, Graduate School of Education
                                   2
                                     Harvard University, Department of Physics

         Abstract: Augmented reality (AR) technology is being considered by educators for its proven
         ability to help students visualize abstract concepts; however, currently there are barriers to
         having this technology available for every student. In this study we investigate the use of AR in
         remote 1-1 tutoring scenarios, which can be more accessible and affordable to educational
         institutions since AR devices would not be required for every student. We present a system for
         AR-based physics instruction, and perform a between-subjects study where an instructor uses
         the AR system while teaching electromagnetism physics to a remote student. The two
         experimental conditions differ in the types and amount of AR visualizations. We measure how
         the presence of AR impacts student learning and inquiry activities. We find that students who
         are tutored with more complex AR content have better learning gains and make more requests
         for action, compared to students who view the same lesson with limited AR. We discuss
         possible reasons and implications for these findings.

Introduction and Related Work
Augmented reality (AR) technology is becoming known to many educators due to its potential to visualize
complex 3D phenomena and increase student engagement (Arici et al., 2019), and there is growing enthusiasm
about integrating AR into educational settings (Akçayır & Akçayır, 2017). However, this enthusiasm is limited
by multiple factors, such as the high cost of providing AR devices for each student and creating AR content that
is interactive and personalized, as well as barriers to entry due to limited student knowledge of AR technology
(Radu et al., 2021). In the present research we investigate the use of augmented reality for the underexplored
purpose of 1-1 tutoring, specifically in the context of online tutoring. We investigate the context where an
instructor is using an AR headset while manipulating physical objects, while working with a student who views
the instructor’s view remotely through a computer screen (Figure 1 a-h). We envision this context will become
popular with educators because it can reduce multiple limitations: personal AR devices for students would not be
required, instructors would be able to illustrate learning content through carefully curated AR activities, and
students would still be actively engaging in the investigation of the learning material without special knowledge
of how to actively control the experience. Through a novel AR system and a controlled study comparing the
impact of augmented reality visualizations in 1-1 tutoring of physics, we investigate the effects of AR technology
on student learning gains, and on students’ inquiry and communication processes.
          Previous studies have shown that active engagement of students increases learning (Keithly et. al., 2015;
Mayer et. al., 2003), and keeping students active has become a general educational recommendation, especially
in the context of multimedia (Brame, 2016). Furthermore, using multimedia to present educational content as
external representations has the power to enhance learning and communication (Ainsworth, 2008). Therefore, in
a more active and representationally rich context such as augmented reality lessons, one might expect more
effective learning to take place. Indeed, in the domain of physics, studies on students use of AR devices have
shown that AR can improve understanding of magnetic fields (Abdusselam & Karal, 2020; Cai et al., 2017),
electromagnetism concepts (Ibáñez et al., 2014; Radu & Schneider, 2019), and circuits (Beheshti et al., 2017;
Bellucci et al., 2018). Typically AR education research has studied settings where students learn individually or
collaboratively with peers. However, there is a lack of research about AR-enabled 1-1 knowledge exchange
between students and instructors. Furthermore, comparative studies of AR learning typically compare AR
instruction to non-AR traditional instruction such as paper-based or computer-based learning, but do not control
for the effects of technology novelty on student motivation, and typically information exposure varies widely
between AR and non-AR conditions. In this present study, we specifically look at the context of AR in 1-1 remote
tutoring, and control for the effects of novelty and information exposure, by executing a controlled study where
subjects in both conditions are exposed to AR overlays on physics objects, while the information provided by the
instructors is designed to be similar between conditions. We hypothesize that more complex AR visualizations
will improve learning by increasing students’ active engagement and deeper inquiry processes. We expand on this




CSCL2022 Proceedings                                   375                                                   © ISLS
literature by investigating how AR influences students in the context of 1-1 remote tutoring with an experienced
instructor. We specifically investigate the research question of: How does the presence of AR impact student
learning during remote tutoring ?. To answer this question, we have designed an interactive AR system for remote
1-1 tutoring, and performed a between-subjects study that measures learning and inquiry through quantitative and
qualitative methods.

System and Study Design
We designed and implemented an AR system that instructors can use to teach the electromagnetism concepts of
Faraday’s Law and Lenz’s Law, which describe how a moving magnet induces an electric current and opposing
magnetic field in a nearby coil of wire. The user study was designed as a between-subjects design with one
independent variable (amount of educational AR, containing 2 conditions, Full and Basic, described below), and
dependent variables of learning gains and action requests. A total of 44 adult students participated in the study
(N=22 in each condition, randomly assigned), recruited from introductory physics classes at a university in the
United States, who had recently attended at least one class lecture introducing the concepts of Faraday’s Law and
Lenz’s Law. Participation did not count for course credit, was voluntary, and occurred outside of class. During
the experiment, participants talked with the research instructor through Zoom video-conferencing, for a duration
of approximately 75 minutes. The experimental procedure consisted of a 15 minute pre-test (administered through
an online Google form), 35 minute instructional activity, 15 minute post-test, and post-interview for the remaining
time. For the instructional activity, the instructor wore a Microsoft Hololens 2 AR headset and shared its view on
the shared Zoom screen visible to the student (Figure 1.h). Students could see the same view as the instructor.
The system showed dynamic 3D visualizations overlaid on a physical magnet and coil (Figure 1.left). The
instructor could choose various AR visualizations during the instructional session, and could enable, disable, and
move visualizations to answer questions. Furthermore, the visualizations dynamically changed with the movement
of the magnet, and simultaneously with each other, to show students how multiple physics concepts are
interrelated.

Figure 1. Left: Visualizations shown from the perspective of the instructor, in Full-AR condition (a,b,c,d), vs.
Basic-AR condition (e,f,g); and student’s view on their computer screen (h). Brackets: Names of AR visualizations.
Right: Relative learning gains and Action Request questions, average per session under each condition. N=44.
Bars=std. error. *=sig. p < .05.




Participants were exposed to instruction through either a high amount of AR visualizations (“Full-AR”), or a low
amount (“Basic-AR”). These conditions were designed to measure the effect of dynamic AR visualizations during
tutoring, while controlling for extraneous factors. In order to control for increases in student excitement due to
exposure to novel technology, both conditions contained AR visualizations. Furthermore, the conditions were
similar in terms of the instructional material taught to students, and the number and types of question prompts
given to students during the activity. One researcher acted as the instructor in all sessions. In both conditions,




CSCL2022 Proceedings                                   376                                                  © ISLS
students were told they could interrupt and ask questions at any time, and the instructor presented the educational
materials in 3 sequences, explicitly asking the students if they had any questions at the conclusion of each
sequence. The instructional activity script was designed to teach the same instructional content in both conditions
even though the instructor showed different kinds of AR visualizations; the only difference in the script was when
the instructor referred to specific visualizations. The differences between conditions were in the types of AR
visualizations shown to students: The Basic-AR group saw simple static visualizations (a virtual block overlaid
on the physical magnet and a virtual coil on the real coil (Figure 1.e), and a static virtual depiction of magnetic
fields on the desk (Figure 1.f), and a dynamic visualization of electric current direction (depicted as an up/down
arrow near the coil (Figure 1.g)); this information could have been accessed during traditional instruction through
tools such as a voltmeter for measuring current direction, and a drawing to show magnetic field lines. In contrast,
the Full-AR group saw enhanced visualizations (Figure 1. a,b,c,d).
          Learning was measured through pre- and post-tests containing questions about Faraday’s Law and Lenz’s
Law, typically involving relationships between magnet movement, electric current, and forces. The test also
contained transfer questions, measuring students’ ability to transfer knowledge to situations beyond what was
covered in the activity. The learning metrics were calculated using relative learning gains, which accounts for the
fact that a participant’s score will not increase as much when they already know a lot before the study, and is
calculated as the ratio between actual improvement and the total amount of possible improvement: (post score –
pre score) / (max achievable score – pre score). Statistical differences between conditions on learning gains were
calculated using T-Tests. We also performed qualitative analysis to understand how often a student makes a
request for action. An “action request” count was increased every time the student explicitly requested the
instructor to take an action. For example, "Can you pick the magnet up off the table, please?", or “Can you pull it
again?.” or “Let’s see it if you flip the magnet!”. Statistical differences between conditions on action requests
were calculated using Mann-Whitney-Wilcoxon test.

Results
The starting knowledge is believed to be equivalent between the two conditions, since participant pretest scores
did not significantly differ between Full-AR and Basic-AR conditions (t(20) = -.37, p = .71). Relative learning
gains scores resulting from the activity are shown in Figure 1 (right). Overall learning of Full-AR participants
was significantly higher than Basic-AR participants by nearly a factor of two (t(20) = 2.20, p = .035). Analysis of
specific dimensions of the learning test revealed that Full-AR groups scored significantly higher on questions
about physical forces (t(20) = 2.31, p = .027), possibly due to forces being depicted as dynamically changing AR
arrows. Descriptive statistics also show that Full-AR groups tend to score higher on ability to transfer knowledge
to new situations, while Basic-AR tend to score higher on questions about magnetic field induction. When
observing how students made action requests, we detected that Full-AR participants made significantly more
action requests (roughly 10x higher; W = 313, p = .010) than Basic-AR participants.
          To better understand the participants’ subjective experience, we collected information through semi-
structured interviews at the end of the study. These lasted 15-20 minutes, and covered questions such as “How do
you feel about our activity today?”, “How does this compare to how you currently learn in class, or in office hours,
or in labs?”, or “Is there anything you want to change about this activity?”. We observed different trends from
responses between the conditions. Both groups appreciated learning through the AR visualizations and interacting
with the instructor through 1-1 tutoring; however, Full-AR participants discussed virtual objects more frequently,
and mentioned that the interplay between visuals was especially useful in helping them understand the concepts.
In contrast, Basic-AR participants mentioned that compared with the textbook and more traditional online 2D
simulations, being able to see the real objects like the coil and the magnet in the three-dimensional real
environment was helpful. In terms of communication, Full-AR participants emphasized that AR visualization
helped reduce the misunderstanding when discussing abstract concepts. When talking about the improvements,
nearly all Full-AR participants expressed their interests in manipulating the visualizations by themselves; in
contrast, this was rarely mentioned among Basic-AR participants, and mirrors the findings about action requests
discussed above.

Discussion
In this study we explored the efficacy of using AR for 1-1 tutoring, where the instructor wore an AR headset while
the student remotely observed the AR view. This style of tutoring might become popular because it is instructor-
led and students will not need individual devices, enabling easier integration into educational settings. Although
participants in the high AR condition benefitted the most, it is worth mentioning that participants in both
conditions reported increased excitement and perceived benefits, such as enjoying the 1-1 interaction and the
ability to ask questions and clarify knowledge, increased their learning, and increased ability to guide the




CSCL2022 Proceedings                                    377                                                  © ISLS
instruction. This style of AR-based remote tutoring has the potential to improve the accessibility of education,
permitting students who are in remote or low-income environments to connect to quality instruction. Additionally,
the fact that the tutoring session was done remotely through Zoom may have impacted students’ overall sense of
agency, by reducing their ability and willingness to control the learning activity.
          We observed that access to dynamic augmented reality visualizations led to improvement in student
learning. A higher degree of AR visualizations significantly improved learning, and significantly increased
students’ interest in requesting actions upon the learning content. While AR helped students learn better, the
visualizations may have enabled students to more easily observe the effects of actions upon the system, thus
encouraging more requests for action. Additionally, the presence of seeing multiple visualizations dynamically
changing at the same time may also have provided students with knowledge about how concepts are integrated
Although these results are descriptive in nature, this may indicate that AR representations serve to offload the
cognitive work for the students. As students visualize invisible concepts through the AR visualizations, this may
free up students’ need to understand the content or perform mental simulations, and explains why students are
more interested in exploring other possibilities, as observed through increased exploration in action requests.
Future research can explore how AR visualizations serve to offload conceptual processing associated with
understanding abstract concepts, and how student cognitive load can be mediated by AR representations.

Acknowledgments
We wish to thank Bryan Janson, Kelly Miller, and Alex Kontoyiannis for their valuable formative input, as well
as our study participants and publication reviewers. This material is based upon work supported in part by US
National Science Foundation under grant no. 1917716.

References
Abdusselam, M. S., & Karal, H. (2020). The effect of using augmented reality and sensing technology to teach
          magnetism in high school physics. Technology, Pedagogy and Education, 29(4), 407–424.
Ainsworth, S. (2008). The educational value of multiple-representations when learning complex scientific
          concepts. In Gilbert, J. (Ed.), Reiner, M. (Ed.), & Nakleh, M. (Ed.), Visualization: Theory and practice
          in science education. (pp.191-208) Dordrecht: Springer.
Akçayır, M., & Akçayır, G. (2017). Advantages and challenges associated with augmented reality for education:
          A systematic review of the literature. Educational Research Review, 20, 1–11.
Brame, C. J. (2016). Effective educational videos: Principles and guidelines for maximizing student learning
          from video content. CBE—Life Sciences Education, 15(4), es6.
Beheshti, E., Kim, D., Ecanow, G., & Horn, M. S. (2017). Looking inside the wires: Understanding museum
          visitor learning with an augmented circuit exhibit. Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference on Human
          Factors in Computing Systems, 1583–1594.
Bellucci, A., Ruiz, A., Díaz, P., & Aedo, I. (2018). Investigating augmented reality support for novice users in
          circuit prototyping. Proceedings of the International Conference on Advanced Visual Interfaces, 35.
Cai, S., Chiang, F.-K., Sun, Y., Lin, C., & Lee, J. J. (2017). Applications of augmented reality-based natural
          interactive learning in magnetic field instruction. Interactive Learning Environments, 25(6), 778–791.
Ibáñez, M. B., Di Serio, Á., Villarán, D., & Kloos, C. D. (2014). Experimenting with electromagnetism using
          augmented reality: Impact on flow student experience and educational effectiveness. Computers &
          Education, 71, 1–13.
Keithly, M., Brame, C., Woelfle, M., & Friedman, K. (2015, August). Blending it up: Active learning in a
          STEM classroom through the use of on-line materials. In Abstracts of Papers of the American
          Chemical Society. 250, 1155
Mayer, R. E., Dow, G. T., & Mayer, S. (2003). Multimedia learning in an interactive self-explaining
          environment: What works in the design of agent-based microworlds?. Journal of educational
          psychology, 95(4), 806.
Radu, I., Joy, T., Bott, I., Bowman, Y., & Schneider, B. (2021). Using Augmented Reality in Education:
          Opportunities and Pitfalls.
Radu, I., & Schneider, B. (2019). What Can We Learn from Augmented Reality (AR)? Benefits and Drawbacks
          of AR for Inquiry-based Learning of Physics. Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human
          Factors in Computing Systems, 1–12. https://doi.org/10.1145/3290605.3300774




CSCL2022 Proceedings                                   378                                                 © ISLS
