          Multidisciplinary learning analytics development team’s
                 perceptions on supporting student agency
                                Anceli Kaveri, Anni Silvola, Hanni Muukkonen
                     anceli.kaveri@oulu.fi, anni.silvola@oulu.fi, hanni.muukkonen@oulu.fi
                                               University of Oulu

         Abstract: There are concerns of learning analytics (LA) development being too data-driven and
         developers limitedly considering the human aspects of it. We interviewed a multidisciplinary
         LA development team about their perceptions on student agency. Developers mentioned similar
         aspects of agency but there was misalignment between their conceptions of supporting student
         agency. Our results highlight the importance of fostering conversation among multidisciplinary
         LA development teams to enforce mutual understanding to develop tools that best support
         students.

Introduction
There is a growing need to develop LADs that support student agency, i.e., intentional acting and self-influencing
in one’s studies (Bennett & Folley, 2019). This is done through enhancing students’ self-efficacy beliefs, decision-
making, motivation, and performance (Bandura, 1993). LADs can support these processes by providing learners
with targeted support and personal feedback that foster self-reflection and aid strategic study planning. Still, there
is shown to be misalignment between students’ need of support and the information that LADs’ provide (Klein et
al., 2019).
          Studies have highlighted the need to better link the knowledge about learners with LAD development
(Tsai et al., 2020). Previous studies of LA have mostly focused on students’ viewpoint and there is a limited
amount of research about the developers’ perceptions (Johanes & Thille, 2019). Developers, who are responsible
for the decision-making about student data usage and LAD features, have received critique about their limited
consideration of nontechnical aspects of LAD development (Johanes & Thille, 2019). Since the developers are an
important link between student needs and LADs, we investigated their conceptions of student agency and
decision-making behind a student-facing LAD to understand how they envisioned it to support student agency.

Procedure
We explored a multidisciplinary LA development team members’ perceptions of student agency in general and
as part of LAD development process as well as their ideas on supporting student agency with the LAD. The
participants were mainly from educational sciences and computer sciences. The LAD consisted of three different
visualizations about the student’s completed and planned courses, grades, and estimated graduation time. Students
had an option to view their progress and plans in a specific period as well as their grades compared to peers. 12
members of the development team were interviewed, and the transcribed recordings arranged by a social cognitive
theory-supported analysis frame into 4 categories. The categories summarized developers’ descriptions of 1)
Characteristics of agency 2) Acts of student agency, 3) Ways to facilitate student agency and 4) Obstacles of
student agency. Cohen’s kappa coefficient summary agreement calculation was conducted for 10% of the data
resulting in a value of 0.922 suggesting a very good level of agreement (Altman, 1991, pp. 403-408).

Results
Developers defined student agency mostly as ownership and decision-making of one’s studies (see Table 1). In
LAD development context student agency was mostly described as participation in pilots and offering feedback
and ideas. Developers had varying ontological viewpoints to agency, which seemed to reflect their varying
disciplinary backgrounds. Developers with educational science background mostly described student agency
similarly to social cognitive theory (e.g., Bandura 1993). When asked to define agency, 3 developers stated not
being familiar with the concept but later proceeded to discuss ways to support it with the LAD.
         Even though their ontological premises differed, the developers had relatively congruent thoughts about
acts and characteristics of student agency. Mostly they highlighted the importance of students’ supportive self-
efficacy beliefs and being motivated to progress in one’s studies. Developers considered that the LAD could
support students’ self-efficacy beliefs and strategic study planning by giving them real-time personal and
motivating feedback about their progress and accomplishments. They expressed uncertainty on whether
comparative feedback between student and their peers would support or counteract students’ agentic beliefs and
motivation to study.




CSCL2022 Proceedings                                     563                                                   © ISLS
          There were mentions of communicational difficulties hampering the LAD development work. One of
the developers mentioned acting as a “Babel fish”, translator, between developers from different faculties. When
discussing student agency in LAD development process, some developers highlighted the importance of student
participation in every step of the work: starting with gathering student needs. At the other end of the spectrum
there were developers who stated students not needing to be involved in the beginning of the development process
at all. Some developers were doubtful about the ‘usefulness’ of involving students who lack understanding about
the purposes of LADs since they could have negative preconceptions of it. On top of that, data and resource
limitations were brought up as challenges in both involving student in the development work as well as developing
tools that would best answer students’ needs and support their agency.

Table 1
Developers’ frequently mentioned descriptors of student agency
                        a) Student agency in one’s studies.           b) Student agency in LAD development.
 1. Characteristics    Self-efficacy beliefs and motivation.                  Motivation to participate.
     of agency              Ownership of one’s studies.                    Students' abilities to use LADs.
 2. Acts of agency Strategic study planning and progressing.                Active participation in pilots.
                            Utilizing LAD’s feedback.                   Providing feedback about the LAD.
    3. Ways to        Providing students with relevant, easily         Creating opportunities for students to
 facilitate agency    interpretable, and customizable LADs.                   participate meaningfully.
                                                                       Utilizing students’ ideas and feedback.
  4. Obstacles of      Uncertainty of LAD’s feedback’s effects       Resource and technological limitations in
      agency                         on students.                   involving students and utilizing their ideas.


Conclusion
Our findings point out the similarities and contradictories in the developers’ perceptions on student agency and
participation in the development work. Developers expressed caring about enhancing student agency in higher
education studies but their ontological approaches to the concept of agency varied. They also expressed
communicational and resource challenges that inhibited executing these intentions. Previous studies have
recognized the need for pluralistic approaches to develop LADs that effectively support students (Ferguson, 2019).
Our results underline the importance of fostering conversation and mutual understanding in multidisciplinary
teams about the user of the tool as well as clarifying the common course and goal of the development process.
We suggest studying how the multidisciplinary teams communicate their knowledge and clarify their conceptions
regarding students.

Key references
Altman, D. G. (1991). Practical statistics for medical research. Chapman and Hall.
Bandura, A. (1993). Perceived self-efficacy in cognitive development and functioning. Educational Psychologist,
         28(2), 117-148. https://doi.org/10.1207/s15326985ep2802_3
Bennett, L., & Folley, S. (2019). Four design principles for learner dashboards that support student agency and
         empowerment. Journal of Applied Research in Higher Education, 12(1), 15–26.
         https://doi.org/10.1108/JARHE-11-2018-0251
Ferguson, R. (2019). Ethical Challenges for Learning Analytics. Journal of Learning Analytics, 6(3), 25–30.
         https://doi.org/10.18608/jla.2019.63.5
Johanes, P., & Thille, C. (2019). The heart of educational data infrastructures—Conscious humanity and scientific
         responsibility, not infinite data and limitless experimentation. British Journal of Educational Technology,
         50(6), 2959–2973. https://doi.org/10.1111/bjet.12862
Klein, C., Lester, J., Rangwala, H., & Johri, A. (2019). Technological barriers and incentives to learning analytics
         adoption in higher education: insights from users. Journal of Computing in Higher Education, 31(3),
         604–625. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12528-019-09210-5
Tsai, Y.-S., Rates, D., Moreno-Marcos, P. M., Muñoz-Merino, P. J., Jivet, I., Scheffel, M., Drachsler, H., Kloos,
         C. D., & Gašević, D. (2020). Learning analytics in European higher education—Trends and barriers.
         Computers & Education, 155. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compedu.2020.103933

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the Ministry of Education and Culture, Finland [grant number OKM/272/523/2017].




CSCL2022 Proceedings                                   564                                                  © ISLS
