    Integrating Student Identity Support in Orchestration Systems
                    Jennifer K. Olsen, University of San Diego, jenniferolsen@sandiego.edu
                       Shiyan Jiang, North Carolina State University, sjiang24@ncsu.edu

         Abstract: Researchers have advocated for leveraging computing identity to guide teaching
         practice in classrooms. Current challenges to this vision include capturing multiple dimensions
         of information that reflect students’ computing identities and presenting this information to
         instructors effectively so they are empowered to make instructional decisions. Building on
         current orchestration literature, we aim to tackle these challenges by developing an identity-
         centered orchestration dashboard that can be used by instructors to provide real-time learning
         support to students.

Introduction
Not all students in a classroom have the same identity. This diversity is a strength when students collaborate as
they bring in different perspectives (Singer et al., 2020), but it can make feedback and support from instructors
less effective if not taken into account. In particular, computing identity, as one fundamental motivator of human
behavior, shapes how students engage in computing practices in collaborative learning activities. Taking the
established theory of practice-linked identities (Nasir & Hand, 2008), we frame learning as a trajectory of
participation in computing practices in which students express and explore computing identities. In this sense,
computing identities are enacted when a person shows interest in learning computing concepts and pursuing
computing careers, demonstrates self-confidence in learning these concepts, recognizes themselves as a
computing person, and develops a sense of belonging to a community related to computing (Lunn et al., 2021).
In other words, a student’s computing identity consists of motivational, cognitive, and social elements. These
elements grow out of one’s active participation in (inter)disciplinary activities within communities of practice
(Bricker & Bell, 2012).
          Researchers have advocated for leveraging computing identity to guide teaching practice in classrooms,
yet support tools for instructors that help to facilitate collaborative activities often do not include information on
student identity. Particularly, orchestration systems, which provide planning and real-time management support
of learning activities to instructors, have been limited to supporting instructors in providing real-time support to
students by displaying indicators of students’ cognitive, metacognitive, and social skills (Dillenbourg et al., 2018).
However, a students’ identity can impact their actions within a learning activity (Carvalho et al., 2014), making
it important to understand a student’s motivation, not just their answers, when providing them with support. By
integrating information on students’ identities into orchestration systems, we hypothesize that we will be able to
better support student learning. In our project, we are developing an identity-centered orchestration system to
support collaborative learning activities in an exploring computer science classroom. Exploring computer science
classrooms are designed to attract students with a range of interest in computer science (Goode & Margolis, 2011)
in which a student’s identity can play a major role. Below, we describe how current orchestration systems provide
support for student identity and what information is still missing towards developing an identity-centered
orchestration system.

Orchestration systems from an identity perspective
Although previous orchestration systems have not explicitly supported identity information, by providing real-
time information on students’ cognitive and social skills, they are still providing instructors with some identity
information. As discussed above, this real-time information that captures students’ behaviors are also a reflection
on the students’ identities. For example, orchestration systems can provide instructors with information on the
progress of students, their engagement in guess and check behavior, and the proportion of talking that each student
engages in (van Leeuwen et al., 2019). If we consider the social aspect with the amount of talking, a student with
a stronger computing identity will often talk more (Wu et al., 2019). For a cognitive perspective, a student with a
stronger computing identity will often engage in fewer guess and check behaviors. Through this lens, the student’s
behaviors are a reflection of that student’s identity.
         However, it is not just about reframing the information already presented in orchestration systems under
an identity lens. Additional information is also needed to fully reflect a student’s computing identity. In terms of
real-time measures, most orchestration dashboards do not reflect student motivation. The motivation of a student
within a domain is positively linked with their identity in that domain. Further, existing dashboards often focus
on providing information to instructors about student actions while overlooking students’ perceptions of their own




CSCL2022 Proceedings                                     559                                                   © ISLS
skills, how they fit into the group, and their interest in the domain. A student’s perceptions of themselves can
influence the student’s social interactions within a group and the actions that they take. The same actions taken
by a student with a strong perceived computing identity versus a student with a weak perceived computing identity
need to be addressed differently as the underlying cause of the behavior may be different.

Towards an identity-centered orchestration dashboard
Researchers have shown that when developing orchestration dashboards, providing systems that can alert
instructors to issues rather than only providing the information for the instructor to decode themselves tend to be
more beneficial (van Leeuwen et al., 2019). Previous research has developed algorithms to be able to do automatic
detection of actions such as wheel spinning and guess and check that can be integrated into orchestration
dashboards (Holstein et al., 2019). However, much of this work is in intelligent tutoring systems and it is not clear
how to provide this same detection through the aspect of an identity lens. To be able to provide alerts in the
orchestration system, we first must be able to produce these alerts as they relate to a student’s identity. A first step
to developing an identity aware orchestration system for exploring computer science activities is to have the ability
to connect cognitive, social, and motivation metrics with identity information. Currently, self-reported surveys
are commonly used to measure student identity. These measures can be used to capture identity information in a
dashboard at longer intervals. It is an open question as to how real-time cognitive, social, and motivation measures
may combine with these self-reported measures to provide useful information to the instructor.
         Although integrating identity information into an orchestration dashboard can benefit instructors in
gaining a holistic view of student learning, it might be a challenge for instructors to interpret identity information
for making corresponding instructional moves for supporting collaborative learning. With the development of
identity-centered dashboards, future work should consider the following research directions: 1) How can we
combine computing identity with real-time data sources that can be used to differentiate the support that may be
beneficial to students? and 2) How does the inclusion and design of identity information within an orchestration
system affect instructors' feedback to students and cognitive load?

References
Bricker, L. A., & Bell, P. (2012). “GodMode is his video game name”: situating learning and identity in
         structures of social practice. Cultural Studies of Science Education, 7(4), 883-902.
Carvalho, C., Santos, J., Conboy, J., & Martins, D. (2014). Teachers’ feedback: Exploring differences in students’
         perceptions. Procedia-Social and Behavioral Sciences, 159, 169-173.
Dillenbourg, P., Prieto, L.P., & Olsen, J.K. (2018). Classroom orchestration. In F. Fischer, C. E. Hmelo-Silver,
         S.R. Goldman, & P. Reimann (Eds.), International Handbook of the Learning Sciences (pp. 180–190).
Goode, J., & Margolis, J. (2011). Exploring computer science: A case study of school reform. ACM Transactions
         on Computing Education (TOCE), 11(2), 1-16.
Holstein, K., McLaren, B. M., & Aleven, V. (2019). Co-designing a real-time classroom orchestration tool to
         support teacher–AI complementarity. Journal of Learning Analytics, 6(2), 27-52.
Lunn, S., Ross, M., Hazari, Z., Weiss, M. A., Georgiopoulos, M., & Christensen, K. (2021). How Do
         Educational Experiences Predict Computing Identity?. ACM Transactions on Computing Education
         (TOCE), 22(2), 1-28.
Nasir, N. I. S., & Hand, V. (2008). From the court to the classroom: Opportunities for engagement, learning,
         and identity in basketball and classroom mathematics. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 17(2), 143-
         179.
Singer, A., Montgomery, G., & Schmoll, S. (2020). How to foster the formation of STEM identity: studying
         diversity in an authentic learning environment. International Journal of STEM Education, 7(1), 1-12.
van Leeuwen, A., Rummel, N., & Van Gog, T. (2019). What information should CSCL teacher dashboards
         provide to help teachers interpret CSCL situations?. International Journal of Computer-Supported
         Collaborative Learning, 14(3), 261-289.
Wu, B., Hu, Y., Ruis, A. R., & Wang, M. (2019). Analysing computational thinking in collaborative
         programming: A quantitative ethnography approach. Journal of Computer Assisted Learning, 35(3),
         421-434.




CSCL2022 Proceedings                                      560                                                    © ISLS
