Peer assessment for knowledge improvement: Do the type and the
                    affective nature matter?
                                        Jesmine S. H. TAN, Wenli CHEN
                                 jesmine.tan@nie.edu.sg, wenli.chen@nie.edu.sg
                 National Institute of Education, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore

         Abstract: Peer assessment is an important component in collaborative learning. Its effects have
         been substantially evidenced to vary with the types of feedback. This mixed-method study was
         conducted in a pre-service teachers’ TEL design learning context. It aimed to examine the
         different types of feedback and their affective nature on knowledge improvement. Specifically,
         the types of peer comments and their affective nature on pre-service teachers’ TPACK
         knowledge improvement were examined. The results showed that feedback that raised questions
         and concerns about the work and suggestive feedback gained the highest response rate leading
         to further improvement. Both positive and negative comments had the same impact on
         supporting the improvement of their work. The emoticon at the technology platform did not
         influence the participants with the affective state of the peer comments. The implications of
         future peer assessment implementations and the design of technology platforms to promote
         effective peer feedback are discussed.


Introduction
Peer assessment is a form of collaborative learning between two peers with two roles, an assessor and an assessee
(Kollar & Fischer, 2010; Er, Dimitriadis, Gašević, 2021). This approach has positive effects on learning. It can
help identify flaws, clarify misconceptions, and provide suggestions for further improvements (Topping, 2009).
Given the multiple terminologies in this research area, the terms peer assessment, peer critique and peer feedback
will be used interchangeably in this paper.
          While there are many benefits associated with peer assessment, students may face obstacles during the
peer assessment process (Er et al., 2021). Even with a systematic guidance or structured process, superficial peer
comments without constructive purpose may lead to unproductive learning. Furthermore, non-constructive and
judgmental feedback may not identify students’ learning gaps and do not improve learning (Fong et al., 2021).
While better-performing students are more receptive to receiving feedback because of their confidence in
receiving positive comments, weaker students may feel otherwise (Carless, 2006). Moreover, feedback provision,
reception, and revision do not automatically mean that learning takes place (Kollar & Fischer, 2010). There must
be evidence of outcome performance that occurs after the peer assessment process. Therefore, what types of
feedback could lead to knowledge improvement is one area worth examination.
          Moreover, the uptake of feedback is also likely to be positively related to learning when the feedback is
relevant and of good quality such that the recipient of the feedback finds it worthwhile adopting (Kollar & Fischer,
2010). Topping (2009) purported that “peer feedback can be confirmatory, suggestive, or corrective” (p. 22). At
the same time, Lu & Law (2012) states that affective comments influence performance. Affective feedback
encompasses the use of affective language to express assessors' positive or negative feelings toward their peers'
performance. (Lin, 2018). In fact, providing positive feedback is reckoned as an effective strategy to help sustain
deep discourse (Chen et al., 2018), be it written or spoken. Not only does it help with cognitive development, but
it also motivates learning, invokes positive emotions in learners, which could lead to a favourable outlook on the
comments and better performance outcomes (Chen et al., 2018; Lu & Law, 2012). Therefore, how best to design
peer assessment in educational contexts is an area that needs further exploration (Kollar & Fischer, 2010). In
addition, the emotional aspect of feedback is also worth further investigation (Carless, 2006). Premised upon these
areas, this paper examined how the different types of feedback and the affective nature of the comments affect
peers in moving forward by improving their work. By understanding the types of feedback that could lead to better
performance outcomes, we could better inform future peer feedback implementations by equipping students to
provide certain feedback types that promote knowledge improvement. Moreover, suppose affective comments
could motivate learning and has positive effect on knowledge improvement. In that case, it should be encouraged
during the peer feedback process too. The following research questions were crafted for this study:
      1. What are the types of feedback that affects knowledge improvement?
      2. What effect do the affective comments have on knowledge improvement?




CSCL2022 Proceedings                                    11                                                   © ISLS
Literature Review
Peer assessment is reckoned as a form of formative assessment, is commonly seen from the cognitive and affective
aspects (Nelson & Schunn, 2009). Cognitive feedback involves the content of the work, and the feedback
comment could include summarising, specifying, and explaining aspects of the work under review (Lu & Law,
2012). Specific feedback is more effective than generalised feedback (Fong et al., 2021). General feedback
without constructive comments has no value for knowledge and work improvement.
       Affective feedback uses affective language to support and bestow praise or criticism by showing negative
feelings about the work (Cheng, Liang & Tsai, 2015). Affective feedback can be divided into two types: positive
affective feedback and negative affective feedback. Positive affective feedback is usually recommended and is
deemed as one of the most common features presented in the area of formative peer feedback (Cho, Schunn, &
Charney, 2006). In a computer-supported environment, emoticons are commonly used to convey emotions instead
of text comments (Lu & Law, 2012). Regardless on the avenues of giving feedback, there are mixed results on
the effect of positive affective feedback on students' learning improvement. Hence, more research studies are
recommended to explore the different types of feedback to understand better how they affect subsequent
improvement (Fong et al., 2021). Moreover, peer feedback helps students develop metacognition and
understanding of the subject matter involved (Pantiwati & Husamah, 2017), which promotes knowledge
improvement (Cheng, Liang & Tsai, 2015). In the pre-service teacher education, developing the competency to
design a Technology-enhanced Learning (TEL) lesson is important. However, this is a challenging task (Kafyulilo,
Fisser & Voogt, 2015). To guide them in the TEL design, the Technological Pedagogical Content Knowledge
(TPACK) (Koehler, & Mishra, 2009) is reckoned as a reliable framework that could help determine the
effectiveness of a TEL lesson design. The knowledge of TPACK requires understanding and negotiating the
relationships between technology, pedagogy, and content (Wong, Chai, Zhang & King, 2014). Chen, Tan & Pi
(2021) posited that such complex knowledge could be improved via a collaborative learning environment.
       In a collaborative learning environment that is supported by computers, the wide learning spectrum can be
extended effortlessly. Chen, Tan & Pi (2021) reckoned that peer feedback at the class-wide level benefits
collaborative groups in knowledge improvement more than learning at the group level. In this study, the class-
wide peer feedback is situated between two group-level phases in a computer-supported collaborative learning
(CSCL) environment. By examining the feedback generated at the class-wide feedback phase, we could
understand the impact of the types of peer feedback and their affective state had on the knowledge of TPACK.

Methodology

Participants and learning context
Twelve pre-service teachers from the author’s institute participated in this study. An invitation was sent via a
group chat to the course students, and twelve responded. The participants signed the consent form to express their
voluntary participation. At the time of the study, the lecturer had more than ten years of teaching experience.
         Before the collaborative lesson design session, the twelve participants were randomly grouped into six
dyads using an online randomisation tool (https://www.randomlists.com/team-generator). The task for all dyads
was TEL design on a reading comprehension segment based on the assigned Grade four Chinese language reading
texts. The TEL design should exhibit the interactions of the three knowledge components: content, pedagogy, and
technology knowledge. Two sets of materials were disseminated to the participants before the collaborative lesson
design session to support the participants with the TEL design task. The materials are the Five-step Reading
comprehension guide taken from the Chinese Language Syllabus and Teaching Guide for Primary Schools©
(2015) and the definitions of the TPACK dimensions (Koehler & Mishra, 2009; Koehler, Mishra & Cain, 2013).

The research procedure
The entire collaborative lesson design session was conducted entirely online on Zoom. Both the lecturer and the
participants are familiar with the Zoom platform. During the collaborative lesson design session, the lecturer
started with a 15-minute briefing, followed by a Zoom break-out session for the discussion among the group
members before peer feedback phase. After the first 20 minutes discussion, the lecturer admit all participants to
the main room for the class-wide peer feedback. Thereafter, they were assigned back to their group breakout
rooms for group refinement. Figure 1 shows the process of the collaborative lesson design procedure.
         The CSCL platform for this study is the AppleTree system (Chen et al., 2013). The participants were
instructed to construct the TEL design using the three types of bubbles on the AppleTree workspace (Figure 2) to
form a tree structure, with the lesson objective as the root node (dark blue oval) and the lesson procedures (yellow
rectangles) branching out from it. The technology platform associated with the lesson procedure will be populated




CSCL2022 Proceedings                                    12                                                   © ISLS
using the cloud bubbles (light blue clouds). The participants were familiar with the AppleTree system's
functionalities. The tree-structured lesson design is employed rather than the traditional text-based representation.
This graphical structure enables explicit representations of the inter-relationships between content, pedagogy, and
technology components, which is helpful during the peer feedback process. The visual representation enabled the
holistic understanding of complex knowledge in which words alone may be limited to convey (Plotnick, 1997).
Figure 1
The procedure of the study
 Group brainstorming (20 mins)                  Inter-group peer feedback            Group refinement (10 mins)
 • Group members brainstorm TEL design          (5 mins)                             • Group members return to their
   ideas and synergise to one that represents   • Group members visit other            group page and refine their TEL
   the highest quality of idea at the group       group's TEL design to offer          design based on the feedback
   level                                          feedback


           Figure 2
           The AppleTree system Graph-based workspace (Group one) (Names shown are pseudonyms)




         Figure 3 shows the Peer Critique window for the participants to enter their peer comments during the
inter-group peer feedback phase. There are three opinions buttons represented by three emoticons. The
participants could choose to illustrate their emotions of the peer comments. The emoticons are "Smiling face",
which represents an Agreement, "Neutral face", which represents a neutral opinion and "Sad face", which
represents a Disagreement. After selecting the opinion (emoticons), the "Explain why" text box with mandatory
text entry prompts the participants to elaborate the reason for their opinion. This comment box with the text
"Explain why" at the top helps elicit constructive and elaborated feedback. There is no limit to the number of
comments each bubble can receive. Within the given time for the peer critique phase, the participants could access
any groups to contribute their feedback. The next phase following this phase is the Refinement phase. During the
refinement phase, the participants would be routed back to their group page to view the peer comments given by
the other groups' members. One feature of the AppleTree system is anonymous feedback. With this feature, the
names of the critic were hidden from peers but not the teacher. The participants knew of this feature. Figure 4
shows the refinement phase where each bubble indicates the number of comments under each emoticon.
  Figure 3                                                     Figure 4
  The AppleTree system Peer comment box                        The AppleTree system Graph-based workspace
                                                               for Refinement (Group one)




CSCL2022 Proceedings                                     13                                                     © ISLS
Data collection
The participants' generated artifacts were collected and examined to answer the two research questions. The data
source was from the AppleTree system. The TEL design artifacts were collected by downloading the AppleTree
system Report A, which contained the TEL design content and process during the collaborative learning phases.
The data from this report were coded using the TPACK coding scheme. The second data set was the peer feedback
data, collected by downloading the AppleTree Report B. Each row in Report B was one peer comment contributed
by one participant. This data was coded using the Peer feedback coding scheme. Both reports are in Microsoft
Excel format. Each data row had the participant's name and the timestamp of the online behaviour.

Research instruments
The TPACK coding scheme
The coding scheme for the TEL design was derived from the TPACK framework (Koehler & Mishra, 2009).
TPACK is a well-acknowledged and dependable guide to evaluate the quality of TEL design (Koh et al., 2015).
The unit of analysis of the TEL design was a complete TEL lesson design. The score for each TEL lesson design
was derived from the content analysis of the TEL lesson procedures based on the interactions among content,
pedagogy, and technology dimensions. The quality of each TEL lesson design for the TPACK dimension was
measured by a ten-point scale ranging from one to ten, with one being the lowest quality and ten being the highest
quality. Two trained coders coded the data. The inter-coder reliability was high (Cronbach’s alpha = 0.75).
Table 1
The TPACK coding scheme
 TPACK Definition                                                    Scale
 The quality of the TEL design           1-2           3-4                   5-6               7-8              9-10
 based on the interactions among     Very weak   Moderately weak      Relatively good         Good           Very good
 content(C), pedagogy(P), and       interactions   interactions         interactions       interactions     interactions
 technology(T) dimensions.         among C,P,T.   among C,P,T.         among C,P,T.       among C,P,T.     among C,P,T.

The peer feedback coding scheme
The coding scheme for the feedback took reference from the works of Perkins (2003) 's ladder of feedback and
De Sixte et al. (2020) 's findings on the effectiveness of positive (warm) elaborated feedback on post-feedback
behaviour. The unit of analysis is one peer comment. Each peer comments were segregated based on the four
types of feedback for coding. The affective state was coded by the emoticons on the AppleTree system and through
judgement on the comment affective state. Positive affections are warm and motivational (e.g. "good" or a smiley
emoticon). Negative affections are demeaning, and comments without positive affirmative words are neutral.
Table 2
The Peer feedback coding scheme
 Rung          Type           Definition                                                    Type of        Affective
                                                                                           emoticon          state
   1        Clarity (C)       Ask questions to clarify about the work being reviewed
   2        Value (Va)        Comments on the strength or on what they value about      Smiley face (Po), Positive (Po),
                                                                                         Sad face (Ng)    Negative (Ng)
   3      Questions and       Comment on your concerns about the work                          or               or
         Concerns (Q&C)                                                                 Neutral face (Nu) Neutral (Nu)
   4     Suggestions (S)      Make suggestions for improving the work


Data Analysis
Content analysis was conducted on the TEL design artifacts using the TPACK coding scheme to show the quality
of the TEL design to examine the improvement of the knowledge of TPACK. This analysis is needed to examine
the improvement of TEL design before and after peer feedback to address research question one. To answer the
second research question, two analyses were conducted. The first analysis was based on the emoticons from the
AppleTree system, followed by a content analysis on the peer comments using the peer feedback coding scheme.
The coding of the affective state of the comments is independent of the emoticon of the AppleTree system.

Results
The types of feedback that affects knowledge improvement




CSCL2022 Proceedings                                      14                                                    © ISLS
Figure 5 shows an improvement in the TEL design quality after the peer feedback phase. This result illustrates
that the peer feedback supported the pre-service teachers in improving their knowledge of TPACK, leading to an
improvement in TEL design quality. The Mean difference shows the extent of improvement before and after peer
feedback. Figure 6 shows the types of peer feedback and those that were responded to. The type of feedback that
had the highest response rate was the Questions and Concerns comments, followed by suggestions. This result
suggested that these two types of feedback should be encouraged since they promote knowledge improvement.
  Figure 5                                                    Figure 6
  Quality of TEL Design before and after peer feedback        Peer feedback Received




The effects of affective comments on knowledge improvement
Figure 7 shows the affective feedback response based on the emoticon selected by the participants on the
AppleTree system. The disagree emoticon was not selected at all. Figure 8 shows the affective nature of the
comments based on the coded comments. Although there was no disagree emoticon selected, the results in Figure
8 shows the presence of negative comments based on the coded content. These results suggested that the affective
state of the emoticons may not equate to the affective nature of the comments.
 Figure 7                                                  Figure 8
 Affective feedback based on AppleTree emoticon            Affective feedback based on content




Further analysis was conducted to match the emoticons and the affective state comments. Table 3, the keywords
and tones to decide the affective nature of the peer comments were highlighted with red text. Out of the 17
comments, five had the same affective state between the emoticon and the coded comments (grey shade), which
are the positive comments with the Agree emoticon. This comparison suggests that emoticon and the affective
state of the comments do not necessarily match. Hence, semantic tracing on the comments was conducted to
examine what peer comments led to improvement in the TEL design. In Table 3, the blue text shows the keywords
in feedback comments that match the improvements made to the TEL design, indicating the uptake trace, implying
that the affective state of the comments does not influence the uptake for refinement. The important keywords
and key phrases leading to the improved TEL design were mostly questions and concerns types that surfaced
misconceptions, gaps, or suggestions for improvement, leading to improvement in the TEL Design improvement
measured by the TPACK score. The highest improvement were Group 1 (M=5à7) and 4 (M=4à6), followed by
Group 2 and 3 ((M=5à6), Group 5 ((M=3à4), Group 6 (M=4à6).
Table 3
The affective nature, the keywords and phrases of the responded peer comments and the improvements made
 S/   Emo     Affective   Type Peer comment (Chinese words were           Improvements made              Group
 N    ticon   nature           translated to English)                                                      To
                                                                                                         Group
 1    Nu      Po          Va    I like the main activity of the lesson   Deleted “Teacher to allow       G1àG2
                          QC    plan but using Quizlet to learn the      students to access Quizlet to




CSCL2022 Proceedings                                      15                                             © ISLS
                            words is more like the initial reading       complete learning the vocabulary
                            comprehension on vocabulary                  list”
                            understanding, instead of the
                            requirement in the third step of reading
                            comprehension, that is, to understand
                            each paragraph of the passage. It is also
                            lacking in the reading with intonation.
 2    Nu     Po        Va   I like how you include ICT to check for        Included “Finally, students read
                       QC   passage understanding. But it seems to         aloud in unison with
                            miss out on the reading with                   intonations” (Group 3)
                            intonation required in the third
                                                                                                              G1àG3
                            reading comprehension step.
 3    Nu     Ng        QC   this is more of initial reading                Deleted the lesson procedures
                            comprehension on vocabulary                    related to first reading
                            understanding, not the requirement in          comprehension on vocabulary
                            the third step of reading                      understanding
                            comprehension.
 4    Nu     Ng        QC   This is already the third step of              Deleted the lesson procedure       G1àG4
                            reading comprehension; the students            related to locating the words
                            have already completed the first step of       related to “where”
                            the reading comprehension; shouldn’t
                            they proceed quickly to understand the
                            passage, but not need to share and
                            introduce the “Where” already?
 5    Nu     Ng        QC   But this part is more suitable for the first Refined “show some pictures” to      G6àG4
                            step of reading comprehension. For             “show a picture on sports day,
                            third reading comprehension, this              allow students to relate their
                            learning task could be too simple, looks       personal experience (interesting
                            boring.                                        events)”
 6    Nu     Ng        QC   It is already the third step of reading        Deleted the lesson procedures
                       S    comprehension, should omit the                 related to vocabulary
                            initial part of removing vocabulary            understanding
                                                                                                              G1àG5
                            obstacles
 7    Nu     Ng        S    go direct to understanding each                Deleted the procedures on
                            paragraph. In this way, you can                vocabulary understanding.
                            allocate more time for students to fully       Retain “Teacher to allow
                            understand the content of the text.            students to use Nearpod to
                                                                           understand the text”
 8    Nu     Ng        QC   This listening to the sound part is            Deleted the lesson procedure on    G6àG5
                            more suitable for first reading. At this       “listening to the sound part”
                            point, students already initially
                            understand the passage already.
 9    Nu     Ng        C    “responsible for one animal” for what          Elaborated on this procedure       G1àG6
                            purpose?                                       “Group activity: Each group
                                                                           three members. Each one is
                                                                           responsible for one animal
                                                                           (individual component)”
 10   Po     Nu        S    Perhaps during reading comprehension           Include new procedure “Each        G4àG1
                            at the group level, you could give them        student to answer at least one
                            some instructions to prevent anyone            question”
                            not doing anything during this segment.
 11   Po     Nu        Va   Did achieve the learning objective. Just       Deleted “Finally, each group to    G2àG5
                       QC   by using the post-it notes method, the         submit all the unfamiliar words
                            teacher may find it difficult to               on post-it notes to the teacher”
                            concentrate on what words to teach.
 12   Po     Nu        S    Perhaps using the pencil to circle could Deleted “use highlighter to              G3àG5
                            be better. Use highlighter to highlight        highlight the words that they do
                            cannot erase. Instead of writing on            not understand”
                            paper, the teacher can directly use
                            Nearpod to display the paragraphs; the
                            groups can circle the vocabulary they
                            still do not understand during the third




CSCL2022 Proceedings                                 16                                                       © ISLS
                                 reading comprehension. This way can
                                 probably save time.
 13    Po      Po         Va     Quite good, But a small suggestion, you    Include new procedure “Each          G5àG1
                          S      can allow students to use Padlet to        group member to answer
                                 record followed by peer critique. This     questions related to each
                                 way, the teacher can listen and involve    paragraph on Padlet”
                                 also.
 14    Po      Po         S      Maybe can indicate using the tone of the   Include additional keywords          G5àG1
                                 sentences to read out the intonation :)    (underlined) “Students to
                                                                            understand the sentences and the
                                                                            tone to grasp the emotion of the
                                                                            passage before reading aloud”
 15    Po      Po         Va     I feel that this segment is very good      Included “Student to return          G4àG2
                                 “Student must answer one question,         home and record passage
                                 then peer critique the answers of          reading aloud and upload to SLS
                                 group members within-group” segment        platform. Other students peer
                                 include individual and group.              critique after listening to their
                                                                            peers’ reading aloud audio.”
 16    Po      Po         Va     Interesting, but students may not have     Included “If students did not        G6àG3
                          QC     participated in sports day.                participate in sports days before,
 17    Po      Po         Va     Interesting can provide video also         teacher to provide a short video
                          S                                                 of sports day for students to
                                                                            relate the events in the video

Discussion and conclusion
This study examined the different types of peer feedback and their affective nature on knowledge improvement.
Results from the first research question showed that questions and concerns and suggestion feedback supported
pre-service teachers in improving their TEL design resulting through the improved TPACK scores. Studies that
examined the impact of different types of peer feedback on knowledge improvement is rare. Guasch, Espasa and
Martinez-Melo (2019) found that suggestive feedback significantly increased metacognitive activities. In contrast,
this study found that feedback that raises questions and concerns were more highly responded to as compared to
suggestion feedback in supporting pre-service teachers with knowledge improvement. Findings from the second
research question show that both positive and negative affective comments have an equal impact in supporting
knowledge improvement. Apart from that, affective comments could also support the improvement of TEL design,
although its uptake rate was less than half of the positive and negative comments. This observation suggested that
affective comments have no significant impact on participants’ uptake for improvement. This finding corroborated
with De Sixte et al. (2020)’s study showing that positive messages do not necessarily influence post-feedback
behaviour. Generally, the students were prone to consider comments that let them know what they would do rather
than encouraging messages on what they had already done (De Sixte et al., 2020).
          This study has theoretical significance. While students generally prefer receiving positive comments,
they often interpret negative feedback as unconstructive (Fong et al., 2021). Furthermore, Kwon et al. (2019)
found that positive affective feedback was ineffective for improving students' learning when the task is cognitively
demanding. Interestingly, results from this study suggest that cognitive feedback (such as questions and concerns
and suggestions) supported peers' improvement and is more effective than the affective nature of the feedback
comments (Cheng, Liang & Tsai, 2015). Therefore, this study contributes to more empirical studies examining
the impact of different cognitive feedback and their affective state had on post peer feedback behaviour. Secondly,
the mismatch between the AppleTree emoticons and the affective state of the feedback comments have important
implications on educational technology design. The results showing an absence of Disagree emoticon selection
suggested that the participants were reluctant to indicate a negative emotion even though it was anonymous
feedback. Therefore, including the affective emoticons in the technology platform to promote affective comments
could probably only add value to user experience rather than for cognitive development purposes.
          Practically, future implementation of peer feedback should consider developing students’ ability to
provide constructive feedback that could feedforward. For feedback to enhance learning, it must be acted upon
(Boud, 2015). However, without specifying the areas for improvement in the comments, no action can be taken
at the receiving end. This study has limitations. Besides examining the improvement of TEL design based on the
given comments, further analysis on knowledge gain when the participants examined the TEL design of the other
groups could also shed new insights to this research area. Given the small sample size and the authentic context,
more future studies, including experimental designs, would be necessary to explore further findings in other
educational contexts.




CSCL2022 Proceedings                                     17                                                      © ISLS
References
Boud, D. (2015). Feedback: ensuring that it leads to enhanced learning. Clinical teacher, 12(1), 3-7.
Carless, D. (2006). Differing perceptions in the feedback process. Studies in higher education, 31(2), 219-233.
Chen, W., Tan, J. S., & Pi, Z. (2021). The spiral model of collaborative knowledge improvement: an exploratory
     study of a networked collaborative classroom. International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative
     Learning, 16(1), 7-35.
Chen, J., Wang, M., Kirschner, P. A., & Tsai, C. C. (2018). The role of collaboration, computer use, learning
          environments, and supporting strategies in CSCL: A meta-analysis. Review of Educational
          Research, 88(6), 799-843.
Chen, W., Looi, C.-K., Wen, Y., & Xie, W. (2013). AppleTree: An assessment-oriented framework for
          collaboration and argumentation. In N. Rummel, M. Kapur, M. Nathan & S. Puntambekar (Eds.),
          Proceedings of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning (CSCL) 2013 (Part 2, pp. 6-9). Madison,
          USA: International Society of the Learning Sciences.
Cheng, K. H., Liang, J. C., & Tsai, C. C. (2015). Examining the role of feedback messages in undergraduate
     students' writing performance during an online peer assessment activity. The internet and higher
     education, 25, 78-84.
Cho, K., Schunn, C. D., & Charney, D. (2006). Commenting on writing: Typology and perceived helpfulness of
     comments from novice peer reviewers and subject matter experts. Written communication, 23(3), 260-294.
De Sixte, R., Mañá, A., Ávila, V., & Sánchez, E. (2020). Warm elaborated feedback. Exploring its benefits on
     post-feedback behaviour. Educational Psychology, 40(9), 1094-1112.
Er, E., Dimitriadis, Y., & Gašević, D. (2021). A collaborative learning approach to dialogic peer feedback: a
          theoretical framework. Assessment & Evaluation in Higher Education, 46(4), 586-600.
Fong, C. J., Schallert, D. L., Williams, K. M., Williamson, Z. H., Lin, S., Kim, Y. W., & Chen, L. H. (2021).
     Making feedback constructive: the interplay of undergraduates' motivation with perceptions of feedback
     specificity and friendliness. Educational Psychology, 41(10), 1241-1259.
Guasch, T., Espasa, A., & Martinez-Melo, M. (2019). The art of questioning in online learning environments:
     the potentialities of feedback in writing. Assessment & Evaluation in Higher Education, 44(1), 111-123.
Koh, J. H. L., Chai, C. S., Benjamin, W., & Hong, H. Y. (2015). Technological pedagogical content knowledge
     (TPACK) and design thinking: A framework to support ICT lesson design for 21st century learning. The
     Asia-Pacific Education Researcher, 24(3), 535-543.
Kollar, I., & Fischer, F. (2010). Peer assessment as collaborative learning: A cognitive perspective. Learning and
          instruction, 20(4), 344-348.
Koehler, M., & Mishra, P. (2009). What is technological pedagogical content knowledge
     (TPACK)?. Contemporary issues in technology and teacher education, 9(1), 60-70.
Kwon, K., Song, D., Sari, A. R., & Khikmatillaeva, U. (2019). Different types of collaborative problem-solving
     processes in an online environment: Solution-oriented versus problem-oriented. Journal of Educational
     Computing Research, 56(8), 1277-1295.
Lin, G. Y. (2018). Anonymous versus identified peer assessment via a Facebook-based learning application:
          Effects on quality of peer feedback, perceived learning, perceived fairness, and attitude toward the
          system. Computers & Education, 116, 81-92.
Lu, J., & Law, N. (2012). Online peer assessment: Effects of cognitive and affective feedback. Instructional
          Science, 40(2), 257-275.
Nelson, M. M., & Schunn, C. D. (2009). The nature of feedback: How different types of peer feedback affect
     writing performance. Instructional science, 37(4), 375-401.
Pantiwati, Y., & Husamah, H. (2017). Self and peer assessments in active learning model to increase
     metacognitive awareness and cognitive abilities. International Journal of Instruction, 10(4).
Perkins, D. (2003). King Arthur's round table: How collaborative conversations create smart organisations.
     John Wiley & Sons.
Plotnick, E. (1997). Concept mapping: A graphical system for understanding the relationship between concepts
     (pp. 1998-1). Syracuse, NY: ERIC Clearinghouse on Information and Technology.
Topping, K. J. (2009). Peer assessment. Theory into Practice, 48(1), 20-27.

IRB Acknowledgment
Consent from the research participants was obtained based on ethics approval by the National Institute of
Education, Nanyang Technological University, IRB ref: IRB-2019-04-014.




CSCL2022 Proceedings                                   18                                                  © ISLS
