    Virtual Reality for Collaborative Learning in Teacher Education
                     Tuula Nousiainen1, Merja Juntunen1, Päivi Häkkinen2, and Piia Näykki1
        tuula.j.nousiainen@jyu.fi, merja.juntunen@jyu.fi, paivi.m.hakkinen@jyu.fi, piia.t.naykki@jyu.fi
    1
      Department of Teacher Education, 2Finnish Institute for Educational Research, University of Jyväskylä

         Abstract: This poster discusses the potential of virtual reality (VR) for collaborative learning.
         VR can provide engaging, social and creative digital environments for collaborative knowledge
         construction but its pedagogically meaningful uses and affordances are only just developing.
         We present the design of a case study where pre-service teachers become acquainted with the
         pedagogical potential of VR through collaborative exploration and subsequently collaboratively
         design and reflect on authentic school projects using VR.

Introduction and related work
Collaborative learning in blended and digital environments is a critical skill to be mastered by 21st-century
learners (Häkkinen et al., 2017). It requires both the social and cognitive contributions of the participants (Hesse
et al., 2015; Scoular & Care, 2020) but is also vitally connected to the socio-emotional processes during
collaboration (Isohätälä et al., 2020; Näykki et al., 2021). The pandemic has further challenged us to consider how
to bring social and collaborative knowledge construction and engagement to the forefront in online learning (e.g.,
Carrillo & Flores, 2020). Virtual reality (VR) is a promising technology in this respect due to its immersive and
experiential capacity. So far, few studies on VR in education have addressed communication and collaboration in
authentic contexts (Radianti et al., 2020; Southgate, 2020). We also need solutions enabling educators and students
to take control of immersive environments regardless of technical skills (Gaspar et al., 2020). One approach is the
use of pre-designed but open-ended tools that offer creative opportunities. In school education, pupils have
constructed Minecraft environments and explored them with Vivecraft and VR headsets, supporting self-directed
collaboration and active engagement (e.g., Näykki et al., in press). Another example is the use of social VR
platforms such as AltspaceVR, where people engage as avatars in real-time conversation and shared activities in
immersive virtual worlds (Dzardanova et al., 2018). Research related to VR as an environment for interpersonal
interactions in learning is still scarce but there have been positive experiences especially related to the sense of
community (Ripka et al., 2020), suggesting that VR can tap into the need for social presence (Oh et al., 2018).
          We present the design of a case study where pre-service teachers (PSTs) explore, co-design and reflect
on the pedagogical potential of VR tools. Learning by designing refers to a social process, aiming to engage
students in building knowledge and performing inquiries (Kolodner, 2002; Roth, 2001). Design activities require
students to describe, predict and explain certain phenomena, and subsequently help them acquire deeper
understanding of complex problems and abstract principles (e.g., Hmelo et al., 2000). The teacher education
context also presupposes familiarization with real-life, authentic school contexts.

Study design and implementation
The study consists of two cycles (2021–22 and 2022–23), each linked to two study modules: an interdisciplinary
Environmental Storytelling course (ES) and an elective module related to learning technologies and pedagogy
(LT). All PSTs gain experience of different VR environments through collaborative activities and reflection, and
some of them continue to work on the theme by co-designing authentic VR-related school projects, including the
implementation and evaluation of the projects with pupils. The research questions are: How do PSTs reflect on
their learning experience with VR (RQ1)? What are PSTs’ perceptions about the pedagogical potential of VR
(RQ2)? How does learning manifest during collaborative VR activities and the co-design of projects (RQ3)? The
following data are collected: (1) written reflections (learning diaries, portfolios, targeted questionnaires) related
to the PSTs’ perceptions and experiences; (2) screen capture videos documenting the collaboration and co-design
and video annotation to identify meaningful learning moments; and (3) focus groups and workshops to gain a rich
understanding of the experience and to examine the development and potential change in the PSTs’ perceptions.
         The first cycle, taking place this academic year, is considered a pilot: due to COVID-19, both study
modules have been implemented as distance learning, and virtual environments have been explored in 2D mode
on the PSTs’ own computers instead of VR headsets. In LT, the PSTs (N=12) explored several worlds in
AltspaceVR and reflected on their experiences in a portfolio. In ES, the PSTs (N=19) engaged in a collaborative,
role-based activity where five teams representing different media (TikTok, blog/vlog, YouTube, magazine, radio)
were tasked by the ‘Ministry of Education’ to create a strategy for promoting environmental awareness in their
respective target audiences. Working as avatars in AltspaceVR, the PSTs discussed the task, collaboratively




CSCL2022 Proceedings                                    589                                                   © ISLS
created visual notes, and presented their ideas to the Ministry and the other teams. Screen recordings were made
of the activities, and the PSTs’ reflections were collected with a questionnaire and learning diaries.

Initial findings and discussion
The PSTs reflected on different aspects of the activities: some affordances (such as the feeling of presence when
giving a presentation in front of other avatars) supported the learning experience while others (e.g., lack of screen-
sharing functionality within the virtual world) made their collaboration less effective (RQ1). The PSTs discussed
the motivational potential of using virtual worlds with pupils, also pointing out the importance of careful planning
when implementing such activities (RQ2). We have yet to conduct a detailed video analysis, but initial
observations have revealed some interesting points. For example, in the ES course, some PSTs built avatars that
closely resembled themselves while others created distinct characters with backstories. The latter approach
seemed to support adopting different perspectives to the task within the team (RQ3). The findings suggest that
virtual worlds can be used for collaborative learning in pedagogically meaningful ways, but careful attention must
be paid to how the activities are framed and how the PSTs are prepared for them. In the second cycle, we will
focus especially on immersion as we were not able to examine it in the distance learning setting.

References
Carrillo, C., & Flores, M. A. (2020). COVID-19 and teacher education: A literature review of online teaching and
          learning practices. European Journal of Teacher Education, 43(4), 466–487.
Dzardanova E., Kasapakis V., & Gavalas, D. (2018). Social virtual reality. In N. Lee (Ed.), Encyclopedia of
          Computer Graphics and Games. Springer.
Gaspar, H., Morgado, L., Mamede, H., Oliveira, T., Manjón, B., & Gütl, C. (2020). Research priorities in
          immersive learning technology: The perspectives of the iLRN community. Virtual Reality, 24, 319–341.
Hesse, H., Care, E., Buder, J., Sassenberg, J., & Griffin, P. (2015). Framework for teachable collaborative problem
          solving skills. In P. Griffin & E. Care (Eds.), Assessment and teaching of 21st century skills. Methods
          and approach (pp. 37–56). Springer.
Hmelo, C., Holton, D. L., & Kolodner, J. (2000). Designing to learn about complex systems. Journal of the
          Learning Sciences, 9(3), 247–298.
Häkkinen, P., Järvelä, S., Mäkitalo-Siegl, K., Ahonen, A., Näykki, P., & Valtonen, T. (2017). Preparing teacher-
          students for twenty-first-century learning practices (PREP21): a framework for enhancing collaborative
          problem solving and strategic learning skills. Teachers and Teaching: Theory and Practice, 23(1), 25-41.
Isohätälä, J., Näykki, P., & Järvelä, S. (2020). Cognitive and socio-emotional interaction in collaborative learning:
          Exploring fluctuations in students’ participation. Scandinavian Journal of Educational Research, 64(6),
          831–851.
Kolodner, J. (2002). Facilitating the learning of design practices.: Lesson learned from an inquiry in science
          education. Journal of Industrial Teacher Education, 39(3), 1–31.
Näykki, P., Fagerlund, J., Silvennoinen, M., Manu, M., Nousiainen, T., Juntunen, M., & Vesisenaho, M. (In press).
          Facilitating collaborative learning with virtual reality simulations, gaming and pair programming. In
          Handbook of Intelligent Techniques in Educational Process. Springer.
Näykki, P., Isohätälä, J., & Järvelä, S. (2021). "You really brought all your feelings out” – Scaffolding students
          to identify the socio-emotional and socio-cognitive challenges in collaborative learning. Learning,
          Culture and Social Interaction, 30.
Oh, C. S., Bailenson, J. N., & Welch, G. F. (2018). A systematic review of social presence: Definition, antecedents,
          and implications. Frontiers in Robotics and AI, 5(114).
Radianti, J., Majchrzaka, T. A., Fromm, J., & Wohlgenannt, I. (2020). A systematic review of immersive virtual
          reality applications for higher education: Design elements, lessons learned, and research agenda.
          Computers & Education, 147, 103778.
Ripka, G., Grafe, S. & Latoschik, M. E. (2020). Preservice teachers' encounter with social VR – Exploring virtual
          teaching and learning processes in initial teacher education. In E. Langran (Ed.), Proceedings of SITE
          Interactive 2020 Online Conference (pp. 549–562). AACE.
Roth, W.-M. (2001). Modeling design as situated and distributed process. Learning and Instruction, 11(3), 211–
          239.
Scoular, C. & Care, E. (2020). Monitoring patterns of social and cognitive student behaviors in online
          collaborative problem solving assessments. Computers in Human Behavior, 104.
Southgate, E. (2020). Using screen capture video to understand learning in virtual reality. In IEEE Conference on
          Virtual Reality and 3D User Interfaces Abstracts and Workshops (VRW) (pp. 418–421). IEEE.




CSCL2022 Proceedings                                     590                                                   © ISLS
