        The Role of the Physical Space in Distributed Intelligence
      Mike Tissenbaum (co-chair), University of Illinois Urbana Champaign, miketissenbaum@gmail.com
         Robb Lindgren (co-chair), University of Illinois Urbana Champaign, robblind@illinois.edu
              Joshua Danish (co-chair), Indiana University - Bloomington, jdanish@indiana.edu
                  Taehyun Kim, University of Illinois Urbana Champaign, thk4@illnois.edu
                Litong Zeng, University of Illinois Urbana Champaign, litongz2@illinois.edu
                James Planey, University of Illinois Urbana Champaign, planey@illinois.edu
               Emma Mercier, University of Illinois Urbana Champaign, mercier@illinois.edu
                 Jina Kang, University of Illinois Urbana Champaign, jinakang@illinois.edu
                    Morgan Vickery, Indiana University - Bloomington, moravick@iu.edu
                       Mengxi Zhou, Indiana University – Bloomington, mz13@iu.edu
                         Katie Headrick, University of Washington, kht126@uw.edu
                    Taylor, Kaleb Germinaro, University of Washington, kalebg@uw.edu
                       Ben Rydal Shapiro, Georgia State University, bshapiro@gsu.edu
                     Sierra Gilliam, Georgia State University, sgilliam7@student.gsu.edu
                             Jim Slotta, University of Toronto, jslotta@gmail.com
                         Tom Moher, University of Illinois Chicago, moher@uic.edu
                 Vishesh Kumar, Northwestern University, vishesh.kumar@northwestern.edu
                        Nathan Kimball, Concord Consortium, nkimball@concord.org
                        Jessica Roberts, Georgia Tech, jessica.roberts@cc.gatech.edu
                               Kyle Leinart, Georgia Tech, kleinart3@gatech.edu
                       Roy Pea (discussant), Stanford University, roypea@stanford.edu

Abstract: While technology is often the focus within learning environments designed to support distributed
intelligence, less attention has been paid to the role of the physical space. In response, this symposium brings
together seven research strands in which the design of the physical space is a central component of their
distributed intelligences and the collaborative learning they support. Through this symposium, participants will
get the opportunity to engage with these distributed intelligence designs to understand firsthand the
opportunities and challenged associated with the careful integration of space in their own learning designs.

Introduction
Distributed intelligence states that the "intelligence" of the learning environment is not held solely within the
minds of students, but is distributed across the physical space and the technologies developed and deployed to
support students' learning (Pea, 1993). Distributed intelligence goes further, noting that these supports are
integral to the class' intelligence, by supporting specific kinds of communication, aggregation, and sharing of
ideas and information, and removing any of the supports fundamentally changes the intelligence within the
learning environment (Pea, 1993). Research on designing for distributed intelligence has placed significant
attention on the learners and the technologies (Kim & Hannafin, 2011; Hoadley & Kali, 2019); however, there
has been limited research on the role that the physical space itself plays in supporting this intelligence (Hod,
2017; Kirsh, 1995). Further, the work that has been done, has been largely fragmented (Ellis & Goodyear,
2015). In response, there is a need for opportunities to collectively examine research that critically examines the
design, implementation, and analysis of physical spaces as a central component of distributed intelligence.

Objectives
In response, this interactive symposium brings together 7 research projects as a way to provide participants
multiple perspectives on how carefully considered roles for the physical space (along with technology and
learners) within innovative pedagogical designs, can come together to create unique forms of distributed
intelligence. Each of the presentations in this symposium will discuss how space is intentionally considered
within their designs with a particular focus on: 1) The connection between the physical space, the technologies,
the learners, and learning goals in their designed learning experiences; 2) The fundamental role the physical
space played in their designs' distributed intelligence. Together, these contributions aim to provide an
opportunity for participants to experience, synthesize, and discuss, leading approaches to spatially mediated
distributed intelligence. This session will also help participants understand the unique forms of learning and
collaboration that can only be achieved through designs in which the spatial elements are intentionally part of




CSCL2022 Proceedings                                    533                                                  © ISLS
learners’ collective intelligence. Through this approach, participants will gain insight into how they may better
incorporate spatial elements into their own computer-supported collaborative learning designs.

Session Format
The symposium will begin with each researcher giving a two-minute lighting talk to introduce participants to
their projects and the role the physical space plays in their designs. Next, participants will have a chance to
move through the presentation space to try out versions of each project. It is important to note that these "scaled
down" versions of the designs will further highlight the unique affordances and challenges of spatially mediated
learning environments. The session will conclude with our discussant, Roy Pea, facilitating conversations
between the researchers and participants on critical issues around the design and implementation of learning
environments in which the physical space plays a central role in their distributed intelligence.

Implications
We believe this session will provide an important opportunity for opening dialogues on an emerging, but
fragmented, area of computer supported collaborative learning. It will help researchers hoping to design
distributed intelligence learning environments, in which the space itself plays a critical role, to better understand
their unique opportunities and challenges. In this way, we anticipate this session helping to scale up this area of
research and reducing the duplication of errors and challenges encountered by experienced researchers.

When the map is the territory: Supporting interdisciplinary collaborative learning in
immersive hybrid simulations
Mike Tissenbaum, Vishesh Kumar, Taehyun Kim & Litong Zeng

While students need to learn about climate science and sustainability, they should not be decoupled from the
interconnected political, economic, social, and ecological priorities that drive them (Hollweg et al., 2011).
Within these interconnected systems, students also need to learn that the actions of a single city or nation are not
siloed, rather they can impact their neighbours both near and far, particularly when they rely on shared resources
to sustain and grow. An underemphasized aspect of these complex systems are the social interactions across
parties with competing interests, requiring involved parties to balance their own needs and wants against those
of their neighbors, and the strategic, political, and social ramification of their decisions.
          Given their ability to emulate the complex scenarios and conditions found in the real-world,
simulations and games are a particularly effective approach to supporting students in developing these complex
integrated understandings. Immersive and hybrid (combined digital and physical) games and simulations, in
particular, offer the ability to leverage the physical space of the classroom to embody the geographical
distributions and proximal connections found in the real world. These spatially-indexed environments enable
face-to-face interactions, at varying levels of privacy, which mirror the social complexities of real-world
economic and political negotiations (Squire et al., 2007).
          Because of the tight coupling of the physical space to the kinds of authentic interaction students engage
in within these immersive simulations, their design cannot decouple the physical learning space itself from the
design of the simulation, or the underlying learning content. In response, this symposium will showcase an
immersive whole-class multiplayer city management game named City Settlers, in which the classroom
transforms into a fictional shared planet on which teams of participants develop their cities. In teams situated
around the room, students buy and manage buildings for their cities, and trade resources and make strategic
alliances with other cities across the room. The choices students make (e.g., which resources to mine and
buildings to run) can impact their own city's and those throughout the class (through the spread of pollution or
the depletion of shared resources). As the game progresses, students must make increasingly complex decisions
about what to do both at the mirco (their own city) and the macro (the whole classroom level) levels.
          As part of this symposium, we will discuss how the design of City Settlers has supported students to
engage in new forms of emergent whole-class collaboration (Kumar et al., in press), and how the various
technologies in the space have supported and hindered this collaboration. We will also give participants the
chance to play a spatially scaled-down version of City Settlers to experience first-hand how the space and
technology come together to support students' collaborative learning.

Mediated goal navigation in a mixed-reality embodied learning environment
Morgan Vickery, Mengxi Zhou, & Joshua Danish




CSCL2022 Proceedings                                    534                                                   © ISLS
With the increasing ubiquity of technology that can support and track student movement as an input into
computer simulations, there has been a similar rise in studies of how to interpret and support embodied
cognition and learning (Alibali, & Nathan, 2012). In our work, we focus on how students learn in collective
embodied activities: activities where students collaboratively use motion and their sense of movement to make
sense of a phenomenon (Danish et al., 2020). From this perspective, it is important to understand the distributed
nature of this process as individuals learn through both their own embodiment, and their shared embodied
activities. For instance, in our research, where students embody particles and their coordinated motion
determines their state of matter, each student might feel the energy and speed of their movement, but they also
need to maintain distance between themselves and others and diverse trajectories to represent a gas.
          Naturally, when looking at a group of students in environments such as this, students continuously
adopt and negotiate goals for what to do next, regardless of what goal the teacher or facilitator may have
assigned them. Our theoretical framework, the Learning in Embodied Activity Framework, considers not only
how these goals are important for understanding learners’ actions, but how their negotiation of these goals
provides insight into their shared understanding and the relationship between their individual and collective
ideas (Danish et al., 2020). To understand this process of negotiation through collaboration, we turned to
Tissenbaum et al. 's (2017) Divergent Collaborative Learning Mechanism Framework (DCLM) and adapted it to
be applicable within an embodied learning environment. This expansion is in line with the rationale behind
Tissenbaum’s prior work, in which he elaborated on Fleck et al.’s (2009) Collaborative Learning Mechanism
(CLM) framework to acknowledge that students’ goal convergence is often a product of the scaffolds that exist
in formal learning environments and that, in contrast, informal and open-ended learning environments may
enable students to diverge from the goals of the collective. While this expansion provides a necessary distinction
of the nature of students’ collaboration, we argue that embodied, exploratory, and playful learning environments
within formal educational settings require an additional level of nuance.
          In adapting Tissenbaum’s DCLM for analysis of video data from an implementation of a mixed-reality
embodied learning environment “Science through Technology Enhanced Play” (STEP) with a mixed class of 22
first and second-grade students, we developed a taxonomy for mapping students’ expression of goal
convergence and divergence through both their talk and embodiment. In this analysis, we use our ‘Embodied-
DCLM’ to code for rich moments of student goal divergence, convergence, and navigation, and aim to answer
the following questions: (1) What mediational means within a mixed-reality embodied learning environment
enable student divergence and convergence of goals? (2) What is the impact of students’ goal negotiation upon
their experience learning in a collective, embodied classroom environment?
          Our findings indicate how both disparate and shared goals can help to drive students towards collective
understanding of a phenomenon. We will also discuss how designers can leverage an understanding of how this
process is mediated to explicitly support productive goal negotiation in service of learning through collective
embodied modelling.

Young people’s ethic of place-based design: Co-creating digital ‘ecologies of care’
for fellow residents
Katie Headrick Taylor & Kaleb Germinaro

The notion of “smart cities” implies that urban environments can learn: increased digital connectivity distributes
intelligence across entire communities and neighborhoods, thus improving the well-being of residents’ lives.
The more digitally connected data centers are to schools, to traffic signals, to retail, to individual smartphones,
the better off--the more intelligent--our environments will be. In this way, techno-solutionism characterizes the
design logic for developing smart(er) cities, a logic predominantly promoted by tech companies that obscures or
ignores an ethic of care for people and the natural world.
          Our project rejects techno-solutionism and instead takes up technofeminism (Floegel & Costello, 2021)
to ask what ethics young people bring to place-based, digital designs of communities, towns, and cities. Who
and what do young people care about, and care for, when imagining a smarter built environment? How do
young people envision their local contexts via digital mapping tools within the precarities and potentials of
national and global crises? From a technofeminist perspective, the intelligence of a community or city should be
“determined by marginalized community members rather than researchers [or tech companies] who make
assumptions about what communities need” (Floegel & Costello, 2021, p. 5) or how much capital can be
accumulated in the coffers of a few.
          Across New York, Nashville, Seattle, Chicago, and a nonmetropolitan location in the Southeastern US,
young people built digital desire layers over extant maps of their cities and towns to show how built
infrastructures could be more compassionate for all residents. Because of the support learners received via a




CSCL2022 Proceedings                                   535                                                  © ISLS
Mobile City Science curriculum (Taylor et al., 2019), and their endemic experiences as young residents, youth
enacted anticipatory approaches (Amsler & Facer, 2017) toward community development that imagined how
they would like to live in the face of growing social and environmental insecurities. Mapping ideal locations for
health clinics (easily accessible to sick grandparents), a “Friendship Park” (with conversation starters painted on
rocks), community gardens (for children to learn how to grow food), bicycle lanes, more trash cans, and bus
routes, for instance, young people anticipated the necessity of strengthening the social and relational fabric of
community spaces within increasingly uncertain times.
          In pursuing answers to our research questions, we situated our analysis of video records and artifacts
within a qualitative GIS project in which mapping practices are rife with power and ambivalence within a given
community. We found that young people used digital mapping to design and visualize their communities as
ecologies of care (cf. Suárez-Orozco & Suárez-Orozco, 2015): places--and new connections between those
places--to make life better for not just themselves but for intergenerational, multi-racial, and more-than-human
configurations of residents. Unlike smart cities that prioritize efficiencies via digital connectivity, ecologies of
care developed by young people prioritized intergenerational and multi-species connectivity through cleaner,
safer, and more physically interactive dwellings and public spaces. Their contributions invite cities to re-
imagine collective learning to be about care at scale, rather than intelligence at scale, in which technologies
“sustain, heal, and empower our communities, as well as seek liberation from our exploitative and oppressive
systems” (Design Justice Network Principles, 2018, n.p.).

How classrooms can support learning communities
Tom Moher & Jim Slotta

In 2010, we began a project called Embedded Phenomena for Inquiry Communities (EPIC) building on a media
simulation framework called “Embedded Phenomena” (EP; Moher, 2006). EP uses distributed intelligences to
manifest an immersive object of inquiry. Students are asked to share the conceit that a dynamic scientific
phenomenon has been geo-spatially mapped onto the classroom space. Digital "portals" situated around the
room serve as location-dependent probes into the local state of the phenomenon. Students work across space and
time, observing and manipulating phenomena through the portals, constructing and using models of its behavior.
For example, in the Wallcology EP, computer monitors are placed on each classroom wall, providing a form of
X-ray “wallscope” that reveals an ecosystem of animated insects, living on various surfaces (plaster, brick, hot-
and cold-water pipes), and whose populations vary according to systemic variables (temperature, humidity).
Statistical information about each Wallscope habitat is available on screen (e.g., population and temperature
graphs). EPIC employed the Knowledge Community and Inquiry (KCI) model to guide our design of
curriculum in which students collectively investigate the EP, building an evidentiary knowledge base and
responding as a community to system perturbations (e.g., invasive species) (Slotta et al., 2018).
          EP immerse full classrooms of learners in a shared, 'coincident' reality. While the representation is
sparse (i.e., compared with modern VR), the dynamic animations and visual differences between portals
reinforce the dynamism and spatial variability of the underlying phenomenon. Immersion can heighten the sense
of presence—being there—in virtual environments, which may in turn foster interest and engagement in the
activity. Importantly, situating activity in a spatial context that invites movement around the room necessarily
increases opportunities for and richness of social interaction. Distributed intelligences can also be used to create
responsive performance spaces for the enactment of analogical disciplinary practice. In the AquaRoom EP
(Novellis & Moher, 2011), students investigate aquifer structure imagined to be present under their classroom
floor by obtaining sample tubes, moving to sampling sites in the room, obtaining the sample, taking it to a
simulated spectrometer for analysis, and recording their results on a classroom map. The physical movements
and spatial reasoning required to enact this series of steps demark distinctive forms of disciplinary engagement
that may help students develop understandings.
          One of the important challenges of designing large-scale collaborative learning experiences is fostering
students' awareness of and use of peer work and wider community knowledge. In EPIC, we use distributed
devices (Large wall monitors and iPads) to "push" representations of community activity and progress. In
WallCology, for example, a large display continuously depicts an aggregated visual representation of an
emerging food web, driven by learners' investigations of the ecosystems. Students use iPad apps to record any
observations of predation events, which are then aggregated for display on the large monitor. The teacher uses
these aggregates as a source of reference, guiding students to examine gaps or conflicts (Slotta et al., 2018).
          Another important feature of the EPIC curriculum is the temporal aspect. Most collective spatial
applications are quite short in duration - sometimes even a single class period. EPIC units run for months, with




CSCL2022 Proceedings                                    536                                                  © ISLS
the EP always available, any time students or teacher thought it was time to inquire. In this regard, EP emulate
nature: always available for inquiry. However, they offer some distinct advantages over wild nature, in terms of
the accessibility (i.e., situated within the classroom), and the control over disciplinary engagement (discrete
habitats, food webs, etc.).

Studying Equity Oriented & Distributed Classroom Contexts through an Interaction
Geography Lens
Ben Rydal Shapiro & Sierra Gilliam

The projects in this symposium share many different and innovative approaches to pedagogical and learner-
centered design in relation to the physical environment, while also asking new questions, for example,
concerning the ethical collection and use of data in classroom contexts. In this presentation, we first share our
efforts to expand a methodological approach called interaction geography in collaboration with teachers and
teacher educators to study different equity-oriented classroom contexts (Shapiro & Garner, 2021). Subsequently,
we discuss how findings from this work might contribute to and be informed by projects described in this
symposium and more broadly, the notion of distributed intelligence.

Figure 1.
Screenshot from the IGS showing a teacher’s movement (purple path where thicker parts of the path indicate the teacher is
stopped) and all classroom conversation (colored rectangles where color indicates speaker) over a floor plan and a timeline
that extends upwards during a classroom science lesson. This visualization provides one way to see how movement and
conversation unfold over space and time. Video can be dynamically selected by interacting with this type of visualization.




We begin by providing a brief background of interaction geography, highlighting how it draws from a growing
body of work that foregrounds the role of movement in learning and teaching contexts (DeLiema, Enyedy, &
Danish, 2019; Marin et al., 2021). Notably, we demonstrate two open-source tools, Mondrian Transcription and
the Interaction Geography Slicer (IGS), to transcribe and dynamically visualize movement and interaction in
relation to the physical environment (e.g., see: https://benrydal.github.io/igs/). Subsequently, we describe how
we are working with teachers and teacher educators to study and support teaching practice and discourse by
creating interactive visualizations through these tools such as in Figure 1 depicted above.
          We share findings from this work focusing on the strengths and weaknesses of interaction geography to
study phenomena such as pedagogical judgment, multi-party activity, technology use, and equitable
participation patterns across classrooms as well as relevant perspectives on the ethical collection and use of
classroom video data. Likewise, we use these findings to consider how interaction geography can support and
be informed by the many different projects in this symposium and the broader notion of distributed intelligence.

Space Invaders: Multiple Entry Points on a Night Sky Simulation for Supporting
Small Group Collaboration in Classrooms




CSCL2022 Proceedings                                        537                                                       © ISLS
Robb Lindgren, Nathan Kimball, James Planey, Emma Mercier & Jina Kang

Fundamental to understanding and explaining critical phenomena in astronomy is the ability to reason spatially
and to integrate multiple visual perspectives (Plummer, 2014). While most astronomy instruction focuses on
getting individual students to reconcile different sources of spatial data to construct canonical mental models of
astronomical systems, we know from previous collaborative learning research that some of the work of
integrating spatial information can occur through group activities where roles and perspectives are distributed
(e.g., Colella, 2013; Hod, 2017). Astronomy education typically emphasizes observations of the night sky or the
use of single-user night sky simulations, but some of the more challenging tasks, such as navigation based on
star data, is benefitted by sharing and communicating across viewpoints.
          Augmented reality (AR) technologies have been promoted in recent years for their ability to merge and
enhance visual viewpoints in ways that are potentially productive in educational contexts (Akçayır, M., &
Akçayır, 2017; Radu, 2014). AR technologies have the ability to expand and transform the physical space of a
learning environment, but these transformations are usually bound to the visual perspectives of individuals with
expensive headsets, and as such, the utility of AR in collaborative learning contexts has been limited. In this
presentation we will describe a project in which AR is only part of a distributed technology ecosystem that
supports multiple viewpoints and multiple modes of interaction with a persistent night sky simulation.
          The Connections of Earth and Sky with Augmented Reality (CEASAR) platform was designed to add
the component of space (literally) to small group problem-solving tasks. Students can access and annotate the
same night sky simulation from a tablet, a laptop, or an AR headset such as the HoloLens 2. The diversity of
access points means that certain kinds of information are privileged by different devices; the AR viewpoint, for
example, affords the use of natural gestures to point and trace the trajectory of stars, whereas the tablet affords
quick switching between modes such as between a view from Earth’s surface to a view from outside the
celestial sphere. These differences mean that students benefit from communicating with each other across
viewpoints and synthesizing information to complete tasks such as calculating the latitude and longitude of an
unknown position on Earth given a view of the sky at a certain point in time.

Figure 2
Gesture-based interactions in the augmented reality mode of the CEASAR platform.




          In this symposium we will present learner data from several implementations of the CEASAR platform
in classrooms, and we will give attendees the opportunity to engage with the technology in a live demonstration.

How big was a triceratops, really? Using Augmented Reality to Support Collaborative
Reasoning about Scale
Jessica Roberts & Kyle Leinart

Immersive digital environments have tremendous potential to facilitate experiential learning tasks which would
be otherwise impossible or impractical in a classroom setting (Lai et al., 2020; Pirker et al., 2020). Yet despite
growing enthusiasm in educational design communities for these augmented and virtual reality (hereafter
collectively, “XR”) technologies, many open questions remain for how, whether, and why these technologies
support learning in the K-12 setting (Cook & Thompson, 2021), particularly for collaborative learning
experiences (Pirker et al., 2020). Our ongoing work on FossilVR (Figure 3, A), an immersive 3D environment
in which students engage in the inference-heavy scientific processes of excavating, identifying, and
rearticulating fossil skeletons in a virtual world, is exploring the affordances of XR for supporting 3rd-5th grade
students in developing language and science competencies.
          The prototype of our platform, built in Unity with the visual scripting language Playmaker, allowed
single users to uncover fossils placed around the virtual world and record observations and inferences about




CSCL2022 Proceedings                                    538                                                  © ISLS
them in their observation journal (e.g., Observation: “This skull has flat teeth.” Inference: “The animal probably
was a plant eater.”). Pilot testing demonstrated that learners not only enjoyed the environment but also were able
to successfully use the system to generate inferences about multiple fossils.
          However, the pilot revealed two key weaknesses in this single user platform. First, the aim of the
platform is not only to support literacy skills but also reasoning about the nature of science. Authentic science is
a collaborative practice; scientists make hypotheses based on information gathered by the scientific community
over time, using new information to question and challenge prior inferences. Furthermore, viewing the fossils
only in a digital, zoomable interface makes it difficult to reason about scale: how big was this animal in real life,
and how did it compare to other animals in its habitat? These limitations led to the development of an
augmented reality (AR) extension application (Figure 3, C) that moves the fossil exploration and annotation
from the individual screen into a shared classroom space in which multiple students can inspect and annotate a
life-sized AR projection. Observations are pushed to a central repository that can be tagged, sorted, and
collaboratively edited by students and teachers. We hypothesized this shift can support cognitive processes more
akin to those in authentic science inquiry tasks (Chinn & Malhorta, 2002). Here we report on preliminary results
from interviews with teachers about design features to support collaborative learning in the classroom.

Figure 3
The FossilVR interface (A) places students at a virtual dig site where they excavate fossils to record in the
science journal (B). The Annotation Station (C) is an AR extension that places fossils at full scale into the
classroom, allowing multiple students to contribute observation and inference cards to a shared platform (D).




References
Alibali, M. W., & Nathan, M. J. (2012). Embodiment in mathematics teaching and learning: Evidence from
          learners' and teachers' gestures. Journal of the learning sciences, 21(2), 247-286.
Akçayır, M., & Akçayır, G. (2017). Advantages and challenges associated with augmented reality for education:
          A systematic review of the literature. Educational Research Review, 20, 1-11.
Amsler, S., & Facer, K. (2017). Contesting anticipatory regimes in education: exploring alternative educational
        orientations to the future. Futures, 94, 6-14.
Chinn, C. A., & Malhotra, B. A. (2002). Epistemologically authentic inquiry in schools: A theoretical
        framework for evaluating inquiry tasks. Science Education, 86(2), 175–218.
Colella, V. (2013). Participatory simulations: Building collaborative understanding through immersive dynamic
        modeling (pp. 379-430). Routledge.
Cook, M., & Thompson, M. (2021). Guest editorial. Information and Learning Sciences, 122(7/8), 433–441.
Danish, J. A., Enyedy, N., Saleh, A., & Humburg, M. (2020). Learning in embodied activity framework: A
        sociocultural framework for embodied cognition. International Journal of Computer-Supported
        Collaborative Learning, 15(1), 49-87.
Danish, J. A., Enyedy, N., Saleh, A., & Humburg, M. (2020). Learning in embodied activity framework: A
        sociocultural framework for embodied cognition. International Journal of Computer-Supported
        Collaborative Learning, 15(1), 49-87.
Design Justice Network Principles. (2018). Design justice network. https://designjustice.org/read-the-principles.
DeLiema, D., Enyedy, N., & Danish, J. A. (2019). Roles, rules, and keys: How different play configurations
        shape collaborative science inquiry. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 28(4-5), 513-555.
Ellis, R. A., & Goodyear, P. (2016). Models of learning space: integrating research on space, place and learning
        in higher education. Review of Education, 4(2), 149-191.
Fleck, R., Rogers, Y., Yuill, N., Marshall, P., Carr, A., Rick, J., & Bonnett, V. (2009). Actions speak loudly
        with words: Unpacking collaboration around the table. In Proceedings of the ACM international
        conference on interactive tabletops and surfaces (pp. 189–196). ACM.
Fleck, R., Rogers, Y., Yuill, N., Marshall, P., Carr, A., Rick, J., & Bonnett, V. (2009). Actions speak loudly
        with words: Unpacking collaboration around the table. In Proceedings of the ACM international
        conference on interactive tabletops and surfaces (pp. 189–196). ACM.




CSCL2022 Proceedings                                    539                                                   © ISLS
Floegel, D., & Costello, K. L. (2021). Methods for a feminist technoscience of information practice: Design
        justice and speculative futurities. Journal of the Association for Information Science and Technology.
Hoadley, C., & Kali, Y. (2019). Five waves of conceptualizing knowledge and learning for our future in a
        networked society. In Learning In a Networked Society (pp. 1-21). Springer, Cham.
Hod, Y. (2017). Future learning spaces in schools: Concepts and designs from the learning sciences. Journal of
        Formative Design in Learning, 1(2), 99-109.
Hollweg, K. S., Taylor, J. R., Bybee, R. W., Marcinkowski, T. J., McBeth, W. C., & Zoido, P. (2011).
        Developing a framework for assessing environmental literacy. Washington, DC: North American
        Association for Environmental Education.
Kim, M. C., & Hannafin, M. J. (2011). Scaffolding problem solving in technology-enhanced learning
        environments: Bridging research and theory with practice. Computers & Education, 56(2), 403-417.
Kirsh, D. (1995). The intelligent use of space. Artificial intelligence, 73(1-2), 31-68.
Kumar, V., Tissenbaum, M., & Kim, T (in press). Procedural Collaboration in Educational Games: Supporting
        Complex System Understandings in Immersive Whole Class Simulations. Communication Studies.
Lai, N. Y. G., Wong, K. H., Yu, L. J., & Kang, H. S. (2020). Virtual Reality (VR) in Engineering Education and
        Training: A Bibliometric Analysis. Proceedings of the 2020 The 2nd World Symposium on Software
        Engineering, 161–165.
Marin, A., Headrick-Taylor, K., Shapiro, B.R., & Hall, R. (2020): Why Learning on the Move: Intersecting
        Research Pathways for Mobility, Learning and Teaching, Cognition and Instruction, 38(3), 265-280.
Moher, T. (2006). Embedded Phenomena: Supporting Science Learning with Classroom-sized Distributed
        Simulations. SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. (pp. 691-700). ACM.
Novellis, F., & Moher, T. (2011). How real is' real enough'? designing artifacts and procedures for embodied
        simulations of science practices. In Proceedings of the 10th International Conference on Interaction
        Design and Children, 90-98.
Pea, R. D. (1993). Practices of distributed intelligence and designs for education. Distributed cognitions:
        Psychological and educational considerations, 11, 47-87.
Pirker, J., Dengel, A., Holly, M., & Safikhani, S. (2020). Virtual Reality in Computer Science Education: A
        Systematic Review. 26th ACM Symposium on Virtual Reality Software and Technology, 1–8.
Radu, I. (2014). Augmented reality in education: A meta-review and cross-media analysis. Personal and
        Ubiquitous Computing, 18(6), 1533-1543.
Shapiro, B.R., & Garner, B. (2021). Classroom Interaction Geography: Visualizing Space & Time in Classroom
        Interaction, Journal of Research on Technology in Education.
Slotta, J., Quintana, R., & Moher, T. (2018). Collective Inquiry in Communities of Learners. In the International
        Handbook of the Learning Sciences.
Squire, K. D., Jan, M., Matthews, J., Wagler, M., Martin, J., DeVane, B., & Holden, C. (2007). Wherever you
        go, there you are: Place-based augmented reality games for learning. In The design and use of simulation
        computer games in education (pp. 273–304). Brill Sense.
Suárez-Orozco, M., & Suárez-Orozco, C. (2015). Children of immigration. Phi Delta Kappan, 97(4), 8-14.
Taylor, K. H., Silvis, D., Kalir, R., Negron, A., Cramer, C., Bell, A., & Riesland, E. (2019). Supporting public-
        facing education for youth: Spreading (not scaling) ways to learn data science with mobile and geospatial
        technologies. Contemporary Issues in Technology and Teacher Education, 19(3), 529-542.
Tissenbaum, M., Berland, M., & Lyons, L. (2017). DCLM framework: Understanding collaboration in open-
        ended tabletop learning environments. International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative
        Learning, 12(1), 35–64.




CSCL2022 Proceedings                                  540                                                 © ISLS
