        Moderators of Group Productive Disciplinary Engagement
                          Alexandria Holmes, Purdue University, holme104@purdue.edu
                           Temitope F. Adeoye, Purdue University, adeoye@purdue.edu
                            Reina Fujii, Menlo Education Research, rfuj@menloedu.org
                           Toni Kempler Rogat, Purdue University, tkrogat@purdue.edu
                    Britte Haugan Cheng, Menlo Education Research, bcheng@menloedu.org
                       Cindy E. Hmelo-Silver, Indiana University, chmelosi@indiana.edu
                                  Anne Traynor, Purdue University, atraynor@purdue.edu

         Abstract Group engagement in STEM disciplinary tasks is a multidimensional phenomenon.
         We developed a rubric that allows us to measure these different engagement dimensions, the
         interrelations among them, and the role of moderators in those interrelations. We provide a brief
         qualitative exemplar demonstrating this multifaceted conceptualization of engagement while
         exploring how the interrelationships amongst moderators impact group disciplinary engagement
         and account for the qualitative differences among our quantitative ratings.

Introduction
This research builds from Engle and Conant’s (2002) conceptualization of productive disciplinary engagement
(PDE) as making collective intellectual progress related to core ideas and scientific and mathematics practices
during authentic tasks. In a 3-year project, we developed a framework to describe group productive disciplinary
engagement (GDE) (Rogat et al., 2020). The framework and methods developed in the project capture the
complexity of group engagement over time, afford exploration of the moderators that emerge toward explaining
engagement quality and trajectories. This poster presents illustrative examples of the findings emerging from this
research including the interrelations among dimensions of group engagement, as well as the moderators of group
engagement contextualized in the enactment of STEM project-based curriculum.
          We apply a situative perspective to understand collaborative group engagement as negotiated and
constructed in activity systems (Danish & Gresalfi, 2018) serving as instructional opportunities that support or
constrain engagement. These activity systems are inclusive of curricula materials, teacher scaffolds, tasks, and
interactions among learners (Greeno, 2006). We extend prior conceptualizations of individual student engagement
to: a) broaden the analytic focus to encompass collaborative groups’ shared engagement; b) characterize
engagement as multifaceted, and c) describe engagement as interrelated. We conceptualize and operationalize
engagement as social and representative of collective group norms (i.e., those that are shared and endorsed by the
whole or the group majority). To accomplish this, we characterize the norm of students’ observable behaviors,
discourse content, interactions among groupmates, and nonverbal behaviors.

Method
GDE is contextualized in collaborative tasks involving modeling, design, and argumentation in middle school
math, science, and engineering. We draw on a rich corpus of video data collected in three projects where group
work was central to unit goals and what groups came to understand. In this poster, we draw on a subcorpus of
video from one of those projects, the Systems and Cycles project, which aims to promote learning about complex
systems through modeling ecosystems (Hmelo-Silver, et al., 2017).
          We employ a multidimensional conceptualization of engagement, which enables observation of the
individual dimensions of engagement that together constitute GDE and affords the examination of the
interrelations and patterns among engagement dimensions over time. We specify five dimensions of group
engagement: Behavioral engagement (BE) characterizes the group’s joint on‐task engagement. Socioemotional
engagement (SE) involves the group’s positive or negative climate, characterized by the respectful, inclusive, and
cohesive nature of interactions. Collaborative engagement (CE) characterizes the coordination and responsiveness
in the group’s contributions and when co-constructing knowledge. Metacognitive engagement (ME) is group
planning and monitoring (i.e., joint regulation) focused on understanding and progress targeted to the task, content,
and/or disciplinary practices. Disciplinary engagement (DE) refers to contributions which form connections that
integrate conceptual and disciplinary competencies, with these connections supported by rationale. Each
dimension was coded on three quality levels - low (1), moderate (2), and high (3) - apart from DE which had
ratings of (1) low, (2) moderately low, (3) emerging, and (4) high.
          The subcorpus of video included 148 2.5-minute intervals across four groups. Multiple raters assigned
rubric quality ratings for the five engagement dimensions and developed case narratives from recorded intervals




CSCL2022 Proceedings                                    591                                                   © ISLS
aimed at describing the interrelations of GDE. These narratives were reviewed to identify and characterize the
role of the moderators of engagement. We present an example of a group using simulations during the final lessons
of the unit to find the relationship between environmental factors and CO2 emissions. In this segment, we examine
the change in CE work practices when one member leaves the group and the implications for subsequent
engagement.

Findings & Conclusions
Our rubric captures the complexity of engagement across the five dimensions of GDE while incorporating
moderators such as social dynamics (e.g., group member dominance), technology, and teacher scaffolds. For
example, analysis of one 10-minute segment (four 2.5-minute intervals) from an Aquatic Ecosystem unit
showcases engagement characterized by an increase in BE, CE, ME, and DE followed by later decreases (see
Figure 1a). SE was sustained at a high level with a temporary drop in interval 3. Our narrative analyses revealed
that the group’s engagement was moderated by a group member’s dominance, the technology used in the task,
and teacher scaffolds (see Figure 1b).

Figure 1.
Average GDE across one video segment (a) and Impact of Moderators on GDE (b)
                                                      Interval 1: Group member dominance: The absence
                                                          of a dominant groupmate provides an opportunity
                                                          for a typically less involved groupmate to
                                                          contribute to the task. Technology: Two
                                                          groupmates struggle with a simulation while the
                                                          remaining member offers assistance (CE=2);
                                                          complications restrict planning (ME=2), and
                                                          disciplinary talk (DE=1).
                                                       Interval 3: Teacher scaffold: The decrease in CE
                                                          (3→2) reflects the lack of coordination within the
                                                          group as they look for evidence to support their
                                                          claim. The lack of cohesion negatively impacted
                                                          SE (3→2) yet leads to sustained high-level DE,
                                                          aided by teacher scaffold.
                        (a)                                                     (b)

This project provides evidence that the GDE rubric can capture the ways that both students and the contextual
features of learning environments inform groups’ negotiation of shared engagement practices. This approach
enables future research, including an examination of how moderators of GDE support disciplinary progress.

References
Danish, J. A., & Gresalfi, M. (2018). Cognitive and sociocultural perspective on learning: Tensions and synergy
         in the cognitive and sociocultural perspective on learning: Tensions and synergy in the learning Sciences.
         In F. Fischer, C. E. Hmelo-Silver, S. R. Goldman, & P. Reimann (Eds.), International Handbook of the
         Learning Sciences (pp. 33-43). New York: Routledge.
Engle, R. A., & Conant, F. C. (2002). Guiding principles for fostering productive disciplinary engagement:
         Explaining an emerging argument in a community of learners classroom. Cognition and Instruction,
         20(4), 399-483.
Greeno, J. G. (2006). Learning in activity. In R. K. Sawyer (Ed.), The Cambridge Handbook of the Learning
         Sciences (pp. 79–96). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Hmelo-Silver, C. E., Jordan, R., Eberbach, C., & Sinha, S. (2017). Systems learning with a conceptual
         representation: A quasi-experimental study. Instructional Science. 45, 53-72.
Rogat, T.K., Cheng, B.H., Hmelo-Silver, C.E., Traynor, A., Adeoye, T., Gomoll, A.,…& Scribner, A. (2020). A
         multidimensional framework of groups’ productive disciplinary engagement. In Proceedings of the 14th
         International Conference of the Learning Sciences (ICLS 2020). Nashville, TN: ISLS.
Acknowledgments
This research was supported by Grant Nos. 1661266 and 1661234 from the U.S. National Science Foundation.
Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the funding agency.




CSCL2022 Proceedings                                   592                                                  © ISLS
