Using Social Media to Extend Online Professional Development: Investigating
  Teachers’ Fulfillment of Personal Interest and Self-Efficacy on WhatsApp
                       Thomas Richman, Susan Yoon, Katherine Miller, Amin Marei
             trichman@upenn.edu, yoonsa@upenn.edu, kmmiller@upenn.edu, amarei@upenn.edu
                                       University of Pennsylvania

         Abstract: With teachers increasingly learning in asynchronous online environments, social
         media may create opportunities to supplement and capitalize on valuable social aspects of
         teacher learning. However, literature on social media’s role in professional development (PD)
         remains in its infancy, and more research is needed to understand the potential benefits of social
         media within formal PD contexts. In this study, we examine the experiences of six high school
         science teachers that participated in a WhatsApp group offered as a long-term extension of an
         online summer PD. Interest development and teacher self-efficacy lenses were applied to
         analyze interview, survey, and WhatsApp discussion data for these teachers. The analysis
         uncovered that the WhatsApp group (1) provided these teachers with access to personalized
         social experiences that met their interest-appropriate goals and needs and (2) scaffolded mastery
         and vicarious experiences while providing opportunities for verbal persuasion to support self-
         efficacy development.

Introduction
Asynchronous online professional development (PD) is increasingly occupying a central role in teachers’
continued professional learning (e.g., Parsons et al., 2019). These online experiences allow teachers to bypass
geographical and temporal constraints at a low cost, while still delivering robust learning outcomes and improved
professional practices (e.g., Fishman et al., 2013). However, optimal learning for teachers is reliant on social
interactions that encourage peer-to-peer support, and online learning contexts may inhibit these collaborative
opportunities (Alterman & Harsch, 2017; Lieberman & Mace, 2010). Additionally, effective teacher learning and
long-term improvement of teaching practices is dependent on sustained engagement with PD content and
materials (Desimone & Garet, 2015). Given these considerations, social media may present one promising avenue
for supplementing and capitalizing on social interaction within online PD experiences, while offering continued
opportunities for learning and support throughout the entire school year (Goodyear et al., 2014; Greenhow et al.,
2020). Social media platforms are increasingly being integrated into formal PD experiences (e.g., Zhang et al.,
2017), but research on social media’s overall impact on professional learning remains in its infancy (Luo et al.,
2020). As Greenhow and colleagues (2020) argue, there is a need for more research to understand social media’s
contribution toward teacher learning and long-term professional growth within the context of PD design.
          In this study, we examined a professional WhatsApp community connected to an asynchronous online
PD for high school Biology teachers. Due to social media’s capacity for providing long-term and on-going support
to teachers (e.g., Blonder & Rap, 2017; Goodyear et al., 2014), as well as its potential for cultivating and
supporting teachers’ professional identity and beliefs (e.g., Robson, 2017), we posit that two theoretical
frameworks can aide in understanding the benefits of integrating WhatsApp into the design of PD: interest
development (Hidi & Renninger, 2006) and teacher self-efficacy (Blonder et al., 2014). Applying these lenses,
we examined the experiences of six teachers that participated in the WhatsApp group, and we asked the following
research questions: (1) how did participation in the WhatsApp group impact the experience and professional
growth of PD participants, and (2) what does this suggest for the potential benefits of WhatsApp groups in formal
PD more broadly?

Theoretical considerations
Teacher learning and social media
Social media provides teachers with a variety of potential benefits. By accessing professional communities,
teachers can engage in dialogue with mentors, crowdsource problem-solving, or receive peer guidance and
resources related to teaching practices (Hashim & Carpenter, 2019). Social media can also provide teachers with
a sense of belonging, and participating in community dialogue can bolster confidence or promote attainment of
aspirational aspects of one’s own perceived professional identity (Robson, 2017). Additionally, social media can
expand notions of affinity spaces for situated learning, where social media platforms provide a space dedicated to
timely discussions around pedagogical concerns or teaching practices (e.g., Greenhalgh & Koehler, 2017).




CSCL2022 Proceedings                                    43                                                    © ISLS
         Although the majority of teacher learning on social media occurs in informal contexts, a growing number
of PD designers are utilizing social media to supplement formal PD (Greenhow et al., 2020). As a PD tool, social
media platforms have often been used as supports in conjunction with teachers adopting new technologies in their
classrooms (e.g., Wang et al., 2014). By providing opportunities for ongoing discussion of experiences and
challenges, social media platforms have shown particular promise in raising teachers’ self-efficacy beliefs around
technology integration and their technological pedagogical content knowledge (TPACK) (Blonder & Rap, 2017).
In other instances of PD, social media has provided a general moral support and resource sharing mechanism
throughout the school year (e.g., Goodyear et al., 2014). However, social media integration within PD is often
incidental, rather than intentionally designed into the overarching programming, and more research is needed to
understand how PD designers should be incorporating social media into their experiences (Greenhow et al., 2020).

Interest development and self-efficacy
As mentioned above, social media is well-suited for providing ongoing support to teachers over an extended
timeframe (e.g., Goodyear et al., 2014), while also potentially building teacher confidence and aiding in the
cultivation of teaching identity or beliefs (e.g., Robson, 2017). Given these affordances, we argue that interest
development (Hidi & Renninger, 2006) and teacher self-efficacy (Blonder et al., 2014) provide two useful lenses
for understanding social media’s role in teacher learning and professional growth.
          Interest, in the context of learning, can be defined as the psychological state during meaningful
engagement with content, as well as the likelihood of re-engaging with particular content over time (Renninger et
al., 2018). Triggering individual learners’ interest can develop their motivation and support sustained engagement
with activities related to learning topics (Linnenbrink-Garcia et al., 2012). Hidi and Renninger (2006) posit that
learner interest development can be understood as progressing from triggered and maintained situational interest
to emerging and well-developed individual interest. During triggered or maintained situational interest, learner
engagement may be fleeting or superficial. At these nascent phases of interest development, learners may benefit
most from concrete guidance or suggestions, and they may seek recognition for their efforts and contributions
(Renninger et al., 2018). As interest develops, learners with emerging or well-developed individual interest are
likely to independently re-engage with learning content in meaningful ways (Hidi & Renninger, 2006). At these
more developed phases, learners are more likely to challenge themselves, and they may seek constructive feedback
as they begin to conceptualize their place in a larger field (Renninger et al., 2018). Simply triggering situational
interest does not guarantee that learners will progress to individual interest, but access to interest-appropriate
guidance, resources, and supports, can help learners progress to more well-developed phases (Renninger et al.,
2018). Effective PD is reliant on long-term engagement and re-engagement with PD content (Darling-Hammond
et al., 2017), so supporting teacher interest development (i.e., a teacher’s likelihood of independently re-engaging
with PD content over time) may be important for ensuring long-term learning and improvement of professional
practices. Given social media’s natural capacity for long-term and ongoing discussion, feedback, and resource
distribution, we believe that social media is a promising tool for supporting teachers’ interest development.
          Self-efficacy, originally theorized by Bandura (1997), broadly describes a learner’s belief in their own
abilities to achieve certain levels of performance or complete certain tasks. Conceptualizations of teacher self-
efficacy have been applied in a range of teacher learning contexts (e.g., Atasoy & Çakiroğlu, 2018), and positive
self-efficacy has been associated with many benefits for teachers, such as improved student learning outcomes,
increases in student motivation, and an increased likelihood that the teacher will try new or innovative methods
of teaching (Blonder & Rap, 2017). Much like well-developed levels of individual interest, positive self-efficacy
may or may not develop organically, and Bandura (1997) argued these beliefs are generated from four possible
sources: mastery experiences (i.e., direct experiences of succeeding completing a task), vicarious experiences (i.e.,
observations of others), verbal persuasion (e.g., a mentor providing encouragement), and physiological and
affective states (e.g., unhappiness dampening confidence). Research has found that in the case of teachers, mastery
experience (i.e., positive perceptions of one's own past accomplishments) is most effective for cultivating positive
self-efficacy beliefs, but external scaffolds, such as positive feedback or encouragement can also help to build
positive self-efficacy (Blonder et al., 2014; Renninger, 2010). While interest and self-efficacy are distinct, beliefs
about self-efficacy may significantly impact interest and vice versa, and these concepts are often intertwined
within an individual’s experience (Renninger, 2010). For example, if a person believes that they are skilled at a
type of task, they will generally be more likely to re-engage with that task.
          As we present in the study below, we believe that the affordances of social media, in this case a
WhatsApp group for teachers, can support and cultivate interest development and self-efficacy beliefs among a
group of teachers following participation in a formal PD.

Methods



CSCL2022 Proceedings                                     44                                                    © ISLS
Context and Participants
As part of a larger NSF-funded project, our team implemented two iterations of an asynchronous online PD in the
summers of 2019 and 2020 that guided high school science teachers through the steps of enacting a curriculum
using computer simulations to demonstrate biological phenomena. This PD was designed to take teachers
approximately 40 hours, and throughout its duration teachers were exposed to new content knowledge (e.g.,
complex systems in Biology), engaged with and learned about a variety of Biology computer simulations, and
worked with mentors and peers to plan their own implementation of lessons adapted from lesson plans developed
by the PD designers. A guiding principle in the design and implementation of the PD was scaffolding access to
social capital among teachers (Yoon et al., 2020). In order to support peer-to-peer learning and a sense of
community in the online PD, participants were invited to attend semi-monthly synchronous virtual meetups,
guided to discuss and engage with each other in a structured discussion forum, and connected with peer mentors.
More detail on the design and implementation of each iteration of this PD can be found in Yoon et al. (2020).
           In June 2020, a WhatsApp group was created as an optional extension of the PD for participants to
continue engaging with each other beyond the 6-week PD. WhatsApp was chosen because several teachers already
routinely used the platform. Between June 2020 and June 2021, 24 participants (out of 96 that completed the
course) from eight different countries joined the WhatsApp group, with the majority joining from India (seven
participants) and the US (10 participants). One intent of the group was to allow for peer connections across cohorts,
so participants from each iteration joined the group. Two members of our team, both authors on this paper, acted
as facilitators in the group discussion. Over the 13-month duration of the group, participants made 217 posts while
the facilitators made 89 posts. Out of the 24 participants in the group, 15 posted at least once. Several scaffolds
were implemented in the WhatsApp group with the aims of (1) promoting teachers’ continued interest and
engagement with PD resources, content, and ideas as a means to support classroom practices and implementation,
and (2) cultivating a welcoming online space to build teacher confidence and to support teachers communicating
with and learning from each other. These scaffolds can be found in Table 1.

Table 1
Scaffolds implemented in the WhatsApp group
       Scaffold                             Description                                          Example
Disseminating readily Resources and media that were related to concepts from Facilitator: “I thought this ~10
usable or easily      the PD were curated and shared with the group. These         minute video was super cool and
interpretable         were selected for their ease of interpretability and for     would be quite accessible for a
resources/media       their direct applications in the classroom or in a teacher’s huge range of students. If you are
                      professional growth. This was meant to cultivate and         interested, I would definitely
                      support interest development among PD participants to recommend checking it out 😊
                      continue engaging with the PD content and curriculum         [link to video]”
                      (Renninger et al., 2018).                                    Participant A: “This is amazing!
                                                                                   Thank you :)”
Encouraging the       The group was framed (in the group description, emails Participant B: [shares two short
exchange and          to participants, and during PD meet-ups) as a space for      videos of students engaging with
discussion of         discussion of implementation experiences, questions, and a lesson previously discussed in
implementation        concerns. This aimed to provide participants with            the WhatsApp group] “Thank
experiences           opportunities to explore and receive feedback on their       you for all your guidance
                      own mastery experiences while exposing peers to              [Facilitator]. Very glad to be a
                      vicarious experiences (Blonder et al., 2014) while also      part of this group”
                      encouraging re-engagement with PD concepts or ideas. Participant C: “Amazing.. would
                                                                                   love to learn from you
                                                                                   [Participant B]!”
                                                                                   Participant B: “Thank you. Sure
                                                                                   [Participant C]. Anytime. 😊”




CSCL2022 Proceedings                                     45                                                  © ISLS
Supporting an           Explicit public recognition of participants’ efforts and     Participant D: “Hello guys, check
environment where       contributions was posted by facilitators following           out this resource if you haven't
participants receive    participant posts. The aim was to cultivate and support      already: [tool for online teaching
explicit public         motivation, confidence, and interest development among       during the pandemic]”
recognition for their   PD participants to continue engaging with the group and      Participant C: “Thank you for
efforts and             the PD content/curriculum (Renninger et al., 2018). The      sharing!”
contributions to the    facilitators activities were meant to serve as a model for   Participant E: “Amazing”
group                   other participants to express appreciation as well.          Facilitator: “Love this!”

         To delve more deeply into the experiences of the participants in this group, we focused our analysis on
six teachers. These teachers were selected to reflect a range of participation levels, as well as a representative
array of geographic locations and school demographics. Three of these teachers, Hina, Carl, and Aaliyah, teach
at public high schools in the US. Two other teachers, Aditi and Maryam, are in India, while the last teacher,
Abigail, is in Kenya. These three teachers work at private high schools in large cities. Hina and Abigail were the
two most active posters in the group. Carl, Aaliyah, and Maryam posted occasionally relative to others. Aditi
posted a few times at the formation of the group before transitioning to lurking. Future research will examine the
experiences of fully non-posting participants.

Table 2
Information on the six teachers in this study
Name      Posting Activity          Year of PD      Country     School SES Information
                                    Completion
Hina       Posted 67 times          2020            USA         55% white; 12% qualifying for free/reduced lunch
Carl       Posted 14 times          2019            USA         10% white; 100% qualifying for free/reduced lunch
Aaliyah    Posted 16 times          2020            USA         42% white; 39% qualifying for free or reduced lunch
Aditi      Posted 4 times           2019            India       Predominantly high-SES local students
Maryam Posted 24 times              2019            India       Predominantly high-SES local students
Abigail    Posted 58 times          2020            Kenya       Predominantly high-SES local students

Data sources and analysis
Semi-structured interviews were conducted with the six teacher participants. The interviews followed an interview
protocol that included 26 questions (e.g., “how would you describe the discussion in the WhatsApp group?” or
“were there instances when discussion in the WhatsApp group impacted the way you think about your own
teaching?”). The interviewer encouraged participants to share the reasoning underlying their answers.
Furthermore, each teacher completed pre- and post-surveys before and after participating in the PD (e.g., “what
do you expect from this PD opportunity?” and “what do you anticipate will be the most difficult challenges for
implementation?”). An iterative process of qualitative data collection and analysis was adopted to draw meaning
from the data sources (Ravitch & Carl, 2020). The interview and survey data and the posts made in the WhatsApp
group were qualitatively analyzed by the first author for ideas and comments that elucidate the participants’
experiences in the WhatsApp group and how those experiences impacted their learning and professional growth
in relation to the original PD. Specifically, a focus was placed on identifying themes that emerged related to
interest development and teacher self-efficacy. These themes were presented to the other authors on this paper for
corroboration. Disagreements were resolved through discussion until consensus was achieved. In situations where
clarification or additional information was needed, follow-up interviews were conducted with the teachers. Over
the course of this analysis, three follow-up interviews (with Hina, Aaliyah, and Anita) were conducted.

Results

Personalization of experience to meet interest-appropriate goals and needs
Participants joined the WhatsApp group with varying levels of situational or individual interest, and the overall
usage and perceived value of the group varied accordingly from teacher to teacher. For several teachers, access to
peer perspectives was critical in either promoting further interest development (Aaliyah and Abigail) or in meeting
the interest-specific needs of the teachers (Hina and Aditi). Likewise, the dissemination of readily digestible
resources, such as short videos, prompted re-engagement and sustained interest among two participants (Carl and




CSCL2022 Proceedings                                    46                                                   © ISLS
Hina). These teacher experiences, framed by their differing interest-appropriate goals and needs, are examined
more thoroughly below.
          One result of the WhatsApp group was the formation of a mentorship pairing. Aaliyah was so impressed
by Hina’s contributions during peer discussions throughout the PD that she reached out to Hina in the WhatsApp
group to see if she could schedule a phone call. As Aaliyah described, “she seemed really resourceful, so I hit her
up on WhatsApp, and she was like, ‘sure we could do a Zoom meeting.’ So we Zoomed each other, and I actually
implemented.” At the time of this initial engagement, Aaliyah described herself as experiencing maintained
situational interest in the PD and its concepts. Aaliyah had not regularly returned to PD materials prior to her
interaction with Hina, and her plans for implementation were uncertain. By offering direct guidance for
implementation, Hina’s mentorship made re-engagement with PD materials manageable. This mentorship
continued throughout the school year, and access to expert peer guidance encouraged Aaliyah to regularly return
to lesson ideas from the PD and to adapt them to her classroom. Overtime, Aaliyah’s interest progressed and
transitioned towards emerging and well-developed levels of individual interest. Following participation in the
WhatsApp group, she continued to engage with PD ideas independently, and she planned to continue
implementing and adapting PD lessons for the foreseeable future. Aaliyah credited the WhatsApp group for this
development. She said,

         I think when you're online, some [connections] just don't happen organically, because you're
         online and everyone doesn't know each other […] Having the [WhatsApp] group, I think that
         was a natural fostering thing, because it's natural for teachers to share information [and]
         encourage newer teachers.

Hina, the mentor in this case, also valued these interactions. Aaliyah shared her lesson plan ideas with Hina, and
Hina provided feedback. She explained, “it was really, really nice to connect with somebody [and to] hear her
side of things.” For Hina, these interactions also spurred her to regularly return to PD concepts, and she
appreciated this motivation. She already had high levels of individual interest prior to joining the WhatsApp group,
but the opportunity to be seen as a mentor and to have her expertise appreciated helped to further cement desire
to continue re-engaging with the PD curriculum. In fact, her well-developed individual interest led to occasional
frustration with the broader group. She hoped the group would be more active, and she was hoping to receive
more challenging and constructive feedback from peers. She felt the discussions in the group did not always
adequately challenge her.
          In Abigail’s case, the group delivered timely guidance on classroom practices followed by encouraging
feedback. Abigail reached out to the group for advice on implementing a simulation activity with her students.
Similar to Aaliyah, she described herself as experiencing maintained levels of situational interest, and she was
uncertain if she would eventually implement lessons from the PD. In particular, she had doubts that computer
simulations were worth implementing within her classroom and teaching practices, at one point asking herself
during the PD, “is this for me?” However, she thought a suggested lesson idea posted in the group could work
well in her classroom, and she tried implementing it. She shared videos of some of her students’ work in the group
and received several accolades from peers. She found these acknowledgements deeply motivating, and it pushed
her to continue considering ways to adapt her teaching and capitalize on simulations like those from the PD. She
then regularly and independently returned to the PD simulations and curriculum, and she sought out other
opportunities to implement simulation-based lessons in her classroom. In her words, “the ideas which I got from
that group are really amazing. [...] My way of teaching has changed a lot.” Though she finished the PD with
situational interest in the PD ideas, her participation in the WhatsApp group served to support her development
of deeper individual interest.
          Less directly, participation in the WhatsApp group provided aspirational models of teaching practices.
Although Aditi posted just four times, she checked every post that was made in the group. She joined the group
with well-developed levels of interest in the PD and its curriculum, and she had already implemented several of
its lessons with her students during the previous year. In her case, she did not feel the need for explicit support or
encouragement to continue implementing and iterating on the PD curriculum. However, she hoped to continue to
improve her pedagogy, and she valued peer interactions on WhatsApp in this regard. She was a member of several
professional WhatsApp groups, and she said seeing the diversity of methods and resources that teachers use to
engage their students is inspiring for her. She aimed to create an interactive classroom for her students, and seeing
her peers’ resources and experiences motivated her to work harder to do so. As she described, “when everybody
around you is trying new things, making [their classes] more interesting, and presenting ideas in such a way in
which children are also responding to it, you are motivated to try different things.” In her case, learning from
peers is an on-going and long-term process, and continual access to her peers’ perspectives fosters her desire to




CSCL2022 Proceedings                                     47                                                   © ISLS
regularly examine and improve her own methods. This process of examining her own practices in reference to
those of peers she respects aligns with her well-developed levels of interest.
           Finally, access to easily digestible and concrete resources was highlighted as a benefit of the group.
Unlike the other teachers, Carl did not seek out access to peers’ perspectives, and peer-to-peer exchanges were
much less critical to his overall experience in the group. He joined the group with maintained levels of situational
interest in the PD curriculum, though he did not regularly engage independently with the PD content or lessons
beyond the PD. He believed the group’s value came from the posts that shared easily digestible content, such as
short educational videos. He liked the more theoretical aspects of the PD, and he enjoyed returning to those ideas
when educational videos were shared in the group. Each of these short posts served as reminders and
encouragements to return to PD concepts, and he appreciated these short and accessible nudges. Like Carl, Hina
also valued these short video resources, but from a different perspective. Her interest levels were significantly
more developed, and the resources posted in the group acted as prompts to interrogate and think deeply about how
she can effectively integrate the curriculum into her classroom. As she described, resources that were shared in
the group “kept the [PD curriculum] at the forefront of my mind.” In one instance, a short video reminded her of
her work as a PhD student. Though the video was only tangentially connected to the PD curriculum itself, it
triggered Hina to see a new connection between her past research and the PD modules. “I was like, ‘Oh my gosh,
how come I have never thought about this?’ And so, I spent 2-3 days looking at it whenever I had time. [...] It's
not necessarily that it converts into an automatic lesson to implement, but it does give me an idea.” As she was
developing her ideas for a new lesson plan, she shared her plans with the group, and she hoped to implement these
ideas in the coming school year.

Scaffolding of mastery and vicarious experiences and access to verbal persuasion
Three teachers, Abigail, Aaliyah, and Maryam, described the group impacting their self-efficacy beliefs. Central
to these experiences were the ability to share and receive feedback on personal mastery experiences and the
opportunity to witness the vicarious experiences of others in the group. Access to verbal persuasion in the form
of encouragement from peers and mentors helped to further solidify beliefs around self-efficacy.
          The scaffolding of mastery experience was critical in Abigail’s case. Her initial low levels of interest (“is
this [PD] for me?”) were at least partially derived from negative feelings of self-efficacy. She did not see herself
as the type of teacher that could confidently integrate technology into her classroom, and this hesitance dampened
her interest and discouraged her from meaningfully engaging with and implementing technology-based lesson
ideas. However, the WhatsApp group provided her with a means to receive digestible, real-time guidance from
facilitators and peers, and it provided her with an outlet to share her work and receive positive feedback. The
overall experience described above, of successfully implementing and sharing that experience with others for
feedback, served to dramatically build her confidence. As a result, her beliefs around her own capacities to adapt
her teaching and integrate technology have substantially increased. She described this change as altering her
teaching style overall and shifting her role in her school, where she began to advocate for more simulation-based
teaching methods among her colleagues. “I'm very popular nowadays,” she said. “In my campus, teachers come
to me and say, ‘teach me how to go about [teaching with computer simulations].’” The mastery experience (i.e.,
successfully implementing a simulation-based lesson) and the positive encouragement from peers when reflecting
on that experience, strengthened her perceptions of her own abilities.
          For Aaliyah and Maryam, the change in self-efficacy beliefs was less pronounced, but still meaningful.
In each case, the teachers felt less confident about the immediate steps they should take to effectively implement
PD lessons in their classes. For these teachers, access to peer guidance in the form of vicarious experience and
verbal persuasion were valuable. Aaliyah drew from Hina’s direct mentorship. She explained, “Hina was my go-
to person because she had done it, and she would give advice if I really got stuck. [...] It was very much like, if
[I] ran into a speed bump or if [I] had an immediate question, [I] would get the answer from [her].” Aaliyah says
she probably would have implemented the PD lessons with or without support from Hina and others, but the
guidance built her confidence and made the process less daunting. Drawing from Hina’s explanations of her own
implementation experiences coupled with Hina’s encouragement provided Aaliyah access to the vicarious
experience and verbal persuasion she needed to feel more confident.
          Maryam drew directly from the posts that Abigail shared in the group. When Abigail shared her students’
work in the group, Maryam was impressed. Seeing Abigail’s example made the simulation-based lesson feel
manageable, and she decided to follow Abigail’s example and implement the same lesson with her students. Here,
the explicit vicarious experience (i.e., observing the videos of student work posted by Abigail) provided the
catalyst. Abigail’s posts laid out manageable steps to follow and made her own implementation feel feasible.
Maryam’s implementation went well in her eyes, and this mastery experience further contributed to her self-
efficacy beliefs. She posted her experiences and some of her students’ work to the group and also received




CSCL2022 Proceedings                                      48                                                    © ISLS
accolades from peers, further cementing her positive perceptions of her mastery experience. As with Abigail and
Aaliyah, the group provided Maryam tangible opportunities for improving self-efficacy beliefs.

Discussion
This study contributes to the growing body of research on teacher social media usage as a means for ongoing
professional learning. Generally, many of the potential benefits of social media previously identified in the
literature have also emerged in this case as well. Participating in the WhatsApp group created opportunities for
mentorship and peer support to emerge (e.g., Hashim & Carpenter, 2019). This occurred quite explicitly in the
case of Aaliyah and Hina and less formally in the instances of participants posting their experiences for feedback
and encouraging each other (e.g., Maryam and Abigail). The group also provided opportunities for teachers to
access resources and to have ongoing moral support throughout the year (e.g., Goodyear et al., 2014).
          As Greenhow et al. (2020) have argued, there remains a need for more research examining social media’s
optimal role in teacher learning and formal PD, and we believe this study provides one perspective to approach
this issue. Although our formal PD occurred during the summer, the WhatsApp group offered an extension for
teachers to continue re-engaging with PD content and ideas over time. Teachers entered this group with differing
levels of situational and individual interest. and the group provided the teachers with opportunities to personalize
their experience in accordance with their differing interest-related goals and needs. Aaliyah and Abigail entered
the group with lower levels of situational interest relative to their peers, and they appreciated the concrete guidance
from peers and facilitators in the group (e.g., Renninger et al., 2018). In Abigail’s case, opportunities to receive
positive feedback within the group also seemed to increase her likelihood of re-engagement, which aligns with
the interest literature (Hidi & Renninger, 2006). Carl, who also had less-developed levels of situational interest,
was most intrigued by simple and easy-to-access content about PD ideas, and this content triggered his re-
engagement with PD concepts. Hina and Aditi joined the group with well-developed interest, and their experience
in the group reflected this difference. Hina’s role as mentor to Aaliyah made her feel genuinely appreciated for
her expertise (Renninger et al., 2018), and she appreciated that the varying resources being shared in the group
would encourage her to interrogate her existing understanding of PD concepts. Aditi also relied on WhatsApp to
better understand her pedagogical practices as they relate to peers’ practices (Renninger et al., 2018), particularly
around interactive forms of teaching.
          The role of social media in promoting teacher self-efficacy, especially around the use of technology, has
been previously documented (Blonder & Rap, 2017; Wang et al., 2014). However, the use of WhatsApp as a
direct extension of PD to support self-efficacy regarding PD lessons and resources appears to be a promising
outcome of this study. Abigail, Aaliyah, and Maryam each experienced strengthened self-efficacy resulting from
participation in the group, with Abigail experiencing a profound increase in her confidence. Mastery experience,
vicarious experience, and verbal persuasion each contributed to these increases in self-efficacy. Mastery
experience has been highlighted as the most valuable aspect of self-efficacy development for teachers (Blonder
et al., 2014), and participation in the group contributed toward Abigail and Maryam both undergoing their own
mastery experiences of implementing simulation-based lessons in their classrooms. As teachers’ experiences were
shared with each other, for example in the form of videos captured in class, they also served as mechanisms for
teachers to access vicarious experiences for better understanding implementation. Verbal persuasion, in the form
of mentorship (Aaliyah and Hina) and positive feedback and encouragement (Maryam and Abigail), was present
as well.
          Importantly, the participants in this study represent only a fraction of those that participated in the
WhatsApp group overall, and the WhatsApp group itself represented just a fraction of those that participated in
the original PD course (24 of the 96 PD participants joined the group). It is likely that the effect of the group on
many other members (such as those that entirely lurked without posting) was less impactful, perhaps substantially
so, and future studies will examine a broader range of participant experiences. However, given the ultra-low-cost
nature of a WhatsApp group and the minimal time investment required to create and facilitate such a group, the
substantial impact it had on these six participants is meaningful. While WhatsApp and social media may not have
served as a universal support that benefited all teachers in the PD, the impact that it did have on this subset of PD
participants is promising. Looking ahead, the utilization of WhatsApp and social media as a support mechanism
for long-term interest and self-efficacy development within and beyond PD offers an encouraging opportunity for
PD design and research.

References
Alterman, R., & Harsch, K. (2017). A more reflective form of joint problem solving. International Journal of Computer-
         Supported Collaborative Learning, 12(1), 9–33.




CSCL2022 Proceedings                                       49                                                      © ISLS
Atasoy, V., & Çakiroğlu, J. (2018). Preservice science teachers’ collective efficacy in a science methods course. Educational
           Studies, 45(3), 326–341.
Yoon, S. A., Miller, K., Richman, T., Wendel, D., Schoenfeld, I., Anderson, E., Shim, J., & Marei, A. (2020). A social
           capital design for delivering online asynchronous professional development in a MOOC course for science
           teachers. Information and Learning Sciences, 121(7/8), 677–693.
Bandura, A. (1997). Self-efficacy: The exercise of control. W H Freeman/Times Books/ Henry Holt & Co.
Blonder, R., Benny, N., & Jones, M. G. (2014). Teaching self-efficacy of science teachers. The Role of Science Teachers’
           Beliefs in International Classrooms, 3–15.
Blonder, R., & Rap, S. (2017). I like Facebook: Exploring Israeli high school chemistry teachers’ TPACK and self-efficacy
           beliefs. Education and Information Technologies, 22(2), 697–724.
Darling-Hammond, L., Hyler, M. E., & Gardner, M. (2017). Effective teacher professional development. Learning Policy
           Institute.
Desimone, L. M. & Garet, M. S. (2015). Best practices in teachers’ professional development in the United States.
           Psychology, Society, and Education, 7(3), 252-263.
Fishman, B., Konstantopoulos, S., Kubitskey, B. W., Vath, R., Park, G., Johnson, H., & Edelson, D. (2013). Comparing the
           impact of online and face-to-face professional development in the context of curriculum implementation. Journal
           of Teacher Education, 64(5), 426–438.
Greenhalgh, S. P., & Koehler, M. J. (2017). 28 days later: Twitter hashtags as “just in time” teacher professional
           development. TechTrends, 61(3), 273–281.
Greenhow, C., Galvin, S., Brandon, D., & Askari, E. (2020). A decade of research on K-12 teaching and teacher learning
           with social media: Insights on the state-of-the-field. Teachers College Record, 122(6), 1-7.
Goodyear, V. A., Casey, A., & Kirk, D. (2014). Tweet me, message me, like me: Using social media to facilitate
           pedagogical change within an emerging community of practice. Sport, Education and Society, 19(7), 927–943.
Hidi, S., & Renninger, K. A. (2006). The four-phase model of Interest Development. Educational Psychologist, 41(2), 111–
           127.
Hashim, A., & Carpenter, J. (2019). A conceptual framework of teacher motivation for social media use. Teachers College
           Record, 121(14), 1-18.
Lieberman, A., & Mace, D. P. (2010). Making practice public: Teacher learning in the 21st century. Journal of Teacher
           Education, 61(1–2), 77–88.
Linnenbrink-Garcia, L., Patall, E. A., & Messersmith, E. E. (2012). Antecedents and consequences of situational interest.
           British Journal of Educational Psychology, 83(4), 591–614.
Luo, T., Freeman, C., & Stefaniak, J. (2020). “Like, comment, and share”—professional development through social media
           in higher education: A systematic review. Educational Technology Research and Development, 68(4), 1659–1683.
Parsons, S. A., Hutchison, A. C., Hall, L. A., Parsons, A. W., Ives, S. T., & Leggett, A. B. (2019). U.S. teachers’ perceptions
           of online professional development. Teaching and Teacher Education, 82, 33–42.
Ravitch, S. M., & Carl, N. M. (2021). An Integrative Approach to Data Analysis. In Qualitative research: Bridging the
           conceptual, theoretical, and Methodological (pp. 212–231). SAGE.
Renninger, K. A. (2010). Working with and cultivating the development of interest, self-efficacy, and self-regulation. In D.
           D. Preiss & R. J. Sternberg (Eds.), Innovations in educational psychology: Perspectives on learning, teaching, and
           human development (pp. 107–138). Springer Publishing Company.
Renninger, K. A., Ren, Y., & Kern, H. M. (2018). Motivation, engagement, and interest. In F. Fischer, C. Hmelo-Silver, S.
           Goldman and P. Reimann (Eds.) The International Handbook of the Learning Sciences (pp. 116–126). New York,
           NY: Routledge Press.
Robson, J. (2017). Performance, structure and ideal identity: Reconceptualising teachers' engagement in online social spaces.
           British Journal of Educational Technology, 49(3), 439–450.
Wang, S.-K., Hsu, H.-Y., Reeves, T. C., & Coster, D. C. (2014). Professional development to enhance teachers’ practices in
           using information and communication technologies (ICTs) as cognitive tools: Lessons learned from a design-based
           research study. Computers & Education, 79, 101–115.
Zhang, S., Liu, Q., Chen, W., Wang, Q., & Huang, Z. (2017). Interactive networks and social knowledge construction
           behavioral patterns in primary school teachers’ online collaborative learning activities. Computers & Education,
           104, 1–17.

Acknowledgements
This research was funded by a grant from the U.S. National Science Foundation, #1721003. We would also like
to thank our collaborators on the design and development of the online PD course, who include Daniel Wendel,
Ilana Schoenfeld, Emma Anderson, Jooeun Shim, and Eric Klopfer.




CSCL2022 Proceedings                                          50                                                       © ISLS
