                 InterSim:            Supporting              Face-to-Face
                               Collaborative                  Design
                                                 Ernesto Arias1,3
                                                  Hal Eden1,2

                            1Center for LifeLong Learning & Design        (L 3D)
                                  2Department of Computer Science
                                 3College of Architecture and Planning
                                     University of Colorado at Boulder

At the Center for LifeLong Learning & Design at the University of Colorado at Boulder, we are exploring
models of learning and collaboration that require an emphasis on     shared interaction as well as the social
structures and the cultural environment in which the interaction takes place. We are now pursuing the
development of a computational INTERactive SIMulation (InterSim) station to significantly extend in very
unique ways the interactions that are possible.

This effort involves the creation of a prototype to integrate systems supporting new paradigms of
interaction with simulations--with an emphasis upon support for shared interaction to mediate social
aspects of learning, design, and planning.    These paradigms     would integrate the use of physical
objects--to support and encourage face-to-face interaction among the participants--with virtual objects--
to provide computational support for the model underlying the simulation.      By creating this alternative
bridge between the physical and the virtual, the system would allow the interaction both with simulations
and among individuals to take place at a distance using two systems linked across a network.   The stations
will have a horizontal interactive computer screen that can act as both physical and computational
gameboard. Physical simulation objects, outfitted with a tracking sensor can be placed on top of this
interaction surface. The projected, computer-based parts and the real, computer-recognizable parts
together form a model that blurs the boundaries between the physical and virtual worlds.

The InterSim will allow us to investigate various areas central to learning:
Developing new interaction paradigms.   Much of our work indicated that new ways of allowing individuals
and groups to interact with computational environments are needed.       The need to support groups to learn
and design together will require interactions that go beyond the one user/one computer situation that is
broadly supported now. Providing support to augment and mediate social interactions is also crucial.

Studying cooperative problem solving and social aspects of design. Our approaches stress both (a) the
importance of balancing the role of the human and the computer in knowledge-based systems, and (b)
the need to support group and individual roles in the design and learning processes.     The proposed
system will allow us to extend support for collective processes, including aspects such as consensus
building, shared understanding, and surfacing hidden or implicit conflicts.

Supporting Extended Interaction. At the same time, we recognize the need to support new modes of
interaction among individuals within groups, including cases where the individuals are not co-located.      We
have investigated support for video interaction, and one of the elements that we have found to be missing
is the ability to create shared interactions.

This research is supported by NSF Grant Nos. CDA-9529549 and REC-9631396.
