  A poster presentation submitted to the CSCL97 Conference, University of Toronto
                        INTERROGATIVE PROCESS OF INQUIRY
             AND COMPUTER-SUPPORTED COLLABORATIVE LEARNING

                                      Kai Hakkarainen
                                  Department of Psychology
                                    University of Helsinki
                                          P.O. Box 13
                               SF-00014 University of Helsinki
                                             Finland
                              Email: Kai.Hakkarainen@helsinki.fi
                                    tel: +358-50-5634248
                                    fax: +358-9-19123443

ABSTRACT

The purpose     of the study  was  to  analyze   epistemological  nature   of elementary   school
students'   knowledge-seeking  inquiry   in  computer-supported      collaborative learning.  The
problem addressed in the study was whether elementary school students are able to engage
with an interrogative process of generating and transforming their own research questions and
improve their conceptual understanding in a way that is analogous with scientific inquiry.     A
further aim was to examine how discourse interaction and collaboration between the students
facilitated advancement  of their  question-driven  inquiry.   Conceptual   tools  developed   by
Jaakko Hintikka's interrogative model of    inquiry  were applied    for analyzing   the students'
process of inquiry.

Technological infrastructure of the study was provided by the Computer-supported Intentional
Learning Environments, CSILE developed by professors Marlene Scardamalia & Carl Bereiter.
The study was carried out by analyzing conceptually and qualitatively written notes produced
by 28 grade 5/6 students to CSILE's database.    The material represented research questions,
intuitive explanations  and written  comments    generated   by  the  students    themselves  and
scientific information searched by them.

The analysis indicated that the CSILE students' generated systematically explanation-seeking
research  questions. Further, they were  able to articulate  a series of  subordinated   questions
while answering for their principal research questions. Results of the study indicated that depth
of inquiry, as measured by the number of subordinated questions, was closely associated with
conceptual advancement. Further, the analysis revealed that discourse interaction between the
students helped them to regulated   their   question-driven  inquiry  and focus   on specific and
manageable research questions.

The cognitive value of the questions generated by the CSILE students was confirmed by an
assessment   of three internationally highly regarded philosopher    of  science. Two out  of the
three experts explicitly pointed out that the CSILE students' were advancing in their inquiry
through articulating more specific subordinated questions and, therefore, regarded the students'
process of inquiry to be progressive in nature. The study indicated that with an appropriate
pedagogical and epistemological support elementary school students are able to productively
                                            1

participate in very   advance forms of inquiry traditionally assumed to characterize only
scientific inquiry.
