Tools for Collaborative Teaching in Netseminars and Netcourses
Sherry Hsi1, George Collison2, & Robert Tinker2

1 University of California at Berkeley, Cognition & Development Area, School of Education, Berkeley, CA 94720-
1670 (510) 642-9717, <hsi@socrates.berkeley.edu>

2The Concord Consortium, 37 Thoreau Street, Concord, MA 01742, (508) 371-3476
<bob@concord.org>, <george@concord.org> 508-371-3478

Keywords: distance education, teacher professional development, tools to support teaching in
collaborative settings

Two projects called the International Netcourse Teacher Enhancement Coalition (INTEC) and the
Virtual High School (VHS) Consortium involve studying and utilizing advanced collaborative
technologies for teacher professional development and for the development of netcourses for
students (see http://www.concord.org). Netcourses are courses of study that are offered through
the Internet and graphical browser as a main way to share information, carry out discussions, and
assess student learning. Netseminars are Internet-based courses offered to teachers-in-training to
create netcourses for their virtual students. The overarching goal is to test the scalability and
adoption of the netseminar/netcourse model to deliver robust virtual instruction given various
resource constraints of real-place settings, and the diversity of school and social contexts for
learning.

INTEC support teachers directly in implementing the use of student investigations in mathematics
and science at the middle and high school levels by offering a set of network-based high quality
netcourses linking participants with exemplary NSF curriculum development efforts. The hybrid
instructional approach includes netseminar delivery through a graphical browser, face-to-face
meetings at the site, as well as net based virtual study groups on-line to support both synchronous
and asynchronous discussion.

The Virtual High School Consortium project explores 1) the feasibility of creating of strong
partnerships and communities between teachers, school administrators, technologists, and content
experts through collaborative technologies, 2) the scalability and replicability of these electronic
communities to support secondary school instruction and 3) the promotion of constructivist
teaching practices toward global education reform.

A suite of tools are integrated to support instruction in the INTEC and VHS netseminars and
netcourses. For example, Graffiti Tree permits Web-based collaborative sketching. Lotus Learning
Space authoring environment and DOMINO discussion server provides the highest level of
interactivity to date on the web. Participants can exchange and view multiple file types, build web
based discussions, and on-line multimedia curricula without the need for HTML authoring.

In  this demonstration,  conference  attendees    will have the  opportunity   to experience a
netseminar, as well as test a suite of innovative tools for collaboration. Attendees will have
the opportunities to   jointly construct a netcourse,   and    engage in on-line  critique and
discussions  around    knowledge    building     in the  LearningSpace    environment   while
examining previous discussions by teachers around the country.

1 Author's Present Address: 100 La Cueva, Los Alamos, NM 87544 (505) 661-2560 <hsi@ton.berkeley.edu>
2 The Concord Consortium, 37 Thoreau Street, Concord, MA 01742 (508) 371-3478 <george@concord.org >
