Active and Supportive Computer-Mediated Resources
               for Student-to-Student Conversations

                Noel Enyedy, Phil Vahey, and Bernard R. Gifford

                             Education of Mathematics, Science and Technology
                   Graduate School of Education, University of California at Berkeley

                                                Abstract
Communication is a central aspect of human learning.   Using the Probability Inquiry Environment (PIE) as
an example, we examine how external representations (both textual and iconic) mediate face-to-face
conversations among students, and support productive mathematical discourse. We provide quantitative data
that suggests that seventh grade students who used PIE learned some of the basic principles of probability.
Two cases studies are that illustrate how communication supported by computer-mediated representations
contributed to this success. The first case study demonstrates how the computer can actively prompt
student conversations that lead to learning. The second case study examines how an animated graphical
representation supported these productive conversations.

Introduction
   Computer Supported Collaborative Learning (CSCL) as a field of inquiry sets out to understand,
support and change the learning practices of students and teachers working together in groups.   This paper
explores the theme of collaboration as a design principle and illustrates how to use the rich media of the
computer to support students as they collaborate.  Using the Probability Inquiry Environment (PIE) as an
example, we look at the computer-mediated representational resources designed to help support productive
mathematical conversations.
   There is a synergetic relationship between the practices and artifacts of a community and an individual's
thinking and activity. Clifford Geertz stated, "culture, rather than being added on, so to speak, to a finished
or virtually finished animal, was ingredient, and centrally ingredient, in the production of the animal itself"
(1973, p.47). Cognitive artifacts, those cultural artifacts used to aid the process of thinking and
communication, quickly become inseparable from the knowledge and established practices of a community.
While this relationship makes describing human activity increasingly difficult to analyze, it provides a
leverage point to promote change.  One way to conceptualize instructional design, then, is as a type of
anthropological activism (diSessa personal communication) in which we leverage the relationship between
tools and practice in an attempt to redefine the practices of the teaching and learning community through the
introduction of new technologies.
   Re-conceptualizing the issues of instructional design as anthropological activism encourages designers
of educational software to seriously consider that a critical dimension of the design space is the practices and
activities that surround and influence how the software will be used in a classroom. The purpose of this
paper is to illustrate a genre of educational software that recognizes discourse practices as a central
component of human learning and uses technology to support this key classroom practice and improve
learning.
   In this paper we will try to answer the question, "How can the computer be effectively used to start and
support mathematical conversations?" Specifically, in the domain of probability, how can computer-
mediated textual and graphical representations  help students to articulate their naive intuitions about
probability, and scaffold them in the process of constructing arguments that reflect a more standard
understanding  of probabilistic reasoning?
   By examining the design of PIE and its implementation in a seventh grade classroom, we hope to
refine both our theoretical understanding of collaboration and learning, and how to better support the
emerging collaborative practices of the classroom.  In this paper we first discuss the aspects of CSCL that
influenced our initial design and then illustrate, through two case studies, how we refined the
representational resources to make them better support collaborative learning. In the first example, we
show how making the computer an active agent that prompted and structured student conversations created
the opportunity for students to productively build on their existing ideas. In the second example, we
explore how the students used a dynamic, graphical representation as a supporting resource to uncover the
structure of the outcome space in a game of chance.

The Role of Communication in Instruction and Learning
   CSCL is based on the premise that technology can be effectively used to mediate, support and redefine
the interaction of students and teachers engaged in the teaching and learning enterprise (Koschmann et al.
1994). This belief, in turn, rests upon the well supported assumption that learning is intimately tied to the
process of communication.   However, communication is far too broad an idea to effectively guide
instructional design--different situations and goals require different forms of communication.   In fact, it has
been argued that many of the problems our current educational system is experiencing can be directly traced
to the fact that much of today's educational practices are based on a transmissive model of communication
where the teacher attempts to impart knowledge to students by lecturing to them in a lock-step fashion
(Pea, 1994; Gifford, 1997).
   We posit that collaborative learning environments should be based on a transformative model of
communication, defined by Roy Pea as conceptual learning conversations that lead to the social
construction of understanding and individual conceptual change (1994).   We believe that this view entails
that learning environments support practices that allow students to: participate in authentic situations; be
active in their learning; and reflect on, modify and articulate their understanding.
   Additionally, we found it profitable to adopt the theoretical stance of distributed cognition to guide how
we designed technologies to mediate and support transformative communicative practices, because this
perspective carefully considers the interactions between the mind and the world in its analysis of intelligent
activity. Distributed cognition holds that intelligence does not reside solely in the head of an individual but
is an interactive process that is mutually constituted by the student, the symbolic and physical
environment, and other social actors (Pea, 1993). As Edwin Hutchins points out technologies do not
merely help us to accomplish tasks, they fundamentally change the nature of the task from the perspective
of the user.
   Mediating technologies do not stand between the user and the task.       Rather, they stand with the user as
resources used in the regulation of behavior in such a way that the propagation of representational state that
implements the computation can take place...These tools permit the people using them to do the tasks that
need to be done while doing the kinds of things people are good at: recognizing patterns, modeling simple
dynamics of the world, and manipulating objects in the environment.     (Hutchins, 1995, p. 154-155)

Resources for Communication and Collaboration
   PIE uses the technology to mediate the learning process in three primary ways.       First, the technology
is used to create authentic investigations--we have discovered that having the students analyze the fairness
of games of chance is an activity that students consider authentic, and leads to students spontaneously
employing aspects of probability theory (Vahey, 1995).  By authentic we mean that PIE engages the
students in truly problematic situations. This follows Jean Lave's proposed use of the term, "Given lively
imaginations, it does not matter whether the problems conform to life experience, but it is important that
they engage the imagination, that they become really problematic" (1992).     Although important to the
success of PIE, this paper will not concentrate on authenticity, and will instead discuss the other aspects
more directly related to the form and content of student discourse.
   Second, the technology takes an active role in shaping specific interactions and practices, by prompting
students to discuss the salient aspects of the domain during the investigation. By stopping the flow of
activity and initiating a conversation on a particular topic, the computer takes on a social role in the
interaction, either beginning or changing the direction of the students' conversation.
   Third, the software provides non-linguistic resources that can productively support mathematical
discourse by providing public reference objects.  By public reference objects for communication, we mean
physical or symbolic artifacts available to students that can be talked about, gestured to, and manipulated in
their efforts to create a shared understanding. The software uses public reference objects to provide both a
framework for interpretation (resources for individual conceptual change) and a place to apply that
framework (resources for converging on a shared understanding as students attempt to solve problems).
That is, the representations on the computer screen influence how each student interprets the activity.
Much of the research in cognitive science focuses on this relationship between an individuals cognition and
external representations (e.g. Larkin and Simon, 1987; Zhang and Norman, 1994).         However, it is our
position that the representations on the computer screen also provide a shared public medium for
communication about their individual interpretation.   And this process of using the representations to
negotiate a public interpretation, in turn, provides the impetus for the students to refine their private
understanding.
    This theoretical framework, which views technology as providing active and supportive resources for
interaction, has direct implications for instructional design. The Distributed-Mediated Learning Model
(DMLM) (Gifford, 1997) provides a practical method to envision how our theoretical framework can be
translated into computer mediated learning activities.  The DMLM is a model that outlines the possible
social and technological resources for independent and collaborative learning.    The model has three major
classifications of resources. First, there are representational and structural resources found in the learning
activities themselves. Second, there are informational resources relevant to the activity, such as a database
of previous students' questions and answers1 .   Third, the student has access to more able others, such as the
teacher or student aids, who can help the student when appropriate.
    Finally, at the center of the DMLM is the student, both as an individual, and as part of a group.
Students are in control of how they utilize the array of resources.    In addition, the students themselves are
viewed as one of their own primary resources.    We believe that students' existing conceptions play a
productive role in the development of expertise.   Indeed, existing student conceptions are one of the most
important resources that students have for making sense of new situations (Smith, et al., 1993).       An
important subtext of this paper is that in designing for collaboration it is important to consider how the
structure and resources of the activity interact with the students' naive intuitions about the domain.

Using Existing Ideas as Building Blocks for Learning
    Given the well-documented difficulties people have in reasoning probabilistically (e.g. Kahneman and
Tversky, 1996; Shaughnessy, 1992), at first glance it seems futile to expect that students can build on their
naive intuitions of probability to construct a more standard conception of probability.     However, accepting
such a fatalistic viewpoint would mean that we would invalidate one of the most important resources that
students have available to them--what they already know and believe about uncertain events. Instead, we
must find ways that student intuitions can be used as building blocks for the construction of knowledge, and
find ways within the learning environment to support the collaborative process of assembling these
building blocks into a robust, normative understanding of probability.
    In prior work (Vahey, Enyedy, and Gifford, 1997) we have shown that students' ideas about probability
can be viewed in terms of four interrelated aspects of normative probability theory: randomness, outcome
space, probability distribution, and the role of data. By randomness we mean the non-determinability of an
event, and what predictions one can make of this non-determinable mechanism.        By outcome space2      we
mean the set of all possible outcomes.    By probability distribution we mean the probabilities assigned to
the different outcomes in the outcome space. Finally, by the validity of data we mean how data can be used
to justify conclusions, including when and how data is considered to be useful.
    For the sake of coherence and space, this paper concentrates only on the students' ideas in two closely
related ideas of the four interrelated aspects in our framework--the outcome space and probability
distribution. Students have great difficulty in enumerating an outcome space and in differentiating between
different outcomes in the outcome space.    Perhaps most importantly, students frequently fail to recognize
the relevance of the outcome space at all (Fischbein et. al, 1991).    For example, when shown a game in
which one team scores a point on five out of eight equiprobable outcomes, and another team scores on the
remaining three out of eight outcomes, many students will state that this game is fair.      Students often over
generalize the unpredictability of events to the point where they will say all games of chance are fair

1 Many schools as of yet still do not have network capabilities.       We decided, therefore, to concentrate on
providing the resources to support two students' face-to-face interactions around a single computer, with a mind
towards eventually adding support for location independent collaboration such      as   the archival  data sources
mentioned in the DMLM.
2 We Follow   Pitman (1992) and  use the  term outcome space   instead of sample space, as  this seems to  be more
consitent with the students' intuitions.
                           FIGURE 1 Play mode of the Three Coin Game

because what happens is all luck. However, these same students, who do not recognize the outcome space
as a relevant aspect of probability, are often comfortable talking about how often classes of events are
expected to occur (i.e. the probability distribution). The next section describes an activity in which students
collaboratively refine their intuitions about the outcome space and connect this set of intuitions to the
concept of a probability distribution.

PIE: The Probability Inquiry Environment
   In PIE the students investigate the fairness of specific games of chance in the context of collaborative,
guided inquiry, where each step in the investigation is designed to facilitate the type of interactions that
research has shown to be most productive. Each PIE activity consists of six steps: Rules, Try, Predict,
Play, Conclude and Principles.
   In Rules,  the software shows the students an animated introduction to the current game (the rules of
the game depicted in Figure 1 will be discussed in the Qualitative Analysis Section). In Try, the students
get a chance to experiment with the representations and controls of the simulation. This was done to allow
the students some amount of familiarity with the environment before asking them to make predictions.         In
Predict, we chose questions that highlight aspects of the game that are particularly salient to a standard
understanding of probability. By making collaborative predictions, students: articulate cohesive
explanations in which they have some commitment; are often forced to consider alternate perspectives; and
are sensitized to future events that may support the prediction or call that prediction into question (cf.
Koschmann et al., 1994). In Play (see Figure 1), the software simulates the playing of the game.   At this
stage, PIE provides several resources and capabilities to facilitate productive collaboration. Some of the
most important of these resources are: an animated probability tree that highlights the current state of the
point; the partitioned outcome space that shows how each team scores; and a histogram that can toggle
between showing the distribution across each of the outcomes or the points for each team.      Each of these is
a shared representational resource that can be used by the students to jointly construct an explanation of the
current situation. In Conclude, the students compare their predictions to the data from the simulation.
Finally, in Principles, the environment scaffolds the students to jointly articulate what they can generalize
from the activity.
   These activities are then followed up with real-world activities in which students flip coins, roll dice,
etc. as they investigate aspects of probability without using the computer simulations.     Throughout the
curriculum the students also participate in full-class discussions, where each pair relates their findings from
the activities, and discusses how to best determine if the game is fair. In these discussions students raise
issues such as; the relative utility of the different representations, methods they used for deciding if the
game is fair, and how to formalize their knowledge in the language of mathematics.
   Initial work on PIE was done in laboratory studies (Enyedy, Vahey and Gifford, 1997; Vahey, Enyedy,
and Gifford, 1997).  These studies were used to inform the most recent version of PIE, which is the focus of
this article. This recent version of PIE was implemented in two seventh grade classes in an urban middle
school that serves a diverse group of students. The students were given pre- and post-tests, PIE logged all
student actions on the computer, four case studies were videotaped during all the sessions, other pairs of
students were taped intermittently throughout the curriculum, and the teacher was audio-taped during the
sessions.  On days that the students used the computers they went to a central computer lab, where there
were twelve Macintosh computers.    The dialogue presented in this paper is from our preliminary analysis of
the video records of the classroom implementation.

Quantitative Results
   In this section we will briefly present quantitative data that will address the question of, "How well did
the students who used PIE develop a conceptual understanding of probability?"     In the following section,
qualitative data will be presented to explore how PIE supported the types of interaction and communication
that fostered conceptual change.
   At the end of the three week probability unit the students who used PIE (n=45) and a control group3
(n=54) were given a paper-and-pencil test of the probability concepts addressed by the unit.    Items on this
test were derived from standardized tests (National Center for Educational Statistics, 1994), suggestions
from the NCTM (NCTM, 1990), items from the research literature on probabilistic reasoning (Kahneman
and Tversky, 1996; Konold, 1993), and specific items created by our research group that were designed to
assess the probability intuitions relevant to our instructional objectives. The score for each student was
based on the percentage of correct answers on multiple choice questions (1 point each) combined with an
analysis of the student's explanation of her answer. Student explanation scores (1 point each) were assigned
based on whether or not the student referenced or justified their answer with an appropriate mathematical
construct. We used a blind scoring process so that while scoring the test the researcher did not know to
which group the student belonged.
   The main finding is that the students in the PIE curriculum significantly out performed students from
the control group on the post test (T=3.6, p <.001). Students who used PIE scored an average of 14.1 on
the post test, compared to the control group students who scored an average of 10.5 on the post test.     This
effect can be attributed to the PIE intervention because the two groups performed equally well on a pre-test
administered prior to the unit (T=.21, p >.5).

Qualitative Analysis
   Given that the students in the PIE curriculum were more successful at learning basic probability, this
section examines two case studies of how PIE prompted and supported social interactions that may have
contributed to this success. First, we discuss a change to the structure of the environment that made the
software more active in scaffolding and prompting certain classes of productive interactions. Second, we

3 The control group consisted of two classes taught by the same teacher as the PIE group. The control group's unit
covered the same topics as the PIE group, but was taught in the traditional manner for this school. The traditional
method in this case did not use a computer but instead had the students play and analyze a number of games of
chance.
examine a change we made to a specific representational resource, which made this resource more accessible
and useful to the students as they investigated probability.
   The two case studies both occurred in one activity, the Three Coin Game.       In this game two teams,
Team A and Team B, score points based on the outcome of three coin flips. Team A scores a point on five
of the eight possible outcomes, and Team B scores a point for three of the possible outcomes.   Because
each outcome is equally likely and Team A scores on more outcomes than Team B, this game is unfair in
favor of Team A.   The animated probability tree and dynamic histogram were both on the screen during the
entire simulation (see Figure 1).

Prompting Mathematical Discourse: Observation Notes
   In the laboratory study of PIE, several types of behaviors were evoked during the simulation (Play).
Unfortunately, not all of these behaviors led to productive learning interactions.    During the most
productive (and most rare) interactions, students compared the current state of the simulation to their
predictions, and attempted to formalize their understanding.  At other times, however, students would
become "caught up" in the simulation, excitedly watching each point and cheering the different teams on,
without comparing their expectations to the results, and without attempting to formalize their understanding
of the situation. Finally, students would sometimes start the simulation, become detached, and start talking
"off task" (for instance, discussing recent movies).   These students only turned their attention back to the
environment when the simulation was completed.        We suspected that the problem was that we only
provided very limited ways for the student to participate with the simulation.   This led us to search for ways
in which we could keep students involved and scaffold productive interactions that would help students
reconsider their predictions, refine their ideas, and formalize their understandings.
   The extensive literature on prompting provided a starting place for such a search.     Prompting has been
shown to be productive in helping groups of students to become more expert readers (Brown and Palinscar,
1989), has been shown to help individual students create self-explanations while solving science problems
(Chi, deLeeuw, Chiu, and LaVancher, 1994), and has been shown to help foster reflection for students
engaged in computer-based activities (Davis and Linn, in preparation; Scardemelia and Bereiter, 1991).
However, such studies have focused on prompting's effect on individuals cognition, but have not
investigated the types of social interactions between two students that result from computer-based prompts.
We chose to investigate the role of the computer as an active participant in student discourse, which seeded
student conversations with questions and ideas that highlight important aspects of the learning activities.
Toward this end PIE was modified so as to stop the simulation at strategic points and have the students
enter observation notes. These observation notes were intended to stop the flow of the activity, draw the
students' attention to salient aspects of the simulation, and provide a forum for the students to create and
articulate cohesive explanations about the current situation. For example, after every two games, PIE
would ask the students "Do you think the game is fair or unfair now?", and would provide a sentence starter:
"We think the game is ______ because ______."
   Preliminary analysis shows that the observation notes did prompt students to reevaluate their
predictions and attempt to refine their understandings, even when students did not enter any text in response
to the observation notes (a traditional measure for evaluating the effectiveness of prompts). This can be
seen in Figure 2, where although J and P did not respond to the prompt by entering an observation note,
simply stopping the simulation and posing a question created the opportunity for a long, productive
interaction that lasted throughout the next simulation.  Student J first responded to the question of fairness
by stating that the game was, indeed, unfair, but instead of Team B winning more (as he originally
predicted), Team A was winning more. They then started the game again, and P continued the conversation,
stating that he expected that Team A would win more.      In this example we see that the observation note
provided an impetus for a conversation that allowed the two students to contrast the prior, typed predictions
to the results of the simulation, and allowed P to state his disagreement with the original predictions. By
stopping the flow of the activity, the computer created a space for interaction and seeded the dialogue with
the possibility of critically re-evaluating their original predictions.
    Game:    After  200  points,     Team A  is ahead
    J:     up  yours,  Team    A.
    Game:    Do you  think     the game  is  fair or  unfair   now?
    J:     This  game  is    bullshit  (starts   game  again)    I  was right,     this  game is
           unfair.
    P:     Well, my  prediction      was right,   it was  something    close    to  this prediction,
           your  prediction     was  like...Cause    Team A   is way  up  there    and  Team B  is  way
           down  there,  and    it's   like, J,  what's   up   with  your  prediction?
    J:     You didn't  say     that  Team A  was  gonna win,   you   agreed    with  my prediction
    P:     I did,  I did     say that  Team  A  was  gonna   win.

FIGURE 2: J and P comparing their predictions to the simulation.
   Our preliminary analysis also shows that there were times when students took advantage of the
opportunities created by the observation notes in order to refine and formalize their understanding of the
situation. In Figure 3 we see the initial predictions and then the observation note of two students, Q and X,
as they attempt to determine if the three-coin game is fair. In their predictions they first state that the game
is fair, even while explicitly stating that Team A has more outcomes than Team B.      They later state that
Team A will score more points than Team B because Team A has more of a "variety".        However, in their
observation note we see that these ideas have been refined to include specific references to the outcome
space, including the number of outcomes that score a point for each team.
   These preliminary findings suggest that employing technology as an active agent that stops the flow of
student activity in order to seed productive student conversation can be a productive mechanism for helping
students to reflect upon and formalize their understandings.  Not only can stopping the flow of activity
prevent students from getting too caught up in "cheering" during the PIE simulations, but such interactions
can structure discourse by presenting students with the opportunity to make their thinking visible to each
other, structure their responses into appropriate forms (e.g. a claim and evidence for that claim), clear up
ambiguities, and attempt to come to a negotiated understanding of the situation. And because technology
was employed as an active agent that seeded discourse, it was possible to seed such interactions at the time
that the most relevant evidence was readily available (for example, by asking if a game is fair immediately
after a game to 200 points has ended).

    Prediction    #  1:
        We    think  the  game    is fair  because   they  both   have  an equal    chance.   For  team
    A HHH,    HHT,  HTH,  THH,    and,  TTH.   For  team  B  they  only  have    HTT,  THT,  and  TTT.

    Prediction    #  3:
        We    think  Team    A will  score   more points   because   team  A    has more  of  a variety
    of the    toss  on their     side  so they  have  a better     chance  which    will allow  them  to
    win.

    Observation     note:
        We    think  the  game    is <unfair>   because   team   A has  more    chances  than  team B.
    Team   A's  probability      is  5 to 3
   FIGURE 3: Students Q and X as they refine their thinking throughout the simulation.

Supporting Mathematical Discourse: The Probability Tree
   Once begun, domain specific conversations need to be supported by a variety of resources that will
allow students to articulate and revise their ideas. The effectiveness of a given computer-mediated
representation to support communication and promote conceptual change will depend on its accessibility
and utility to the students. However, accessibility and utility are not static--they change as the students
refine and connect their intuitions. The following examples demonstrate the value of providing a few
persistent representations--representations that physically do not change, but which are accessible and
useful to students who are at different locations along a learning trajectory.
   As mentioned previously, students typically have many naive, non-standard intuitions about the
outcome space and its relevance to reasoning probabilistically.   For these students we included probability
trees in each game as a visual resource that would help them organize their developing understanding of the
outcome space. Probability trees can be used  to   spatially organize the outcome space by a series of
branches and nodes that correspond to the possible outcomes of each constituent part of a compound event.
   However, the students often entered the Three Coin Game with the belief that the outcome space was
an irrelevant construct when deciding if the game was fair.  For students at this point in their learning
trajectory, the probability tree was used as a game board.  That is not to say it was not useful to the
students' conversations. For these students the probability tree still served as a public resource for
communication, helping students when they got into linguistic trouble describing the game.  At points in
the activity where the students seemed to be struggling for the appropriate word or phrase to express their
ideas, the students made gestures that referenced the probability tree and helped clarify the ambiguity of their
verbal speech allowing the conversation to continue.
   As the students' understanding progressed to the point where they accepted the relevance of the outcome
space, the probability tree became more than just a crutch for a limited or ambiguous vocabulary for talking
about uncertainty. The probability tree provided the students with a way to quantify the outcomes assigned
to each team and compare those quantities.   By the end of the activity most students had begun to use the
bottom row of the probability tree as an ordered list of outcomes, counting off the combinations of
outcomes that scored for each team to produce two proportions.     Students then used these proportional
quantities to reason about the situation and make predictions about the expected frequency of events. For
example, in Figure 4 Student R uses the probability tree to convince her partner that the game is unfair by
counting the outcomes for each team.

    D:  Go to  um.  .      [points    to the screen    where  it   says, " We  think the  game   is
         fair."]
    R:  No we  don't.
    D:  We don't   think     the game    is fair?
    R:  No because   look,      1, 2,  3,  4,  5    [points  to each   of team  A's outcomes    along
         the bottom   row    of  the   probability     tree].   Five  chances,  and  B only  gets
         three   chances.
    D: [points   to the     bottom    row of the    tree as  he recounts   the  outcomes]  All   right
         unfair.

FIGURE 4: Students D and R using the tree as a list to enumerate and partition the outcome space.
   In the initial laboratory study, that is where the story ended. The students progressed from using the
tree as a game board to using the tree as a list. While this was an important achievement, the probability
tree also supports a more sophisticated visualization and use of the outcome space that goes beyond its use
as an ordered list of outcomes. The probability tree appears to encourage students to discuss their intuitions
and rationale for these intuitions regarding the relationship between the outcome space and the expected
probability distribution. In more complex probabilistic settings, in which all the outcomes are not equally
likely, this integration of intuitions becomes essential because simply counting up outcomes will no
longer correctly determine the expected probability distribution.
   In the laboratory study, however, students exclusively relied on the counting strategy to decide if the
game was fair and displayed no signs that they considered the frequency at which intermediate events
occurred as relevant to the solution. Therefore, we took the static representation of the probability tree and
added animation. (In the laboratory study, as an event happened, such as the first coin landing on heads, the
probability tree would blink that branch of the tree). By animating a token along the tree, we hoped to
highlight the connection between the outcome space and the probability distribution and help the students
discuss the intermediate events that correspond to the constituent parts of the compound event. We
predicted that this would help the students to perceive the process by which a compound event occurs and
consider the frequency with which each individual constituent event occurs.
   Preliminary analysis suggests that we had limited success.      While the counting strategy was still the
dominant way to use the tree and envision the outcome space, we did see some encouraging uses of the tree
that may indicate that the students were more aware of the intermediate stages of the three coin flips and
their relationship to the outcome space.    For example in Figure 5, two adjacent pairs started to compare
their ideas about what they thought was going to happen during the simulation.      Student S points out that
the HH intersection of the probability tree is important to their analysis, because if the first two flips are
heads, it does not matter what the third coin lands on, team A wins either way (this state is re-created in
Figure 1).

    B:    Do  you guys  think    that     A will  win cause  it  has more?
    S:    Yep,  because  if   it  hits     heads  twice  it automatically     goes   to A.      [in  the
           simulation  the    1st  coin     has just  landed  on heads]    If  it hits  heads,      look,
           [S points  to    the HH    intersection    on the  tree  at the   same   time  in    the
           simulation  the    second   coin    lands  on heads]    Now A   automatically       wins,  see?
    B:    Why?
    S:    `Cause  as soon    as  it   gets   two  heads  its only  heads-heads--A     A [pointing     to
           the outcomes     HHH and   HHT]

FIGURE     5:  Students discussing strategic intersections of the probability tree.
   The students, in this example, used the tree as a resource in their discussion of why having more
outcomes matters.  That is, they used the tree to help them connect their new found concept of the outcome
space to their existing ideas about the frequency of events (i.e. a probability distribution).
   The progression in this case--from using the tree as a game board, to using the tree as a list, finally to
using the tree as way to connect previously disconnected ideas--illustrates the importance of stable and
persistent representations. The tree, although unchanged physically, changed function as the students'
understanding progressed from isolated intuitions about specific aspects of probability to a coherent
normative understanding of the outcome space and probability distribution.
   Further, this data suggests that animation may play a role in extending    a representation's utility across
the different stages of a students learning trajectory in our environment. The value added in this case was
that the animated tree supported a different type of conversation than the static probability tree. The
animated probability tree supported students in their efforts to talk about the connections between their
ideas.
   This can be seen as a new take on an old story. Most studies about diagrammatic reasoning focus on
individuals and how animated representation (and representations in general) can be used to suggest and
constrain a student's interpretation. Here we have examined how    animated representations support
conversations among individuals.    In addition, we have looked at how multiple interpretations of a single
representation can actually contribute to the learning process.

Conclusion
   This paper highlights the importance of considering the process of student-to-student, face-to-face
interaction when designing educational software.    In our introduction we stated that educational software
should create an environment where students are active in their learning by reflecting on, modifying and
articulating their understanding. It is our position that this can be accomplished successfully when the
software is designed to foster and support domain specific conversations.
   The two case studies of students using PIE begin to explore how the rich representational resources
available in computer-mediated activities can be used to support collaboration.   In the first case we showed
how the computer can be an active participant in the interaction by using symbolic representations and text
to focus the students attention and discussion on selected features of the activity. The second case study
showed how graphical representations can be used as supportive resources for communication and problem
solving. The dynamic probability tree helped to make the abstract structure of the outcome space visible to
the students and allowed them to use the representation as a prop in their discussions in which they
articulated and refined their intuitions.
   Acknowledgments
   This research is funded in part by grants from the U.C. Urban Community-School Collaborative and
from and the Berkeley chapter of Sigma Xi. We would like to thank the members of the InterActiveMedia
Study group, and Rogers Hall for their comments.      We would also like to thank Jesse Ragent for his help
in the design and implementation of PIE in his classroom.
References
Brown, A. and Palincsar, A. (1989). Guided, Cooperative Learning, and Individual Knowledge Acquisition.
   In Knowing, Learning, and Instruction, Resnick (Ed.)    Hillsdale, NJ.
Chi, M., Bassock, M., Lewis, M. Reimann, P. and Glaser, R. (1989).  Self-explanations: How students
   study and use examples in learning to solve problems.   Cognitive Science, 13, 145-182.
Davis, E.A. and Linn, M.C. (in preparation). Scaffolding Students' Knowledge Integration through Prompts
   for Reflection.
diSessa, A. (1997). Personal Communication.
Enyedy, N., Vahey, P., and Gifford, B. (1997). Designing Interactions for Guided Inquiry Learning
   Environments.    In Design of Computing Systems, (pp. 157-160).  Sith, Salvensy, Koubek (Eds).
   Amsterdam, The Netherlands: Elsevier.
Fischbein, E., Nello, M., and Marino, M. (1991). Factors affecting probabilistic judgements in children and
   adolescents. Educational Studies in Mathematics 22: 523-549.
Geertz, C. (1973).  The Interpretation of Culture. New York, NY: Basic Books.
Gifford, B. R. (1997). Toward a New Instructional Architecture for Distributed Learning Environments.
   Paper presented to the 1997 Annual Meeting of the American Educational Research Association,
   Chicago, April 1997.
Hutchins, E. (1995). Cognition in the Wild., (pp. 49-116). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Kahneman, D., and Tversky, A. (1996). On the Reality of Cognitive Illusions. Psychological Review, v.
   103, n. 3, 582-591.
Konold, C., Pollatsek, A., Well, A., Lohmeier, J., and Lipson, D. (1993).  Inconsistencies in students
   reasoning about probability. Journal for Research in Mathematics Education. 1993, v24, pp. 392-414.
Koschmann, T.D., Myers, A.C., Feltovich, P.J., Barrows, H.S. (1994).  Using Technology to Assist in
   Realizing Effective Learning and Instruction: A principled approach to the use of computers in
   collaborative learning. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 3(3), 227-264.
Larkin, J. and Simon, H. (1987). Why a diagram is (sometimes) worth ten thousand words. Cognitive
   Science, 11(1), (pp. 65-100).
Lave, J. (1992). Word Problems: a microcosm of theories of learning. In Context and Cognition: Ways of
   Learning and Knowing, Light and Bull (Eds.). Harverster Wheatsheaf, Hertfordshire, England.
National Center for Educational Statistics (1994). NAEP 1992 Trends in Academic Progress. Washington,
   DC: Office of Educational Improvement and Research, US Department of Education, US Government
   Printing Office.
National Council of Teachers of Mathematics. (1981).   Teaching Statistics and Probability, Shulte and
   Smart (Eds.).   Reston, VA: National Council of Teachers of Mathematics
Pea, R. (1993). Practices of distributed intelligence and designs for education. In G. Salomon (Ed.)
   Distributed Cogntitions: Psychological and Educational considerations, (pp. 47-87).   New York, NY:
   Cambridge University Press.
Pea, R. (1994). Seeing What We Build Together: Distributed Multimedia Learning Environments for
   Transformative Communications.      The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 3(3), 219-225.
Pitman, J. (1993). Probability. Springer-Verlag, New York.
Scardamalia, M., and Bereiter, C. (1991). Higher Levels of Agency for Children in Knowledge Building: A
   Challenge for the Design of New Knowledge Media.       The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 1(1), 37-
   68.
Shaughnessy, J.M. (1992). Research in Probability and Statistics: Reflections and Directions. In Handbook
   of Research on Mathematics Teaching and Learning, D. Grouws (Ed), pp. 465-493.
Smith, J.P., diSessa, A., and Roschelle, J. (1993). Misconceptions Reconceived: A constructivist analysis
   of knowledge in transition. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 3(2), 115-163.
Vahey, P. (1996) How Students Conceptions of Fairness Informed the Design of an Interactive
   Instructional Probability Environment.  Presented at the American Education Researchers Association
   annual conference, New York, NY.
Vahey, P., Enyedy, N., and Gifford, B. (1997). Beyond Representativeness: Productive intuitions about
   probability.  Proceedings of the Nineteenth Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society, M.
   Shafto and P. Langley (Eds.), pp. 769-774, LEA.
Zhang, J. and Norman, D. (1994). Representations in distributed cognitive tasks. Cognitive Science, 18(1),
   (pp. 87-122).

Authors' Addresses
enyedy@socrates.berkeley.edu
pvahey@socrates.berkeley.edu
bgifford@socrates.berkeley.edu
