Teachers'     analysis    of  and   support     for   students'    collaborative     problem-
solving activity: a study in a CSCL environment for understanding sound in
physics

Kristine LUND, Michael BAKER, Erica DE VRIES
UNIVERSITÉ LYON2 - CNRS, UMR GRIC - Équipe COAST
Ecole Normale Supérieure de Lyon, 46, allée d'Italie, 69364 Lyon cedex 07, FRANCE
tel : +33 4 72 72 85 38   e-mail : lund@ens-lyon.fr, mbaker@ens-lyon.fr, edevries@ens-
lyon.fr

      CSCL environments can provide new opportunities for and make new demands on
teachers as well as on learners. Although CSCL does not yet have widespread use in the
classroom, laboratory studies of the kind we present here can shed light on how teachers
can  benefit from   CSCL    environments    designed   to encourage   reflection on   their own
professional practice. While much is known about how teachers intervene in traditional
classroom and tutoring settings (e.g. Douglas, 1991, Fox, 1993, Sinclair & Coulthard,
1975), less research has been carried out on tutoring interactions in computer mediated
situations.  The  generic  CSCL    environment   ConNeCT      (Confrontation   Negotiation   and
Construction of Text) was specially designed to promote discussion on a meta-cognitive
level (cf. Baker & Lund, 1997, Chi & VanLehn, 1991, Maverech & Light, 1992) between
students performing a collaborative text production task. We chose the domain of sound
propagation for our study. We show how ConNeCT can provide teachers with a way of (i)
studying the  process    by which   students  collaboratively  solve  problems   in our   chosen
domain and (ii) reflecting on their own activity. We thus address the following questions
within   our structured   CSCL    environment   :  (1)   how   do  teachers   analyze  students'
collaborative problem solving     activity in preparation  for tutoring?, (2)  how  do  teachers
tutor collaborating dyads? and (3) what is the relation between (1) and (2)?
      Our    study  was   designed  to  answer  these    questions  by analyzing    a  teacher's
annotations of a series of CSCL interaction traces and asking for clarifications        through
interviews and by automatically tracing to file the ensuing on-line teacher-student-student
trilogue tutoring sessions in order to compare the teacher's annotations and goals with what
actually happened during     the  trilogues. The   first part of our  study took    place in the
classroom where the students were shown a film on sound and asked to write a descriptive
text of a situation concerning two tambourines. On a subsequent day in the laboratory,
pairs of students carried out  the remaining    problem-solving    in three phases    within the
context of ConNeCT. In phase 1, the students expressed their opinions for their own and
their partner's text. In phase 2, the students discussed their texts and produced a common
text. Then in phase 3, after having analyzed the interaction trace, the teacher tutored the
students.
      We    present   an analysis  of   how  teachers  analyze   collaborative problem-solving
interaction traces issued from ConNeCT. We use an example trilogue sequence along with
an interaction trace annotated   by   a teacher to illustrate that despite  appearances   of the
students' final solution, the trace permitted the teacher to see they had not understood an
element   crucial  to the description   of   sound  and   therefore  was   able  to tutor   them
accordingly. We conclude that teachers can gain knowledge on students' conceptions by
studying collaborative problem-solving interaction traces and that introducing teachers to a
CSCL environment such as ConNeCT can give them information relevant to tutoring. In
future work, we intend to explore the use of CSCL environments for promoting reflection
on the part of teachers.

Baker, M.J. & Lund, K. (1997). Promoting reflective interactions in a CSCL environment.
      Journal of Computer Assisted Learning (1997) 13, 175-193.
Chi,  M.T.H.   &    VanLehn, K.A.      (1991).  The   Content  of  Physics  Self-Explanations.
      Journal of the Learning Sciences, 1, 1, 69-105.
Douglas, S.A. (1991). Detecting and repairing tutoring failures. In P. Goodyear (ed.).
     Teaching Knowledge and Intelligent Tutoring. Norwood N.J. : Ablex.
Fox, B,  (1993). The  Human    Tutorial Dialogue Project, Issues in    the Deign of
     Instructional Systems In (eds.) Olson, G.M, Olson, J.S., Curtis, B. Computers,
     Cognition, and Work. Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Hillsdale, New Jersey.
Maverech, Z.R. & Light, P,H. (1992). Peer-based interaction at the computer : looking
     backward, looking forward. Learning and Instruction, 2, 275-280.
Sinclair J. McH & Coulthard R.M. (1975), Towards an analysis of discourse.    Oxford
University Press, London.
