A Model for Evaluation of the Online Learning Experience

Denise Stockley, Chris Groeneboer, Maria Bakardjieva*

Faculty of Education, School of Computing Science,
Dept. of Communication
Simon Fraser University
Burnaby, B.C. Canada V5A 1S6

604-291-3847, 604-291-3257, 604-291-4788

dstockle@sfu.ca, groen@cs.sfu.ca, mbakardj@sfu.ca

*This paper was written collaboratively, and order of authorship is not a reflection of
contribution.

    In this poster, a model is presented for evaluating online learning. Situated learning
(Lave & Wenger, 1991) provides a theoretical basis for the model. According to this
theory, learning is situated in activity, context, and culture. Through social interaction and
collaboration, learners become engaged in a community of practice.     This practice includes
activities involving interaction with others, interaction with artifacts as representations of
ideas (e.g., papers, projects, videos, concept maps), and interaction with artifacts which
mediate communication and creation and manipulation of representations.     In the context of
online learning, computers mediate communication and manipulation of representational
artifacts. This means that researchers and reflective practitioners have a unique opportunity
to access the interactions of learners. For example, computer conferencing systems
produce transcripts of the discourse which can then be evaluated.

    Criteria for evaluation of the online learning experience include critical thinking,
collaboration, and knowledge building. For example, is there evidence of critical dialogic
engagement? A central issue in each of these criteria is the process learners become
engaged in as they produce representations of their understandings.    Further, design of the
learning activity shapes that process. Therefore, a requirement of the model is that it
address instructional design, process, and outcomes. The goal of the model is to provide a
means for synthesizing examination of the online learning experience from different
perspectives. Two case studies are presented in which the model has been applied. One
case involved a graduate course, the other an undergraduate course. The technology used
to deliver the courses was Virtual-U, a web-based networked learning environment to
support collaboration and knowledge building. We conclude with an assessment of some
of the implications of the model and future modifications of the model.
