          Working Shops: Developing Authentic Use of
                                           Technology
                                           Hal Eden1 and Stevan Kalmon1,2

      1Center for LifeLong Learning & Design                                2New Vista High School
          Department of Computer Science                            Boulder Valley School District
            Institute of Cognitive Science                                      Boulder, CO
              University of Colorado
                   Boulder, CO

One of the most significant challenges that confronts those who wish to integrate technology tools in schools is
how to create a meaningful, broad, and sustainable impact.   In dealing with this challenge, researchers often
overlook or undervalue the role of the teacher in the development and deployment of technology to support
learning.

In order for teachers to guide and support their students in using educational technologies more effectively and
meaningfully, the teachers themselves must be learners.   They need to learn and assess the technologies, gauge
the effectiveness of these technologies in various learning situations, and, in light of these experiences, rethink
how to approach the processes of teaching and learning.   But for this complex and difficult process to occur, the
school itself must be reconceptualized as a learning organization -- one in which all members are actively
engaged in a learning process rather than separating learning from teaching.

Through the collaborative work of teachers at New Vista High School in Boulder and researchers at the Center for
LifeLong Learning and Design at the University of Colorado/Boulder, a model of organizational learning called
the Working Shop has been developed and is being implemented.      Drawing on other successful organizational
learning models (e.g., apprenticeships, artists' studios, and scientific laboratories), the Working Shop envisions
and supports learning as an integral element of doing work and creating educational products.       Working Shop
processes include regular, continuous work sessions, collaborative learning, mastery and application of tools,
mixed levels and kinds of knowledge, and making use of diverse experiences and ideas, all of these focused by
the goal of creating projects and curricula (the educational products of the Working Shop).

With modest grant support New Vista and the L3D Center, joined by the School of Education at the University of
Colorado/Boulder, have undertaken a one-year project for implementing Working Shops.          Learning teams, each
consisting of four to six members from the three institutions, will work throughout the year to design and
experiment with the projects and curricula they create.  We believe this work will demonstrate an effective
strategy that not only obtains meaningful and sustainable integration of technology in schools but also re-shapes
the fundamental nature of schooling.

                                                  1
