                      Community-school collaboration - BBN's Mentor CenterTM -

                                           Melanie Goldman
                                          mgoldman@bbn.com

                                  BBN Corporation, a GTE Company
                                            70 Fawcett Street
                                         Cambridge,    MA 02138

        Telementoring opens up possibilities for new kinds of collaboration in the schools - ones where
members of the community contribute to the learning of students and find benefits for themselves as
well.
        Mentoring involves an experienced person giving guidance, knowledge, and encouragement to
someone who is learning.   The benefit to mentors can be furthering one's own knowledge, the fulfillment
of the desire "to make a difference," and to make a personal connection in their communities. In this age
of the Internet, innovative educators are combining the concept of mentoring with the reach and
convenience of new telecommunications technology. Now, more students can become involved in a
positive, collaborative relationship with a caring adult, who can provide attention, academic
assistance, validation, advice, and support.
        BBN's National School Network, an NSF sponsored program, has created an easy to use Web-
base tool Mentor CenterTM, that supports linking students and classes with outside mentors.  Put in its
simplest terms, Mentor CenterTM brings together on the Web three participants in an educational
collaborative relationship.
       The teacher - that is the person who has the responsibility for overseeing and facilating a
        student's learning.
       The student - that is, the person who, in the course of his or her learning, is creating documents
        or products that require feedback from some more knowledgable person.
       The mentor - that is a more knowledgeable person in the community (locally or globally) who is
        willing and able to offer feedback to some student about his or her documents or products.
Working  with  a 6th grade  teacher, we initially designed Mentor CenterTM as a way to have community
members serve as mentors in an ongoing, constructive relationship with students to help them with
their writing. Mentor CenterTM has evolved to where any type of work available through the Web,
text, graphics, sound, can be shared through the tool. Underlying the development of the Mentor
CenterTMtool is the hypothesis - telementoring could become more scalable if there were tools that
tailor feedback to the learners' requirements.

Setting up:
        For setting up the project, teachers enter mentors and students into respective "pools" of
names/addresses and then match mentors and students.     Mentor CenterTM allows for several variations
of relationships - one student to work with one mentor, one student to work with several mentors, or
several students to work with one mentor.
Exchanging work:
        Once assigned a mentor the student pastes his/her written work into a form on the web; an
automatically sent email message notifies the mentor (or mentors) that the student's work is waiting
for him/her to read and includes the Web Page address (URL).    The mentor accesses the web page with

                                               - 1-
the student's work along with a feedback form. The mentor enters constructive comments which are
automatically returned - either to the student or the teacher.
Technology:
       The Mentor CenterTM    tool uses publicly available software such as World Wide Web based
pages, Internet browsers. It will be inexpensive to set-up and maintain on a school's machine. To keep
the technical and cost requirements low, it does not require any particular commercial database system.
All information is kept in files on the web-site which can be used as is or shipped to a commercial
database if desired. Mentor CenterTM   is designed so that at some future time we will be able to  make  it
available to everyone, no matter what platform a site is using.
       Teachers and facilitators find that Mentor CenterTM provides a comfortable structure on which
to base a telementoring project. Mentors and students find it easy to use. One project facilitator
commented, "[Mentor CenterTM is ] extremely easy to set up and easy for students and mentors to learn."

Current projects:
      ArtsEdge - Kennedy Center for Performing Arts
Graduate music education students mentoring middle and high schools students.
      Educational Testing Service, Princeton NJ
Accomplished teachers will work with teachers to see and analyze other's practice as a way to
improve their own.
      Regional Information Center upstate NY
Graduate education students mentor high school students in writing.
      Concord, NH
Lawyers in a local law firm will mentor 6th graders in writing.
      Rosa Parks School, Cambridge, MA
Employees of BBN mentor 6th graders in writing
      MediaOne Company
Employees in MediaOne's Cybermentor program will volunteer to telementor teachers in the
Watertown, MA school system in use of technology.

                                           - 2-
