                  The Potential of Computer-Supported Collaboration and
      Knowledge Awareness for Supporting Analogical Problem Solving

       Antonia Baumeister, Eberhard-Karls-University of Tuebingen, Konrad-Adenauer-Strasse 40, 72072 Tuebingen,
                                                     a.baumeister@iwm-kmrc.de
           Tanja Engelmann, Friedrich W. Hesse, Knowledge Media Research Center, Konrad-Adenauer-Strasse 40,
                                                        72072 Tuebingen,
                                   Email: t.engelmann@iwm-kmrc.de, f.hesse@iwm-kmrc.de

                Abstract:    The present   experimental    study   investigates   the   impact of    computer-supported
                collaboration   and  knowledge     awareness    regarding    the  source  problems      the collaboration
                partner has remembered on analogical problem solving. Collaborating dyads with an external
                representation   for supporting   knowledge     awareness    were    compared  to    collaborating dyads
                without  such   an external  representation    and   to a   baseline of nominal   dyads.    Collaborating
                dyads were less efficient in analogical problem solving than nominal dyads.

      Theoretical Background and Research Questions
                Analogical problem solving as a central learning mechanism can be defined as transferring the entire
       solution process or parts of it from a previous source problem to a new target problem from a more or less
       disparate domain (Hesse & Klecha, 1990). Individuals, especially novices, often have difficulties in identifying
       structural correspondences    between    source  problems     and  target  problems,   as they   mainly   focus   on surface
       similarities. Therefore, in the present project, it is assumed that mutual explanation during collaboration on an
       external representation   may    stimulate a  deeper    level  of  processing,   and thus     may  foster  identification   of
       structural correspondences    between    source problem     and   target problem  (Schwartz,     1995). Furthermore,     it is
       assumed that the postulated positive impact of computer-supported collaboration on analogical problem solving
       may  be  amplified  by   providing    an innovative     form   of  group   awareness,   i.e., knowledge     awareness    (cf.,
       Engelmann    &   Tergan,  2007).  In  this project,  it is  assumed   that  knowledge   awareness      can be  achieved     by
       showing each collaborator the text editor window of his collaboration partner, displaying the source problem the
       partner  has   remembered     as solution  relevant     for a  target  problem,   respectively.      Providing an    external
       representation of the collaboration partner's knowledge allows for a visual comparison of remembered source
       problems   which  could   result in a higher  salience     of solution   relevant features    of the source problems     that
       otherwise may not be identified by both collaboration partners (cf., Suthers, 2001).

      Method
                Participants  and    Design. Ninety-six    students   (64   female,  32  male) of  the  University  of   Tuebingen
       (Germany) participated for either course credit or payment. Average age was 23.15 years (SD = 3.70). The
       students were   randomly    assigned  to one  of the    following    three conditions:  (1)   collaborating dyads    with   an
       external representation for supporting knowledge awareness (CDER-KA; N = 17 dyads), (2) collaborating dyads
       without an external representation for supporting knowledge awareness (CD0; N = 16 dyads), and, as a baseline
       condition, (3) nominal dyads consisting of individual problem solvers (ND; N = 15 dyads).
                Materials and Procedures. Participants were told that the study was about computer-supported decision
       making in the domain of criminal law. First, they filled in a web form stating demographic data as well as a
       multiple-choice  test assessing   prior  knowledge.     After  a  short  (10-15   minutes)    training phase   of  using  the
       software tool of this experiment, the learning phase (21 minutes) started introducing three kinds of delicts (e.g.,
       which solution steps does the commission delict have?) as well as two worked-out example cases per delict (i.e.,
       source problems). In the following problem solving phase, participants received seven target problems which
       varied in their surface and structural similarity to the source problems. For example, some target problems were
       embedded    in a highly  similar  cover  story  like one    of   the source   problems, but   required  the application     of
       solution steps of one of the other kinds of delicts. Participants individually had to remember for each target
       problem and write down in an individual text editor window whether there was a source problem that required
       solution steps also relevant for this target problem, respectively (25 minutes). Afterwards, participants were
       randomly assigned to one of three conditions working on the subsequent tasks with time on task held constant.
       In the first collaborative condition, spatially separated dyads were provided with an external representation for
       supporting knowledge awareness by inspecting the text editor window of the collaboration partner, displaying
       the source problems the collaboration partner had remembered (5 minutes). Afterwards, these dyads had to solve
       the target problems   collaboratively   by  adapting    the solution   suggested  by  the   source   problem   to the target
       problem    (30 minutes).  The  goal  was   to write  a  mutual    solution   of each target   problem   down    in a  shared
       collaborative text editor window. The dyads communicated in this phase via phone conferencing. In the second

3-0
collaborative condition, spatially separated dyads also collaborated in order to solve the target problems, but
they were not provided with an external representation for supporting knowledge awareness, and thus, could
establish knowledge   awareness    only by  means   of audio  communication.     In  the baseline condition,  problem
solvers worked on the target problems completely individually. At the end of the study, as a manipulation check,
participants of both collaborative conditions had to indicate in a web form how often (in percentage of the target
problems) it had occurred that their collaboration partner had remembered a different source problem in relation
to a target problem than the one they had remembered themselves.
          Dependent   Measures.   The  main  dependent   measures   were correctness     of the (collaborative)  source
problem choice in relation to each target problem and correctness of (collaborative) target problem solution.

Results and Conclusions
          All analyses are based on group level, i.e., on the values of each dyad. The hypotheses were tested by
means of planned contrasts.
          Univariate  analyses  of variance   (ANOVA)      yielded  no  significant  differences    between   the three
conditions regarding age, gender distribution within the dyads (i.e., whether both members of a dyad were same-
gender or not), subjective learning preference (i.e., visual vs. verbal learner), experience with computers as well
as prior knowledge assessed by the multiple choice questionnaire (all Fs < 1). Average prior knowledge was
16.71 points (SD = 1.83) out of 27 points and can be regarded as low to medium.
          Manipulation   Check.  Knowledge    awareness   was   analyzed by  assessing    differences  in remembered
source problems between both members of a dyad, and by contrasting the deviation of perceived differences
from objective   differences in remembered    source   problems.  The  two   collaborative  conditions   did not  differ
significantly with   regard  to their   knowledge   awareness   of   differences  in   remembered    source   problems
(CDER-KA: M = 0.11; SD = 15.60; CD0: M = 1.34; SD = 19.89; F < 1).
          Correctness  of  Source  Problem    Choice.   A  score  of  dyadic  source   problem    choice  was   formed
indicating whether no member, one member or both members of a dyad had remembered the correct source
problem individually in relation to a target problem and whether they agreed on the correct source problem for
transferring its solution to the target problem. The planned contrast conducted on the score of dyadic source
problem   choice   yielded  no  significant differences   between  the  baseline    of nominal   dyads    and the  two
collaborative  conditions   combined    (ND:  M    =   26.67; SD   =   4.42; CDER-KA:     M   =  27.06;   SD  =   4.18;
CD0: M    =  27.00;  SD  =  2.88;  F  < 1). Furthermore,   the  two  collaborative   conditions   (CDER-KA   and  CD0)
performed the task of source problem choice equally well, according to a second planned contrast (F < 1).
          Solution of Target   Problems.   Nominal   dyads worked    on highly   significantly  more  target  problems
(M =    8.93; F(2,45)    = 16.72;  MSE   =   1.48;  p  =  .001)  than  collaborating   dyads    (CDER-KA:  M  =   6.88;
CD0: M = 6.63). In addition, a planned contrast on the scores of correct target problem solution revealed that
nominal dyads gained a much higher score (M = 49.50; F(1,45) = 12.89; MSE = 93.52; p = .001) than the
collaborative conditions (CDER-KA: M = 38.50; CD0: M = 38.88) which scored equally (F < 1). Nevertheless, the
confidence ratings of the nominal dyads concerning having the target problems solved correctly provided that
the solution was correct were significantly lower (M = 18.98; SD = 11.20) than the corresponding confidence
ratings  of  collaborating  dyads  without   an  external  representation    for supporting     knowledge    awareness
(M = 28.66; SD = 11.20; p = .05), but did not differ from the confidence ratings of collaborating dyads with an
external representation for supporting knowledge awareness (M = 27.09; SD = 10.42; p = 10).
          To sum up, in this study, it could not be confirmed that collaborating dyads identify solution relevant
aspects of source problems more often than individual problem solvers do and that an external representation for
supporting knowledge awareness improves collaborative analogical problem solving. Nevertheless, computer-
supported collaboration has a high potential for supporting analogical problem solving, because the need to
externalize  and  negotiate  solution  relevant  source  problems    may prevent    learners    from considering   only
superficially similar problems. Future research is needed to clarify the impact of knowledge awareness and to
develop   computer-supported    environments    that  are  highly  adapted   to  the   requirements   of  collaborative
analogical problem solving.

References
Engelmann,    T.,   &  Tergan,    S.-O.  (2007).   An   innovative   approach    for   fostering  computer-supported
          collaboration. In C.  Chinn,  G.  Erkens, &  S. Puntambekar    (Eds.),  Proceedings    of  the 7th Computer
          Supported Collaborative Learning Conference (pp. 187-189). New Brunswick: International Society of
          the Learning Sciences, Inc.
Hesse, F. W., & Klecha, D. (1990). Use of analogies in problem solving. Computers in Human Behavior, 6, 115-129.
Schwartz, D. L. (1995). The emergence of abstract representations in dyad problem solving. The Journal of the
          Learning Sciences, 4, 321-354.
Suthers,  D.  D. (2001).   Towards   a systematic  study  of  representational  guidance    for collaborative learning
          discourse. Journal of Universal Computer Science, 7(3), 254-277.

                                                                                                                            3-
