      Bridging Principles and Examples through Analogy and Explanation

                            Timothy J. Nokes, Kurt VanLehn, Learning Research and Development Center
                                             University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 15260
                                              Email: nokes@pitt.edu, vanlehn@cs.pitt.edu

                   Abstract: Previous research in cognitive science has shown that analogical comparison and
                   self-explanation are two powerful learning activities that can improve conceptual learning in
                   laboratory settings. The current work examines whether these results generalize to students
                   learning physics   in   a classroom   setting. Students  were  randomly  assigned  to  one of  three
                   worked example learning conditions (reading, self-explanation, or analogical comparison) and
                   then took a test assessing conceptual understanding and problem solving transfer. Students in
                   the self-explanation    and  analogy   conditions    showed   improved  conceptual    understanding
                   compared to students in the more traditional worked example condition.

       Introduction
                   What learning activities lead to a deep understanding of new concepts and support problem solving
         transfer?  One  approach     to   addressing   this question    is to  examine  what    knowledge   comprises   `expert
         understanding' and then design learning environments to help novices construct that knowledge. Research on
         expertise  suggests   that a key    aspect of expert  knowledge     is understanding how    the domain   principles are
         instantiated in the problem features (Chi, Feltovich, & Glaser, 1981). The purpose of the current work was to
         design learning activities based on cognitive science principles to help students acquire this knowledge and
         improve their conceptual understanding.
                   Two learning paths that have been hypothesized to facilitate deep learning are self-explanation and
         analogical comparison. Self-explanation has been shown to facilitate both procedural and conceptual learning
         and transfer of that knowledge to new contexts (Chi, 2000). Of particular interest to the current work are some
         promising results from the Chi, Bassok, Lewis, Reimann, & Glaser (1989) laboratory study showing that good
         learners were more likely than poor learners to generate inferences relating worked examples to the principles
         and concepts of the problem. This result suggests that prompting students to self-explain the relations between
         principles and worked examples will further facilitate learning and conceptual understanding. Prior laboratory
         work has also shown that analogical comparison can facilitate schema abstraction and transfer (e.g., Gentner,
         Lowenstein, & Thompson, 2003; see Gentner, Holyoak, & Kokinov, 2001 for a general overview). However,
         this work has not examined how learning from problem comparison impacts understanding of how abstract
         principles  relate to the  problem    features. The  current    work   examines how  self-explanation   and analogical
         comparison may help bridge students' learning of the relations between principles and examples.

       Experiment
                   The  purpose  of   this experiment   was  to   test whether  self-explanation and analogical  comparison   of
         worked examples facilitates conceptual learning and problem solving transfer for students learning rotational
         kinematics in a classroom environment.

        Methods
                   Seventy-eight students from the United States Naval Academy (USNA) participated as a part of their
         normal course work. The students participated from 4 sections of the introductory physics course taught at the
         USNA. The number of students in each section ranged between 18-26 students and the experiment took place
         during their normally scheduled lab time.
                   A   between-subjects    design   was  used   with   students randomly  assigned   to  one  of three  learning
         conditions: reading (n = 26), self-explanation (n = 26), and analogy (n = 26). The lab session was divided into a
         learning and test phase.
                   Learning Phase. The learning materials were presented in paper booklets. All participants received a
         principle booklet that gave an introduction to the principles and concepts of rotational motion (e.g., angular
         displacement, angular velocity, angular acceleration, etc.). The principles each had written descriptions, graphic
         illustrations, and formulae. Students were given 9 minutes to read through the introductory booklet and had
         access to it through the entire learning phase. Participants were then randomly assigned to one of the three
         learning conditions (reading, self-explanation, and analogical comparison). Each condition received a learning
         booklet.
                   The booklet for the reading condition consisted of six worked-out examples (word problems with the
         step-by-step solution) that included detailed explanations and principle justifications for each solution step. Part

3-00
of the solution to the worked example was left blank for the participants to fill in. The problems were presented
sequentially and the participants' task was to read aloud the problem filling in the blanks as they went. They
were then  given   the solutions to the fill-in-the-blanks and  repeated  this procedure    for the  second  worked
example. Next, they solved two isomorphic practice problems (one more problem than the other two learning
conditions to control for time on task). This procedure was then repeated for the remaining two sets of worked
examples.  The  learning booklet  for the   explanation condition consisted    of the  same  six worked    examples.
However, the participants in this condition were not given the explanations right away but were first instructed
to try and generate the explanation and principle justification for each step. After generating their explanations
they read through the `expert' explanations (the same ones given to the reading group). After generating and
reading through the explanations for the two worked examples they solved one isomorphic practice problem.
They then repeated this procedure for the remaining two sets of worked examples. The booklet for the analogy
condition used the same worked examples and explanations as the reading booklet without the fill-in-the-blanks.
After reading the worked examples they were asked to compare and contrast the two examples writing out the
similarities and differences between them. These compare and contrast questions were designed to focus the
learner on various aspects of the underlying concepts. They then solved one practice problem and repeated this
procedure for the remaining two sets of problems. The total training time was 55 minutes.
         Test Phase. After the learning phase all participants were given a test to assess their understanding of
the concepts. The test booklets consisted of three sections including a multiple-choice test (13 questions) and
two  problem    solving  tasks.  The  multiple  choice   test  assessed   qualitative    reasoning   and conceptual
understanding.  The problem  solving    tasks assessed  application of   the concepts    in new  contexts.  The  first
problem was to apply the concepts in a slightly different way than they had practiced during the learning phase
(a different set of steps) and in a new context (cover story). The second problem was similar in structure to one
of the worked examples however it included some new irrelevant information (extraneous values) and a new
context (cover story).

Results
         Test performance was highly variable within each condition. To best assess the effects of instruction on
test performance we examined the upper half of the learning performers within each condition (median spilt of
the practice problem scores). Test performance for the high learners in each condition is shown in Table 1.

Table 1: Mean Test Performance for the High Learners for Each Condition.

                                                                    Test
  Training                       Multiple Choice           Problem Solving 1                Problem Solving 2
                                    Conceptual          New Context / Diff. Steps       New Context / Extra Info
 Reading (n = 13)                       .51                   .77 (d = .70)                        .51
 Explanation (n = 13)             .59 (d = .45)               .76 (d = .70)                   .71 (d = .69)
 Analogy (n = 13)                 .59 (d = .48)                   .55                         .75 (d = .86)

Discussion
         The results are consistent with the laboratory predictions and show that self-explanation and analogical
comparison  can  support  conceptual  learning  in a  classroom  setting. Both    the self-explanation   and analogy
groups showed conceptual learning gains beyond the traditional worked example group on the multiple-choice
test (Cohen's d effect size scores of .45 and .48 respectively). The results for the problem solving tests were
more mixed. The reading and explanation groups showed an advantage over the analogy group on problem 1
whereas the explanation and analogy group performed better on problem 2. The reading group was expected to
perform closer to the other groups on problem solving because they had more practice (solving an additional
practice problem   during  learning). Current   work   examines   the solutions   in  more    detail to  differentiate
conceptual from procedural errors.

References
Chi, M.  T. H.   (2000). Self-explaining   expository  texts: The dual    processes   of generating   inferences and
         repairing mental  models.  In  R.  Glaser (Ed.)   Advances   in  instructional  psychology.   Mahwah,   NJ:
         Erlbaum.
Chi, M. T. H., Bassok, M., Lewis, M. W., Reimann, P., & Glaser, R. (1989). Self-explanations: How students
         study and use examples in learning to solve problems. Cognitive Science, 13, 145-182.
Chi, M. T. H., Feltovich, P. J., & Glaser, R. (1981). Categorization and representation of physics problems by
         experts and novices. Cognitive Science, 5, 121-152.
Gentner, D., Holyoak, K. J., & Kokinov, B. N., (Eds.), (2001). The analogical mind. Cambridge, MA: MIT
         Press.

                                                                                                                         3-0
         Gentner, D., Loewenstein, J., & Thompson, L. (2003). Learning and transfer: A general role for analogical
                 encoding. Journal of Educational Psychology, 95, 393-408.

       Acknowledgments
         This work   was  supported  by   Grant  SBE0354420   from  the    Pittsburgh Science  of Learning    Center
         (www.learnlab.org). I thank Max Lichtenstein, Brett Van De Sande, and Bob Shelby for help in designing and
         preparing the physics materials as well as Dan Belenky, Ted McClanahan,      and Mary Wintersgill   for help
         collecting the data. I also thank Robert G. M. Hausmann and Anders Weinstein for discussions.

3-0
