        From Newcomer Enculturation to Fertile Zones of Cultural
              Encounter: A Bidimensional Metaphor for Schooling
Yifat Ben-David Kolikant, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, School of Education, yifatbdk@mscc.huji.ac.il

         Abstract: Instructional approaches that rely on the theoretical concept of learning as a process
         of enculturation usually regard the teacher as the expert and the students as the newcomers.
         We suggest an alternative metaphor, where students are viewed as longstanding members of
         an  overlapping yet   different culture  than   that represented  by   the  instructional setting. This
         metaphor    allows    for  sensitivity   to  learning     difficulties  that    arise  when    students'
         contextualization of the milieu is dominated by the other cultural viewpoint. We suggest the
         concept of fertile zones of cultural encounter as a pedagogical approach to bridging the gap
         between cultures by designing interventions appreciated by members of both cultures, while
         also   encouraging   students   to engage    in the   practices  of    the professional   culture.   We
         demonstrate the usefulness of such conceptualization in two school subjects: computer science
         and history.

Introduction
         This paper proposes the metaphor of a cultural encounter for conceptualizing students' performance in
formal school learning environments. It draws on work done by Lave and Wenger (1991), who conceptualized
learning as a process of enculturation into a community of practice (CoP) through participation by newcomers in
peripheral yet legitimate, genuine activities of the CoP. The newcomers gradually increase their participation,
ultimately becoming full-fledged participants with a holistic perspective on professional practice that develops
over time (Lave & Wenger, 1991; Wenger, 1998). According to Wenger (1998), cultures consist of composite
repertoires of  shared capabilities   created  by  interaction,  borrowing,     imposition,    and brokering   among    its
constituent CoPs. Roth and Bowen (1995) define culture as including both the resources and the practices of a
given field. They define the resources and practices as follows:

         We use the notion of material, social, and conceptual resource to denote the instruments, facts,
         phenomena, and theories scientists draw on in their work. Practice is the label for the act of
         constructing (or deconstructing) physical and conceptual entities, the resources of the field. (p.
         76)

         Based   on Schoenfeld's   definition  (1992)    of a mathematical   point    of view,  we   can define   having a
viewpoint characteristic of any field as valuing the processes carried out by professionals (or full participants) in
that field and having the predilection to apply them. One's cultural viewpoint determines what one considers
important   and unimportant   in any  situation; thus  our    viewpoint  determines    what    we learn from   a situation.
However, it is a reciprocal relationship because our viewpoint evolves as we learn, i.e., as we participate in a
culture (Wenger, 1998).
         Instructional models    that rely  on   Lave and   Wenger's     theoretical  framework    emulate    "real world"
participation in a culture in school, as expressed by the following description of the cognitive-apprenticeship
instructional model:   "Cognitive  apprenticeship    methods    try to   enculturate  students    into authentic  practices
through  activity and  social interaction   in a way  similar   to  that evident--and    evidently     successful--in craft
apprenticeship" (Brown, Collins, & Duguid, 1989, p. 37). In these emulations the teacher usually represents an
old-timer in the culture, whereas students are viewed as newcomers to the culture (e.g., Yackel & Cobb, 1996;
Schoenfeld, 1992). For example, in the cognitive apprenticeship implemented by Schoenfeld (1992), it is clear
to all participants in the milieu that he is the expert. This power relationship faithfully reproduces the power
relationship between newcomers and old-timers described by Lave and Wenger.
         Nevertheless, I claim that in certain domains the metaphorical view of the educational milieu as a "busy
tailoring shop" (Collins, Brown, & Holum, 1989) where the expert tailor is the teacher and the students are
merely apprentices (or newcomers) does not capture the complicated social fabric of the milieu and is therefore
limited in its ability to explain and anticipate learning difficulties. Today's students come to school with a wealth
of informal   knowledge   that includes   learning   practices  that have   proved    useful   in out-of-school   learning
experiences, such as their interactions with the Internet as consumers and producers of knowledge and their
gaming experiences (for further discussion of the impact of students' computer experience on their cognitive
skills, see Gee,  2003). As   our  expectations  of  schooling   sociology   shift  so   that  we no   longer assume   that
teachers are the authorities with the knowledge and instead expect students to assume responsibility for creating
knowledge, our metaphors for educational milieus should reflect this change.

                                                                                                                              1-101
                  To   this end, I suggest  using  the  metaphor    of a  cultural encounter   in which  students   are  viewed    as
         members    of a culture intertwined  with     the CoP represented    by   the instructional setting. This  bidimensional
         metaphor faithfully maintains students' newcomer-ness to the culture represented by the instructional setting but
         at the same time regards students as longstanding members of an intertwined culture, thereby adding to the
         picture by emphasizing the multicultural nature of the sociology of schooling today. In the rest of this paper, I
         first define the concept of a cultural encounter; then I describe an instructional approach called fertile zones of
         cultural encounter   (FZCE),   which  uses    the  concept to address   and   explain certain  learning   difficulties; and
         finally, I demonstrate    the usefulness  of   the cultural-encounter   metaphor   in  two  school   subjects:  computer
         science and history.

        Cultural Encounter
                  Intertwined cultures are cultures that overlap with respect to some of their essential characteristics and
         usually with respect to some cultural resources, yet have different viewpoints regarding the same situation. I do
         not intend to divide people into cultural groups; rather, my point is that each of us belongs to many cultures and
         thus people act differently on the same resources in different contexts depending on the cultural perspective that
         dominates   their  contextualization (i.e., interpretation)   of the situation  (Wertsch,   1998).  It is all a matter    of
         contextualization; metaphorically speaking, people can choose which of many hats best fits the context. For
         example, the same historian would interact with the historical text of the Passover Haggadah in one way during
         the Seder and in another way in his or her professional work. The advantage of the cultural-encounter metaphor
         is that it helps us understand difficulties rooted in students' contextualization of educational situations that are
         not consistent with the goal of the milieu designers; i.e., it helps us identify the hat the students have chosen to
         wear. This conceptualization of students' interaction with the educational milieu can serve as a guideline for
         teachers   and  curriculum    developers,   encouraging    them   to help  students   recontextualize     situations when
         necessary.
                  A good example of intertwined cultures is provided by Labaree (2003), who describes the encounter of
         educational researchers with experienced teachers who become doctoral candidates in schools of education as a
         cultural encounter   and, moreover,   as    a culture clash.  The  cultures   of teachers   and educational    researchers
         overlap, as both are interested in education. However, they have different perspectives on their common area of
         interest. Labaree claims that the shift from teaching to educational research requires that the teachers transform
         their cultural orientation "from normative to analytical, from personal to intellectual, from the particular to the
         universal, and from the experimental to the theoretical" (p. 16). The difference between these viewpoints is
         salient in their preferred responses to students who encounter learning difficulties. The primary commitment of
         teachers is to the students, and therefore they want to intervene early; in contrast, researchers "seek to clarify
         and validate arguments about the functions and dysfunctions, causes and consequences of educational practices"
         (Labaree, 2003, p. 17) and consequently may defer intervention. This difference can make teachers suspicious of
         and resistant to activities typical of educational research (sometimes subconsciously).
                  Labaree sought to narrow the cultural gap by urging researchers to emphasize the similarities between
         their culture and that of the teachers--such as their shared dedication to education--so that teachers could more
         easily come to regard the research culture as legitimate. Here I propose a different approach that actually strives
         to make the distinction between professional and other perspectives visible. To this end I introduce the concept
         of a fertile zone of culture encounter (FZCE)--a milieu whose design is sensitive to the alternative cultural
         perspective   that students  might adopt    when   acting  within  the  milieu.  The  FZCE     approach   encourages    and
         facilitates contextualization of the milieu from the perspective of a member of the professional culture and helps
         students to gradually "cross the cultural bridge." This does not mean abandoning their cultural heritage, but
         rather, broadening their perspective as their experience recasts the value of activities as either productive or
         unproductive in a particular context.
                  Three essential characteristics must exist to generate an FZCE: (1) The milieu, or metaphorically the
         encounter zone, should be designed in such a way as to look familiar to the students, thus inviting them to
         regard it as legitimate; this will lead students to adopt the goals of making sense of the milieu and challenges
         presented within the milieu. (2) At the same time, the milieu should be designed in such a way that as students
         strive to accomplish their goal, they come to realize that their current perspective and associated practices are
         limited. (3) The milieu should make it productive and feasible for students to recontextualize, i.e., to employ the
         professional perspective in the milieu.
                  The   next  two  sections   demonstrate    the usefulness     of this   metaphor   in  two  disciplines.   First I
         demonstrate    how  treating  computer  science    education  as  an  encounter   between   two  cultures  of   computer-
         oriented   problem-solvers    helped in   understanding    and   addressing    students' learning    difficulties. Then   I
         demonstrate how treating history education as an encounter among cultures of text readers led to the design of a
         milieu that helps students practice historical thinking.

       Computer Science Education

1-10
Two Computing Cultures
          The Israeli high-school curriculum in computer science (CS)--like curricula in many other countries--
is oriented toward the academic CS world. As such, it centers on the algorithmic problem, and the main goal is
to introduce students to the scientific principles of computation. Because technology is perceived merely as a
tool for  demonstrating  those   principles,  it is  recommended       that the technology     chosen be  one    that does not
distract students. By the time students start their CS lessons, they are already veteran computer users (or as
Nardi  (1993)  put it, "local developers").      A   user  is defined   by  Turkle   as someone    who   is "involved   in the
machine in a hands-on way, but is not interested in the technology except as it enables an application" (Turkle,
1995, p. 32). However, the dividing line between using and programming a computer is not clear-cut (Goodell et
al., 1999;  Nardi, 1993),  so    it is likely   that students     will utilize their user-oriented    experience  in   solving
computer-related problems in school computer classes. Here I briefly characterize the two cultures--that of the
teachers  and  the instructional    setting and  that   of    the students.  A  detailed   characterization   of the   cultural
differences, as well as other examples that demonstrate the strength of this metaphor for understanding and
resolving teaching and learning difficulties in an advanced CS course (concurrent programming), can be found
in X (Ben-David Kolikant & Ben-Ari, in press).
          The cultural differences are best demonstrated in a situation in which a program produces unexpected
output. In the context of software development, a programmer would set the goal of analyzing the error that
caused this to occur and designing and implementing a solution. In the context of software use, an unexpected
behavior by the program might be tolerated, especially if it does not prevent achievement of the user's goal. For
example, when downloading pages from the Internet we might decide not to devote any effort to understanding
messages that appear on screen as long as we can get the pages we want.
          The interactions expected when one attempts to solve problems differ, too. An interaction dominated
by the perspective of the professional culture involves a multi-layered approach to problem-solving, with back-
and-forth movement between different layers of abstraction: the human-computer interface, the program being
used, underlying software such as the operating system, and the machine that is executing the program (Aho &
Ullman, 1992). An interaction dominated by the user's perspective is primarily on a single layer--that of the
interface (Turkle, 1995). The underlying layers remain opaque and are not used in problem-solving.
          Finally, these perspectives differ in terms of what one considers valuable knowledge and thus in terms
of learning preferences. Users appreciate a development process based upon exploring technological artifacts;
therefore, they tend to appreciate functional knowledge focused on the question "How can I make it work?"
rather than   on "Why   does  it work    the  way    it does?"    (Carroll  &  Rosson,   1987;  Turkle,   1995).  Within   the
professional  culture, there  is greater  appreciation     of  abstract  knowledge      of data structures,   algorithms,  and
computational models, as well as of formal development activities such as analysis, design, and documentation.

Utilizing the FZCE Framework for Design
          Since we assumed that our students were used to the single-layer approach to problems, we designed an
environment   that would  provide      information   regarding    the  three layers  of the  problem   through   its  interface
layer. Therefore, when a program was being executed the screen was divided into three parts: (1) the top of the
screen displayed the input and output of the program, that is, the users' interaction with the computer; (2) the
middle part of the screen displayed information on the state of the program and the values of the variables, i.e.,
the underlying layers; and (3) the line at the bottom of the screen allowed for manipulations such as step-by-step
executions and resetting. The students could use the rapid feedback to check on their assumptions and verify the
correctness of their solutions.
          Furthermore,   we   designed      the  specific     assignment     described   here   in   such   a way     that the
synchronization problem that students had to solve originated in the shared interface resource, i.e., the input.
Thus, solving the problem required contextualizing the interface in terms of the specific effects of errors in code
that is executing on the computer, as programmers typically do it, in contrast to users, who perceive the interface
merely as a means of interacting with the computer. Finally, we deliberately chose a simple calculation in order
to minimize engagement in activities irrelevant to synchronization. The students were introduced to a program
designed to calculate a student's final grade using three processes and were asked to synchronize the processes.
Two    of the processes, First   and   Second,   compute      the   student's  grade  in   the first and  second   semesters,
respectively, by reading three grades and computing their maximum value. The third process, Average, should
be blocked until the maximum values have been calculated (by First and Second) and only then compute the
final grade as an average of the maximum values.

Analysis of the Students' Work within the Milieu
          We analyzed the work process of two pairs of students. One pair, Y and M, encountered an unexpected
output due to incomplete synchronization. They then re-executed the program, and when the output refused to
disappear  they  asked T  (the   author) for  help.     Up to  line 9,  the  transcript shows   no   attempt  to examine   the

                                                                                                                                   1-10
         program    code;  rather, their interpretation  of the situation   was  solely  from   the perspective    of users   who
         misunderstood the instructions provided by the interface:

                 1.    Y   [pointing  to two  lines of  unexpected    output]: The   question   is what  are  they  [the
                       processes] requesting? What are they asking for?
                 2.    T: Can you explain what these two lines [of output] mean?
                 3.    Y: They're telling me to enter the data from the second semester and then the data from
                       the first semester.
                 4.    T: How did you come to this conclusion?
                 5.    Y:   Because  it [the computer]  asked  me  to. [Reads   the line from   the screen:]  Enter   the
                       second-semester grades.
                 6.    T: What do you mean by "it asked me to"? Who is "it"? I wrote this program.
                 7.    Y: I don't know, either you or the computer. It doesn't matter to me who wrote it [the
                       program]. I'm coming to the computer now and that's what it's telling me to do. Right?
                 8.    T: No, no. You know perfectly well why the computer wrote those lines.
                 9.    Y [looking at the printout of the program code]: Mm... mm... because it started from this
                       line [points to "write statement in process Second" in the code] and then moved over
                       here [points to "write statement in process First"].
                 10.   T: OK!

                 Utilizing the FZCE metaphor, we suggest that the students' difficulty resulted from their perspective:
         instead of experiencing the situation as programmers encountering a problem to be analyzed and solved, the
         students were thinking as users interacting with an unfriendly computer artifact (lines 1, 3, 5, and 7). In fact,
         when   the students   were then  asked  to explain  why  the  execution  of the  code  brought   about   the unexpected
         output (line  8),  as programmers     ask  when   encountering   unexpected    output,   they began  utilizing   the  two
         underlying layers (line 9), the program code and the computational model, as programmers are expected to do in
         these situations. For a detailed description, see Ben-David Kolikant (2004).

        FZCE-Based Evaluation
                 In this respect the assignment functioned as an FZCE, since Y and M could not survive the milieu as
         long as they viewed it from a perspective different from that of programmers. However, the other pair did not
         consider the assignment worth their effort because they found a way of detouring around the problem (without
         solving it) and objected to the teachers' refusal to accept their solution. They rightfully claimed that in the real
         world no one would use a three-part program to do something that a simple calculator can do.
                 Therefore, when the assignment was revised the problem was changed to one involving a computer
         game with missiles and aliens. The programming requirement remained the same. The newly worded problem
         won students' approval, as manifested by the fact that they all decided to spend their free time working on it and
         that they expressed enthusiasm about programming situations that might come up in the real work world. In fact,
         the metaphors of FZCE and cultural encounter helped us revise the entire course, and the next year we saw that
         students' achievements and satisfaction had improved (Ben-David Kolikant & Ben-Ari, in press). For example,
         being  aware  that  students   devalue abstraction,  which   is an   important  skill in  the professional   culture, we
         arranged the problems in a sequence beginning with contexts that could come up in the work world and let the
         students discover the similarities among them; this led to a discussion of the power of abstraction. Later in the
         course, problems were presented in abstract form, as they are in the professional CS culture.

       History Education

        Two Cultures of Text Comprehension
                 Becoming a historical thinker is not a trivial matter. The term historical thinking is defined in various
         ways,  yet it is widely   agreed  that it encompasses    the ability to see through    the eyes  of  the people   we  are
         studying, the ability to evaluate historical sources while being conscious of author bias and the contextual nature
         of the text (in terms of social and cultural aspects), and awareness of the multifaceted nature of history as well as
         its interpretative nature  (Seixas, 1993;  Wineburg,   2001).   Wineburg    (2001) terms   these abilities   "unnatural."
         Learning to think "unnaturally" involves realizing that a "natural" interaction with historical material misses the
         rich subtexts,   usually  takes place  on  the scale  of appropriation/resistance,    and  is (usually   unconsciously)
         dominated   by   readers'  emotions    and  sense  of  belonging    (Wertsch,   2002).    Examples   of  how   emotions
         unconsciously mediate the ostensibly cognitive interaction with historical texts are common in the literature.
         Chambliss   and   Garner  (1996)  found   that adults read   texts selectively. They   accept  facts that support    their
         beliefs, but meticulously examine and critique anything that contradicts their own perceptions. Similar results
         have been reported regarding students (e.g., Lord et al., 1979; Reynolds et al., 1982).

1-10
         Wineburg (2001) studied differences between historians and students in terms of how they interact with
historical texts. He found that the two groups differed in what they do when they read a historical text as well as
in what  they   consider knowing      the  text. He   termed     these results  different epistemologies   of text. In   fact,
Wineburg    portrays two   cultures   of   text readers   who    have  different goals when    interacting with    texts and
consequently approach the texts differently. The historians view a text as a window to understanding the human
being behind it, a means of seeing through her or his eyes. They were therefore interested in the subtext, trying
to reconstruct the authors' intentions and goals and to bring to the surface the author's worldview, assumptions,
and beliefs. This interest governed their interaction with historical texts, such as their decision to employ the
heuristics of sourcing, meaning "the practice of reading the source of the document before reading the actual
text" (p. 76). In contrast, although the students worked seriously, they rarely compared the sources. Instead they
employed heuristics similar to those employed in reading comprehension tasks. Their goal was to elicit the true
story: "for students, reading history was not a process of puzzling about authors' intentions or situating texts in a
social world, but of gathering information with texts serving as bearers of information" (p. 76). Therefore, it is
no surprise that students became "flustered in the face of contradictions" (p. 67).
         Wineburg uses the metaphor of a courtroom to depict the differences between historians and students.
Historians reading texts resemble attorneys working with testimony. Attorneys actively draw out testimony by
placing  documents   side  by   side,  finding   discrepancies,   questioning    sources,  and delving   into  the  sources'
conscious and unconscious motives. Students read the way jurors work with testimony: they patiently listen to
testimony, question themselves about what they heard, but do not question witnesses directly or subject them to
cross-examination.   This  metaphor    reinforces     the   portrayal  of history education   as  a  cultural encounter   of
intertwined text-reader cultures.
         Indeed, the concept of a culture clash has come up before in the context of history education. Barnett et
al. (2000) discuss it in describing the difficulties of college students who were given a collaborative research
assignment in a history course. The clash was between two different viewpoints on what counts as learning and
knowing   history.  To   the   instructor, knowing       history meant    developing  your   own   voice.  He   viewed   the
assignment as an opportunity to emulate historians' work, and especially to experience how historians express
their voice, by constructing well-defended arguments that are presented to the community not as the true story
of what happened, but rather as an argument inviting discussion and debate.
         The  students  found   the assignment     inefficient   for   achieving what  they  considered   learning  history.
Their contextualization of the situation was derived from their experience in school, and thus their goal was one
that would have been legitimate in similar educational milieus in the past: mastering a set of facts and dates, and
more importantly, knowing what the teacher wanted them to know (i.e., repeating the teachers' voice). To this
end, the  most  efficient  milieu   is a   lecture    by  the  teacher;   a  research-based milieu   is  highly inefficient.
Furthermore, the goal of expressing their own voice was alien to them and was regarded as illegitimate. Hence
the students objected to the milieu. By the end of the course, however, some of the students expressed different
insights into the nature of history and the work of historians and even came to appreciate the collaborative
effort.

The FZCE as a Design Framework
         Designing   such    a milieu  using     topics  from    the Israeli history  curriculum,   where  the  milieu   was
developed, is quite a challenge. Much of the curriculum is devoted to the early history of the Zionist movement,
the founding and early history of the State of Israel, and the ongoing conflict with the Arabs. These topics lend
themselves   to teaching   students   to   think historically,   because    the Jews,  the  Arabs,   and the  British  (who
conquered the country in World War I) have different perspectives on the historical events. Nonetheless, the
ongoing   conflict associates   the unnatural     aspect    of historical   thinking with   feelings of  betrayal   of one's
collective. Putting  it in the  cultural-encounter       framework,    students--longstanding    members   of   their  ethnic
collectives--might regard the instruction to look through the eyes of the "enemy" as illegitimate and immoral
(Kelman,    1999). We   believed, however,       that it is important   to  use these topics to  teach   historical thinking
because such thinking will help them deal with the numerous contradictions that they encounter when exposed
to diverse opinions through the electronic media.
         We therefore developed a computer-supported collaborative learning (CSCL) environment in which
Israeli Jewish and Israeli Arab students read historical sources that interpret a historical event relevant to their
past and jointly wrote their interpretation of the event. The event in question is the issuance of the Balfour
Declaration on 2 November 1917. At that time Britain was still engaged in World War I, and Palestine, like the
rest of the region, was under the control of the Ottoman Empire. The Balfour Declaration was addressed to Lord
Rothschild. Lord Balfour, the British Foreign Secretary, conveyed the British Government's `sympathy with
Jewish Zionist aspirations' for a national home in Palestine. A team comprising two historians (one Jew and one
Arab) and three educational researchers (one Arab and two Jews) chose five secondary sources (by two Jews,
two Arabs, and one Englishman) that discuss the event in order to present a wide range of interpretations.

                                                                                                                                  1-10
                  The decision to engage students from the two conflicting groups was prompted by a need to amplify
         the voice of the "other" in the past. This need originated in our hypothesis that each side's interaction with the
         historical texts would be highly emotional as well as a symmetrical inversion of the other side's interaction on
         the scale of appropriation/resistance (Wertsch 2002); thus, each side would automatically ignore or resist the
         voice of the past agents of the other. However, the present agents of the other would most probably appropriate
         that voice and thus amplify it during the group discussion. We assumed that students would prove the milieu
         effective. Wishing to `show the light' to the other agent, they would strive to master both sides' reasoning and
         find rational ways of communicating their viewpoint, fearing that otherwise their voice would not be considered.
         The interaction in which each agent pinpoints the issues that the other agent, being unconsciously mediated by
         his/her culture, has chosen to ignore, resist, or appropriate "automatically" would make the agents conscious of
         the fact that their interaction with their common past, like the interaction of the authors of the five sources with
         that same past, is mediated by their sense of belonging. This was the purpose of the milieu.
                  Our design utilized contact theory (Allport, 1979; Amir, 1969) and particularly applications of contact
         theory in designing encounters between Israeli Jews and Arabs that showed that when certain conditions are
         fulfilled, participants' perceptions of the other side evolve (e.g., Stephan et al., 2004). This step was necessary in
         order   for students  to listen  to each  other's voices  and    continue  the interaction.  For   example,     in order to
         encourage    collaboration  rather  than  competition--one    of the  conditions   necessary  for    a fertile encounter--
         success  in  the group   assignment   did not necessarily  depend    on  a  group  consensus.   Instead   we   allowed   the
         students  to present  two   different opinions, as   long as  they  analyzed   the differences   between    them.  Another
         example was the decision to use secondary sources so that students could shift the moral judgment onto the
         historians who wrote the texts; in other words, they could say harsh things without saying them in their own
         names. In addition, these sources provide examples of the norms of scholarly communication in the field of
         history. Finally, we based our environment on Wiki technology, which permits joint asynchronous writing; i.e.,
         anyone can add, change or delete a Web page. The use of Wiki technology provided the flexibility to collaborate
         at a distance or face to face.
                  The assignment was carried out in groups and consisted of two two-week phases: In the first phase,
         students worked in ethnically homogeneous groups. Each student read two sources and summarized them for the
         group. Then each group jointly composed an essay addressing the assignment questions. Next, the Arab and
         Jewish groups commented on each other's essays. In the second phase the students formed an inter-ethnic group
         and were given two options: they had to write a joint essay that either answered the assignment questions or
         explained the essence of the disagreement between them that prevented them from writing one answer.

        FZCE-Based Evaluation
                  We followed four Arab students and five Jewish students as they contended with the assignment by
         analyzing   all the  essays  they  had  produced.  We    also recorded   the face-to-face   meeting    at which    the nine
         students finalized their joint essay, and we interviewed four students (two Arabs and two Jews) shortly after
         they  had   finished working    on  the assignment.   Below   is a  synopsis   of  the  relevant results.   For  a detailed
         description, see Ben-David Kolikant and Pollack (in press).
                  The first phase, in which each ethnically homogeneous group dealt with the secondary sources alone,
         was dominated by practices of appropriation/resistance. This phase yielded two different theses, each of which
         focused on the relationship between the main agent (Britain) and one co-agent (the group's own people), and
         minimized the role of the third agent, i.e. the other people. As expected, each group resisted the other group's
         thesis, probably  due    to the mediation  of their  ethnic   identity. Interestingly,  the  Jews'   text reveals  a lot of
         emotions (e.g., "it's a shame"), whereas the Arabs constructed rational, well-warranted arguments to dispute the
         Jews' thesis.
                  Furthermore,    both   groups  addressed  the  historical  sources  from  the  cultural perspective    of  reading
         comprehension. Like Wineburg's students (see above), they sought the "one true story." This approach was
         salient in each group's written review of the other group's essay. Both groups believed that if only they had
         sufficient  information  they   could  know   what   had  really happened    but  that, in  any  case,  the other   group's
         viewpoint was wrong. Moreover, each group accused the other side's authors of being subjective. For example,
         in the following excerpt, taken from the Jews' written critique of the Arabs' essay, the Jews simply claimed that
         the Arabs had missed the truth that "appear[s] in the historians' articles explicitly":

                  There   are too    many  assumptions   that you  disagree  with   and claim    are incorrect.  On  what
                  basis??? They appear in the historians' articles explicitly, [so] what makes you decide they are
                  wrong? You can't argue with facts.

                  In the second phase, however, a change was already evident in the first joint draft, in which the groups
         explicitly  described the   differences between   their  theses  as the result of  ethnic   identity and  inherent   human
         subjectivity. Additionally, the students used different tools for addressing the texts and the disagreement. For

1-10
example, in the following excerpt the Jews again critiqued the Arabs' thesis, but this time unemotionally and
with a rational, well-warranted argument that weakened the Arabs thesis. Specifically, the Jews critiqued the
Arabs' acceptance of the thesis offered by one of the Arab sources while ignoring the counter theses offered by
the British source and the second Arab source (note that they avoided using the Jewish sources).

         The Arab Group are adamant that Britain knew the implications full well and do not raise any
         doubts about the matter.... Of the entire spectrum of historians' opinions on this question--
         from Bian al-Chot, who says the British were naive, to the decisive Sykes, who alleges that
         the British undersecretaries acted knowingly--the AG chose to side more with Dr. al-Chiali.

         We also observed collaborative work in a friendly atmosphere in the face-to-face meeting at which the
students produced their joint essay. In fact, the students were engaged in learning by doing history. First, they
put a lot of effort   into adding   the appropriate  references  to  their text, as  historians typically  do. That work
required verification of their text by checking it against the historical sources. This change was quite radical,
since the essays by the two groups had included only a few references. More importantly, they read the texts--
even texts to which they had objected before--out loud together. Although they did not agree with the text, that
did not prevent them from clarifying the points made in it. We thus concluded that the milieu was useful in
leading students to adopt a more historian-like work style than they had had in the first phase and helped make
them aware of the bias inherent in the practices of historians and in historical texts.
         However,     we   also noticed  that  the joint efforts   focused  on   producing  a   decent presentation.  The
students operated on the assumption that they agreed in general and ascribed what they considered the minor
disagreements   to  their  different  ethnicity. Yet they  decided   that  the differences  could   not be   bridged, and
therefore there  was  no   point in   further exploration  even  if they  knew   of  facts that might  weaken   the other
group's argument--and we observed two such situations. We thus concluded that further work is required to
design an FZCE that supports the adoption of historical methods to deal with contradictions.

Conclusions
         This paper suggests that when we adopt a sociocultural perspective on schooling it could be useful to
view students not only as newcomers to the professional CoP or culture of the discipline taught but also as
longstanding members of cultures that overlap that culture. Students' interactions within the educational milieu
are thus  viewed   as cultural  encounters.   The  usefulness   of  this metaphor   was demonstrated    in two  domains,
computer    science and    history; I believe,   however,  that this metaphor     is relevant   to the broad   educational
community and that many disciplines would benefit if the cultural-encounter metaphor were applied to them.
For example, here CS was used to demonstrate the user culture. But computers are becoming common resources
in school and students are likely to contextualize computer-related situations from a user perspective, which
would lead them to set goals and employ practices that might not be consistent with those of the teachers. For
example, students who work with interactive computerized simulations in physics class might contextualize the
milieu based on their (computer) gaming experience (Gee, 2003). The concepts of cultural encounter and FZCE
are therefore broadly relevant and are becoming more so as we enter the age of pluralism, digitalism, and the
information explosion.

References
Aho, A. V., & Ullman, J. D. (1992). Foundations of computer science. New York: W. H. Freeman/Computer
         Science Press.
Allport, G. W. (1979). The nature of prejudice. Cambridge, MA: Perseus Books. (1st edition published 1954).
Amir, Y. (1969). Contact hypothesis in ethnic relations. Psychological Bulletin, 71, 319-342.
Barnett, M., Barab, S. A., Schatz, S., Warren, S. (2000). Designing a community of inquiry in an undergraduate
         history   course:    A clash   of cultures.   Paper presented     at the Annual    Meeting    of  the  American
         Educational Research Association, New Orleans, LA.
Ben-David Kolikant, Y. (2004). Learning concurrency as an entry point to the community of CS practitioners.
         Journal of Computers in Mathematics and Science Teaching, 23(1), 21-46.
Ben-David    Kolikant,  Y,  &   Ben   Ari, M.  (in press). Fertile  zones  of  cultural encounter   in computer  science
         education. Journal of the Learning Science.
Ben-David Kolikant, Y, & Pollack, S. (in press). The asymmetrical influence of identity: A triadic interaction
         among Israeli Jews, Israeli Arabs and historical texts. Journal of Curriculum Studies.
Brown,   J. S, Collins,   A., &  Duguid,   P.  (1989). Situated  cognition    and the culture   of learning. Educational
         Researcher, 18(1), 2-42.

                                                                                                                             1-10
         Carroll, J. M., &   Rosson, M. B.   (1987). The  paradox of  the active   user. In J. M. Carroll  (Ed.), Interfacing
                  thought:   Cognitive aspects  of   human-computer   interaction   (pp.  80-111).   Cambridge,   MA:  MIT
                  Press/Bradford Books.
         Chambliss,   M. J., & Garner,  R. (1996). Do   adults change their minds   after   reading persuasive text? Written
                  Communications, 13(3), 291-313.
         Collins, A., Brown, J. S., & Holum, A. (1991). Cognitive apprenticeship: Making thinking visible. American
                  Educator, 12(6), 38-47.
         Goodell, H., Maulsby, D., Kuhn, S., & Traynor, C. (1999). End-user programming/informal programming: A
                  workshop conducted at the ACM CHI 1999. SIGCHI Bulletin, 31(4), 17-21.
         Kelman, H. C. (1999). The interdependence of Israeli and Palestinian national identities: The role of the other in
                  existential conflicts. Journal of Social Issues, 55(3), 581-600.
         Labaree, D. F. (2003). The peculiar problems of preparing and becoming educational researchers. Educational
                  Researcher, 32(4), 13-22.
         Lave, J.,   & Wenger,   E.  (1991).  Situated learning:  Legitimate peripheral     participation. Cambridge,  UK:
                  Cambridge University Press.
         Lord, C. G., Ross, L., & Lepper, M. R. (1979). Biased assimilation and attitude polarization: Prior theories on
                  subsequently considered evidence. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 37(22), 2098-2109.
         Nardi, B. A. (1993). A small matter of programming: Perspectives on end user computing. Cambridge, MA:
                  MIT Press.
         Reynolds, R. R., Taylor, M. S., Steffensen, M. S., Shirey, L. L., & Anderson, R. C. (1982). Cultural schemata
                  and reading comprehension. Reading Research Quarterly, 17(3), 353-366.
         Roth, W.-M., & Bowen, G. M. (2003). When are graphs worth ten thousand words? An expert-expert study.
                  Cognition and Instruction, 21(4), 429-473.
         Schoenfeld, A. H. (1992). Learning to think mathematically: Problem solving, metacognition, and sense-making
                  in mathematics. In D. A. Grouws (Ed.), Handbook of research on mathematics teaching and learning
                  (pp. 334-370). New York: Macmillan.
         Seixas, P. (1993). Historical understanding among adolescents in a multicultural setting. Curriculum Inquiry,
                  23(3), 301-327.
         Stephan, C. W., Hertz-Lazarowitz, R., Zelniker, T., & Stephan, W. G. (Eds.). (2004). Arab-Jewish coexistence
                  programs. Journal of Social Issues, 60(2), 237-452.
         Turkle, S. (1995). Life on the screen: Identity in the age of the Internet. New York: Simon and Schuster.
         Wenger,   E.  (1998). Communities   of practice: Learning,  meaning  and    identity. Cambridge,   UK:   Cambridge
                  University Press.
         Wertsch, J. V. (1998). Mind as action. New York: Oxford University Press.
         Wertsch, J. V. (2000). Voices of collective remembering. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
         Wineburg, S. (2001). Historical thinking and other unnatural acts. Philadelphia: Temple University Press.
         Yackel,  E.,  & Cobb,   P.  (1996). Sociomathematical   norms,   argumentation,    and  autonomy   in mathematics.
                  Journal for Research in Mathematics Education, 27, 458-477.

       Acknowledgments
         This paper is an outcome of a research project supported by Israel Science Foundation grant 1180.

1-10
