Questioning Teacher Goals in Professional Development: Do Goals
                                      Really Make A Difference?

                  Chandra Hawley Orrill, Sandra Geisler, Rachael Brown, Victor Brunaud-Vega
                           University of Georgia, Learning and Performance Support Lab,
                                         611 Aderhold Hall, Athens, GA 30602
                 Email: corrill@uga.edu, sgeisler@uga.edu, brownra@uga.edu, lbrunaud@uga.edu

          Abstract:   This   study   reports  empirical  evidence   on   a   common       principle   of effective
          professional development dealing with teachers' involvement in their own learning. The data
          used were collected during a five-day mathematics institute involving 51 teachers in grades
          three  through    eight. Questions   of   how  participants'   goals    influence   their   satisfaction,
          perceptions,   and learning  were   examined.   Surprisingly,    the alignment     of the   participants'
          goals with the institute's goals did not effect satisfaction, perceptions, or learning.

Background
          Teachers play a critical role in student achievement (e.g., Hill, Rowan, & Ball, 2005). Because of
issues with achievement, a variety of reform efforts aim to change and rebuild the way teachers think about
teaching and learning (e.g., NPEAT, 2000). As a result, a variety of lists of principles on effective professional
development (PD) have emerged. The sources of these lists and the foundations from which they are derived
vary (Guskey, 2003). In general, there is a strong lack of data about teacher learning (Fishman & Davis, 2006)
leaving the list developers to rely on best practices in the development of these lists of principles.
          One   common     principle  of  effective PD   focuses  on teachers'    involvement      in their  own    learning.
Specifically,  teachers  should    be involved   in  the identification  of  their  own    learning   needs,    the    learning
opportunity and the PD process to be used (Guskey, 2003; Hawley & Valli, 1999; NPEAT, 2000). Selecting and
committing to professional development goals is considered a key motivator; it drives learners' choices, their
attention and   their resulting opportunity   to learn (Pintrich  &  Schunk,    1996).    To  explore  the  role   of  teacher
involvement,    this  study attempts  to  determine    how teacher's  personal    goals    as they   aligned    to the  stated
workshop   goals  affected   their  satisfaction with,   perceived usefulness     of, and    measurable   learning     from  a
mandatory PD experience in which they were not able to help shape the goals.

Methods
          The PD program was designed to improve K-8 mathematics teaching in one rural district working to
implement the state's new mathematics standards. The developers' goals for the project included: increasing
mathematical content knowledge for teaching, building a shared vision of standards-based practice, introducing
investigations-based teaching strategies, and integrating manipulatives to support mathematical learning.
          The data were collected from 51 third through eighth grade teachers during the five-day mathematics
institute held immediately prior to the 2007 school year. The research questions of interest were:
    1.    How do participants' alignment with workshop goals influence their satisfaction with a PD experience?
    2.    How do participants' alignment with workshop goals influence their perceptions of the usefulness of a
          PD experience?
    3.    How do participants' alignment with workshop goals influence their performance on an assessment
          after a PD experience?
          Surveys    and an  assessment   of  teacher    mathematical   knowledge      for   teaching    (Ball, 2003)    were
administered both as pre and post-workshop measures. The pre-survey included the question, "What are your
personal goals for this summer institute?" Given that the teachers received little prior information about the
summer institute, their stated goals likely identified what they valued. The responses were coded to indicate
whether   each   teacher's  goals  were  aligned  to one   or more   of  the   stated institute  goals.  Unclear    or  blank
responses were labeled "Ambiguous". We found that 24 teachers listed goals aligned to the institute goals; 12
teachers listed goals did not align to the goals; and 15 teachers listed goals were Ambiguous.
          To  determine    participants'  satisfaction with   and  their   perceptions    of  usefulness    of  the    PD, we
considered   six Likert-scale questions.   Each   question asked   teachers    to rank    whether  they  strongly   disagree,
disagree, agree  and   strongly agree.   We  converted   these scores   to numeric    ratings   of 1  to 4. We     then ran  a
crosstabs analysis between each question and the three groups. A Pearson chi-square statistic was calculated to
determine whether there was any significant difference between the three goal-alignment groups.
          As a measure of the institute's impact on teacher learning, we relied on matched forms of the algebra
subtests of the Learning Mathematics for Teaching (LMT; SII/LMT, 2004) assessment for each grade band (3-5
and 6-8).  The   assessments,   given  at the beginning    and end   of  the   institute, were  scored   using     the z-score

                                                                                                                                  3-0
         conversion tables provided by the test developers and changes in mean z-score was considered significant in
         cases where z  0.3.

       Findings
                 Analysis of the correlation between the teacher satisfaction scores on three Likert-scale questions   and
         the three goal-alignment groups showed that there was no significant difference at the 0.05 confidence level
         between the groups.
                 Teacher perception of the usefulness of the PD experience was determined from three different Likert-
         scale questions. But, as with the satisfaction scores, the analysis of the perception scores showed no significant
         difference at the 0.05 confidence level between the three groups.
                 Teacher learning was determined by considering the mean gain scores on the LMT. While the ANOVA
         analysis showed no significant difference between groups at the 0.05 confidence level, each of the groups did
         experience significant growth when considering the LMT gain scores. In our sample, the Ambiguous group
         showing the most growth (z=1.072); the Aligned group showed the middle amount of growth (z=1.023); and the
         Not Aligned group had the least growth (z=0.836) between the pre and posttest administration.

       Discussion
                 In this  study we examined      the impact  of teachers'    personal goals on their satisfaction with and
         perceptions of PD. We also considered the impact of these goals on their mathematical knowledge for teaching
         development. Based on the principles for effective PD, we expected those teachers whose goals met at least one
         of the institute goals to show  higher      levels of  satisfaction and demonstrate   higher  levels of  learning.
         Surprisingly, our study found that all of the teachers showed significant gains in their knowledge; however those
         in the Ambiguous group showed the most growth, but only slightly more than the Aligned group. Teachers'
         satisfaction with and perceptions of usefulness of their PD experience were not significantly different regardless
         of whether their personal goals aligned to those of the PD.
                 This raises questions about the importance of teachers' involvement in their PD experiences. Contrary
         to the prevailing consensus, suggesting that teachers need to set their own learning goals (e.g., Hill, 2004), our
         data suggested that teacher alignment with the goals of the workshop was not an essential characteristic. Thus,
         involvement as developers in the PD effort may not be critical for participating teachers' success in the PD.  In
         this particular study, the PD could be considered "successful" even in the cases where the teachers' goals were
         not aligned with the institute goals.

       References
         Ball, D. (2003). What mathematical knowledge is needed for teaching mathematics? Secretary's Summit on
                 Mathematics, U.S. Department of Education, February 6, 2003; Washington, D.C.
         Fishman, B. & Davis, E. (2006). Teacher learning research and the learning sciences. In R. K. Sawyer (Ed.), The
                 Cambridge handbook of the learning sciences, (pp. 535-550). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
         Guskey, T. R. (2003). Analyzing lists of the characteristics of effective professional development to promote
                 visionary leadership. NASSP Bulletin, 87(637), 4-20.
         Hawley, W. D., & Valli, L. (1999). The Essentials of Effective Professional Development: A New Consensus.
                 In L. Darling-Hammond & G. Sykes (Eds.), Teaching as the learning profession. San Francisco:
                 Jossey-Bass.
         Hill, H.C. (2004). Professional development standards and practices in elementary school mathematics.
                 Elementary School Journal, 104(3), 215-231.
         Hill, H.C., Rowan, B., & Ball, D.L. (2004). Effects of teachers' mathematical knowledge for teaching on student
                 achievement. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan.
         NPEAT (National Partnership for Excellence and Accountability in Teaching) (2000). Revisioning professional
                 development: What learner-centered professional development looks like. Oxford, OH: Author.
         Pintrich, P. R., & Schunk, D. H. (1996). Motivation in education: theory, research, and applications.
                 Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Merrill.
         SII/LMT (Study of Instructional Improvement/Learning Mathematics for Teaching) (2004). Learning
                 mathematics for teaching. Ann Arbor, MI: Consortium for Policy Research in Education.

       Acknowledgments
         The work reported here was supported, in part, by Georgia's Teacher Quality Higher Education program. The
         opinions expressed here are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect those of the funding agency. The
         researchers wish to thank the participants and Dorothy White, Natasha Brewley-Corbin, Eileen Murray, and
         Susan Sexton for their assistance in the data collection effort.

3-0
