     Change in Students' Internal Scripts for Knowledge Building:
                     A Challenge for Capturing Epistemic Agency

    Jun Oshima, Ritsuko Oshima, Shizuoka Univ., 3-5-1 Johoku Naka-ku Hmamatsu-shi JAPAN 432-8011
                         Email: joshima@inf.shizuoka.ac.jp, roshima@inf.shizuoka.ac.jp
                     Knowledge Forum® Japan Research Group(1), kfjp@inf.shizuoka.ac.jp

          Abstract: The purpose of the study was to develop the assessment tool to capture learners'
          epistemic  agency  (Scardamalia,  2002).    By referring  to   studies on  scripted cooperation,   we
          developed  the script completion    task  for pairs  of elementary   school   students to engage   in.
          Students'  developed  scripts for   collaboratively  solving    a socio-scientific  problem    in two
          consecutive  lesson  units were  analyzed     by the  four  commitments     of knowledge    building
          discourse (Bereiter, 1994).

Background and Purposes
          Knowledge building (kb) is a deep constructivism that is focused on learning as a process in which
learners  collaboratively build   objective   knowledge     based   on   conceptual   artifacts, whereas    the  shallow
constructivism is directed at learning as a process in which learners make effort to deeply understand knowledge
objects  that have  been  created by  others.  Although    the kb  perspective   provides  us  with a new    direction of
designing lessons in the classroom, it is still not easy to develop classrooms as kb communities. Many studies
have attempted    to establish pedagogical    design  principles  based   on   necessary conditions   to sustain  the  kb
community (i.e., Scardamalia, 2002). In particular, recent studies pay more attention to a specific condition for
the kb community, the epistemic agency. The epistemic agency is described in Scardamalia (2002) as follows:

          Participants set forth their ideas and negotiate a fit between personal ideas and ideas of others,
          using contrasts to spark and sustain knowledge advancement rather than depending on others
          to chart that course for them. They deal with problems of goals, motivation, evaluation, and
          long-range planning that are normally left to teachers or managers.

          While studies have been challenging lesson designs for students to take over the epistemic agency from
teachers, there have  not been  many    studies that  develop   the assessment    tools to capture  students'  epistemic
agency. There are found two assessment approaches to the epistemic agency. First, some cases can be described
in detail that a group of students engage in knowledge building with exerting their epistemic agency. Oshima,
Oshima, Murayama, Inagaki, Takenaka, Yamamoto, Yamaguchi, & Nakayama (2006) described how a group of
students reflected on their own and others' previous works for the purpose of inventing new experiments to
figure out how alum crystals are created in aqueous solution. Second, we can ask students to evaluate their
learning  processes  with a  specific  criterion.  van  Aalst  and  Chan    (2007)   proposed  the  knowledge    building
portfolio approach as a formative assessment for learners to reflect upon their activities from the kb perspective.
They found that students using the knowledge building portfolio recognized the effectiveness of kb perspective
on their own learning as well as significantly improved conceptual understanding. Although these approaches
provide us with insights on how well students treat their own learning while they are appropriately instructed to
do so (i.e., Students are instructed to exert their epistemic agency under appropriately designed environments.),
we  further need   a new  assessment   approach    to evaluating   how   their developed   epistemic  agency   would   be
transferred in future contexts of learning. In this work, we developed a new evaluation approach to capturing
epistemic agency in future learning contexts, and applied the evaluation in our two consecutive kb lesson units
for elementary school students in Japan.

Evaluation of Students' Epistemic Agency through Two kb Lesson Units
Script Completion Task as an Assessment Tool for Epistemic Agency
          Referring to internal script research (e.g., Kollar, Fischer, & Slotta, 2005), we developed a procedure
to evaluate   each student's  personal  script  for argumentation     in  kb. Kollar, et al.  (2005)  asked  students  to
evaluate two different qualities of scripts (high and low level) and explain which script was better than the other.
Based on students' explanations, Kollar, et al. evaluated each student's personal script for collaboration. We
extended their approach for the purpose of evaluating epistemic agency as follows: First, we asked students to
actually create their scripts rather than evaluate and explain given different levels of collaboration scripts. Since
our aim   was  at capturing  students' epistemic    agency,   we  had  to facilitate students' intentional  use  of their
personal scripts. Second, we gave students an incomplete script where two characters (a stray cat and a wild cat)
were debating a socio-scientific issue (Do we need zoos?), and asked a pair of students to create further scripts.

                                                                                                                            3-0
         The socio-scientific    issues require    students of  handling   different perspectives   simultaneously  for  generating
         their solutions. We thought that such a task requirement was necessary for students to exert their epistemic
         agency. Finally, since arguments that students created here appeared as discourse between the two characters,
         we evaluated students' commitments to their discourse based on the four kb discourse commitments (Bereiter,
         1994).

        Analysis Design
                  We examined students' epistemic agency by using the script completion task in the pre- and post-test
         paradigm.   The  target    lesson unit was    on nuclear   power   generation.  Students   were   engaged  in  progressive
         problem solving in groups using Knowledge Forum®, a CSCL technology for facilitating progressive discourse.
         Before and after the lesson unit, the script completion task was administered. Students in pairs engaged in the
         task. They wrote down their scripts following the two characters' discourse on the zoo in a worksheet. Their
         scripts (16 pairs in pre-test, and 15 pairs in post-test) were evaluated by two independent scholars with three-
         point scales of  four   kb  discourse  commitments      (Bereiter,  1994):  (1) mutual   understanding   commitment;   (2)
         empirical testability commitment; (3) expansion commitment; and (4) openness commitment. The agreement
         between the scholars was over 85%. Disagreements were resolved through their discussion. Besides the change
         in students' epistemic agency from the pre-test to the post-test within one lesson unit, we were also concerned
         with the influence of students' previous kb lesson experiences. One third of students in the target 6th-grade
         classroom had kb lesson experience in their previous year (genetically modified foods). We therefore further
         examined    the  influence  of   previous  kb lesson    experience   on the   change  in students'  epistemic  agency  by
         comparing between the previously experienced students and the others.

        Results and Discussion
                  In the comparison between the pre- and the post-test, we found that students' epistemic agency was
         improved in empirical testability (F2 = 2.62, p = .10) and openness commitments (F2 = 5.04, p < .05). Results
         suggested   that students'  experiences    in the  kb  lesson  unit  made   them  prepared  for exerting  their  epistemic
         agency for kb in new context, particularly being more concerned with evidences for supporting their claims and
         possible  rebuttals  for   their  claims.  Further    comparison   between    more   kb  experienced    students  and less
         experienced ones showed an interesting phenomenon. It was found that proportion of students who improved the
         empirical testability commitment was higher in more kb experienced students, whereas proportions of students
         who improved the openness commitment were almost the same between more and less kb experienced ones.
         Taking results together, we can propose a possible developmental trajectory of epistemic agency that students
         first become able to recognize openness to challenge their beliefs, and developed a methodology to test their
         belief with evidence. Results in this study and the proposed developmental trajectory of the epistemic agency
         would require at least two direction of further research. First, the developmental trajectory of openness before
         empirical   testability may    be contradictory    to  results of  scientific reasoning    research such  as  the positive
         feedback    bias suggesting      empirical  testability   before  openness.   Second,    we   did   not find  any  critical
         developmental    shift  in mutual  understanding      and expansion  commitments      that are more    based on  collective
         nature  of  kb   discourse.  Further   research    is needed   to examine     whether we   need   more   time  to see  the
         developmental change that can be captured by the assessment tool or need another assessment tool that is more
         sensitive to kb nature of students' discourse.

       Endnotes
          (1) The following persons participated in this research as Knowledge Forum® Japan Research Group: Shigenori Inagaki,
              Masaji Fujimoto, Isao Murayama, Hayashi Nakayama, Makiko Takenaka, Miki Sakamoto, Etsuji Yamaguchi, and
              Tomokazu Yamamoto.

       References
         Bereiter, C. (1994). Implications of postmodernism for science,          or,    science    as   progressive      discourse.
                  Educational Psychologist, 29(1), 3-12.
         Kollar, I., Fischer,   F., & Slotta,   J. (2005).  Internal and   external  collaboration  scripts  in  web-based science
                  learning at schools. The Proceedings of CSCL2005, pp. 331-340.
         Oshima, J., Oshima, R., Murayama, I., Inagaki, S., Takenaka, M. Yamamoto, T., Yamaguchi, E., & Nakayama,
                  H.  (2006).    Knowledge-building     activity   structures in  Japanese  elementary     science pedagogy.   The
                  International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 1(2), 229-246.
         Scardamalia,    M. (2002).   Collective   cognitive   responsibility for the  advancement    of knowledge.    In  B. Jones
                  (Ed.), Liberal Education in the Knowledge Age. Chicago, IL: Open Court.
         van Aalst, J., & Chan, C. K. K. (2007). Student-directed assessment of knowledge building using electronic
                  portfolio. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 16(2), 175-220.

3-0
