         Identifying Threshold Concepts in Learning Nanoscience
     by Using Concept Maps and Students' Responses to an Open-
                                               ended Interview

                     Eun Jung Park, Gregory Light, Thomas Mason, Northwestern University,
                                          Email:   eun-park@northwestern.edu

         Abstract: This study explores students understanding of key concepts in nanoscience with the
         intention   of   identifying a  potential threshold   concept      in the field   through   the  analysis of
         student concept maps and explanatory interviews. The analysis of students' maps indicates
         conceptual development and learning difficulties in learning size­dependent property change
         at  the  Nano-scale.   In  addition,  it identifies potential      threshold  concepts   in  the  study  and
         understanding     of  nanoscale   science  from   the students'     perspective.     It also   indicates  the
         importance of previous learning in science to integrate isolated concepts and to help students
         achieve a deeper understanding of key phenomena at the nanoscale.

Introduction and Rationale
         Since Feynman (1960) invited us to the "room at the bottom", nanoscience and technology has not only
attracted considerable interest from scientists and engineers but also from the general public. While it has grown
as a new,   potentially   rich  field in science,  substantial   attention     has yet  to be given     on research   about its
educational  perspectives.    Recent   studies (Stevens,   S.  et.   al. 2007)     with scientists,  engineers    and  learning
scientists, have  identified  a number    of potential `big   ideas'  or    key concepts   central   to  the understanding    of
nanoscale science and technology. To the end, this study is a preliminary exploration of students understanding
of a number of those key concepts with the intention of identifying a potential threshold concept in the field.
         Meyer    and     Land  (2003,   2006)    describe the   term,    threshold     concept  as   a  conceptual    gateway
representing   `a transformed   way   of understanding,    or  interpreting,    or viewing   something     without  which   the
learner cannot progress'. Threshold concepts have also been characterized as being transformative, integrative,
probably    irreversible, potentially  troublesome,    and   often   boundary      makers  (Meyer    and   Land,   2003). The
troublesomeness of knowledge here refers to a concept being conceptually difficult, meaningless, inert, alien or
implicit (Perkins,  1999   &   2006).  Traditionally key   concepts      or big ideas   in a discipline   (including   potential
threshold concepts) have been identified through research methods aimed at developing a consensus of expert
opinion  (Stevens,   S.   et.  al. 2007).   Similarly, concepts      which     are troublesome      with   respect to  student
understanding have often been identified by experts `through professional reflection on the nature of the subject
as a conceptual entity' (Davies 2006). In so far as these methods draw upon expertise to identify problems for
student  understanding,    such    methods  might  be  referred  to  as     `top-down'   approaches.      On  the  other hand,
`bottom up' approaches focus on identifying troublesome concepts through research with students, themselves.
Such approaches identify both the variation in the ways in which students experience or understand a concept
and the key dimensions of variation which might constitute the troublesomeness of the concept - such as the
aspects  of variation   revealed   in phenomenographic       studies (Marton       &  Booth   1997).     This study   primarily
focuses on the less frequently taken `bottom up' approach, although it is done against the background of a `top
down' perspective of a faculty expert. For the purposes of this study, the experts concept map is not used here as
a means of comparison with student concept-maps but rather as a way of identifying the key concepts in the
specific area.

Methodology
         This study focuses on the analysis of student interviews in which the students were asked to construct
and explain concept maps exploring the troublesome nature characterizing their understanding of fundamental
nanoscince   concepts.    Students    were   probed   for  their   deeper      understanding     of the   concepts  and   their
relationship.Concept maps, consisting of nodes (concepts) and connecting lines (propositions), have been used
in research and classroom practice to reveal and assess student knowledge and structure in sciences and other
disciplines (Novak & Gowin, 1984). Based on Ausubel's meaningful learning and an epistemological idea that
concepts    and concept   relationships  are  the  building  blocks   of    knowledge    structure,  concept   maps    reveal a
learner's knowledge of facts, ideas, and how they are related to each other.
        Data    were  collected    from   7  volunteers    out of    21     engineering    majors    taking   an  introductory
thermodynamics of materials science course including a unit and a term project on nanoscience concepts in
which a learning tool was developed to aid students to learn about property changes in nanometer range. Based
on an interview with the course professor and his construction of an expert concept map, 15 key nano-concepts
were selected    and provided   for   students to  construct   their own     concept    maps. Pre-   and   post-concept  maps

                                                                                                                                   3-0
         including   students'  responses   to  open-ended     interview   questions   about   the   construction  of their  maps
         (understanding of concepts and reasoning for propositions) were explored in detail. In addition, to help clarify
         the distinctions the researchers were attempting to identify, students were provided with working definitions of
         three different   categories of  concept  during   the interview:   (i)  important,   (ii) difficult, and (iii) threshold.
         Students were then asked to select concepts from their own maps and to identify them with respect to these
         categories and to provide reason for their responses.

       Findings and Discussion
                  The comparative analysis of the change in students' pre and post maps, showed an increase in the links
         students made between concepts for thermodynamic behaviors at Nano-scale and surface related terms such as
         "surface energy/force/tension" or "surface area to volume ratio". This indicates an increase in the knowledge of
         concepts  and   their relationship with   respect to  size­dependent     or surface-dominated    property  change  at  the
         Nano-scale. However, student intervierw responses with respect to their reasoning about the mechanism of size-
         dependent    property  change    (such  as    melting  point   depression)    showed    a   lack of   understanding   and
         misconceptions    of  these key phenomena.     Although    the expert    in the field (the  course  instructor) suggested
         "surface area to volume ratio at Nano-scale" might be a threshold concept in the understanding of the cluster of
         concepts presented in the nano-unit of the course; as a simple ratio it was not itself regarded as a conceptually
         difficult concept for students to understand.   Although as a critical concept for explaining propert change at the
         nano level, it was regarded as difficult.  A previous study (Cohen et al., 1999) also discussed learning difficulty
         in understanding   the  concept  beyond   its mathematical    meaning.   Students    of this study  reported concepts  in
         thermodynamics related to the nature of matter - including surface energy, surfaces forces etc. - as threshold
         concepts. In addition, the difficulty of visualizing the concept of "size at Nano-levels" was mentioned as another
         potential threshold concept in this course. Both these concepts were regarded as perquisite knowledge to the
         thermodynamics    course,   concepts   acquired   in previous   science  and    engineering  courses.  This  suggests  the
         importance   that previous   learning  in science    plays in integrating   isolated  concepts   in Nano-science   and in
         helping students understand science at a Nano-scale. In particular, student reports of "size at Nano-levels" as a
         related threshold concept points to the troublesome nature of the concept of "size" at Nano-levels. The size
         conception   within   surface-dominated   property   change    at Nano-scale    could   be counter-intuitive to  students
         familiar with macro-scale in a visible range.
                  Identifying threshold concepts from students' concept maps will help us to better understand student
         learning, conceptual difficulty, and conceptual development in nanoscience education. In future, comparing the
         different perspectives on threshold concepts between teacher and students might also provide useful information
         for the preparation of nanoscience education.

       References
         Cohen, A.; Moreh A. (1999) Hands-on method for teaching the concept of the ratio between surface area and
                  volume, American Biology Teacher 61(9) (Nov/Dec 1999)
         Davies, P. (2006). Threshold concepts: how can we recognize them? In J. H. F. Meyer and R. Land (eds.),
                  Overcoming barriers to student understanding: Threshold concepts and troublesome knowledge (pp.
                  70-84). New York, NY: Routledge.
         Feynman, R. P. (1992). There's plenty of room at the bottom. Journal of Microelectromechanical Systems, 1(1),
                  60-66.
         Marton, F., & Booth, S. (1997).    Learning and awareness. Mahwah, NJ : Lawrence Erlbaum.
         Meyer, J. H. F. & Land, R. (2006). Overcoming barriers to student understanding: Threshold concepts and
                  troublesome knowledge. New York, NY: Routledge.
         Novak,   J. D., &  Gowin,    D. B. (1984).  Learning   how    to  learn. New    York  and  Cambridge,    UK:    Cambridge
                  University Press.
         Perkins, D. (1999). The many faces of constructivism. Educational Leadership, 57(3), 6-11.
         Perkins,  D.  (2006).  Constructivism     and troublesome     knowledge.     In J. H.   F.  Meyer   and  R.  Land  (eds.),
                  Overcoming barriers to student understanding: Threshold concepts and troublesome knowledge (pp.
                  33-47). New York, NY: Routledge.
         Stevens, S. Y., Sutherland, L., Schank, P., & Krajcik, J. (draft, 2007). The big ideas of nanoscience. Retrieved
                  June 2, 2007 from http://hi-ce.org/PDFs/Big_Ideas_of_Nanoscience-20feb07.pdf

       Acknowledgments
         This  work   was  supported     by the  National   Center   for   Learning   &   Teaching    in  Nanoscale   Science  and
         Engineering (NCLT) under the National Science Foundation Grant No. 0426328.

3-0
