         Models of Expertise in Process- and Content-Dominated
                                       Areas of Bioengineering

                       Anthony J. Petrosino, and Vanessa Svihla, University of Texas at Austin
                                 ajpetrosino@mail.utexas.edu, vsvihla@hotmail.com
                     Manu Kapur, Nanyang Technological University, manu_kapur@hotmail.com

         Abstract: We examine expertise as an assemblage of factual knowledge, conceptual knowledge,
         and the ability to transfer. Experiment 1 provides empirical support in biomechanics, a content-
         dominated   domain;   Experiment    2   extends  the  construct   to  bioengineering    design,  a  process-
         dominated domain. Factual knowledge is a lesser predictor than conceptual knowledge, which is a
         lesser predictor than transfer in determining level of expertise. This study instantiates a view of
         expertise that held broad appeal but lacked empirical evidence.

A Model of Expertise
         The development of expertise has been framed as requiring: (a) a deep foundation of factual knowledge, (b)
a conceptual framework, and (c) organization to support retrieval and use (Bransford, Brown, & Cocking, 2000).
This view is modeled in the context of biomechanics (Pandy, Petrosino, Austin, & Barr, 2004). The control group
received a lecture and worked problems and the experimental group completed challenge-based instruction modules
(Schwartz, Lin, Brophy, & Bransford, 1999). Changes in student achievement were quantified using pretest and
posttest  questionnaires   designed    to measure    changes    in   three facets   of  expertise   (a)   factual knowledge,
operationalized as use of key facts and principles; (b) conceptual knowledge, operationalized as use of underlying
principles and equations; and (c) transfer, operationalized as application of knowledge to new situations. A model
was posited as a weighted, linear combination of factual knowledge, conceptual knowledge, and transfer. Transfer
was weighted most heavily (50%), with the remainder divided between conceptual knowledge (40%) and factual
knowledge (10%). The weightings were chosen to reflect one of the main tenets of this synthetic view: The ability to
grasp key  concepts  (conceptual   knowledge)    and   to apply   those concepts  in   solving novel  problems    (transfer) is
much  more    important  to the development      of  expertise   than is   the ability  to recall  facts. Thus,   expertise  in
biomechanics  was    hypothesized   as  Model    1: E=    0.10F  + 0.40C    +  0.50T,   where  E   = expertise,   F =  factual
knowledge, C = conceptual knowledge, and T = Transfer.

Experiment 1: Empirical Derivation of the Model
         The model is an expression of theoretical beliefs that, while compelling, are not supported empirically. The
data for the empirical derivation are those collected during the theoretical derivation. These data are changes from
pre to posttest along three facets of expertise: (a) factual knowledge; (b) conceptual knowledge; and (c) transfer. The
groups' scores were compared using two-group multivariate analysis of variance (MANOVA).

Results
         The experimental group (M = 1.73, SD = 1.10) achieved significantly higher transfer gains than the control
group (M = 0.40, SD = 0.70) (F = 10.57, p = 0.00) and this is associated with high power (power = 0.87). There was
no significant difference in conceptual knowledge (F = 0.92, p = 0.35) or factual knowledge (F = 3.10, p = 0.09).
The linear combination that maximally separated the two groups is Model 2: E = 0.14F - 0.36C + 1.27T. When
contrasted with the theoretical model, E = 0.10F + 0.40C + 0.50T, the relative magnitudes of the weights share the
same  ordinal trend  (F <  C <  T). The   weight   for transfer,  as compared   to  the  theoretical model,   is  much larger,
suggesting that the original model underestimated the importance of this facet. The derived weighting for conceptual
knowledge is reversed from the theoretically proposed weighting, meaning that when controlling for the gains in
factual knowledge and transfer, higher scores on conceptual knowledge yield lower differences between the groups.

Experiment 2: Extending the Model to the Context of Design
         We   extend the   domain   to bioengineering     design, which    provides a   contrast between    primary focus    on
explicit learning to implicit  learning   in the   presence of   content   (Goel, 2000).   While   most   of the  problems   in
Experiment  1  could    be  solved  via   reliance  on similarity  transfer,   design   problems   require   dynamic  transfer
(Schwartz,  Varma,   &  Martin, in  press)   because   design  involves    interaction, iteration, and  coordination   of new

                                                                                                                                3-
         learning. The participants were two cohorts of senior student teams in the capstone design class at a large public
         university.  A  2-month   design project   is our  in-situ intervention.  Cohort 1 teams   designed  digital stethoscopes
         whereas Cohort 2 teams selected biomedical devices to redesign. A design test was completed before and after the
         project  and coded  based   on  our  three  facets of expertise,  though  transfer presented  a challenge.   Voice  of  the
         Customer (VOC), which involves multiple perspective taking, was leveraged as a proxy for transfer.

        Results
                  A two-group MANOVA reported a significant multivariate effect, F(3, 41) = 7.59, p <0 .00, power = 0.98.
         Further univariate analysis revealed significant effects for conceptual knowledge, F(1, 43) = 4.58, p = 0.02, power =
         0.68, and transfer, F(1, 43) = 4.56, p < .001, power = 0.96, but not for factual knowledge, F(1, 43) = 0.00, p = 0.96.
         The canonical function that maximally separated the cohorts, using standardized scores is Model 3, E = -0.21F +
         0.58C + 0.90T. The F < C < T ordinality is maintained. Because Cohort 2 teams selected their own devices, they
         were likelier to incorporate the VOC. This experiment demonstrates that the model is generalizable to a process-
         dominated domain.

        Relating to Adaptive Expertise
                  Adaptive Expertise (AE) is the ability to adapt to novel problems (Hatano & Inagaki, 1986) and involves
         transfer to  new   situations  (Hatano  &   Inagaki,  1986).   Schwartz,   Bransford,  and  Sears   (2005)  proposed    AE
         dimensions   of  innovation and  efficiency.   To  examine   the fidelity of VOC   as  a proxy  for transfer we   relate to
         efficiency to factual and conceptual knowledge and innovation to transfer. We examine long-term variation in AE as
         scored by experts, controlling for short-term gains in factual knowledge, conceptual knowledge, and transfer.

        Results
                  A group level MANOVA reported a significant multivariate effect, F(2, 39) = 3.70, p = 0.03, power = 0.65.
         Cohort   2 teams   were rated   higher  on  innovation without   compromising    their efficiency   scores. The  effect  on
         innovation was significant, F(1, 40) = 5.92, p = 0.02, power = 0.66. The effect on efficiency was not, F(1, 40) = .04,
         p = 0.84. Cohort 2 was found to have developed more on innovation, meaning that our proxy approximated transfer
         Cohort 2 had more opportunities to engage in procedural learning (Goel, 2000). This has instructional implications.

        Conclusion
                  Although there seems to be consensus in the literature on facets of expertise (Bransford et al., 2000), their
         relative importance   has  not  been studied.  Our  analysis   provides  confirmatory  support  for an  earlier  theoretical
         hypothesis: Facts are less important than concepts, and concepts are less important than the ability to transfer in
         being able to distinguish expertise. We now have a sense of the ordinal relationships of these components to the
         development of expertise in at least one domain, bioengineering. The weights across experiments were not identical,
         which   may  indicate that  learning in a  process-dominant    context  may  be  different than when   learning  content is
         emphasized. Future research should address generalizability and consider other views of transfer.

       References
         Bransford, J. D., Brown, A. L., & Cocking, R. R. (2000). How People Learn: Brain, Mind, Experience, and School.
                  Expanded Edition.
         Goel, V. (Ed.). (2000). Dissociation of Design Knowledge: Elsevier.
         Hatano, G., & Inagaki, K. (1986). Two courses of expertise. Child development and education in Japan, 262­272.
         Pandy,   M.  G., Petrosino, A.  J., Austin,   B., & Barr,   R. (2004). Assessing   Adaptive  Expertise  in  Undergraduate
                  Biomechanics. Journal of Engineering Education, 93(3), 211-222.
         Schwartz, D. L., Bransford, J. D., & Sears, D. (2005). Efficiency and innovation in transfer. In J. Mestre (Ed.),
                  Transfer of learning from a modern multidisciplinary perspective (pp. 1-51). Greenwich, CT: Information
                  Age Publishing.
         Schwartz, D. L., Lin, X., Brophy, S. P., & Bransford, J. D. (1999). Toward the development of flexibly adaptive
                  instructional  designs. In  C. Reigeluth   (Ed.),  Instructional Design   Theories  and  Models    (pp. 183-213).
                  Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
         Schwartz,   D. L., Varma,   S., &   Martin, L. (in  press). Dynamic    Transfer and Innovation.  In  S. Vosniadou   (Ed.),
                  Handbook of Conceptual Change. NJ: Erlbaum.

3-
