Digital Youth Network: Fusing School and After-School Contexts to
                           Develop Youth's New Media Literacies
           Nichole Pinkard, Center for Urban School Improvement, Chicago, pinkard@usi-schools.org
                      Brigid Barron, Caitlin Martin, Stanford University, Stanford, California
                               Email: barronbj@stanford.edu, ckmartin@stanford.edu

          Abstract: This paper examines the Digital Youth Network as a model for developing youths'
          digital literacy through the fusion of in-school and out-of-school new media-based learning
          activities.

Introduction
           When the 6th graders of today enter adulthood in 2018 what will it mean to be a productive, informed
and literate  citizen?  We   contend   that being  literate in 2018   will  require  the need   to fluidly  use   multiple
modalities (e.g. text, aural, graphic, cinematic, and interactive) to communicate locally and globally for personal
and professional uses. An informed and empowered citizen will need to be digitally literate, possessing the
ability to both produce and critically consume media in multiple forms in order to fully communicate. This shift
in the communicative value of media objects beyond the field of entertainment raises the question of how to
ensure  that  all citizens, especially youth,  are prepared    to communicate      effectively. The   national  dialogue,
through the form of calls for more technology in the classroom, more tech savvy teachers, technology standards
(NRC, 1998; ISTE, 2007), and a better prepared workforce (Levy & Murnane, 2004) apparently has placed this
task in the hands of schools, with communities and homes providing backup support.
          In this paper, we put forth our model, Digital Youth Network (DYN), a hybrid digital literacy program
that creates opportunities for youth to engage in learning environments that span both school and out-of-school
contexts.

Digital Youth Network
          We posit that the Digital Youth Network model is one that explicitly combines the affordances of the
different contexts where youth spend their time into one learning environment that not only teaches youth how
to use  NMLs    but   also creates meaningful  opportunities   for   youth  to use their NMLs.     It is a model  for  the
construction of a new youth-serving institution that is not bounded by walls nor time of day. The core of the
model spans the worlds of school, home, and after-school activities, and provides youth with: (a) access and
training in the use of new media literacy tools; (b) meaningful activities where the development of new medial
literacies is essential for  accomplishing   goals and (c)   a continuum    of  established new    media   mentors  (high
school through professionals) who develop students' technical skills, serve as role models, and provide students
access to the communities of practice surrounding technology-based careers.
          The DYN model focuses heavily on the 6th through 8th grade experience by not only teaching youth
how to use new media literacies but also creating meaningful opportunities for youth to use their new media
literacies. These opportunities include explicit connections to school-based curriculum, interest-based clubs that
require youth to use new media literacies in order to participate, and remix competitions and "open shop" times
(both virtual and place-based) where youth are supported in using new media literacies to explore their own
questions and push their imagination. To achieve these goals the program is structured into two components: in-
school  media   arts  classes  and after-school pods.  The   mandatory      school day   media  classes    ensure that all
students are exposure to a broad set of literacies while the optional after-school pods enable all students to build
on  the breadth   of  exposure  received in  school and     identify skills of their choice  to  explore   in-depth.  The
combination of in-school and out-of-school programming simultaneously provides a base of knowledge to allow
in-school teachers to embed digital literacy into instruction without fear of having to teach kids how to use the
new media tools. Below are brief descriptions of components of the DYN Model.

Methods
Participants
          We have followed a cohort of 47 learners at Old Orchard, one of three schools currently using the
DYN model, across two years beginning in sixth grade. Old Orchard is an inner-city charter school serving
approximately 140 6-8 graders from middle to low-income households, most of whom are African American.
From   this  cohort,  we   are closely documenting   the    learning  of twelve    case  study  learners.  We   construct
technobiographies (Author, 2006) based on accounts provided in interviews and through observations in order
to chart learning activities across time and setting. We use interviews to obtain an historical account from the

                                                                                                                       1      3-3
         learner's perspective of the emergence and evolution of projects. Field notes and video collected by researchers
         and teacher/mentors offer additional data.

       Results
        Are there changes in students' experience with fluency building activities across the year?
                  Fluency   with  information                                         technology          has         been         defined    as a  combination                of skills,  concepts, and
         intellectual capabilities that allow one to use technology to meet personal goals (NRC, 1999). Although there
         are many kinds of experiences that build fluency, we are interested in those that were more likely to involve
         some aspect of design, personal expression and/or require more advanced concepts related to computing. To
         look at students' history of experiences they were asked to indicate the number of times they had participated in
         sixteen activities that were   considered                                       to          have         fluency building           potential.             Four   categories  for frequency   of
         experience were available for each experience type including never, once or twice, three to six times, and more
         than six times. At both pre and post test, a total breadth score was calculated for each student by counting the
         total number of activities the student had ever participated in at least once.
                  History   of activity as a                                        function         of gender,        time,         and    pod  participation.               To  look at  differences in
         experience as a function of gender, participation in pods, and time, a repeated measures ANOVA was carried
         out with gender    and  pod  participation                                       as          the between                  subject  factors and              time   of survey   as the repeated
         measures variable. This analysis yielded a main effect of Time F (1, 31) = 140.14 p = .01. Students' breadth
         score was greater at post-test (M= 11.8, SD=3.09, SE=.52) than it was at pretest (M=4.0, SD =1.99, SE=.34).
                  Comparison of fluency building experiences of students at Old Orchard with those of students in an
         affluent Silicon Valley community. In order to have a comparative sample, we collected data from 37 middle
         school students in the Silicon Valley area of California who were enrolled in a summer school enrichment class
         focused on game design and the creation of websites. Thirty two percent of the sample is female. Fifty-one
         percent of the students were Asian American, 35% Caucasian, 5% Latino, and 3% Indian. At the time of the
         survey, 14% of the students were going into sixth grade in the fall, 46% into seventh grade, and 41% into eighth
         grade. A subset of the questions asked in the survey given at Old Orchard were in the California survey.
                  Figure 1 shows the comparison of the mean number of fluency building experiences students had ever
         participated in for the Silicon Valley sample and for Old Orchard at both pre and post survey. By the end of
         their sixth grade  year the  Old  Orchard                                        sample                  had higher         means    than  the             6th   through 8th  grade technology
         focused Silicon Valley sample.
                                                                                14

                                                                                12                                                                           11.83

                                                                                10

                                                                                                   8
                                                                                  8

                                                                                  6

                                                                                                                                 4
                                                                                  4

                                                                                  2

                                                                                  0
                                                                                      California sample 6-8 grade        6 grade NKO fall             6 grade NKO spring
                                                                                                                              sample

         Figure 1. Mean breadth of fluency building activities for Silicon Valley, Old Orchard pre and Old Orchard post.

       Discussion
                  To summarize, the Digital Youth Network combines technical, social, virtual and human resources into
         programming   that    spans both  school                                       and          after-school       contexts.            Our findings                thus far that the DYN   model
         suggest significant growth in students' experience with projects likely to build technological fluency and new
         media literacy. In addition, both the quantitative data and the qualitative case study data suggest that as learners
         become immersed in projects, and comfortable with new media tools, their learning activities diversify.

       References
         Author and collaborators (2006). Journal article.
         National Research     Council  (1999).                                        Being          fluent       with   information            technology.                Washington,    DC: National
                  Academy Press, 1999.

3-                                                                                                                                                                                                     2
