                       Rapid Collaborative Knowledge Building:
          Lessons Learned from two Primary Science Classrooms
                   Foo-Keong Ng, Chee-Kit Looi, Wenli Chen, Learning Sciences Laboratory,
                                      National Institute of Education, Singapore
                                          Email: fookeong.ng@nie.edu.sg

          Abstract: Cognizant that a critical 21st century skill is the capacity to do rapid collaborative
          knowledge building (RCKB) in a dynamic setting, we are interested to introduce practices for
          RCKB into classrooms. Through RCKB, students also have opportunities to learn and articulate
          their understanding in a deeper way than traditional classroom lessons. We describe a research
          project  in which  together   with teachers, we initiated   lesson activities that enact RCKB    for
          science lessons. Towards that goal, we envisaged 10 principles for RCKB in the design of
          lessons, and  worked     with teachers  to   co-design lesson  plans and apply     these  principles.
          Reporting on our initial pilot study, we document some effects of our intervention package in
          terms of traditional and non-traditional assessments of learning gains. We started with 6 weeks
          of initiation activities (a.k.a. "Paper Scribbles" or PS sessions) in the classroom using sticky
          paper notes,  which   was   followed   by another 10   weeks   of  activities in a school computer
          laboratory with the use of the Group Scribbles (GS) software technology. We share our lessons
          learned in this study, discuss implications for socio-technical instructional design of successful
          rapid knowledge building activities in the classroom, and suggest avenues for improvement and
          further research.

          Keywords: collaborative knowledge building, distributed cognition, collaborative learning.

Introduction
          Traditional   patterns  of  classroom   talk have evolved    over  a significant   period   of time,  and are
continuously reproduced as part of institutionalized schooling. Analysis of classroom discourse has been the
subject of extensive educational research (e.g., Cazden, 1988; Edwards & Westgate, 1994; Mercer, 1995). The
most typical or default pattern of classroom interaction is the IRE (initiation-response-evaluation) pattern which
has been shown to account for a possible 70% of teacher-student classroom interactions (Nassaji & Wells, 2000;
Wells, 1999). In the IRE, a teacher initiation (I) is followed by a student reply (R), followed by an evaluation of
this reply (E) by the teacher. In this pattern, the teacher initiates discussion, usually with a question, students
respond and the teacher provides feedback in the form of evaluation. IRE has been criticized for leading to
unrewarding    and boring   classroom   discussions. Changing    such  deep-seated traditional   patterns of  classroom
discourse poses a considerable degree of challenge for classroom reform.
          Moreover, there is an ever-increasing need to provide students with learning experiences that reflect the
challenges and opportunities they will experience in the workforce of the 21st century. One key class of workforce
skills relates  to    rapid collaborative  knowledge     building  (RCKB).     RCKB      techniques   include   problem
identification, brainstorming, prioritizing, concept mapping, and action planning (DiGiano, Tatar, & Kireyev,
2006). By harnessing these techniques in the classroom, it is possible for students both to learn existing subject
matter  more   deeply  and   also  to become   participants in   21st century  knowledge     building practices.  These
techniques can be enacted with light-weight technology such as sticky paper notes (a.k.a. "stickies" or "Post-It"
notes  or "scribble   sheets"), or with  digital technologies  such   as Student Response     Systems  (SRS).   A more
sophisticated  solution is  Group  Scribbles  (GS),  developed   by   SRI international,   which enables  collaborative
generation, collection and aggregation of ideas through a shared space based upon individual effort and social
sharing of notes in graphical and textual form. GS was built on a Tuple Space server interfaced with a client
software written in Java.
          We are interested in exploring the harnessing of RCKB in primary (elementary) school classrooms with
the use of interactive technologies. Using a design research approach, we are interested to find out if RCKB can
improve students' learning as measured by traditional and non-traditional assessments, and to innovate and test
effective pedagogical practices enabled by both the paper and the electronic version of sticky notes.

Technology Support for RCKB
          Sticky notes can be used effectively for individual or group conceptual work, such as brainstorming,
prioritizing or visualization activities (Stacker, 1997). However, stickies have physical limitations such as the
need for a lot of manual busy work (handing out, collecting, copying and duplicating, moving from place to place,
etc.) as well as ongoing supply, archiving, and publication issues. It is also difficult for everyone in a large group
to view a sticky note immediately, simultaneously, and remotely when someone publishes it. GS enhances the

                                                                                                                          2-
         characteristics of  sticky  paper  notes by  providing   their key features  while  avoiding some   of their  physical
         constraints. It has affordances    of flexible support   for brainstorming,  deep  dives, and   collaborative decision
         making that is provided by stickies or scribble sheets, coupled with the automated distribution, collection, and
         aggregation  support   that is provided  by  Student Response     Systems  (SRI  International, 2006).  The   GS  user
         interface presents each user with a two-paned window. The lower pane is the user's personal work area, or "private
         board", with a virtual pad of fresh "scribble sheets" on which the user can draw or type (see Figure 1).
                  The essential feature of the GS client is the combination of the private board where students can work
         individually and group boards or public boards where students can post the work and position it relative to others',
         view others' work, and take items back to the private board for further elaboration. Figure 1 shows a lesson
         activity in class in which each pupil posts answers to the question "When does the heart beat faster /slower?" in the
         private board, and then moves their answers to the public board for sharing. The pupils' Scribble notes showed a
         multiplicity of ideas they generated which enabled the teacher to initiate discussions on the interesting postings.
         For example, one student posted "just before examination" in the category of "faster heartbeat", a contribution
         which surprised the teacher and the class, and which prompted the teacher to initiate a discussion on why this
         might be the case.
                  Thus   GS  supports   collaborative   learning, which  is well-supported   by the literature  as an  effective
         learning pedagogy (Koschman, Hall, & Miyake, 2002; Wasson, Ludvigsen, & Hoppe, 2003) in a dynamic class
         context. In  collaborative  classrooms,  groups  of learners   and their teachers  routinely work   in more   complex
         configurations  than lecture-based    classes. They take   roles, contribute ideas, critique each   other's work, and
         together solve aspects of larger problems, all to good effect (e.g., Hake, 1998; Palincsar & Herrenkohl, 1999).
         Managed flow of information and control is essential to the structure of many of these successful educational
         activities (Guribye, Andreassen, & Wasson, 2003).

                                        Figure 1. A Morae screenshot of the public and private boards.

       Research Design
        Methodology
                  For our research design, we adopted a design-research approach to school-based work on using GS as an
         attempt to address complex problems in real classroom contexts in collaboration with practitioners, and integrates
         known and hypothetical design principles with technological affordances to render plausible solutions. Our goal is
         to conduct rigorous and reflective inquiry to test and refine innovative learning environments as well as to define
         and refine new learning-design principles (Brown, 1992; Collins, 1992).

        Intervention
                  In our work with a primary (elementary) school in Singapore, pupils and teachers from two primary 4
         classes were provided software-usage training for 2 sessions of an hour each. Then they had 6 weeks of Paper
         Scribbles (PS) as an initiation phase, in which activities carried out in their school's Science Room. This phase
         was intentional  as  a means    to begin  enculturating   the  teachers and  the students  into the practice  of rapid
         collaborative brain-storming and critiquing, with the relevant protocols and social etiquettes. We felt that the
         classroom   culture that engenders    group-collaboration,    mutual engagement,    problem-solving    and  knowledge
         sharing should remain the same regardless of the technology used. In PS, easy-to-use sticky notes were adopted to
         facilitate the students' use in contributing ideas to activities posed by the teacher. For example, they used sticky
         notes to guess animals based on the characteristics given by each other, to post the name of the organs in the
         human digestive system, to post different living organisms in a particular habitat, and to classify fruits according
         to different characteristics, etc. They used sticky notes to comment on each others' posting as well. Students
         worked in groups of four face-to-face. They first posted sticky notes on an A4 size magnetic boards ("group

2-
boards") and then put them on the class whiteboard for other groups to see. Sometimes teachers put the group
boards under the visualiser-projector system for public view.
       Subsequently, the classes switched to the use of the GS technology for 10 weeks (see Table 1). Each
week they had a one-hour GS Science lesson in the computer laboratory. Each pupil was fitted with a Tablet-PC
(TPC) with a GS client software installed.

Table 1: Group Scribbles Activities.

Week    Topic of                                               Activities
         lesson
1      Circulatory   1) Students post what the blood transports (e.g., water, air, oxygen/carbon dioxide, food,
       System        waste materials)
                     2) Students post answers to the question: When does the heart beat faster /slower?
                     3) Teacher group students' contributions according to activity/ emotions/others
2      Circulatory   1) Individual postings of keywords learnt on blood vessels onto group board.
       System        2) Group leaders eliminate the repeated postings.
3      Circulatory   1) Students compare 2 plants' system: One without water for a few days, the other has been
       System of     placed in the dark for a few days, and post their contributions onto the group board.
       plant         2) Groups exchange boards to comment and improve on each other's postings.
4      Energy        1) Students list things that have energy or need energy to work in their group board.
                     2) They categorise the postings under the headings "Living things and Non-living things".
5      Light ­       1) Students classify and post into their group board under the headings "Light Sources" and
       Light         "Not A Light Source".
       resources     2) Groups exchange group boards to comment on/improve/get new ideas for own board.
                     4) Class to view and comment group boards in gallery-walk style
6      Light ­       1) Students choose coloured and numbered tokens in GS. Students with the same number
       House         will belong to the same group.
       design        2) Students decide on the different materials for the windows, doors and walls.
                     3) Groups discuss and comment on decisions if there are different opinions.
                     4) Groups did a gallery walk of the different boards.
                     6) Students vote for the best group on the public board.
                     7) Teacher comments on the boards.
7      Light-        1) Students are present with a diagram of a plant in a deep container with an opening at the
       Shadow        top.
                     2) Group members brainstorm different ways to allow light to reach the plant and post their
                     methods (by drawing or words) onto the group board.
                     3) Teacher shows a set of objects on the public board. Students in each group are asked to
                     draw all the various possible shadows of these objects.
                     5) Students view each others' boards and comment. Students can perceive that objects cast
                     different shadows depending on where the source of light is coming from.
8      Heat      ­   1) Students are posted with a problem situation ­ Robinson Crusoe is stranded in an island
       Story     of  and needs heat to survive.
       Crusoe        2) Students post all the different ways which Crusoe can use heat to survive.
                     3) Students explain the rationale of their postings. Teacher leads a discussion on conductors
                     and insulators.
9      Heat -        1) Students brainstorm ways of slowing down the rate of melting, using these materials:
       ways of       newspaper, paper towels, aluminum foil, plastic bag, ice cubes, rubber bands.
       slowing       2) Teacher distributes the materials mentioned above to the students. Each group creates a
       down the      container to prevent the ice cubes from melting, and leaves the container under the sun.
       rate of       3) Group leaders   come   to the front   and cut open  the containers  to pour contents into
       melting       beakers. Those with the least water or the biggest ice cubes in the beaker would have
                     designed the best container. Each group shares how they designed the container.
10     Heat -        1) 8 group boards named to A to H, will have the diagram of the computer and a water tank.
       designs a     Each  group comprises    of  4 members.   Members    1 to  3 will each visit their respective
       cooling       numbered boards (1 to 3) to retrieve materials for the designing of a cooling system.
       system to     2) They could draw how they will use the material. Member 4 will be the coordinator to
       diffuse       oversee the voting of the best group design. (Only 1 material from each board is allowed)
       heat          3) Groups visit each other groups' boards and comment if necessary.
                     4) Groups present their solutions to the whole class.

                                                                                                                     2-
                  In PS as well as GS, the research team worked with the teachers to co-design and implement lessons.
         Throughout our instructional design, we tried to incorporate the following 10 principles of RCKB, of which the
         latter five were adapted from Scardamalia (2002):
            (1)   distributed cognition ­ designing for thinking to be distributed across people, tools and artefacts,
            (2)   volunteerism ­ letting learners choose what piece of the activity they want to participate in,
            (3)   spontaneous participation ­ designing for quick, lightweight interaction driven by students themselves,
            (4)   multimodal expression ­ accommodating different modes of expression for different students,
            (5)   higher-order thinking ­ encouraging analysis, synthesis, evaluation, sorting, categorizing, etc.,
            (6)   improvable ideas ­ providing a conducive environment where ideas can be critiqued and made better,
            (7)   idea diversity ­ exploring ideas and related/contrasting ideas, encouraging different ideas,
            (8)   epistemic agency ­ encouraging students to take responsibility for their own and one another's learning,
            (9)   democratized knowledge ­ everybody participates and is a legitimate contributor to knowledge,
            (10) symmetric knowledge advancement ­ expertise is distributed, and advanced via mutual exchanges.
                  After each lesson, we held sessions with each teacher to gather their feedback on the lesson and to give
         ourselves (teachers and researchers) a chance to reflect on what had happened in the classroom.

        Research Questions
                  In this study, our research questions were as follows:
            1.    Does     our intervention package (outlined above) improve   pupils scores in science,  as   measured  by
                  traditional examination results?
            2.    What non-traditional learning gains (if any) are there using the aforementioned intervention package?

        Data Collection
                  In our collection of data, at least 2 researchers observed each session and took down detailed field
         observation notes. One video camera was set behind the classroom to record the sessions. Screen capturing
         software Morae     was  used on 8  of the TPCs to record how    each pupil interacted with  GS   on   it. The video
         recordings were collected and transcribed. After the whole intervention, we conducted in-depth interviews with
         the 2 teachers and 8 selected students from each of the two classes.

       Observed Effects
        Traditional-Learning Gains
                  We are happy to report that our intervention using PS and GS was generally positive, both in terms of
         learning gains in the traditional sense, and in terms of some effects that are not measured in traditional assessments.
         Performance in traditional assessments is a concern not only of teachers, but of students, parents, principals and
         other stake-holders. We did a comparison on students' science exam scores at the end of the semester across all the
         6 classes in the school, among which 2 classes (4F and 4C) are experimental classes with our intervention and the
         other 4 classes are control classes without our intervention (4A, 4B, 4D, and 4E). Among these 6 classes, 4F and
         4E are high ability classes whereas 4A, 4B, 4C, and 4D have pupils of mixed-ability. Each class has 40 students.
         As the students' abilities across the six classes are not the same, we considered their science scores of previous
         semester as the covariate when comparing the science exam scores of the final semester. The result of Analysis of
         Covariance (ANCOVA) is shown in Table 2.

         Table 2: Comparison of current semester Science exam scores across 6 classes, controlling for the Science scores
         of previous semester.

             Source                Type III Sum ofSquaresMean Square      F                  Partial EtaSquared
             Corrected Model       61281.475(a)         10213.579         173.537**          .826
             Intercept             19.256               19.256            .327               .001
             PreScor               32648.971            32648.971         554.733**          .716
             Class                 983.481              196.696           3.342**            .071
             Error                 12948.164            58.855
             Total                 942112.000
             Corrected Total       74229.639
          Note: ** p <.01.

2-
       We would normally expect higher-ability pupils to do better. Nevertheless, the results in Table 2 show
that there was still a significant variation in science scores of the final semester among the 6 classes (F=3.342, p
< .01) that cannot merely be explained by the previous semester's science scores (a proxy for the pupils' science
abilities). Inter-class differences accounted only for 7% of the variance. The adjusted   means of  the current
semester scores are shown in Table 3. It is shown that the 2 classes with our intervention (4F and 4C) have the
highest adjusted science scores. The overall ANCOVA test being significant, a cursory glance at Table 3 shows
that our experimental classes float to the top in terms of adjusted mean scores. Detailed pair-wise comparisons
were conducted as a follow-up to compare the exam scores between each pair of classes (Table 4).

Table 3. Adjusted mean of the exam scores, controlling for the Science scores of previous semester.

                            Class          Adjusted Mean    Std. Error      95% Confidence Interval
                                                                         Lower Bound       Upper Bound
    GS classes      4F (High Ability)          65.973         1.376         63.261            68.684
                   4C (Mixed Ability)          63.401         1.338         60.764            66.038
                    4E (High Ability)          61.180         1.290         58.638            63.723
     Non-GS        4A (Mixed Ability)          60.097         1.263         57.608            62.587
      classes      4D (Mixed Ability)          60.010         1.311         57.427            62.593
                   4B (Mixed Ability)          59.962         1.291         57.417            62.506

Table 4. Pair-wise comparison, controlling for the Science scores of previous semester.
                                      Adjusted Means Difference Estimate        F
                    4F      4A                      5.875                    9.124**
                    4F      4B                      6.011                    9.181**
                    4F      4C                      2.571                      1.568
                    4F      4D                      5.962                    8.886**
                    4F      4E                      4.792                    7.594**
                    4C      4A                      3.304                     3.395*
                    4C      4B                      3.440                     3.653*
                    4C      4D                      3.391                     3.505*
                    4C      4E                      2.221                      1.310
                    4E      4A                      1.083                      .342
                    4E      4B                      -.219                      .418
                    4E      4D                      1.170                      .379
                   4A       4D                      .087                       .002
                   4A       4B                      .136                       .006
                   4D       4B                      .049                       .001
Note: ** p < .01, * p < .1.

       The pair-comparison results in table 4 show that GS "high-ability" class 4F had very significantly higher
scores than the other 4 non-GS classes (p<.01), and higher (but not significantly) scores than 4C, the other GS
class, which was of "mixed-ability". Class 4C had marginally significantly better adjusted-means compared to
three non-GS classes 4A, 4B and 4D (p<.1) and even did better (but not significantly so) against the "high-ability"
class 4E. There was no significant difference between any pair of non-GS classes. The ANCOVA results seem to
suggest that GS had a significantly positive overall impact on the classes science examination results, whether
they are of "high ability" or "mixed ability", at least in the samples that we worked with. Since 4C and 4F were
taught by different teachers, the "teacher effect" may also explain why 4F's results so overwhelmingly trump the
other classes'. However, we need further research to elucidate the exact characteristics of this "teacher effect".

Non-traditional Learning Gains
       In addition to the above, we have evidence from interviews with teachers and surveys with students,
corroborated with our own observations and field notes, of some positive changes in the class (including the
teachers and students) toward cultivating 21st century learning skills and dispositions. We need to bear in mind
that changes did not come easily, especially in teaching-and-learning cultures that are traditionally IRE, and even

                                                                                                                        2-
         with deliberate design, there is always a natural tendency to revert to IRE modes. Teachers and students were also
         adjusting to the new software with its technical glitches, while adjusting towards a new classroom culture.

        Improved Social Skills
                  Throughout      the PS   and  GS   activities, we   found  the emergence       of  etiquette that was   socially
         co-constructed by students and teachers. In the first few sessions, students did not know how to comment on each
         other's work tactfully. Some students felt quite irritated when they saw scathing negative feedback from others.
         Even within a group, there were situations where students disagreed with one another and could not find a solution.
         The teachers and students discussed and jointly came up with rules that all should follow, for example:- Be
         responsible  for your  own    posting; Do   not trash   or hide other's posting;  Do    not create new    boards without
         teacher's permission; Do not use SMS language in the posting; Do not repeat comments that have already existed;
         Posting should not be too lengthy in a scribble sheet; Only the group leader is allowed to use the big-Marker
         features. Students then learnt to work more harmoniously and there was buy-in to those rules by the students. In
         some of the activities, students are encouraged to comment on other students' scribbles during sharing time. Many
         of their initial comments are just one word: "why?" The teacher initiated a discussion to show that this comment
         was not specific enough or useful to the contributor of the scribble being commented upon, and that comments
         should be more specific. In subsequent sessions, the comments were more targeted and specific.

        Instant formative feedback
                  We observed instances of the GS activities supporting instant formative feedback from the students and
         from the teacher effectively. With the rapid formative feedback from the GS, the teacher can literally see students'
         misconceptions immediately and take corrective action. For example, in the first GS activity, when the students
         were asked to post "what does blood transport" to the public board, some students posted "blood" and "vessel".
         Such students seemed to manifest "associative" instead of "logico-deductive" reasoning. The teacher immediately
         pointed out the wrong answers and corrected them. Teacher L told us,

                  "I particularly enjoy the instant feedback I get from my students' mass participation. I have
                  many pairs of eyes to help me evaluate students' understanding. It saves on time as students
                  help to  edit   postings during  their visit   to each other's board.   They   learn  to reflect  when
                  comments are made on their postings. They learn through collaboration as they improve on each
                  other's postings. This is indeed "more hands make light work". Students who are less inclined
                  academically could learn from the instant feedback without feeling embarrassed."

        Whole class participation
                  We observed high levels of attention and participation from the students in the activities. It is apparent to
         educators and even students themselves that some students do not speak up in class because they are shy. If these
         students try to  speak   but  are not  loud enough,   their  peers  may ask   them   to speak  louder,  bringing further
         embarrassment. There are further reasons why some students do not speak up: (1) to preserve harmony and avoid
         confrontation; (2) having a perfectionistic streak, and (3) fear of embarrassment in front of the whole class. In the
         PS and   GS  activities, the  whole class   was engaged,    which   benefits all the students  especially  those passive
         learners and shy students. As shared by Teacher L,

                  "Students who are vocal and articulate may tend to dominate the discussion but in GS, passive
                  learners are given the opportunity to contribute as every member could participate at their own
                  pace. Students are given plenty of opportunities to ask questions and to clarify their stand by
                  posting and commenting. My weak students could learn from the postings of the higher ability
                  students and    the fast workers   could guide    the slow ones. With   the introduction   of GS,  the
                  learning experience enters a different phase. Students could discuss in groups without the need
                  to drown each other's voice. They enjoy the freedom of expression without being ridiculed. The
                  non-threatening     atmosphere  encourages     the shy  and  reserve    students  to participate  more
                  actively. I could receive more contribution of ideas as compared to the conventional method of
                  eliciting answers."

                  With GS and a culture of improvable ideas, students felt safe to make mistakes in small groups. Student
         B shared her view on the difference in classroom participation with and without GS.

                  "he thinks that his answer may be wrong then he'll be like scared then he won't really answer;
                  then if answer right means he's like about to argue with someone that means he disagree with
                  something if he wants to raise up his hands and answer; if he's not sure or he knows that his

2-20
         answer is like some point missing or something like that ... He will not answer ... with GS he
         really post and he really says his answer out."

Change in Epistemic Agency
         We saw a gradual shift in the learning epistemologies enacted by the teacher and the students. Towards
the last few lessons of GS, we could observe students engaging, explaining, challenging, and collaborating with
one another. As the teachers got more and more used to the idea of distributed learning, they venture into more and
more creative activities that disperse the locus of control to all members of classroom, taking advantage of the
affordances of GS. Students took more ownership and responsibility for their learning. They enjoyed group work
using GS. Says student B,

         "Ya they explain things (.) some things I don't understand (.) then they will tell me (.) oh
         actually this is this this this you know (.) like erm:: (.) we should put this in this way like the ice
         that experiment (.) they will say (.) er:; Manu he was sitting beside me (.) so I was like I think
         this is this and this and this this this (.) so its like (1) erm okay:: it makes a little bit of sense so I
         followed him "

         This lies in stark contrast to the "traditional" way of learning, in which students learned science from the
teacher (who may be boring) or from the textbook (which may be factually wrong) for the sake of gaining marks in
the examinations. Some student who is "weak in science" and who struggles cluelessly to provide the "the one
official correct long answer"   expected  by the  science  teacher, learning  science can  be  rather  daunting         and
demoralizing. Using designed lessons with GS, there was genuine sense-making, not learning for the contrived
task of answering test questions. In the above interview excerpt, the interviewee was referring to the ice-cubes
wrapping lesson, in which groups of students were given a set of 4 materials (a newspaper, a plastic bag, tissue
paper, aluminum foil) and were tasked to discuss, via GS, the best order in which to wrap the ice cubes, and later
implement their design.
         In lesson 9 on designing a container to insulate heat loss, some groups who had the same theoretical
design (order of wrapping of the insulating materials) obtained different results (different extent of ice melting).
Students wondered why this was the case. The class then realized that it was possible that the ice-cubes could have
been hand-handled with different amounts of time. With this hypothesis and out of curiosity, two of the students
went home to experiment with the wrapping and they verified that holding the ice-cubes by hand longer does
cause the ice to melt more, even with the same order of wrapping materials. This is something they would not
normally bother to do when learning science, and this is beyond what they would have learnt from the textbook or
a teacher in typical science lesson.

Better communication
         Ostensibly, children and teachers use a common language (English, or the Singaporean version, Singlish)
to communicate. However, there is a difference between children-to-children talk and teacher-to-children talk. A
communication    gap  could arise between    the teacher  and students   due, inter  alia, to power-imbalances,           a
generation gap, different lingo used and time pressure on the teacher to complete the lesson. According to one
pupil,

         "when we ask question, you know teacher right will frown like that [does frowning expression]
         teacher will do a frown. I think that I talk to my friends better than I talk teacher . my friend
         understand   my  language,   but teacher    say children   language  and   my language     is  like
         different. ...but when when I ask my friend right (.) teacher will just scolding why am I talking,
         then ok I cannot ask anymore."

         In "traditional" classroom   protocols, the teacher  usually  does most  of  the  talking and  students         are
supposed to be listening. Students will be afraid to ask one another to clarify points of the lesson. Sometimes,
among peers, a significantly more precocious peer may talk in ways that bewilder others. Thus this could create a
communication gap not unlike the teacher-children gap. GS facilitates the closing of this gap. Pupil K says:

         "When [student Y] talks it is very difficult to understand. So if he posted it, then [Teacher L] can
         at least ... when [Teacher L] sees it she can explain ..."

         Thus we   see GS   not only   opens up   more   channels   of communication,  but  facilitates whole-class
simultaneous communication at the children's level of understanding. The communication happens in parallel,
and not in serial, and this affords the teacher more time to care for students' understanding (e.g. by polling through
different group boards and giving quick comments as the students are working). In a traditional classroom setting,

                                                                                                                                 2-2
         the teacher could only ask one or a few students at a time, and check their understanding. She would not be able to
         cater to everyone even if she wanted to. Some students may be raising their hands forever without having a chance
         for the teacher to clarify their doubts.

        Shifts in Learner Identities
                 Before    the Scribbles  intervention, the identities students had   in the class   were those of  unthinking
         copy-machines copying out the word-perfect, officially correct, "scientific" answers to their workbooks. Here is a
         testimony from pupil B:

                 "Ya    I'm learning   better than in class (.) cos  during the activity  right  (.) we're doing   the
                 workbook (.) teacher write on the board (.) oh copy copy copy copy copy (.) then after that we
                 learn nothing ...
                 Ya cos teacher write on the board then we just copy down whatever she write on the board (.) cos
                 sometimes we write wrongly right then teacher wants a answer to be (.) cos teacher seems like (.)
                 teacher say that answer is correct (.) so must follow answer (.) so so we just copy down (.) we
                 don't we don't use our brain at all."

                 In the course of the PS and GS lessons, there were indications that the students acquired identities in
         classroom as learners who contributed ideas. They also learn to hypothesize scientifically (what causes this, what
         if, etc) and think as young scientists. Using GS, there even arose a friendly competitive atmosphere to put in as
         many good ideas as possible, hoping to get the teachers' attention and praise.
                 Teachers also reported "spillover" effects after our intervention period. For example, they noted that
         some "weaker" students attempted to provide longer explanations in open-ended questions in written assessments.
         During peer marking of English compositions, students spontaneously sought for clarifications from their peer
         authors. In subsequent work, we plan to probe more deeply into these "spillover effects."

       Surprises, Caveats, Areas for Improvement
                   In the course of our intervention, not everything went smoothly to our expectations. We share some of
         the lessons learnt and how we can address the issues in our future research.
                 Complexity of Instruction: We learnt that students may not be able to follow the teacher's instruction
         even in a class of better students, but especially when students are of lower linguistic or academic ability. In the
         GS lesson 10 on design a cooling system for the computer, a group of students came up with "handphone" which
         was not given in the list of cooling devices. In future, we will consider chunking and embedding of instructions in
         GS, and leaving "breadcrumbs" for students who got lost wandering off on their own to be able go come back on
         task.
                 "Creative" adaptations: There were examples of students' ways of using GS that were not designed for.
         Besides on-screen artistic doodling, we saw some groups "subverting" the democratic choice of tokens with a
         student grabbing all the tokens onto her private board, and only letting her friends take the tokens to form their
         own groups. It appears that students like to be in control in choosing their own group instead of forming a random
         group. Because the physical separation between some members and the lack of a chat tool, students resorted to
         hand  signals, talking across  the   classroom and occasionally  moving    around   in the  classroom  to where  their
         teammates are seated. These show the emergent nature of real classroom dynamics powered by a piece of software
         such as GS.
                 Software and Technical Problems The most common complaint by teachers and students about GS was
         that it hanged or crashed frequently, disrupting workflow. GS was not originally designed for a large number of
         users and there are issues with bandwidth even in the case of wired connections. We tried wireless connection in
         the first GS lesson and it failed. There were instances where some students who "defaced" the public board or
         other groups' boards, accidentally or deliberately with the large Marker tool in GS, causing annoyance to the
         teacher and other students.

       Conclusion
                   In this paper, we described how we adopted 10 RCKB learning-design principles, and how we initially
         enacted classroom activities with these principles, first using non-digital-technology support (PS) and later with
         technology  support    (GS)   in two     primary 4  science   classes. Guided     by   a  proscriptive  design  in a
         learning-conducive classroom culture of mutual respect and enacting classroom-interaction protocols, several
         emergent  collaboration   and  coordination  behaviours   manifested   by  students  in  both  non-digital-technology
         settings (PS) and technology-settings (GS) were observed. In particular, we saw better social skills enacted, more
         authentic communication,     whole-class  participation, shifts of identity, shifts in  epistemic agency   and  better
         sense-making.   For   the pupil, GS    afforded  instant formative  feedback    from   teacher and  fellow    students.
         Furthermore,   in terms   of traditional assessments,  both the  "stronger class"   and  the "weaker   class" showed

2-22
improvements compared to other classes that did not experience such an intervention. The results are heartening
as these positive outcomes happened within half a year of our intervention. We feel that the initial lessons we
co-designed   with the teachers are only the beginning    of even more powerful  ways   of  tapping on     different
collaboration and coordination pattern activities. We shall continue to work closely with our partner school to
refine the theory and practice of RCKB. Despite some teething problems and technical glitches, we are positive
that GS, building on the lessons from the learning sciences and with the right technological and pedagogical
designs that are sensitive to on-the-ground realities, will make a positive impact on students' learning.

References
Brown,   A. L. (1992).  Design  experiments: Theoretical   and  methodological challenges   in creating    complex
         interventions in classroom settings. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 2(2), 141-178.
Cazden, C. (1988) Classroom Discourse: The Language of Teaching and Learning, Heinemann, Portsmouth.
Collins, A. (1992). Towards a design science of education. In E. Scanlon & T. O'Shea (Eds.), New directions in
         educational technology (pp. 15-22). Berlin: Springer.
DiGiano, C., Tatar, D., & Kireyev, K. (2006). Learning from the Post-It: Building collective intelligence through
         lightweight, flexible technology. In Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work Companion,
         Banff. http://Group Scribbles.sri.com/publications/index.html
Edwards, A.D & Westgate, D.P.G (1994) Investigating Classroom Talk, Falmer Press, London.
Guribye, F., Andreassen, E. F., & Wasson, B. (2003). The organisation of interaction in distributed collaborative
         learning. In B. Wasson, S. Ludvigsen & U. Hoppe (Eds.), Designing for change in networked learning
         environments (pp. 385-394). Boston: Kluwer.
Hake, R. R. (1998). Interactive-engagement vs. traditional methods: A six-thousand student survey of mechanics
         test data for introductory physics courses. American Journal of Physics, 66, 64-74
Koschman, T., Hall, R., & Miyake, N. (Eds.). (2002). CSCL 2: Carrying forward the conversation. Mahwah, NJ:
         Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Mercer, N. (1995) The Guided Construction of Knowledge: Talk Amongst Teachers and Learners, Multilingual
         Matters Ltd, Clevedon.
Nassaji, N. &  Wells,  G. (2000) `What's  the Use of   `Triadic Dialogue'? An  investigation   of teacher-student
         interaction', Applied Linguistics 21/3, 376-406.
Palincsar, A. S., & Herrenkohl, L. R. (1999). Designing collaborative contexts: Lessons from three research
         programs. In A. M. O'Donnell & A. King (Eds.), Cognitive perspectives on peer learning (pp. 151-177).
         Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Scardamalia, M. (2002). Collective Cognitive Responsibility for the Advancement of Knowledge. In B. Smith
         (Ed.), Liberal Education in a Knowledge Society, pp. 67-98. Chicago: Open Court.
SRI International. (2006). http://groupscribbles.sri.com/
Stacker, D. (1997). Rapid Problem Solving with Post-It® Notes. DeCapo Press, Tuscon, AZ.
Wasson,   B., Ludvigsen,  S., &  Hoppe,  U.   (Eds.). (2003).  Designing for change in  networked     computing
         environments. Boston, MA: Kluwer.

Acknowledgements
This material is based on work supported by the Learning Sciences Lab and a grant from the National Research
Foundation, Singapore. We wish to thank SRI International for providing a license to use the GS software in
Singapore, and Jeremy Roschelle and Charles Patton for sharing their valuable insights and perspectives with us.
We are grateful to Mayflower Primary School for collaborating with us on this research.

                                                                                                                       2-2
