   Measuring Mathematics Discourse in Technology-Supported
                                         Collaborative Activities

                Ken Rafanan, Jeremy Roschelle, Ruchi Bhanot, Torie Gorges, William R. Penuel
                         SRI International, 333 Ravenswood Avenue, Menlo Park, CA, USA
                  Email: ken.rafanan@sri.com, jeremy.roschelle@sri.com, ruchi.bhanot@sri.com,
                                      torie.gorges@sri.com william.penuel@sri.com

         Abstract:      This   paper presents   a classroom    observation   protocol  and  analysis  method     that
         efficiently capture key student and teacher discursive moves. We developed this protocol for use in
         a    study comparing    classrooms     using Eduinnova,     handheld  computer-supported     collaborative
         learning software, with classrooms using a popular, non-collaborative software application aimed
         at the same topic. Analysis of data from the observations clearly shows differences between student
         discourse in these classrooms but also reveal some challenges in the CSCL classroom.

Introduction
         Discourse      analysts study  text  and  talk   that can  be  represented  and contextualized     both in   terms of
features   of the   setting  and  in  light  of  the  cultural  tools   and practices  participants  engage   in   the setting
(Fairclough, 1992; Gee, 2005). While discourse analysis has proven essential for theory building, it is overly
time- and resource-intensive for intervention studies. Nonetheless, in studying an intervention that relies on
discourse as a learning mechanism, it is important to measure both how much and which type of discourse is
actually occurring.     An  alternative  to  discourse  analysis   for  larger-scale intervention   research is  a structured
observation    protocol.    In  conjunction   with    our research    on  enhancing   student   discourse   in   mathematics
classrooms,   we    set out  to design  an  observation   protocol   and  see how    useful it could be  in  our design  and
intervention research.
         We     integrated   the  Eduinnova     software   (Zurita    &  Nussbaum,    2004)    into an   intervention   called
TechPALS, which includes mathematics content, teacher professional development, and peer to peer learning
activities to address    the particularly   important   topic  of  rational number   (fractions) at  the elementary    school
level. Our research goal is to test whether TechPALS results in better learning than Larson Intermediate Math
(LIM), a popular, non-collaborative fractions software. Overall, our study hypothesizes that when students ask
mathematical    questions    and explain    their answers  to   each  other  and rely  less on  the teacher  as  a  source  of
authoritative knowledge, they learn better. Hence, we wanted to construct an efficient instrument to detect any
changes in classroom discourse patterns within the context of our study.

TechPALS Intervention
         The    Eduinnova      software,  the   foundation     for the  TechPALS     intervention,  builds   upon   scientific
principles  for motivating      and  structuring  peer-assisted    learning (Johnson  &  Johnson    1987;   Slavin  1990).  In
TechPALS activities, students work in triads on tasks that require each student to answer a question and for the
student group to agree upon an answer. The technology coordinates tasks to provide individual students with
problems to solve ("individual accountability") and also requires that students work together to complete the
task ("positive interdependence"). The system provides the teacher with a display of summary feedback on both
the progress of groups through problem sets and the success rate across groups on mathematical tasks.

Observation Protocol Design
         We    created   an  observation    protocol  with     specific categories for  student  discourse   to  differentiate
between particular discursive moves that have been found in prior research to support student mathematical
learning, such as giving mathematical explanations, and moves that do not, such as giving answers without
explanations (Webb, 1991). A primary design goal was for the protocol to allow high reliabilities. Toward this
goal, we focused on just 11 different conversational moves that a student might make. A key feature that we
revised after piloting the protocol was to focus observations on one individual student instead of asking the
observers to record all the key discourse markers for a small group, a difficult task in real-time. Because the
TechPALS      intervention     theoretically restructures   not    just student-student  interactions  but   student-teacher
interactions, it was also important for us to capture the key discourse markers of the teacher.

Observation Data Analysis
Sample
         A total of 38 students were randomly assigned to and observed across two classes, one representing the
control  condition   (LIM    class)  and the    other the  intervention   condition  (TechPALS      class). Pre-intervention

                                                                                                                                  3-
         mathematics achievement measures revealed no significant differences between these two experimental groups.
         There were 21 students in the TechPALS class (including 9 boys and 12 girls) and 17 students in the LIM class
         (including 9 boys and 8 girls). There were four observers observing the two conditions.

        Plan of analysis
                  Analyses were conducted on the Student Activity Codes (including the Student-Student Discussion and
         Other Work categories) and the Teacher Activity codes (including those for the Teacher's Activities with the
         Small Groups/Individuals and with the Whole Class categories). Within each coding category, we calculated the
         sum of the observations captured during the observation period spanning six minutes. This was repeated for
         each of  the behaviors   in the above  4   coding categories for the  entire sample. Mann-Whitney   U    tests with
         Bonferroni corrections for multiple comparisons were conducted to compare the observed codes between the
         two conditions.

        Results
                  The findings indicated that students in the TechPALS class gave answers significantly more often than
         students in  the LIM    class (U =  43.0,  p < .005). Students   in the TechPALS   class  also directed their peers
         significantly more often than students in the LIM class (U = 100.0, p < .005). Data on the Other Work category
         of Student Activity codes indicated that students in the TechPALS class read problems aloud more often than
         students in the LIM class (U = 79.0, p < .0125). We found a trend for students in the TechPALS class to give
         more explanations to their peers (U = 105.0, p < .05), but the finding was not significant when Bonferroni-
         correction was used. The observations for the Teacher Activity category indicated teachers in the LIM class
         gave more    math explanations   or answers   to  students than teachers  in the TechPALS   class (U =   45.0, p <
         .00625). There were no significant differences in the number of observations on teachers' behaviors with the
         whole class.

        Discussion
                  Overall, the results clearly distinguish between the TechPALS and the LIM classroom; students are
         talking more in the TechPALS classroom. However, not all the talk fit our desired pattern. Students directed
         their peers and gave answers without explanations to their peers more often than students in the LIM group.
         Based on prior research it would be desirable for students instead to ask for help and give explanations. There
         was a non-significant trend for students giving more explanations. Students in the TechPALS classroom also
         read problems aloud more often than those in the LIM classroom, an important opening move in any group
         problem-solving activity.

        Conclusion
                  Our experience with the TechPALS observation instrument shows that this more efficient form of data
         collection can   yield valuable  insights. We  would  recommend     continuing  with discourse analysis where   the
         primary research objective is theory development or detailed explanation of the mechanisms of learning. As
         researchers  transition to  designing  and   studying new    classroom  interventions, discourse analysis may    be
         impractical. While our study constraints rule out discourse analysis, we must continue to attend to and measure
         the discourse, and our observation protocol allows us to capture essential elements of classroom discourse.

       References
         Fairclough, N. (1992). "Intertextuality in critical discourse analysis." Linguistics and Education (4). 269-293.
         Gee, J. P. (2005). An introduction to discourse analysis: Theory and method. Boston, MA, Routledge.
         Johnson,   D.  W.  and   R.   Johnson  (1987).   Learning   together  and  alone:  Cooperative,  competitive,  and
                  individualistic learning Englewood Cliffs, NJ, Prentice-Hall.
         Slavin, R. E. (1990). Cooperative learning: Theory, research, and practice. Englewood Cliffs, NJ, Pretice Hall.
         Webb, N. M. (1991). "Task-related verbal interaction and mathematics learning in small groups." Journal for
                  Research in Mathematics Education (22). 366-389.
         Zurita, G. and M. Nussbaum (2004). "Computer supported collaborative learning using wirelessly connected
                  handheld computers." Computers and Education (42). 289-314.

       Acknowledgments
         The research reported here was supported by the Institute of Education Sciences, U.S. Department of Education,
         through Grant R305K060011. The opinions expressed are those of the authors and do not represent views of the
         U.S. Department    of   Education.  Hewlett-Packard   through   its Global   Philanthropy program, provided    vital
         support with a generous donation of four classroom sets of iPAQ Pocket PCs. Eduinnova£ has provided key
         support for all aspects of the study.

3-
