 Are Worked Examples and Tutored Problem Solving Synergistic
                                          Forms of Support?

       Ron Salden, Vincent Aleven, Human-Computer Interaction Institute, Carnegie Mellon University,
                                 5000 Forbes Avenue, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA
                                   Email: rons@cs.cmu.edu, aleven@cs.cmu.edu
             Rolf Schwonke, Alexander Renkl, University of Freiburg, Department of Psychology,
                                   Engelbergerstr. 41, 79085 Freiburg, Germany
             Email: renkl@psychologie.uni-freiburg.de, rolf.schwonke@psychologie.uni-freiburg.de

         Abstract:   Tutored   problem  solving   with    automated  tutors  has  proven  to  be  an effective
         instructional method. Worked-out examples have been shown to be an effective complement
         to  untutored  problem    solving, but   it  is  largely unknown   whether   they   are an  effective
         complement to tutored problem solving. Further, while computer-based learning environments
         offer the possibility of adaptively transitioning from examples to problems while tailoring to
         an  individual learner, the  effectiveness    of such  machine-adapted   example    fading  is largely
         unstudied. To address these issues, two studies were conducted which compared a standard
         Cognitive   Tutor  with  two  example-enhanced      Cognitive    Tutors. The    results indicate  that
         adaptively fading worked-out examples leads to the highest transfer performance on delayed
         post-tests compared to the other two methods.

Background
         One very successful approach in learning and cognitive skill acquisition is the use of "tutored problem
solving"  by  intelligent tutoring systems    (e.g.,  Koedinger    & Aleven,  2007;   VanLehn     et al.,  2005). Since
Cognitive Tutors   focus  mainly  on  problem    solving  performance   they can  be  further  improved    by  providing
worked-out solutions when the primary instructional goal is to gain understanding (e.g., Renkl & Atkinson,
2007). Additionally,   since  worked-out    examples     might  not  be as  effective in later   stages of the  training
(Kalyuga, Ayres, Chandler, & Sweller, 2003) a fading method should be employed in which the worked-out
steps are gradually faded from worked-out examples to problems.
         Two   recent  studies (Schwonke      et al.,  2007) investigated   whether   "tutored   problem   solving"  and
worked-out examples are redundant or synergistic forms of support. Their findings showed that tutored example
fading in a  fixed manner   leads  to more    transfer than  tutored problem  solving  alone   and  was   also less time
consuming. The authors suggested that the fading of examples could be even more beneficial for learning if the
rate at which the worked-out steps are faded would be adapted to the students' individual learning progress.
         In order to investigate whether tutored problem solving and worked-out examples are synergistic when
examples are adaptively faded, three experimental conditions were compared: 1) a problem solving condition
which  uses  the standard  Cognitive  Tutor;  2)  an   example-enhanced     Cognitive Tutor  which   fades  worked-out
steps in a fixed manner; and 3) an example-enhanced Cognitive Tutor which fades worked-out steps adaptively
for each individual learner. The main hypothesis states that an adaptive fading procedure, combined with tutored
problem solving, will lead to better learning and higher transfer than a pure tutored problem solving procedure
and a fixed non-adaptive procedure for fading examples (also combined with tutored problem solving). The
three experimental conditions were addressed in both a lab setting (in Freiburg) and a classroom setting (in
Pittsburgh). By  linking  both lab  and classroom      settings a  stronger and  more  authentic  investigation   of the
experimental methods is created and possible effects will have higher implications.

Studies
         For the Freiburg lab study students were recruited from a German high school and randomly distributed
across the three experimental conditions and participated in two lab sessions. Furthermore, during the first lab
session a pre-test and an immediate post-test were given and a delayed post-test during the 2nd lab session. The
experiment   focused  on  one  section of   a larger   Unit in  the tutor curriculum   that deals  with   the  geometric
properties of angles. Furthermore, in contrast to the problem solving condition, the students in the fixed fading
condition received fully worked-out examples initially, which were gradually faded to pure problem solving.
For the adaptive fading condition the build-up of worked-out steps was the same as the fixed fading condition
up until the multi-step problems. Once students got to those problems any value step could be presented as
either pure problem solving or as worked-out, depending on the student's performance explaining worked-out
steps. The results showed that the adaptive fading condition attained a higher immediate post-test and delayed
post-test performance than the problem solving and fading conditions.

                                                                                                                            3-
                  The Pittsburgh classroom study took place at a vocational school which already uses the Cognitive
         Tutor for their Geometry curriculum. Overall, the materials and procedure were very similar to the German lab
         study with the difference that the study covered the entire angles Unit and had a longer duration. Additionally,
         pre- and post-tests were distributed and the delayed post-test was administered three weeks after the students
         finished working on the Cognitive Tutor. The results showed that when excluding the fixed fading condition, the
         adaptive fading  condition  did attain higher transfer   performance  on  the delayed   post-test than the problem
         solving condition.

       Discussion
                  Two studies were conducted comparing "standard" tutored problem solving, with a Cognitive Tutor,
         versus two conditions in which tutored problem solving was enriched with worked-out examples. The worked-
         out examples were faded in either a fixed or in an adaptive manner. These manipulations were tested both in a
         lab study and in an actual classroom setting as part of a regular high school curriculum. Results of the lab study
         show that adaptively fading worked-out examples leads to higher transfer performance on both regular post-test
         and delayed post-tests. While this effect was not fully replicated in the classroom study, a significant benefit in
         transfer performance for the adaptive fading condition over the problem solving condition was revealed on the
         delayed  post-test. In short, the results  indicate that the implementation   of an   adaptive fading  procedure of
         worked-out examples within a Cognitive Tutor can be useful in both lab and actual classroom environments.
         Tutored  problem    solving and worked    examples,  adaptively   faded, are synergistic, not  redundant,  forms of
         support.

       References
         Kalyuga,  S., Ayres,   P.,  Chandler,  P., &  Sweller,   J.  (2003). The    expertise reversal effect.  Educational
                  Psychologist, 38, 23-32.
         Koedinger, K. R., & Aleven, V. (2007). Exploring the assistance dilemma in experiments with Cognitive Tutors.
                  Educational Psychology Review, 19, 239-264.
         Renkl, A., & Atkinson, R. K. (2007). An example order for cognitive skill acquisition. In F. E. Ritter, J. Nerb, E.
                  Lehtinen, T. O'Shea (Eds.), In order to learn: How the sequence of topics influences learning (pp. 95-
                  105). New York , NY : Oxford University Press.
         Schwonke, R., Wittwer, J., Aleven, V., Salden, R., Krieg, C., & Renkl, A. (2007). Can tutored problem solving
                  benefit from   faded  worked-out   examples?    In  S. Vosniadou,   D. Kayser,   & A.    Protopapas (Eds.),
                  Proceedings of EuroCogSci 07. The European Cognitive Science Conference 2007 (pp. 59-64). New
                  York, NY: Erlbaum.
         Van Lehn, K., Lynch, C., Schulze, K., Shapiro, J. A., Shelby, A., Taylor, D., Weinstein, A., & Wintersgill, M.
                  (2005). The   Andes   physics  tutoring project:   Five  years  of evaluations.  International Journal  of
                  Artificial Intelligence in Education, 15, 1-47.

       Acknowledgements
         This work was supported in part by the Pittsburgh Science of Learning Center which is funded by the National
         Science Foundation award number SBE-0354420.

3-0
