      The Classroom as A Complex Adaptive System: An Agent-Based
     Framework to Investigate Students' Emergent Collective Behaviors
                    Paulo Blikstein, Northwestern University, 2120 Campus Drive, Evanston, IL, 60208 USA
                             Dor Abrahamson, 4649 Tolman Hall, Berkeley, CA, 94720­1670 USA
                    Uri Wilensky, Northwestern University, 2120 Campus Drive, Evanston, IL, 60208 USA
                           Email: paulo@northwestern.edu, dor@berkeley.edu, uri@northwestern.edu

                 Abstract: This study applies agent-based modeling methodology to investigate individual and
                 social factors   underlying  inequitable    participation   patterns observed    in  a real classroom     in
                 which   an experimental      collaborative   activity  was   implemented.     We    created   agent-based
                 simulations   of simplified   collaborative    activities   and  qualitatively   compared   results    from
                 running   the   model   with  the    classroom     data.   We    found   that  collaboration    pedagogy
                 emphasizing group performance may forsake individual learning, due to preference for short-
                 term group efficacy over individual long-term learning. The study may inform professional
                 development and pedagogical policy.

      Agent-Based Modeling and Team Work in Classrooms
                 Agent-based     modeling   (ABM)     has  been  increasingly     used by    scientists to study   a  wide    range    of
       phenomena such as species in an ecosystem or molecules in a chemical reaction (Bonabeau, 1999; Wilensky &
       Reisman,  2006).    Such   phenomena,   in   which    the elements     within  the system   (molecules,     or  animals)   have
       multiple behaviors and a large number of interaction patterns, have been termed complex and are collectively
       studied in the interdisciplinary field called complex systems. In recent decades there has been a surge in social-
       science studies employing ABM (Epstein & Axtell, 1996). Recently, ABM has been used to illustrate aspects of
       cognitive development in social context (Abrahamson & Wilensky, 2005; Blikstein, Abrahamson & Wilensky,
       2006).  We   argue   that  ABM   has   potential   to contribute    to the advancement      of theory    on group   work     and
       collaboration in classrooms, particularly, the computational power of ABM enables researchers to mobilize an
       otherwise static list of conjectured behaviors and witness emergent group-level patterns.
                 A classroom engaged in collaborative group work can be seen as a complex adaptive system (Hurford,
       2004)  in which   optimal   as well  as suboptimal     behavioral    patterns  may  emerge.    Despite   individual    students'
       initially explorative behaviors, once a functioning coordination scheme evolves in a group and is evaluated as
       well adapted  to  performing     the mandated    task, an    implicit  quietus  is set on  any   further exploration    or   task
       rotation, and the group achieves dynamic stability. Such arrangement would be fitting for workplaces, but its
       instantiation in  classrooms   may    present  teachers   with   the   dilemma  of  maximizing    group     production    at the
       expense   of individual   learning,  especially  of   struggling  students who     are benignly   assigned  by   the   group    to
       mathematically lesser tasks. ABM methodology may provide education researchers and practitioners tools for
       understanding such classroom dynamics, so that they can identify points of leverage for working with students'
       natural behavioral inclinations to achieve equitable participation.

      Implementation of a Model in the Form of Agent-Based Procedures
                 We  set out   to build  a  computational    model    that would    simulate  phenomena      we had     observed    in a
       middle-school    mathematics     classroom   engaged      in group-based     problem-solving      activity  (Abrahamson         &
       Wilensky, 2005). In that classroom, roles were spontaneously assigned by students within groups so that the
       pedagogical   value  of    individual  students'   tasks  could    be  indexed     by  each   student's  prior   mathematical
       achievement.   Such   inequitable    labor division   is  injurious,   because  it perpetuates   and  even    exacerbates    the
       classroom achievement stratification. For our model, we chose a simpler numeric puzzle task (see Figure 1a).
       This linear  puzzle  consists  of  set of  numbered    pieces   to  be  concatenated    in ascending    order  (1,  2, 3, 4...).
       Necessary activities within this task are retrieving pieces (simplest task), verifying if pieces are already present
       in the puzzle (intermediate demand), and connecting pieces (most demanding task). Initially, puzzle pieces are
       scattered all over the classroom. Piece-retrievers wander around and, when they find a piece, grab it and go back
       to their group's table, delivering it to the piece-verifier. The piece-verifier evaluates whether a copy of the piece
       is already present (the puzzle cannot have repeated pieces). If so, the piece-verifier orders the piece-retriever to
       discard the   piece  and   bring a  new   one.  If the   piece is  suitable,  the  piece-verifier delivers    it to the   piece-
       connector, who will check if the piece fits the puzzle in its current state, and connect it to the puzzle. For each
       successful micro-task, students receive positive feedback in the form of an increment in their skill (speed and/or
       accuracy). Overall group performance is evaluated by the time-to-completion divided by the number of correct
       pieces. Our   independent   variables   are:  (a)  pedagogical    style  (with  or  without   mandated     role  rotation);  (b)
       students' initial skill level for each task and distribution of skill levels within students; (c) task difficulty.

3-
                               a.                                                                     b.
Figure 1. Design rationale for the Stratified Learning Zone model, and results from multiple runs of the model.

Initial Findings
         In analyzing the model's output, one must adopt a skeptical stance, because in any act of modeling lies
the inherent  possibility  that  some  critical  aspect of   a situation has  been   overlooked.   Yet,   this challenge   of
modeling is certainly not unique to agent-based modeling but is typical of any scientific endeavor. That said,
after many   sets  of experiments    over  a  large initial  parameters  set, we    were  able  to  plausibly  demonstrate
relations between pedagogical practice and student learning, as follows: (i) The overall performance of groups
with mandated role-rotation decreased by approximately 40%; (ii) When student­agents were reinforced for
group  performance    rather  than individual   learning,   students  became  entrenched     within skills reflecting    their
initial skill-level distribution; (iii) However, when role rotation was mandated, even though production slowed
down, more learning occurred, per student. A careful analysis of the impact of each task on group performance
is necessary    to build a causal  explanation   of  our  numerical     results. Increasing  a  low-level  task    skill (i.e.,
increasing  the number     of puzzle  pieces  a  retriever­student   can bring   to the  group  per time   tick)   appears to
decrease  the   correct/incorrect  puzzle-pieces  ratio (failure ratio)  linearly   (see red line  in Figure   1b,   bottom),
whereas increasing the high-level task skill effects a non-linear trend (see blue line in Figure 1b, top).

Conclusions
         We have presented a computer-based methodology for conducting research into collaborative learning.
To demonstrate the methodology, we described the design and implementation of an agent-based model that
simulates   the emergence     of  inequitable participation    patterns  in a collaborative-inquiry      activity.  In future
publications we will explain in details results from experiments with the model, the validation of the model
using  real world    data,  and   limitations of  this  approach.    Hopefully,    by  harnessing   the   perspectives    and
methodologies of complexity science, such as through building and experimenting with agent-based simulations
of classroom interaction dynamics, we can create useful tools that inform theory building and equip practice.

References
Abrahamson, D., & Wilensky, U. (2005, April). The stratified learning zone: Examining collaborative-learning
         design in demographically diverse mathematics classrooms. Paper presented at the annual meeting of
         the American Educational Research Association, Montreal, Canada.
Abrahamson,     D.,  &   Wilensky,  U. (2005,    June). Piaget?    Vygotsky?     I'm game!:     Agent-based    modeling    for
         psychology research. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the Jean Piaget Society, Vancouver,
         Canada.
Blikstein, P., Abrahamson, D., & Wilensky, U. (2006, June). Minsky, mind, and models: Juxtaposing agent-based
         computer     simulations  and  clinical-interview     data   as a   methodology     for  investigating    cognitive-
         developmental theory. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the Jean Piaget Society, Baltimore, MD.
Bonabeau,   E.,    Dorigo, M.,   Théraulaz,   G. (1999).    Swarm    intelligence:  From   natural  to   artificial  systems.
         London: Oxford University Press.
Epstein, J., & Axtell, R. (1996). Growing artificial societies: Social science from the bottom up. Washington:
         Brookings Institution Press.
Hurford,  A.  (2004,  April).  A   dynamical  systems   model   of  student  learning    and an  example   from    a HubNet
         Participation Simulation. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the American Educational Research
         Association, San Diego, CA.
Wilensky,   U., &   Reisman,    K. (2006).  Thinking    like a  wolf, a  sheep   or  a firefly: Learning  biology    through
         constructing    and  testing computational     theories--an     embodied      modeling  approach.     Cognition   &
         Instruction, 24(2), 171-209.

                                                                                                                                  3-3
