Game Practices and Educational Design: Applying an Ethnographic
        Analysis of Game Play to an Educational Design Problem

        Tom Satwicz, University of Georgia, 611 Aderhold Hall, Athens GA, 30601, tsatwicz@uga.edu

         Abstract: In this poster I use findings from an ethnographic analysis of young people's video
         gaming practices to approach an educational design problem. Three categories of practices are
         identified as a starting point for design principles informing a new virtual environment that
         simulates   school practices.   The intended   purpose   of the  environment    is to provide   young
         people and their families with a resource for navigating the complexities of American schools.

         Negotiating  a  complex    hidden  curriculum  is  an  important   aspect of  academic  success   in  American
schools (Jackson, 1968). As students move through educational institutions they make many choices, including
decisions about    courses, extra   curricular  activities, and   their disposition towards    disciplines    and  school
personnel (Stevens, O'Connor, & Garrison, 2005). Navigational practices used in school are often learned while
participating  in social networks   outside  of school, consequently     students  from  backgrounds    unfamiliar  with
educational institutions likely do not have resources comparable to their peers for approaching their academic
careers. The unevenness of navigational practices frames an educational design problem; how do we provide all
young   people and   their  families with   the resources   to develop   school   navigational  practices  that   lead to
academic success?
         In this poster I connect findings from an ethnographic analysis of young people's gaming practices to
the design of a prototype virtual environment that simulates many aspects of education. In the ethnographic
study, eight participants (4 boys/4 girls, 9-15 years) were asked to play games in their homes as they normally
would using their own games and game systems (Stevens, Satwicz, & McCarthy, 2008). While the participants
played researchers made video recordings of their `in-game' and `in-room' activity (totally over 100 hours).
Researchers content logged the videos and coded activities such as teaching and learning, using cheat codes, and
engagement in STEM practices for future detailed analysis. I then used interaction analysis techniques (Jordan
& Henderson, 1995) to create detailed transcripts of practices from the coded instances to explain the interaction
of cognitive, social, and material resources.
         One particularly salient finding from the ethnographic study identified several ways in which young
people juxtapose their in-game activities with their everyday life (Stevens et al., 2008), suggesting that games or
virtual environments might be used to help young people discuss their academic careers. In this poster I explain
how three practices identified in the analysis (task identification, resource adaptation, and the use quantitative
representations) were used in the design of a new prototype virtual environment I call Rubites. Rubites also is
based on the virtual economy of websites such as neopets.com, webkinz.com, and whyville.net (Ito & Horst,
2006). In this sense the Rubites virtual economy is an analogy to the commodification of schoolwork (Nespor,
1997) and the complexity of educational institutions.

Task identification practices
         Task identification practices are the means by which players are assigned or select tasks throughout the
course of play. My analysis shows that some tasks are assigned by the game, for example a player may be
required to beat a particular enemy in order to move forward in the game. Other tasks emerge as the player
interprets the game situation. For instance one participant worked outside the explicit rules of Zoo Tycoon to
build cages for holding guests and zoo workers, a task that the game allows but does not support in the stated
goals. The implication is that players attempt to learn how accomplish tasks that are not necessarily embedded
in the game, however when doing so they may learn about the internal structure of the game.
         To   support task  setting  practices  in Rubites  I have   included designed   goals  and    levels  as well as
elements  that will  allow  young  people   to push  against  the implicit  goal of achieving   academic   success.  For
instance, if a player attempts to fail out of school Rubites provides the opportunity to take a GED or to enroll in
an alternative school. I also anticipate that because of the dynamic nature of the virtual economy players will
work to create particular kinds of profiles. From these profiles tasks such as collecting all of a particular kind of
`school supply'   or  creating  a popular   extra  curricular  activity will emerge.   I have   also   limited particular
resources in Rubites to promote competition as well as conditions for recurring problems (de la Rocha, 1986;
Squire & Barab, 2004).

Resource adaptation practices
         Resource    adaptation   refers to the practical   application  of  strategic assets  (i.e., published   strategy
guides, Internet search engines, the knowledge of others, and memory cards) by game players to accomplish

                                                                                                                              3-
         tasks. Game players organize resources into a variety of learning arrangements that often are not authoritatively
         assigned as  part of the  internal   game   design  (Stevens    et al., 2008). Consequently,    learning   is not always
         explicitly designed into the game but rather brought on as part of an interaction between the player and the
         game. In these situations, the game acts as a provider of representational resources; making available resources
         such as  direct instruction, memory,      assigned tasks   or goals, images   of a situation, a  story line,  quantitative
         representations, game moves, diagrams, maps, and text. Game players then engage in practices of adapting the
         resources provided by the game and those available outside of the game to accomplish emergent tasks.
                  To design for resource adaptation practices I have made available a multi-modal set of resources for
         Rubites that will allow for the emergence of a variety of learning arrangements. This includes a discussion
         board, a profile page, mini-games, along with items in a store that are used to enhance a character. Additionally,
         Rubites has been designed for use in two settings: after-school clubs and homes. As previous research on virtual
         environments    and  game  play  in  similar  settings has    demonstrated,   young   people  often   gather  information
         through unofficial means (Fields & Kafai, 2007; Stevens et al., 2008). To support the unofficial gathering of
         information not all knowledge of Rubites will be officially published. The environment will include cheat codes
         and secret moves that allow players to advance their academic career to mimic both videogame play as well as
         the implicit learning of school-based norms, values, and practices by American children.

       Quantitative practices
                  My  analysis  also  identified   several  quantitative practices--the   various means    by   which  people  use
         quantity in everyday situations. Quantities are an essential aspect of game design and consequently I have found
         them to be an important dimension to how players organize their gaming activities. Quantitative practices are
         often evident in the determination of the next move in a game and can involve specialized interpretations of
         representations. They are also a means by which players prepare for random events, add efficiency to their play,
         and  determine  before the   game   tells them whether     they will be  successful.  By taking   up  different practices
         players learn to interpret representations differently as they progress through games.
                  I have used my analysis of quantitative practices to frame some initial design decisions. In Rubites there is a
         focus on virtual economies and commodified schoolwork. Quantities exist as `good grades' and `activity points' that
         determine the player's allowance. Grades and points are a function of which classes and extracurricular activities (i.e.,
         mini-games) the player has completed. Grades, activity points, and allowance are designed to support the emergence
         of a variety of experiences that students can use to juxtapose Rubites with their real world school.

       References
         de la Rocha, O. L. (1986). Problems of sense and problems of scale: An ethnographic study of arithmetic in
                  everyday life. Unpublished dissertation, University of California, Irvine.
         Fields, D.  A., &   Kafai,   Y. B.   (2007).  Tracing  insider    knowledge    across time    and space:   A  connective
                  ethnography   in a  teen   online game    world.  In  C.  Chinn, G.   Erkens &  S.   Puntambekar     (Eds.), The
                  proceedings of CSCL 2007: Of Mice, Minds, and Society (pp. 196-205): International Society of the
                  Learning Sciences.
         Ito, M., & Horst, H. (2006). Neopoints, and neo economies: Emergent regimes of value in kids peer-to-peer
                  networks Paper presented at the American Anthropological Association.
         Jackson, P. W. (1968). Life in Classrooms. New York: Holt, Rienhart and Winston, Inc.
         Jordan, B., & Henderson, A. (1995). Interaction analysis: Foundations and practice. Jounal of the Learning
                  Sciences, 4(1), 39-103.
         Nespor,  J.  (1997). Tangled    up   in   school:  Politics,  space, bodies,   and signs in   the  educational    process
                  (sociocultural,  political, and    historical studies    in education).   Hillsdale, NJ:   Lawrence    Erlbaum
                  Associates.
         Squire, K.,  &  Barab, S.  (2004).   Replaying    history: Engaging     urban underserved  students    in learning world
                  history through computer simulation games. In Y. B. Kafai, W. A. Sandoval, N. Enyedy, A. S. Nixon
                  & F. Herrera (Eds.), Embracing diversity in the Learning Sciences: Proceedings of the sixth ICLS (pp.
                  505-512). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
         Stevens, R., O'Connor,    K., &     Garrison, L.   (2005).   Engineering  student  identities in  the  navigation  of the
                  undergraduate curriculum. Paper presented at the American Society for Engineering Education Annual
                  Conference, Portland, OR, June 12-15.
         Stevens, R., Satwicz, T., & McCarthy, L. (2008). In-game, in-room, in-world: Reconnecting video game play to
                  the rest of kids'   lives. In  K. Salen   (Ed.),  The  Ecology   of  Games:  Connecting    Youth,    Games,  and
                  Learning (pp. 41-66). Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.

       Acknowledgements
         This work was supported by a grant from the National Science Foundation (NSF#0354453). Any opinions, findings
         and conclusions expressed here are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the NSF.

3-
