      On Learning Electricity With Multi-Agent Based Computational
                                                Models (NIELS)
                                            Pratim Sengupta & Uri Wilensky
                                   Learning Sciences, Northwestern University, USA
                                Email: g-sen@northwestern.edu, uri@northwestern.edu

          Abstract:    We    present NIELS    (NetLogo   Investigations    in  Electromagnetism,    Sengupta    &
          Wilensky, 2005, 2006), a multi-agent based learning environment that represents phenomena
          such as Electric Current, Resistance, etc in the form of "emergent" (Wilensky & Resnick,
          1999) computational models. Based on a pilot implementation in a 7th grade classroom, we
          argue that NIELS models enable learners to "think in levels" (Wilensky & Resnick, 1999)
          which in turn enables them to bootstrap their existing object-based knowledge structures to
          engender a deep, expert-like understanding.

Section 1: Introduction
          Understanding electricity requires the ability to reason about the relevant phenomena at multiple levels
(Eylon    &  Ganiel,  1990;    Gutwill, Feredriksen  &   White,   2000;  Sengupta      &  Wilensky,   2006,  in  progress).
However, students in traditional physics classrooms, after instruction, are unable to relate behavior of electrons
and   atoms  within   the wire  at the  microscopic  level   to the aggregate    or macroscopic    level behavior   such as
current, resistance, etc. Eylon & Ganiel (1990) identified this as the "missing macro-micro link" between the
domains of electrostatics and electricity. To address this issue, we designed NIELS (NetLogo Investigations In
Electromagnetism,     Sengupta     & Wilensky,   2005),  a   curricular unit   consisting  of  multi-agent  based   models
designed in the NetLogo modeling environment (Wilensky, 1999). NIELS models represent phenomena in the
domain    of electricity  as   emergent ­ i.e., aggregate-level   phenomena      such  as electric current  and  resistance
emerge from simple interactions between thousands of individual agents (electrons and atoms). Our pilot studies
in  a 7th grade  classroom     show  that after interacting  with   NIELS,    a) students  are able   to "think  in levels"
(Wilensky & Resnick, 1999) about the relevant phenomena, and b) use their existing object-based knowledge
elements (that are also responsible for generating commonly noted "misconceptions" about Electricity) in order
to understand and explain the relevant phenomena.

Section 2: Theoretical Framework
          In their review of this literature on naïve misconceptions, Reiner, Slotta, Chi and Resnick (2000) argue
that naïve reasoning is "incompatible" with that of experts and argue that the general knowledge of material
substances, their properties, and how they behave is drawn on as a source of conceptual information whenever
the novice encounters a difficult new physics concept. They also claim that experts use a different ontology of
knowledge ­ "process" schemas ­ to make sense of phenomena in electricity. In her more recent work Chi
(2005) argued that several misconceptions related to understanding complex systems cannot be remediated due
to the incommensurability between common schemas about processes (for novices) and the "emergent" schema
(for experts). However, other researchers (e.g., Papert, 1980; Levy & Wilensky, 2007; Sengupta & Wilensky,
2006,  2007;   Blikstein   &   Wilensky,   2005;  Wilensky      & Resnick,    1999)   argue  that  students can   come   to
understand these emergent processes through recruiting intuitions about individuals and individual behavior, and
advocate   agent-based    modeling   as a method   for enlisting  these  intuitions.   diSessa (1993)  terms  this  type of
intuitive knowledge the sense of mechanism, and argues that it provides learners with the capabilities to assess
the   likelihood of   various  events   based on  generalizations   of  what   does   and does  not   happen,   and causal
descriptions and explanations. The visual and perceptual cues embodied in the NIELS models and activities
activate object-based knowledge elements in the learners' mind, which in turn provide them with a sense-of-
mechanism    of  the   relevant  phenomena.      The   rules of   interactions between    agents   in the  NIELS    models
correspond   to  simple   "body-synctonic"    (Papert, 1980)    interactions  such  as push,  pull and   simple  collisions.
Students'    interact with   these models   through  a  combination     of simple    perceptual   actions (e.g., counting,
observing trajectories of objects, etc.), which in turn leverage their core-knowledge systems that even research
as number & motion (Spelke & Kinzer, 2007). We believe that this enables students of much younger ages (7th
grade) to make sense of the phenomena that are typically taught in high school, college or beyond.

Section 3: NIELS ­ The Learning Environment
          The  models     that the students interacted with   are (in  order):   Moving   Electrons,  Current In  a Single
Wire, Series Circuit and Parallel Circuit. The first model demonstrates how electric current can emerge due to
simple electrostatic interactions between individual charges. The individual-level agents in the second models

                                                                                                                               3-3
         are electrons and atoms inside a wire which is connected across two ends of a battery. Electrons exhibit random
         Brownian   motion     due to collisions  with  the  atoms,  and  when   an  electric  field is  applied, a  net drift in   the
         direction of    the applied  field  is superimposed  on    them, thereby   giving  rise  to electric current.   The   rate of
         collisions of the "free" electrons with the atoms within the wire represents electrical resistance, while Voltage is
         represented  in   terms  of  concurrent   electrostatic forces  between    the  electrons   and the  battery terminals.    In
         Models 3 & 4, students use their understanding of both agent-level interactions and aggregate level phenomena
         (from the Model 2) to understand and explain the behavior of simple electrical circuits in series and parallel.

       Section 4: Methods
                   NIELS was implemented in a 7th grade classroom (n = 23) in a Chicago Public School in a middle-class
         urban neighborhood. The duration of the implementation was 8 class-periods, and the class met thrice a week.
         Students were administered a pre-test in the form of a written questionnaire on Day 1 and Day 8 respectively.
         The length of each class period was an hour, and on average, students spent 1.5 class periods interacting with
         each model.     Students  were   designated   to work   in groups   of 2   or 3, assigned   randomly,    and a  laptop   was
         assigned  to each     group. Accompanying     each   NIELS   model     are Activity  Sheets   that  contain  some   relevant
         content knowledge, as well as instructions that scaffold students' interactions with the model. The activity sheets
         also provide prompts for logging their observations, reflective tasks, as well as questions that elicit mechanistic
         reasoning  from     the students.  In  addition, one of  the  researchers   present   in the   classroom   conducted   short
         interviews   with   randomly  selected   individual students  while  they  were   interacting   with the models.  In   these
         interviews, which were videotaped, students were often asked to think aloud, as well as to provide mechanistic
         explanations of relevant phenomena. The data from the pre- and post-tests, in-class interviews and the activity
         sheets were then coded in terms of a) levels (macro, micro) of description of objects and processes; and b)
         object-based knowledge elements and c) the contextual cues that activated these knowledge elements.

       Section 5: Results
                   One of the most striking differences between the pre- and post-test responses of students was revealed
         when we asked them to draw (and label) what they expected to see if they looked inside an electrical wire which
         is not connected to anything. 95% of the students' diagrams in the pre-test were macro-level representations of
         the wire, consisting of a cross sectional view of a single wire, where they drew the outer insulating material and
         an inner metallic core. Only 5% of the students drew "current particles" inside the wire, and indicated that the
         flow of these particles as "current". In the post-test, all the students drew diagrams in which the constitutive
         elements were electrons and/or obstacles. 95% of the students were also able to explain voltage, resistance and
         electric current in terms of the micro-level agents and their interactions, compared to only 10% in the pre-test. In
         the transfer tasks, that involved reasoning about electric circuits from macro-level diagrams, 90% of the students
         were able    to explain  the circuit   behaviors from   both perspectives     - micro-level   and  aggregate.   Finally, our
         analysis  of the    process data  (in-class interviews,  log files, activity  sheets) reveal   that students  were  able   to
         bootstrap their intuitive, object-based knowledge elements (e.g., P-prims (diSessa, 1993)) to engender a deep
         understanding of the relevant phenomena.

       References
         diSessa, A. (1993). Towards an epistemology of physics. Cognition & Instruction, 10, 105-225.
         Eylon,  B-S.    &   Ganiel,  U. (1990).   Macro-micro    relationships:  the    missing  link  between   electrostatics  and
                   electrodynamics in student reasoning. International Journal of Science Education, 12, 79-94
         Fredericksen, J., White,B., & Gutwill, J.(1999). Dynamic mental models in learning science: The importance of
                   constructing derivational linkages among models. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 36(7).
         Papert, S. (1980). Mindstorms: Children, computers and powerful ideas. Basic Books, NY.
         Levy, S.T., & Wilensky, U. (2008).       Inventing a "Mid-level" to make ends meet: Reasoning between the levels
                   of complexity. Cognition and Instruction, 26(1), 1-47.
         Reiner,  M., Slotta   J. D., Chi   T.,  H., & Resnick   L.,  B.  (2000).   Naïve  physics   reasoning:   A commitment      to
                   substance-based conceptions. Cognition and Instruction, 18(1), 1-34.
         Sengupta,  P.,   &  Wilensky,    U. (2005).  N.I.E.L.S:  An  emergent    multi-agent    based  modeling    environment     for
                   learning physics. Paper presented at the 4th International Joint Conference on Autonomous Agents and
                   Multiagent Systems (AAMAS 2005), Utrecht, Netherlands.
         Sengupta,    P.,    &   Wilensky,   U.   (2006).  NIELS:     An  agent-based     modeling      environment   for  learning
                   electromagnetism. Paper presented at AERA 2007, San Francisco, CA.
         Spelke, E. S. & Kinzler, K. D. (2007). Core Knowledge. Developmental Science, 10(1) 89-96.
         Wilensky,    U.   (1999).   NetLogo.    http://ccl.northwestern.edu/netlogo.     Center   for   Connected    Learning    and
                   Computer-Based Modeling. Northwestern University, Evanston, IL.
         Wilensky, U., & Resnick, M. (1999). Thinking in levels: A dynamic systems perspective to making sense of the
                   world. Journal of Science Education and Technology, 8(1).

3-
