       SPACE: Online Tools for Supporting Formative Instruction

R. Benjamin Shapiro, Louis M. Gomez, Northwestern University, 2120 Campus Dr., Evanston, IL 60208, USA
                              Email: rbs@northwestern.edu, l-gomez@northwestern.edu
Denise C. Nacu, University of Chicago, 1313 East 60th St., Chicago, IL 60637, USA, dnacu@usi-schools.org

         Abstract:     Modern    pedagogies   offer   considerable  promise  for  supporting     improved  student
         learning.   Formative    assessment    can   improve    teaching  and   learning  by  using   evidence   of
         student    understanding    to   adapt  instruction.    However,    the  current  social    and technical
         infrastructure of schooling often makes the teacher workload associated with such practices
         difficult to scale and sustain. We describe SPACE, an online tool for teachers and students to
         plan, do, formatively and summatively assess project-based Inquiry.

Introduction
         Enabling every student to succeed requires fundamental changes to the longstanding organization of
instruction in   most   schools,  both   inside  and   outside of  the  classroom,  from   teacher   training, to  in-service
professional   development,      to the   mechanisms    through    which   individual  teachers   and    whole  schools    are
evaluated.  In   particular, schools   must   move   from  delivering   identical instruction  to classfulls of  students  to
differentiated   instruction  which    responds    to  the individual   backgrounds    and   ongoing     needs  of   students.
Formative   instruction,    the  practice of  adapting    instruction  on a  student-by-student    basis  using   data  about
ongoing  learning,     has  been  recognized    as a   remarkably   powerful   method   for   improving    outcomes    for all
students (Black and William, 1998). It is an especially critical pedagogical approach in learning environments
where,   rather  than   following   homogeneous       trajectories of  pre-scripted  activities, students' learning    comes
through hands-on participation in scientific or pseudo-scientific investigations of personally meaningful topics
(i.e., Inquiry).
         Yet,    despite overwhelming      evidence    in  favor of  inquiry-based    learning   and formative   instruction,
American schools have struggled to implement and sustain them. From the perspective of an individual teacher,
inquiry-based differentiated instruction usually requires far more effort than more traditional pedagogies; the
demands of such reform instruction may be more than any single teacher, working alone, can sustain. Success
requires heroic     efforts that are rarely   scalable  and  are   only seldom    sustainable,   given the current   state of
development      of the  technology   of  schooling    (we construe   technology    broadly   to include   both  information
technologies, but also the other material and social resources and routines that together constitute schooling as a
technical system).
         Organizationally       and  materially,   the social  structure  of schools   insufficiently    supports  teachers'
classroom   work    as  they lead   Inquiry learning.  The  methods     we  use  to assess  students   and train  and  assess
teachers (and schools) are mismatched to the kinds of knowledge developed through engagement in Inquiry
(Resnick, Lesgold, and Hall, 2005); standardized tests do not test (and their reports do not give credit to) most of
these skills. Grade-as-average representations of learning are inappropriate accounts of constructivist activities
where students build densely interconnected knowledge over long time-spans, rather than rote learning or sets of
discrete skills  (Stroup    and  Wilensky,    1999).  Adopting   formative  instruction   (or, recognizing   that  change  in
schools is a highly distributed practice, we might say constructing formative instruction) necessitates giving
students credit not only for the quality of the final products they create, but also for the developmental trajectory
that allows  them    to create   them,  including  the  many   revisions  along   the way.  The   challenge  of   developing
assessments consistent with reform pedagogy is both material and social, as the tools in place and the meanings
of those tools, as constructed in practice (e.g., as varying kinds of assessments are differentially legitimated by
leaders, policy makers, or parents) must change. Finally, the loosely coupled organizational structure of most
schools, where teachers seldom see and rarely critique each others' work, especially across subject areas, does
little to prepare teachers for and to lend them ongoing support on learning activities (like Inquiry) that integrate
a wide range of disciplinary skills (e.g., the literacy, science, mathematics, and visual arts skills that are used on
a science fair project).
         The SPACE (for Supporting Projects through Authoring, Critique, and Exemplars) tool, described here,
is a computational     infrastructure  for  improving   the range   of  instructional practices   necessary  for  successful
formative instruction of project-based Inquiry. The SPACE tool is not intended to be the sole driver of school
change   toward     formative    instruction; our  design   philosophy    (Bryk   et  al., 2006)   explicitly   rejects such
technological imperative models. Rather, we have designed SPACE as part of a larger effort of social practice
design, including innovative professional development protocols.

Problems of Practice

                                                                                                                                 3-
                   The SPACE     tools  are intended   to  support    the   resolution  of  several   critical problems     of practice
         incumbent on teachers implementing formative instruction for Inquiry. Specifically:
                   xDescribing   a   trajectory of intermediate   tasks     whereby   students  work    toward   final  project  goals.
                     Doing  this supports   students'  meta-cognition     by   helping   them   to monitor     their progress  as  they
                     complete a complex project.
                   xArticulating robust and specific expectations for the quality of student work on every step of this
                     trajectory, using a shared language that is comprehensible to students and other teachers. Doing this
                     supports  students'  meta-cognition     by  allowing    them    to self-assess   their work.    It also   supports
                     teachers' practice  by   offering clear   dimensions    with    which  to  evaluate    students'   work.  This    is
                     especially critical when teachers from different subject-areas collaborate, by making the expectations
                     within teachers' different disciplines mutually visible.
                   xManaging the many artifacts that are created in the course of project-based Inquiry, including both
                     finished products and intermediate work product.: A typical student project may have a dozen steps,
                     each producing at least one artifact. Teachers and students (especially those working in groups) often
                     struggle to keep track of these artifacts when doing projects.
                   xAssessing   student  work   and   giving students   low-latency     feedback   so that  they can    revise and   re-
                     submit. Assessment lies at the core of formative instruction routines, providing information that can
                     guide ongoing teacher reflection and instructional support.
                   xUsing  assessment    data   to adapt   ongoing    instruction    and plan   future  instruction.    A   database   of
                     assessment  data  describing   students'   success   on   the   individual steps   of  each project    can  reveal
                     specific skills that need improvement. Cross-student or cross-class patterns in this data can reveal
                     systemic  skill strengths/weaknesses      (e.g.,   difficulties using  evidence    to  construct   arguments      in
                     multiple subject areas).

       Tool Description
                   SPACE is a web-based application with which teachers can do all of the above; it supports the entire
         lifecycle of  project-based   Inquiry, including    project  planning,  execution,   assessment,    and  reflection.   To  use
         SPACE,    a teacher   must  break  a project  down    into   a set of tasks.   For each   task (e.g.,  pick  a topic,   state a
         hypothesis, describe materials, etc.), the teacher can specify instructions and must enter at least one assessment
         criterion (e.g., good spelling and grammar or relates the independent and dependent variables). Taken together,
         the set  of entered  criteria form a   rubric for that  step.  When    a  student  creates   a new    project  in  SPACE,     or
         accesses an existing project, he or she sees a list of all of the tasks that make up the project. Each item in the list
         shows the number of times it has been critiqued, as well as an indication of whether a teacher has required that
         the work be revised. From that list, the student can click on any task to see instructions, the rubric, and enter his
         or her work. If the work has been critiqued, the student can also see past critique and commentary about the
         work. At any point, the student can also browse other students' work, in order to critique it or learn from it.
                   Because  student  work   and  assessments    thereof   reside  in a  persistent central  database,   teachers   may
         freely browse student work in a number of interesting ways. They may, for example, look at all of a single
         student's work on a project or look at all students' work on the same task of a project. At any time that student
         work is viewed it may also be assessed using the rubric of the associated task template. SPACE also offers
         multiple  aggregated    representations   of  student  work:   Teachers     may   easily  view  a  grid-based      view of  all
         students' status on a given project, with states that demand immediate attention highlighted. They may also
         access several summary reports of assessments, on a per-student, per-project, or per-cohort basis, describing
         students' performance on the range of assessment criteria (and associated standards/benchmarks) input during
         project planning. These reports offer a compelling alternative to the infrequently collected and disconnected-
         from-instruction standards-based data that are typically available to teachers.

       Design and Implementation
                   SPACE was created through a participatory design process involving teachers and leaders at an urban
         charter middle school in a large Midwestern United States city. The implementation of SPACE in science, social
         studies,  and literacy  classrooms   led  teachers   to dramatically     increase  their  schoolwide    press    for  common
         research  skills expectations   and    instruction, as  evidence    of   student   weakness    on  such     skills was   made
         universally evident through the data visible in, and activity facilitated by, SPACE.

       References
         Black, P. and William, D. (1998). Assessment and classroom learning. Assessment in Education: Principles,
                   Policy, and Practice, 5(1).
         Bryk, A., Gomez, L., Joseph, D., Pinkard, N., Rosen, L., Walker, L. (2006). Activity theory framework for the
                   Information    Infrastructure      System.    Unpublished         Manuscript.    Accessed         Mar.   2,   2008.

3-
       http://www.iisrd.org/documents/IIS_Activity_Framework_2006.pdf
Resnick, L. B., Lesgold, A., and Hall, M. W. (2005). Technology and the new culture of learning: Tools for
       education professionals. In Gardenfors, P. and Johansson, P., editors, Cognition, education, and
       communication technology. Englewood, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Stroup, W. and Wilensky, U. (1999). Understanding learning as emergent phenomena: Moving constructivist
       statistics before the individual and beyond the bell-curve. In A. Kelly & R. Lesh (Eds.), Research in
       mathematics and science education. Englewood, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.

                                                                                                                3-
