               Shared Inter-generational Collaborative Problem Solving Play
                                                            Spaces
                       Sinem Siyahhan, Sasha Barab, Micheal        Downton, Indiana University, Bloomington,
                                         Email: ssiyahha@indiana.edu, sbarab@indiana.edu

                  Abstract: We designed a five-week family program where seven parent-child dyads ages 9 to
                  12 played Quest Atlantis, a multi-user 3D educational computer-game used in middle schools
                  internationally  as part  of the  school  curriculum,  in an informal   setting. Our   goal was  to
                  understand the challenges, opportunities, and collaborative work that result when both parent
                  and child are immersed within a shared collaborative problem solving play space.

       Introduction
                  Researchers    have  paid special   attention to  parent-child  interaction  in  order to   understand   how
         children's complex cognitive processes develop in the context of social relationships and socio-cultural tools
         and practices (Vygotsky, 1978; Rogoff, 1990). Although it is found that parents continue to provide effective
         assistance to their children with problems around ages between 8 and 12 (Gleason & Schauble, 2000), parents
         start to engage  in their children's  lives less  and less around  middle  school. This,  partially, is because,  as a
         desired learning outcome, children are expected to become independent and self-regulated learners. But another
         reason is specific to the socio-historical context in which we are in where children master new technologies
         faster than adults (Tapscott, 1998) and create their own cultural practices around it. Children spend time outside
         of school playing video games and other internet activities through which they get to know things in new ways,
         to interact with other people, and to prepare for future learning and problem solving (Gee, 2003; Squire, 2005).
         It is one thing to talk about educational use of video games and another thing to talk about designing educational
         video games where game principles are used to support the learning of academic content (Barab et al, 2007). We
         conducted   a study  in an   informal learning   environment   to  explore the possibilities of making    educational
         videogames a "shared inter-generational collaborative problem solving space" for parents and children where
         they engage in collaborative learning through playing.

       Implementation
        Context
                  We set our study at a local Boys and Girls Club. The club is solely designed for youth programs and
         activities that allowed   us to introduce   our program    to elementary and   middle school  children.  51%  of   the
         children were between ages 10 and 15. Secondly, the club serves to low and middle SES children, and 66% of
         children are from minority families. Also, the club was open between 3pm and 8 pm which was convenient to
         set a program for parents and children where parents can attend after work.

        Participants
                  Seven parent-child dyads participate in the program. There were two father-son dyads, three mother-
         daughter dyads and one mother-son dyad and one boy who came either with his mother or father. One of the
         father-son  and  mother-daughter   dyads  was   a family.  Parents held middle-class jobs such as small business
         manager,   accounts  receivable   coordinator,    nursing, payroll  system  manager,     chemist, and   administrator
         accountant. Two of the children were 9, two of them were 10 years old, and one of them was 11, 12, and 13
         years old.

        Data Collection
                  In the beginning of their first session, parents filled out a 12-item questionnaire. On a 5 point-Likert
         scale, parents rated their and their child's familiarity and comfort level with computers and videogames, interest
         in science  and  art related  activities. Parents  answered    two open-   ended questions   about   the  leisure and
         education-related activities they do with their children. At the end of five weeks, three parent-child dyads were
         interviewed about their experiences. During the implementation, two researchers took `thick notes' during each
         session. Except the first week of the program, all four sessions were audio and video taped for each parent-child
         dyad.

        Results
        Dyad Profiles

3-30
         Each dyad picked a tree type as their identifier. Pinyon, one of the father-son dyads, was the only dyad
where the child seemed to be catching up with technology faster than the parent. The father reported that his son
was `very familiar' and he himself was `somewhat familiar' with commercial videogames. He also rated his
familiarity and comfort  with  computers   lower    than his  son's. Maple,  Pine, and Waterlocust,   three mother-
daughter dyads, had similar profiles. All parents rated their and their children's familiarity with commercial
videogames   low,  and their and their   children's familiarity and  comfort  with computers   high. Roseberry   and
Hickory, two mother-son dyads, were commercial video-game players. Roseberry mother reported that her son
was `somewhat' familiar and comfortable with computers and herself higher than her son. Hickory mother rated
both herself and her son `very high' on the same items.       Oak, the other father-son dyad, was the only dyad
where the father seemed to be part of the digital age. He rated himself higher on familiarity with commercial
games and computers and comfort with computers than his son.

Case Characterization
         Session  One. The   facilitator introduced  the  Quest  Atlantis overarching   story, walked  parents   and
children through a user manual and the program syllabus. They chose a username. Participants first mission was
related to exploring the virtual environment, where parents' and children's task was to watch a video about
Atlantis history, to visit and gather information about two worlds in Atlantis and report what they have found to
OTAK, a virtual computer that greets users when they first log in. Parents and children were observed to focus
primarily on understanding how to use the tools to play the game successfully.
         Sessions Two and Three. When parent-child dyads came in for the second session the following week,
they were   greeted and were   immediately     directed  to a computer  to  continue to work   on where     they left
previously. Parents and children were able to finish the tasks faster than before. Parents observed to be more
distanced and letting the child take over while going through I-BURST mission, where players learn about the
code of conduct for using the virtual space, and Shardflower mission, where players learn about seven social
commitments that foster children's sense of purpose and citizenry.
         Sessions Four and Five. By the fourth session, most parents and children were working on the mission
they had chosen together. Only one parent-child dyad, in which the child was the oldest, wanted to work on
science-related missions in addition to two language arts missions they had done. Only three parent-child dyads
came  to the fifth and final session.  At  the end  of   five-week   program, only one  parent-child dyad   couldn't
complete all three required missions (Introduction, I-BURST and Shardflower).

Core Themes
         Through examination of the data three core themes emerged. First, in order to share a conceptual space,
the groups had to negotiate how to share tasks and mutually decide how to go about progressing on the activities
which seems to be a necessity for collaboration. Second, groups had to share an intention to understand the
context in order to make sense of the content. Third, the space allowed parents and children to relate to and
share their personal experiences. These themes also intertwined with parenting styles. Given the limited space,
we cannot discuss our findings here. But findings will be discussed in more details on the actual poster.

                                                                                                                         3-3
