                                                    Mindful of Process:
                 Scaffolds for Collaboration Discourse in Design Education
                        Daniel Steinbock, Stanford University School of Education, steinbock@stanford.edu

                   Abstract:  Given   the  critical importance   of   collaboration    in lifelong learning,  this paper
                   highlights the  need    for interventions that help   learners develop     awareness    of the  social
                   dimensions   of  group   problem   solving  and  adopt   patterns   of  discourse  leading  to  more
                   successful collaborative learning outcomes. In pursuit of this, I present scaffolds that were
                   piloted on students learning the practice of collaborative human-centered design, and argue for
                   the larger significance of design as a framework for developing collaborative capacities.

       Introduction
                   Collaboration can be thought of as involving a dual problem-space that participants must simultaneously
         negotiate (Barron, 2003). One is a content space consisting of the problem to be solved and the solutions generated.
         The second is a relational space consisting of social interactional challenges and opportunities that structure group
         discourse about the content space. The success of collaboration depends on the ability of a group to be mindful of and
         develop both spaces simultaneously. In practice, however, these spaces compete for limited attention and the salience
         of subject-matter in the content space typically dominates. This paper therefore highlights the need for interventions
         that foster collaborative capacities in the relational space. I introduce examples from elementary school students
         learning human-centered design practices.

       Background
                   In her study of twelve 6th-grade triads engaged in collaborative problem solving, Barron (2003) found that
         between-triad differences in post-task individual learning assessments could only be accounted for by differences in
         groups' social interactions, i.e. how   they negotiated  the relational space.   Two  specific  patterns  of collaboration
         discourse were observed in successful groups and lacking in less successful groups. First, more successful groups
         were likely to discuss or accept correct proposals while less successful groups were likely to ignore or reject them.
         Second, utterances were more likely to build on immediately preceding utterances in successful groups, whereas
         conversations  in less  successful groups    were relatively more   incoherent.   Barron's  findings  suggest   that  these
         successful patterns of discourse help groups achieve joint engagement as requisite for establishing a joint problem-
         solving space and group cognition (Stahl, 2006; Roschelle, 1992).
                   From an interventionist perspective, these findings beg the question of how we can encourage learners to
         adopt discourse practices that improve collaborative learning outcomes. There is evidence that through participation in
         intentionally designed discourse communities learners come to appropriate conventions for discussing subject-matter
         in the content space, such as the scholarly convention of justifying claims with evidence (Engle & Conant, 2002).
         What sort of intervention could encourage learners to appropriate discourse conventions in the social-relational space,
         specifically ones linked to collaborative learning achievement?
                   In the next section I introduce a collaborative learning activity highly suited for studying and supporting the
         social-relational space in group problem solving: groups of learners engaged in the practices of human-centered
         design, e.g. need-finding, brainstorming,   prototyping  and user-testing. Group    brainstorming,   for instance, rapidly
         generates a complex, branching stream of ideas and evaluations exhibiting discursive patterns of proposal, response
         and  discussion.  Professional designers   often  use "Rules    of Brainstorming"     as  "interventions"    in their own
         collaborative processes to codify norms of discourse during brainstorms (Sutton & Hardgadon, 1996). As it happens,
         two of the most important rules, "defer judgment" and "build on the ideas of others", scaffold exactly the same
         discourse patterns that Barron found were associated with successful collaborative learning outcomes (see Table 1).

         Table 1: Comparison between two rules for brainstorming (Sutton & Hardgadon, 1996) and patterns of
         discourse found to be associated with more and less successful collaborative learning outcomes (Barron, 2003).

         Brainstorming Rule      Successful Discourse Pattern                          Unsuccessful Discourse Pattern
         Defer judgment          New proposals are discussed and accepted              New proposals are ignored or rejected
         Build on the ideas      New utterances are closely linked to the topic        New utterances are unrelated to the topic
         of others               of immediately preceding utterances                   of immediately preceding utterances

       Interventions
                   Intervening in the collaborative design process, in the sense used here, is what Fischer and colleagues call
         "metadesign"   (Fischer  &   Giaccardi,  2006). "Metadesigners   use    their own   creativity to create  socio-technical
         environments in which other people can be creative. They must create the social conditions for broad participation in
         design activities which is as important as creating the artifact itself..." (Fischer, 2007). What follows, then, is a first

3-3
report on the development of a metadesign framework for collaborative design education.
          In partnership with a K-8 private school, a group of design educators piloted scaffolds for collaborative
design discourse with approximately thirty students between 2nd and 8th grades. The students engaged in a series of
design challenges over the course of a summer, the challenges themselves being prototypes for a design curriculum to
be implemented in the upcoming school year. The overall goal was to help students become "mindful of process" --
that is, to attend to and develop the social-relational space during their collaborations, in addition to the more salient
subject matter of the problem content.
          In order to scaffold the successful collaborative discourse patterns from Table 1, educators borrowed a
technique from the improvisational theatre tradition. During the brainstorm, students were encouraged to begin new
proposals  with  "Yes,  and...[related proposal]",   as opposed to   "Yes, but...[judgment]"  or   any  other  unsuccessful
pattern. In so doing, the student verbalizes acceptance of the proposal, defers analytical judgment, and builds on the
proposal with a related idea. Students role-played brainstorms with and without the scaffolds and then were prompted
to reflect on the perceived differences. In succeeding brainstorms, students were widely seen to practice the intended
discourse  patterns even    though the  explicit  "yes, and"  construction was   largely absent, suggesting    it had been
internalized as a group capacity for negotiating the social-relational space.
          A  second  intervention   was   in the  needfinding  phase,  where  designers  develop   guiding  insights  using
ethnographic research methods to discover unfulfilled user needs. For example, if a child is always getting out of bed
after bed-time, needfinding may determine the underlying cause of the behavior (e.g. thirst, loud noises, fear of the
dark)  and   guide  designers toward    appropriate  solutions (e.g.  installing a water   dispenser   in the  room).  The
intervention modeled    the  practices of professional  designers, encouraging    design  students  to justify their design
decisions by mapping them directly to identified user needs, much in the same way that science students adopted
scholarly conventions of citing evidence in Engle & Conant's study of discourse, (2002).
          Two other interventions worth briefly mentioning include: 1) providing a formal step-by-step model of the
human-centered design process (needfinding, brainstorm, prototype, test, iterate) so learners could verbally frame
their  design    activities   during   group     discussion,   especially  as    they    navigated   process    transitions;
2) providing an abundance of tools and materials for physical prototyping to enable collaborative thinking through
embodied artifacts, role-playing of solutions in situated action, and anchoring of joint attention.

Discussion & Conclusion
          This paper highlights the utility of human-centered design activity as a way to (a) foster awareness of the
social dimensions of collaboration and (b) support the adoption of discourse patterns associated with more successful
collaborative learning outcomes. The capacity to be mindful of the relational space is a critical component of lifelong
learning  as there  are  few  human    endeavors  that  do not involve  some   form   of collaboration.   Furthermore,  the
usefulness of design as a framework for collaborative learning goes far beyond material product design: "Everyone
designs who devises courses of action aimed at changing existing circumstances into preferred ones.... Schools of
engineering, as well as schools of architecture, business, education, law, and medicine, are all centrally concerned
with the process of design." (Simon, 1981)
          This   ongoing research  program    is aimed  at discovering a  framework   for  design-based   education  where
developing collaborative capacities is the primary learning goal. Future communications will provide more thorough
accounts of interventions and their measured effects on learners.

References
Barron, B. (2003). When smart groups fail. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 12(3), 307-359.
Engle,  R.   A., &  Conant,   F.R.  (2002).  Guiding    principles for fostering  productive disciplinary      engagement:
          Explaining an emergent argument in a community of learners classroom. Cognition and Instruction,
          20, 399-483.
Fischer, G. (2007). Meta-Design: Expanding Boundaries and Redistributing Control in Design. Proceedings of
          the Interact'2007 Conference, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, September, 2007.
Fischer, G. & Giaccardi, E. (2006). Meta-Design: A Framework for the Future of End User Development. In H.
          Lieberman,    F.  Paterno  &  V.   Wulf  (Eds.), End  User   Development:     Empowering     people   to flexibly
          employ    advanced   information       and communication     technology     (pp. 427-458).      Dordrecht,   The
          Netherlands: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Roschelle, J. (1992). Learning by collaborating: Convergent conceptual change. The Journal of the Learning
          Sciences, 2, 235-276.
Simon, H. (1981). The Sciences of the Artificial, 2nd ed. p. 129. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Stahl, G. (2006). Group Cognition. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Sutton, R. I., A. Hardgadon (1996). Brainstorming groups in context: effectiveness in a product design firm.
          Administrative Science Quarterly, December, 1996.

                                                                                                                               3-3
