                  A Microgenetic Classroom Study of Learning to Reason
                     Scientifically through Modeling and Argumentation

                Clark A. Chinn, Richard A. Duschl, Ravit Golan Duncan, Luke A. Buckland, William J. Pluta
             Rutgers University, Graduate School of Education, 10 Seminary Place, New Brunswick, NJ 08901
                     Email: cchinn@rci.rutgers.edu, rgduncan@rci.rutgers.edu, rduschl@rci.rutgers.edu,
                                     lukebuckland@gmail.com, pluta@eden.rutgers.edu

                Abstract: We report on a large study of how U.S. middle-school students learned to reason
                scientifically in a science curriculum centered around models and argumentation. We discuss
                the design of our curriculum, the method of the study, and present selected results related to
                overall curriculum effects and to methods of promoting growth in students' reasoning.

      Introduction
                In this paper, we report results from a yearlong microgenetic, quasi-experimental study of middle-
       school life-science students learning to reason scientifically. The students participated in an inquiry curriculum
       in which they regularly engaged in constructive argumentation aimed at constructing, revising, and evaluating
       scientific models on the basis of evidence. In the following, we briefly describe (a) the design of our model-
       based inquiry curriculum, (b) the method, and (c) selected findings about students' growth in reasoning.

      Learning to Reason Scientifically through Modeling and Argumentation
                Despite the   importance  of learning   to reason well, many  or  most adolescents   and adults  are not
       proficient in important  aspects   of scientific reasoning  (Zimmerman,    2000).  To promote    better scientific
       reasoning, we have focused on reasoning about scientific models because the construction and evaluation of
       scientific models is a core scientific practice (e.g., Longino, 2002). Model-driven practices have allowed us to
       consider expanded notions of scientific inquiry that center on the dialogic discourse and epistemic activities of
       coordinating explanatory models with evidence     (Duschl,  Schweingruber, & Shouse, 2007).
                In accordance with these aims, we worked with teachers to develop instructional schemes centered
       around reasoning seminars--small-group and whole-class discussions in which students engage in collaborative
       argumentation  using   evidence to  construct, revise,  compare, and  evaluate explanatory models.  In  a  typical
       instructional module, students construct initial models of a process (such as how things get in and out of cells).
       Students then gather evidence themselves, and they read about other evidence reported by scientists. Through
       dialogic argumentation in a variety of small-group and whole-class contexts, they consider alternative models in
       the light of the available evidence, adopt the model that is most promising, and make further changes to that
       model as they encounter additional evidence. Teachers and students explicitly set goals for reasoning (e.g., a
       goal for one  module   might be  to learn to explain   the same  evidence from  the perspective of two   different
       models) and then evaluate whether these goals are being met.

      Method
                We carried out a yearlong quasi-experiment in twelve school districts in a state on the East Coast of the
       U.S. Seven    teachers and 724  middle-school    students  (most aged  12-13)  in 5 districts participated in the
       modeling-based   curriculum  outlined  above.  Half  of these classes were video  recorded throughout   the year.
       Another 23 teachers and 1,961 students in 7 districts participated in a control group matched on SES, district
       size, and performance on state assessments. Counterbalanced pretests and posttests assessed inquiry abilities
       within a variety of problems, including performance assessments embedded within a two-day inquiry lesson.
                The study was also a classroom microgenetic study exhibiting two key features (cf. Siegler & Crowley,
       1991): (a) Learners were observed daily over more than 8 months; (b) Measures of individual learners' strategy
       use were relatively dense so that we could detect knowledge changes as they occurred and then work backwards
       to understand instructional events that facilitated these changes. Microgenetic studies require measures that can
       be used repeatedly--a challenge in a yearlong study. A modeling-based curriculum is ideal for developing such
       measures because modeling entails the use of many types of inscriptions besides simple prose writing.

      Results
       Growth in Reasoning
                Results from the written posttest have shown that in comparison to students in control classes, students
       in modeling classes made substantially greater advances in their ability to effectively coordinate models and
       evidence. For example, on one posttest problem, students evaluated two alternative models of delayed onset
       muscle pain on the basis of five pieces of real scientific evidence. Typical responses by control students made

3-
no mention of evidence (e.g., The muscle fiber model makes more sense to me) or mentioned evidence only
generically (e.g.,  The lactic acid   model  fits the   studies better). Students  in modeling    classes were better  at
articulating model-evidence connections in detail. Many also noted that it was necessary to modify the muscle
fibers model (which did not posit cell swelling) to account for a study reporting swelling in painful muscles.
         Substantial   improvement    in the sophistication   and   coherence   of students'  use and   understanding  of
epistemic norms was observed over the course of the year in the modeling classrooms. One important shift was
from an   initial preference   for  communicative     and   aesthetic criteria for  evaluating  scientific  models to   a
preference for criteria of empirical and representational accuracy. For example, an early list of criteria for good
models generated by one class made no mention of evidential criteria. Their criteria included: (1) Step by step
sequence, (2) Simple, (3) Has to explain, (4) Self-explanatory, (5) No perfect model, must redesign for each age
group, (6) Have key labeling, (7) Have words and pictures, (8) Have more than one possible model, (9) Add
color. The shift toward including evidential criteria occurred in all classes, but the change occurred slowly and
unevenly within and across different classes.

Effective Instructional Practices
         Our results provide support for a broad range of instructional practices. Four of these are described
below (see Pluta, Buckland, et al. , this volume, on another scaffold that proved to be highly effective).
    1.   Public criteria for good models and good reasons. Teachers and classes developed one set of publicly
         posted criteria for good models and a second set of criteria for good reasons or justifications. Students and
         the teacher then worked throughout the year to refine and improve their criteria. These criteria were an
         effective focal point for many other activities and were regularly referred to by teachers and students.
    2.   Ranking models or reasons using criteria. A task that stimulated extensive argumentation about criteria
         and their  application   was  ranking    three or  four  alternative models  according   to   model criteria, or
         ranking three or four reasons according to reason criteria. These ranking tasks led students to reflect in
         detail  on how  criteria  applied to particular    cases and  whether   the  class's criteria were  adequate  to
         distinguish not only between good and bad models (or reasons), but also--and critically--between good
         and very good models (or reasons).
    3.   Deliberate    introduction of poor   models    and  poor   reasoning.   To deepen    students' appreciation   for
         certain  epistemic criteria, teachers    found  it productive   to deliberately present  poor  models  or poor
         reasons for students' consideration. For example, students found it easier to understand why elaborated
         reasons were valuable when teachers made claims such as "I think that a pickles-only diet is good
         because scientists did an experiment" or "It's good because it said so in a book." Presented with such
         examples, many students grasped that elaborated reasons are essential because they are needed to allow
         open and public criticism of ideas, a process of critical argumentation that is central to the scientific
         enterprise (Longino, 2002).
    4.   "Thought bubbles" linking reasons for model revisions. To encourage greater sophistication in linking
         evidence   to models, we   developed  the  technique    of having  students  write  evidence-based  reasons   for
         model revisions in "thought bubbles" linked to the revision. This scaffold helped students understand that
         evidence does not merely support or contradict models as a whole; evidence can often be taken to support
         or contradict particular parts of models. Students thus learned to link evidence to models more precisely.

Conclusions
         The initial results of this study support the effectiveness of a reasoning curriculum centered around
modeling and argumentation. Although analyses of microgenetic data are just beginning, we have uncovered
shifts in epistemic criteria spanning a year of intensive engagement with modeling and argumentation activities.
And  we  have   begun   identifying instructional  techniques    that appear  to strongly advance    students' ability to
articulate and apply epistemic criteria for linking models to evidence.

References
Duschl, R. A., Schweingruber, H. A., & Shouse, A. W. (Eds.). (2007). Taking science to school: Learning and
         teaching science in grades K-8. Washington, D.C.: National Academies Press.
Longino, H. E. (2002). The fate of knowledge. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Siegler, R.  S.,  & Crowley,   K.   (1991).  The   microgenetic     method:   A  direct  means  for  studying  cognitive
         development. American Psychologist, 46, 606-620.
Zimmerman, C. (2000). The development of scientific reasoning skills. Developmental Review, 20, 99-149.

Acknowledgments
This material is based upon work supported by the National Science Foundation under Grant No. 0529582. Any
opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Science Foundation.

                                                                                                                             3-
