   The role of compression and refinement in visualization tools for
                                               crime analysts
                     Susan W. van den Braak, Herre van Oostendorp, Gerard A.W. Vreeswijk,
           Department of Information and Computing Sciences, Utrecht University, The Netherlands
                             Email: susanb@cs.uu.nl, herre@cs.uu.nl, gv@cs.uu.nl
             Henry Prakken, Department of Information and Computing Sciences, Utrecht University
                 & Faculty of Law, University of Groningen, The Netherlands, henry@cs.uu.nl

         Abstract: This paper presents the results of a study that tested the effect of compression and
         refinement, as implemented in the AVERs graph visualization software for crime analysts, on
         the quality of the users' analysis of a simple crime case and their understanding of this case. In
         this study  professional crime   analysts  and   students who  used  these  methods     outperformed
         users that were only allowed to use conventional methods to handle large graphs.

Introduction
         Graph   visualization tools    have been   shown   promising   for   learning and   for  collaborating on  the
construction and evaluation of arguments (Kirschner, Buckingham Shum, & Carr, 2003; van den Braak, van
Oostendorp, Prakken, & Vreeswijk, 2006). In this spirit, a tool for the graphical visualization of stories and
evidence named AVERs (Argument Visualization for Evidential Reasoning based on stories) has been developed
(Bex et al., 2007). This tools aims at crime analysts who may use it to construct stories about what happened by
linking events into causal chains and to connect the available evidence with these stories through arguments.

Problem statement
         When large arguments are produced graph visualizations are often hard to read. As soon as the size of
the graphs   or  the link density increases,   such    graphs become    increasingly   more   complex  and  harder    to
understand. Argument visualization software should therefore offer methods that allow users to display their
graphs in a readable way. Specialized software for crime analysts should additionally offer methods to elaborate
on  graphs and   make  underlying reasons    explicit. It should  be  easy to unfold   all hidden information   about a
certain node  if desired, while   still being  able to    oversee the larger  picture. This  is  necessary due   to the
interactive nature of the analysis process in which an enormous amount of information needs to be analyzed and
the constructed graphs are continuously being expanded and refined, while the reasons why certain links are
added are often left implicit. We suggest a combination of compression and refinement as a viable solution,
since it improves the readability of the graphs, while it also allows for elaboration. Compression is based on the
idea that sometimes lines of reasoning are compressed into a rule. Take for example, the two-step argument for
believing  witnesses: "witnesses  that  speak  the  truth should   be believed" and    "witnesses normally  speak   the
truth". This may then be compressed into the rule "witnesses should be believed". If a rule is to be attacked, it
has to be restated in an uncompressed form. It is then easy to see that this rule can be attacked by arguing that
witnesses who have a reason to lie do not speak the truth and therefore should not be believed (Loui & Norman,
1995). While decompression is used to add reasons for questionable links, refinement allows for the addition of
more detail to earlier established links. We suggest that useful software tools for crime analysts should provide a
combination of these two methods, since they correspond to tasks that are important during crime analysis.

Method
         The goal of the study was to determine whether tools that contain refinement and compression methods
support their users better than tools that provide conventional methods to handle large graphs. The study was
conducted during a three-hour session at the Dutch police academy in Zutphen; 5 students of crime analysis and
11  analysts  working  in  different districts in   the   Netherlands participated.  Subjects    were assigned  to  the
conditions randomly.   The  treatment    group  was    allowed to  use  a  system which     contained  refinement   and
compression methods in order to analyze a simple case. The control group analyzed the same case by using a
basic system which contained a simpler method for collapsibility that allowed them to collapse or expand all
nodes of a certain type all at once, but in contrast to the treatment condition it was impossible to expand or
collapse individual nodes. We predicted that the subjects in the treatment group would perform better, regarding
the quality of their analysis and their understanding of the case, than the subjects in the control group.
         A pre-test was conducted to help to account for biases between the treatment and the control group,
after which the participants were asked to complete some instructional exercises to familiarize them with the
system. Subsequently, in the actual test they had to analyze a simplified murder case using the system. After
handing in their answers, a post-test was administered which consisted of true or false statements to test their

                                                                                                                           3-3
         understanding of the case. Finally, they were asked to fill in a usability questionnaire of 5-point Likert scale
         statements to measure the user-friendliness of the system as a whole and ease of use of specific features in it.

       Results
                   Pre-test scores revealed that there were no significant pre-existing differences between groups. The
         graphs that were produced by the treatment group were more complete, better structured and more sound than
         the graphs produced by the control group, while the subjects in the control group (M=3972 seconds with SD =
         878) used more time than the subjects in the treatment group (M=3286 seconds with SD=725). T-tests showed
         that the difference in soundness was significant (p=.04) and the difference in time nearly significant (p=.06), but
         the other differences   were   not (p=.40   for completeness      and p=.24    for structure), although   they  were    in the
         expected direction. In total, the graphs of the treatment group were better than the graphs of the control group
         (M=1.22   with SD=0.40     and  M=0.89    with  SD=0.41      respectively).  This  difference  was   marginally    significant
         (p=.07).  On  the whole    the data  suggest that    the  treatment  group   produces   higher    quality analyses  than   the
         control group. The subjects in the treatment group also performed better on the true or false statements of the
         post-test than the control group (M=14.88 with SD=1.55 and M = 14.14 with SD=1.07 respectively). However,
         the difference found was not significant (p=.16). It should be noted that in the treatment group 4 subjects were
         able to answer all questions correctly, in the control group none of the subjects was able to do so.
                   The  usability questionnaire   revealed    a mean   rating  of 2.80   (SD=0.60)   on    a 5-point  scale  for user-
         friendliness and  a   mean  rating  of 3.31 (SD=0.92)     on  the  same  scale  for  ease  of  use. More     specifically, the
         subjects in the treatment group (M=3.63 with SD=0.92) found the collapsibility feature easier to use than the
         subjects in the control group (M=3.38 with SD=1.06), but this difference is not significant (p=.31). These results
         indicate that the user-friendliness of the system needs improvement as a satisfactory score should be at least
         higher than 3 on a scale from 1 to 5.

       Conclusion and discussion
                   The  study  showed   that  crime  analysts   who   are  allowed  to  use methods     to refine  or compress   links
         produce higher quality analyses and understand the case better than analysts who are provided with simpler
         methods to handle large graphs. All differences found between groups were in the expected direction, but only
         the difference in   soundness   was    statistically significant, while  the   differences  in  the  overall  quality of   the
         produced  graph   and  the  time  taken  to complete     the task  were  nearly    significant and  showed    a trend   in the
         predicted direction. On the whole the analyses presented in this paper indicate that the selected methods increase
         performance and they have shown the importance of suitable ways to handle large and complex graphs. The
         usability measures    revealed  that the ease   of   use  of the  features  in AVERs    is satisfactory   but that the  user-
         friendliness of the system as a whole needs improvement. In particular, with respect to user-friendliness the
         inability to undo actions was pointed out as a drawback. While devising future versions of the system we will
         pay extra attention to this area.
                   Although the results presented in this paper are promising and in the predicted direction, the effects
         were not strong. Two reasons for this may be identified. Due to time constraints the case that had to be analyzed
         was rather small and simple. Arguably, in larger cases the differences between conditions might be even more
         apparent. Additionally, we expect that repetition of this study with a larger number of subjects will yield more
         significant  results. Nonetheless   this study  provides     preliminary   support  for the claim    that compression      and
         refinement indeed support users better than conventional methods to produce readable graphs, while they also
         satisfy the specific needs of crime analysts.

       References
         Bex, F.,  Braak,  S.  van  den, Oostendorp,     H.   van, Prakken,  H.,  Verheij,   B., &  Vreeswijk,     G.  (2007). Sense-
                   making software for crime investigation: How to combine stories and arguments? Law, Probability and
                   Risk, 6(1-4), 145-168.
         Braak, S.   W. van    den, Oostendorp,   H.  van,    Prakken,  H.,  &  Vreeswijk,    G. A.  (2006).   A   critical review   of
                   argument visualization tools: Do users become better reasoners? In F. Grasso, R. Kibble, & C. A. Reed
                   (Ed.), Workshop Notes of the ECAI-2006 Workshop on Computational Models of Natural Argument
                   (pp. 67-75). Riva del Garda, Italy.
         Kirschner, P., Buckingham Shum, S. J., & Carr, C. S. (2003). Visualizing argumentation: Software tools for
                   collaborative and educational sense-making. London, UK: Springer.
         Loui, R. P., & Norman, J. (1995). Rationales and argument moves. Artificial Intelligence and Law, 3, 159-189.

       Acknowledgments
         This research  was    supported  by  the Netherlands      Organisation   for Scientific  Research    (NWO)    under   project
         number 634.000.429.

3-
