                          From dialogic to trialogic learning

Jakko van der Pol, VU University Amsterdam, De Boelelaan 1105, 1081 HV Amsterdam, j.vanderpol@uu.nlT

       Abstract: This poster looks at dialogic learning in academic practice with the specific aim of
       the  collaborative processing   of texts. In identifying some   shortcomings    of these   dialogic
       practices it  introduces   the notion of  trialogic learning,  and presents   the  results from a
       comparative study on the affordances of different asynchronous discussion tools to support a
       more content-oriented and trialogic form of conversation.

Dialogue in education
       As thinking and learning can be seen as being inherently dialogic in nature, giving the `voice of the
other' a more prominent role in learning has since long been an aim of educational research. Creating a more
dialogical form of learning has been especially important in academic education, which deals primarily with
abstract or discursive knowledge that can only be shared trough communication and hence presents a form of
`mediated learning'  (Laurillard, 1993). Not only   does dialogue involve  powerful   learning  activities  such as
questioning, explaining and making explicit, but it can also be seen as the only way to create an open and thus
fundamentally `authentic'  learning   environment.  Being   open  to  students' input,   dialogic learning   makes
students´ conceptions of their learning content explicit, inviting them to engage in a process of collaborative
meaning making.

Dialogic learning in practice
       When students interact in a constructive and collaborative way, two different kinds of argumentation
can emerge. Students may argue about the value of certain statements in a text, or they may argue about the
meaning they attribute to it. As a result of our focus on students' collaborative processing of text, we have a
special interest in the second, meaning-oriented kind. This preference of meaning-oriented communication over
opinion-oriented communication when using online discussion forums for learning, is also shared by Klemm,
who expresses it in the following way:

       Don't  settle for just opinions.  Everybody   has   opinions. They  are  like knee  jerk   reflexes,
       occurring with little thought once they have been formed. Thus, it is not surprising that many
       classroom discussion groups online are dominated by opinion messages, rather than rigorous
       analysis and creative thought. (Klemm, 1998, p. 3)

       In line with Klemm's statement, our experience with online discussion groups for the collaborative
processing of texts in academic education yields that students seem to prefer to exchange existing opinions
about practical issues related to the text, above trying to develop their understanding of the meaning of the text.
It seems that, with only a limited understanding of the subject matter, constructing relevant reactions to the
questions of other students requires a considerable amount of content processing effort. However, this effort is
highly valuable from a constructivist learning perspective. In order to investigate how to maximize students'
content processing effort in online discussion forums, we have investigated how we can draw student's online
learning conversations closer into their study material. In a sense, this converts students' dialogic and opinion-
oriented learning (see Figure 1) into a more trialogic and meaning-oriented one (see Figure 2).

 Figure 1. Dialogic learning as open interaction on a conceptual level to stimulate personal meaning making.

Figure 2. Trialogic learning (Paavola et al, 2004), as open interaction on a conceptual level that includes content
              in the dialogue, making the `voice' of the study material more prominently present.

                                                                                                                       3-
       A tool for online anchored discussion
                  The   IVLOS   Annotation  system   is a  tool for online discussion   which integrates students' online
         dialogues with the subject matter at hand. Figure 3 displays a screenshot of the system, with the triangle from
         Figure 2 overlaid to indicate the interplay between dialogue and content. Due to the `anchoring' of discussion
         threads to specific passages from the text (highlighted in green, with a red number), we expect to be able to
         draw student's online learning conversations closer into their study material.

                             Figure 3. The IVLOS Annotation system for online anchored discussion.

                  We have conducted a experimental comparative study (for the followed methodology, see Van der Pol,
         Admiraal & Simons, 2006) on the affordances of two online discussion tools to support a more content-oriented
         and  trialogic form of   conversation. In  total, 1296  messages  generated  in a university course on  General
         Pedagogy were coded by a newly constructed coding scheme (with message as unit of analysis and an average
         interrater reliability across all variables of Cohen's kappa = 0.82). Results of the study (see Table 1) show that
         dialogue in the system for anchored discussion is more directed at reconstructing the meaning of the text (or,
         reconstructing the ´voice´ of the author) than discussion in the traditional forum, which is more oriented towards
         the sharing of personal opinions and experiences. This difference in orientation produces a more constructive
         dialogue in the system for anchored discussion, versus a more debate-like dialogue in the forum discussion.
         Additionally, while messages in the traditional forum resemble usual email conversation and contain social and
         regulative comments, dialogue in the system for anchored discussion is seen to be more efficient and `to-the-
         point.' Although the presence of social comments is often regarded as a positive outcome (functioning as a
         ´social lubricant´), they seemed in this case not to be required for an effective collaboration. We thus conclude
         that for collaborative   text comprehension    by undergraduate   students, anchored discussion  might be  more
         suitable than traditional forum discussion. Finally, the observed differences can be explained by the stronger
         defined collaborative context in the system for anchored discussion, which focuses participants' collaborative
         intentions and their frames of reference.

         Table 1: Comparing the affordances of anchored and `regular' online discussion.

              Percentages of activities:        `Regular' discussion tool (n=462)       Anchored discussion tool (n=719)
         1)   Reconstructing meaning            58 %                                    77 %
              Social comments                   42 %                                    2%
              Regulation of the process         25 %                                    4%
         2)   Self-clarifications               35 %                                    20 %
              Demonstrative referring           5%                                      19 %

       References
         Klemm, W. R. (1998). Eight ways to get students more engaged in online conferences. T.H.E. Journal, August.
         Laurillard, D. (1993). Rethinking university teaching. London: Routeledge.
         Paavola, S., Lipponen, L., & Hakkarainen, K. (2004). Models of Innovative Knowledge Communities and Three
                  Metaphors of Learning. Review of Educational Research 74(4), 557-576.
         Van der Pol, J., Admiraal, W. F., & Simons, P. R. J. (2006). The affordance of anchored discussion for the
                  collaborative processing of academic texts. ijCSCL 1(3), 339-357.

3-
