Teacher strategies for fostering collaborative historical reasoning
                                     in whole-class discussions
  Jannet van Drie, Carla van Boxtel, Graduate School of Teaching and Learning, University of Amsterdam,
                               Spinozastraat 55, 1018 HJ Amsterdam, the Netherlands
                               Email: J.P.vanDrie@uva.nl, C.A.M.vanBoxtel@uva.nl

         Abstract:   Whole-class     discussions  in which    students and teacher   reason    together  and   co-
         construct knowledge are, next to small group work, important in communities of learners. In
         this study  we    address the  question  of what   strategies history   teachers  use to  provoke     and
         support   collaborative   historical  reasoning   in whole-class     discussions. Analyses      included
         transcripts of four whole-class discussions and stimulated recall interviews with the teachers
         and  revealed  differences    in the extent to  which   they  succeeded  in provoking     collaborative
         historical reasoning.

Theoretical Framework
          Whole-class      discussions  are common      practice in  history  education.   In  more   traditional   history
classrooms these whole-class discussions are controlled by the teacher, in the sense that (s)he takes initiative,
asks questions, lectures and explains, gives directions, and evaluative feedback. More recent socio-constructive
perspectives on learning highlight the collaborative construction of knowledge. Whole-class discussions that
take place in these latter settings, such as approaches of community of learners, stress the active participation of
students and collaborative reasoning about and with the key-concepts of the subject-matter.             This is not easy to
achieve. Several studies indicate that the quality of student discourse in community-of-learners classrooms is not
very high and that collaborative reasoning is difficult to achieve (e.g., Mintrop, 2004).
         What strategies can teachers use to promote collaborative reasoning within whole-class discussions?
Mercer (1995) mentions for example making `we' statements, literal recapping and reconstructive recapping of
past activity,   eliciting relevant  knowledge     from   students,  and   elaborating  replies   received.    Kovalainen,
Kumpulainen,     and Vasama      (2001/2002)   identified  four  modes  of teacher   participation   in  a community-of-
learners classroom during whole-class discussions, namely: an evocative mode, a facilitative mode, a collective
mode,    and  an appreciative    mode.    However,   these  studies   mainly  focus  on    the domain      of  science and
mathematics,   and hardly   on   the domain   of  history. Furthermore,    these studies   do  not specifically  focus  on
whole-class   discussions   that are preceded   by collaborative   working    in small groups,    as is  often the case  in
community of learners classrooms.

Research question and method
         The main question underlying this study is: To what extent and how do history teachers succeed in
orchestrating collaborative historical reasoning in whole-class discussions that follow small group work? This
exploratory study is part of a larger research-project that investigates the effects of combining group work with
whole-class   discussions,  in which   knowledge     of history  concepts  is co-constructed,   on   the establishment  of
shared   knowledge   within  the  class   and on  reasoning   with these  concepts  in subsequent     small    group work.
Outcomes of the presented study will be used to develop a training for teachers that participate in this research-
project.
         We videotaped four whole-class discussions in history and used stimulated recall interviews in order to
elicit the practical knowledge of the teachers (Meijer, Zanting & Verloop, 2002) on the strategies they use to
elicit collaborative historical reasoning. They were also asked some more general questions about whole-class
discussions. Participants were four experienced teachers from different schools. The teachers Erica and Deanne
both taught to students in pre-university education (15-16 years of age). Erica gave an introduction to the history
of the United States and Deanne talked about collaboration and resistance during WW2. Gerald contextualized
with his students (general secondary education, 16-17 years of age) several historical sources in time. And Tina
discussed with her students from general secondary education (13-14 years old) drawings about the colonization
period.
         The   transcripts  were   analyzed    on  indicators   of collaborative   historical  reasoning.     We   describe
collaborative  historical  reasoning   in whole-class   discussions  here  as the  situation   in which    the teacher and
his/her students organize information about the past in order to describe, compare, and/or explain historical
phenomena (Van Drie & Van Boxtel, in press), with students as active participants and building on each other's
contributions. The extent to which students had an active role in the discussions was measured as the percentage
of utterances of the students, the number of different students that participate, and the number of instances of
students reacting directly on another student without interference of the teacher. Flanders' Interaction Analysis

                                                                                                                              3-
         Categories  (Flanders,    1970)   was   used   to  analyze    the  interaction between  teacher    and  students.  Lastly,   the
         transcripts were analyzed on appearance and components of historical reasoning: contextualization; description;
         description  of changes;      explanation; use    of  sources;  and   argumentation)   (Van   Drie, Van    Boxtel,   Jaspers &
         Kanselaar, 2005).

       Results
                  To   what    extent  did  the  teachers   succeed      in  orchestrating collaborative  historical   reasoning?   The
         discussions led by Gerald and Deanne showed most contributions of students. About 40% of the utterances were
         of the  students,    compared   to Erica   24%    and    Tina 21%.    In Deanne's   discussion   a  lot of  different students
         participated, about 70%.      The percentage of participating students was for Gerald 58%, for Tina 48%, and for
         Erica 42% (the classes consisted of 19-24 students). The number of times students responded directly to each
         other differed a lot: 37 times for Gerald, 10 times for Deanne, Tina 2 times, and Erica not at all. The outcomes
         of four   categories   of   the  instrument    of  Flanders     are  especially   interesting in   relation  to  orchestrating
         collaborative reasoning, which are accepting or using ideas of students, lecturing, giving directions, and pupil-
         talk initiation. There was not so much difference in the acceptance or use of ideas of students (Deanne 10%;
         Gerald 9%; Tina 9%; Erica 6%). The discussions led by Gerald and Deanne showed more student initiation
         (25% and 23%) compared to Erica (14%) and Tina (5%). Erica and Tina gave more directions (Erica 24%; Tina
         15%;   Deanne   9%;   Gerald    4%)  and   the discussions      led Gerald  and   Tina showed   most    lecturing (Tina  23%;
         Gerald 20%; Erica 9%; Deanne 8%). In each of the discussions one component of historical reasoning that is
         related  to  the     specific task   at  hand,     is central    (Deanne:   argumentation,      Erica:  description;  Gerald:
         contextualization, and Tina: use of sources). Both the teacher and the students showed a lot of reasoning of this
         type. In all cases, the teachers, however, also used other components of historical reasoning that are not directly
         related to the type of task discussed. In the interviews the teachers mentioned several strategies which they used
         to provoke   collaborative    historical   reasoning,    for  example    asking stimulating   questions,   restating  students'
         comments, summarizing, and asking students to respond to each others interpretations and arguments.

       Conclusions and discussion
                  The    analyses   revealed   differences     in the  extent  to which    the  teachers succeeded    in  orchestrating
         collaborative   historical  reasoning   in whole-class     discussions.  In  general,  the discussions   led  by  Deanne   and
         Gerald  showed       more  collaborative   historical    reasoning:   more   active   student   participation and    initiation.
         Strategies that were used to provoke collaborative historical reasoning are amongst others: involving as many
         students as possible, inviting students to respond to each others interpretations and arguments, accepting and
         building  on  students'   ideas,  summarizing,     using   waiting-time,   asking  questions,   not giving  direct   evaluative
         feedback (instead of which the teacher can ask questions that may make him discover his misinterpretation or
         asking other students to respond), and introducing different components of historical reasoning. The analysis of
         historical reasoning suggests that the teacher has an important role in enriching the reasoning in the classroom
         by initiating  different  types  of  historical   reasoning.    Since the  four   whole-class discussions    showed   a  lot of
         differences   (i.e., tasks,   topic, age,  school-level)      the   outcomes   should  be  handled     with  care,   and more
         (qualitative) research is needed to discern the particular (domain-specific) strategies teachers use to promote
         collaborative historical reasoning.

       References
         Flanders,   N.  A.   (1970).   Analyzing   teacher     behavior.    Reading,   Massachusetts:   Adison-Wesley      Publishing
                  Company.
         Kovalainen,    M.,   Kumpulainen,     K.,  &   Vasama,       S. (2001/2002).    Orchestrating   classroom    interaction  in  a
                  community of inquiry: Modes of teacher participation. Journal of Classroom Interaction, 36(2)/37(1),
                  17-28.
         Meijer, P. C., Zanting, A., & Verloop, N. (2002). How can student teachers elicit experienced teachers' practical
                  knowledge? Tools, suggestions, and significance. Journal of Teacher Education, 53(5), 406-419.
         Mercer, N. (1995). The guided construction of knowledge: Talk amongst teachers and learners. Clevedon, UK:
                  Multilingual matters.
         Mintrop, H. (2004). Fostering constructivist communities of learners in the amalgamated multi-discipline of
                  social studies. Journal of Curriculum Studies, 36(2), 141-158.
         Van Drie, J. & Van Boxtel, C. (in press). Historical reasoning: towards a framework for analyzing students'
                  reasoning about the past. Educational Psychology Review.
         Van  Drie,  J., Van   Boxtel,   C.,  Jaspers,  J., &     Kanselaar,  G.  (2005).  Effects  of representational    guidance   on
                  domain specific reasoning in CSCL. Computers in Human Behavior, 21(4), 575-602.

3-
