                            Situated Multimedia Learning for Older Adults:
                Exploring the Benefits of Age-Specific Instructional Design
             Cordula Orth, Theo J. Bastiaens, FernUniversitaet in Hagen, Department of Instructional Technology and
                                               Media, Universitaetsstr. 11, 58084 Hagen
                               Email: cordula.orth@fernuni-hagen.de, theo.bastiaens@fernuni-hagen.de

                    Abstract: This study explores advantages of situated multimedia learning environments with
                    age-specific modifications for older adults. With the strong increase of the ageing population
                    in Western    societies  the   number  of   active   older  adults  willing   to  learn is  growing.
                    Furthermore, due to the increase of ICT older adults will be more and more confronted with
                    multimedia applications that are not tailored to this specific user group and might therefore not
                    be as efficient as they   could  be. A design   that  combines  adjustments   towards   the physical
                    decline and   adapts  cognitive  load  theory to   minimise   cognitive overload    embedded   in  an
                    authentic context provides a fruitful basis for learning environments addressing older adults.
                    However, situated learning approaches vary widely in the support given to the learner and the
                    aim  is to  establish  a  framework    that enables    instructional designers    to administer   the
                    appropriate amount of support for the special abilities and needs of older adults.

        Introduction
                    The   term older  adult  has  frequently   been aligned  with   people  over  the  age  of 50  and  it is being
          recognised that a growing number of this group is not only capable, but also interested in lifelong learning. The
          concept of lifelong learning regards education as not being limited to specific age parameters. With the growth
          in the older adult's population using the Internet the opportunity for senior learners to access online learning
          environments    increases  dramatically.   When  older  adults   use  multimedia-based     learning  environments    they
          usually have to work with products that are not particularly designed for them. Unfortunately developers of
          online materials all too often design materials for the "average" user, without the user group of older adults in
          mind. Older adults seem to be disadvantaged proportionately more than younger learners when they have to
          work with learning materials that do not address their unique abilities and needs. For example younger adults
          may find certain incoherencies in a learning environment also irritating but might just be more effective to deal
          with those barriers. Thus, it is not sufficient to design a learning environment and adopt it for older adults if it
          was  not  developed   for this specific  learner group.   As   learning  environments   are  differentially effective  for
          different age   groups  the  demographic    change   and  the   necessity for  lifelong learning   require  instructional
          designers to rethink their approach to developing learning environments.

        Theoretical Framework
                    Providing better-designed, i.e. adaptive learning environments will especially benefit older learners but
          also improve the quality for all user groups. Especially the growing importance of complex learning cannot be
          solely addressed with technical solutions that have been developed without an understanding of the user group.
          Most educational research is in agreement that not everybody learns or approaches learning in the same way
          which  is  especially  true  for  older  adults  (Truluck    &  Courtenay,   1999). The    potential  of learners,   their
          limitations, and their learning needs including those of older adults have to be addressed. Although older adults
          do not constitute a heterogeneous group there are certain factors that potentially contribute to difficulties they
          might  encounter   with   online  learning materials.  Besides   the  normal   age-related   decrements  in  perception,
          cognition  and  psychomotor    abilities a generation-related   lack  of experience   with  such  technologies   have  an
          effect on this user group.
                    The  perceptual   and  psychomotor     changes  and   their impact   on lifelong   learning   have  been   well
          documented    (Charness   &  Schaie,   2003;   Fisk, Rogers,    Charness, Czaja,  &   Sharit,  2004). As    older adults'
          cognitive ability might already be limited their cognitive activity should not be utilized to cope with inadequate
          design (Hawthorn, 2000). Although these aspects are important to ensure that the learner is able to fully utilise
          the learning materials, one should not focus primarily on design issues while ignoring cognitive challenges of
          older adults using online materials to acquire complex skills.
                    These cognitive challenges are at least partially caused by cognitive ageing, the normal, age-related
          decline associated with a reduced capacity of working-memory to store, retrieve, and manipulate information. In
          this regard,  Gerven,  Paas,   Merriënboer,  and  Schmidt    (2000)   propose  a framework     in which  cognitive   load
          theory (CLT) is merged with significant findings of cognitive ageing research. CLT which is based upon the
          work  of  Sweller   (1994)   states that   learners  should  be  stimulated   to  use  their  limited working-memory
          efficiently, especially when    acquiring  complex    skills in order to  reduce  cognitive   load.  Although    there are

2-
important interplays between the findings from cognitive aging research and CLT, the principles of multimedia
learning have not been integrated into learning environments for older adults. It would however be worthwhile
to examine     whether   they apply  to  learning environments      that require many   hours   of participation   (Clark &
Mayer, 2003). To bridge this gap, i.e. to develop a framework for older adults learning needs, an instructional
design model has to be selected to imbed the learning materials that are especially suited to older adults.
         Knowles developed a theory of andragogy to understand and support adult learning. It emphasises that
adults are self-directed and anticipate taking responsibility for their decisions. Online learning environments for
older   adults should    therefore   not only state   why   learners need   to learn  and  how   the    knowledge   will  be
immediately applicable but should also facilitate for a self directed learning process in which the learner can
utilize their  life experiences   (Knowles,   1975).   As learning   research  in  general has  stated  the importance    of
providing students with an authentic context for supporting learning and andragogy find this especially poignant
for older adults (Knowles, 1984a, 1984b) the concept of situated learning should be considered as a possible
framework.
         Concerning this matter, the concept of situated learning might offer the possibilities to compensate for
age-related deficits in memory by enriching learning contexts. Collins, Brown and Newman (1989) developed
the theory  of  situated  learning   to  increase the   knowledge    transfer  from   classroom    instructions  to real-life
applications (Park & Hannafin, 1993; Young, 1993). Beneficial learning effects of situated multimedia learning
have already been obtained in young adults (Griffin, 1995; Lampert, 1986) however, there is a gap in research
concerning older learners. Intelligence, one factor assumed to predict learning performance is divided into fluid
and  crystallised   intelligence.  Whereas    fluid    intelligence  necessary   for  attention and     short-term  memory
decreases with age, crystallized intelligence essential to solve familiar cognitive problems based on knowledge
and experience      increases or  at least stabilises  with age  (Kliegel  &   Altgassen,  2006;   Schaie,  2005).   Taking
further findings of gerontology into account that adults rather accept learning materials that relate to their pre-
existing knowledge and experiences and can transfer what they learn relate immediately to real life situations
giving them purpose and satisfaction make it plausible that they might prefer authentic tasks embedded into
virtual learning environments are more motivating for older adults than conventional task. As there are huge
variations in  situated  learning    environments   it remains   to be   seen if older learners  really  prefer  to use   the
resources rather independently or if they prefer a rather controlled learning environment with more scaffolding.
         To integrate theories of situated learning, Herrington and Oliver (2000) suggest an instructional design
framework     with  nine  design   recommendations      for authentic    learning  environments.     It is conceived   as  a
guideline  for  the  design   of multimedia-based     environments   that  incorporates the   characteristics   of  authentic
learning. The authentic learning environment should therefore be characterised by real world relevance where
learning is embedded in social practice. The tasks should be authentic and have a diversity of possible outcomes
and authentic assessment that is seamlessly integrated with these tasks. Opportunities for students to examine
content and tasks from a variety of perspectives and to collaborate, articulate, and reflect on the knowledge.
         Moreover, models of self-regulated learning emphasise that students are more effective when they take
a purposeful role in their own learning. The framework from Herrington offers learners an open structure where
they can autonomously direct their own learning and apply their learning strategies to move through the rather
compartmentalised offering of materials. In this regard, it has been shown that volitional skills, i.e. the ability to
self-regulate  the  learning  process,   are  important   prerequisites  for  learning (Deimann      &  Keller,  2006).   As
motivation is an essential factor in older adults' learning (Wlodkowski, 1986) it has to bee seen if this freedom
outweighs the problematic that some learners may lack the necessary learning strategies for effective learning.
         Additionally older adults tend to become less active and hands-on while learning and more reflective
and observant     instead  (Truluck   &    Courtenay,  1999).   Minimal    guidance   where   learners   must    discover or
construct essential information for themselves (Bruner, 1961; Papert, 1980) might therefore be challenging. In
contrast direct   instructional   guidance   (Mayer,   2004;  J. Sweller,    2003)   provides   information  that   explains
concepts and procedures to the learners might be more compatible with older adults.
         Modern instructional design models assume that realistic and rich learning tasks are the driving force
for learning (Merrill, 2002). Well-designed learning tasks stimulate learners to integrate and coordinate required
skills, knowledge and attitudes. This finally leads to a rich knowledge base that allows for transfer to daily life
and future work settings (J. v. Merriënboer, Bastiaens, & Hoogveld, 2004). These developments put forward the
need for a design model to accommodate complex learning (Jeroen J. G. van Merriënboer, Clark, & Croock,
2002). However, such design methodologies or models are rare, so designers often have to fall back on their
own ideas and intuition, thereby often neglecting systematic analysis, design and evaluation (van Merriënboer &
Martens,   2002).   Moreover,    constructivist learning    approaches    almost   always  have    an   implicit or explicit
combination    of   both cognitive   and  motivational  effects  of  the  learning materials.   This  makes  it  even  more
complicated to design constructivist learning environments and to predict and understand its effects.
         The    Four-Components       Instructional    Design Model      (4C/ID)   of  van Merriënboer      (J.  J. G.   van
Merriënboer, 1997) offers such designers' guidelines. It supports the development of complex tasks for learning
that are often used in higher education. The model distinguishes between non-recurrent aspects of learning and

                                                                                                                                 2-
         performance, which differ from problem to problem situation, and recurrent aspects, which are identical from
         one problem situation to another. The model in general exists of four interrelated blueprint components. The
         backbone of the model is formed by learning tasks which are defined as concrete, authentic and meaningful
         'whole task experiences'. They are sequenced in simple-to-complex task classes. Ideally, they confront learners
         with all aspects of a professional competency. The second component is called supportive information. This is
         information that is supportive to the learning and performance of non-recurrent aspects of learning tasks (e.g.
         problem solving and reasoning) within the same task class. It helps to develop mental models and cognitive
         strategies. Just-in-time information is the third component and is prerequisite to the learning and performance of
         recurrent aspects of learning tasks. It is relevant to the performance of routine aspects of the learning tasks. In
         general these are small information units and presented to learners - just-in-time- while working on the learning
         tasks. The last component is called part task practice. These are in fact additional exercises for recurrent aspects
         of learning tasks for which a very high level of automation is required after instruction. Although the 4C/ID
         model is acknowledged as one of the most effective instructional design models (Merrill, 2002) there is little or
         no empirical research about the effectiveness of 4C/ID multimedia learning environments for older learners.
                 Like  the framework   from  Herrington  it     is based on the  tradition of situated learning and  has been
         acknowledged as one of the most effective instructional design models for learning environments that facilitate
         the acquisition of constituent skills that are not dealt with separately but in an integrated fashion. Difficulties in
         learning especially for older adults can be caused by the lack of a suitable framework from which learners can
         anticipate what to expect and how the learning materials interrelate with each other and with existing knowledge
         (Botwinick, 1978). Older adults have been found to be less able to organise learning materials or the learning
         material may be structured inadequately by the older learner due to the absence of learning strategies resulting in
         lower performance (Zacks, Hasher, & Li, 2000).
                 In summary, both learning environments considered adhere to situated learning as older adults benefit
         from contextualised learning in order to connect new information to existing. However, as there are different
         perspectives in gerontology the question remains how much instruction and scaffolding is needed. This leads to
         two areas of research questions. The first part to be investigated is to compare the two aforementioned situated
         learning environments in order to gather which instructional design is more efficient for the older learners on the
         one hand and the younger user groups on the other, or even for both learner groups.
                 As age is an integral part of this study it will have to be examined if differences between the younger
         and the older age groups  can   be solely explained       by chronological age. The  belonging  to a generation   and
         personal experiences of a lifetime are important factors to consider since the ageing process is culturally and
         socially defined. This study will take into account that the experience in using complex systems might play an
         important role in the handling of technology. A specific form of experience is embodied by the concept of
         technology generation that is distinguished following general sociological methodology by age effects (Rama,
         de  Ridder, &  Bouma,    2001). Sackmann    and        Weymann   (1994) investigated   whether  generations   can be
         distinguished from subsequent birth cohorts that currently display similar behaviour towards technology based
         on macro-technological events in their formative period. They found evidence that people who experienced the
         availability of the same types of consumer product during their formative period (age 10 to 25 years) in some
         respect display similar technology usage many years later. So different technology generations appear to behave
         differently with respect to technology and it is the rather sudden discontinuous changes in society that allow the
         differentiation between age and technology generation effects. The age groups relevant for this study can be
         divided into four groups (see Table 1) according to their birth cohorts. The two older age groups are part of the
         "electric generation", the two younger age groups already belong to the "digital generation"(Goor & Becker,
         2001).

          Table 1: Technology generation and chronological age.

              Technology generation         Age
                                            Birth cohort            Age in years at the time of the data collection
              Electric generation           1941­1950               58-67
              Electric generation           1951­1960               48-57
              Digital generation            1961-1970               38-47
              Digital generation            1971-1980               28-37

                 The second part of research question focuses on the differences between the age differences and
         technology generation age effects of the users when trained with an identical learning environment.

       Research questions

2-0
         The interface design of the two learning environments is in accordance with the reviewed body of
literature concerning the special affordances of older learners. However, most of the research done so far has
dealt with web pages or even more general media such as print. This study will implement the recommendations
into two learning environments for complex learning and it will be investigated if the older learners will indeed
benefit from these design adjustments (Hawthorn, 2000). Additionally, the reactions of the younger learners will
be captured t confirm that the recommendations for older adults allow for a barrier free design that is beneficial
for all users. Thus, it is expected that the research will question the myth that younger adults might dislike the
easy to use design that supports older adults. In particular, the following questions will be dealt with:
    x    Are the older age groups comfortable with the interface that is designed for their special needs, i.e. do
         they find it easy to navigate within the learning materials when these recommendations are integrated
         into a multimedia environment?
    x    How do the younger age groups react to the age-specific interface design for older adults?
         The guidelines for the "authentic learning environment" have been qualitatively researched on younger
adults (Herrington & Oliver, 2000). It will be of interest if the data can be confirmed quantitatively in this study
for the younger user  group.  It will also   be   of  utmost  interest how  older adults will learn   with this situated
learning environment and which parts of the framework might be especially beneficial or indeed problematic. It
is also interesting if there is a relationship in the acceptance of the learning environment in terms of age or if the
perceived usefulness will be more on a personal level. The authentic assessment will give further information
about the learning efficiency of the users, with regard to the following aspects:
    x    How   important  to learners within      the "authentic learning  environment"   is  each of the  nine critical
         characteristics of authenticity in the framework?
    x    Are  there differences  in the    performance      between  the age   groups  within the  "authentic   learning
         environment" learning environment?
         In general, there have been very few research studies about the 4C/ID model on younger adults and
none at all with older adults. It will be of interest if the data can be confirmed quantitatively in this study for the
younger user group and to gain new data about older adults as a user group. Again, it will be researched how all
age groups perceive this environment in general but also which parts of the framework might be especially
beneficial or indeed problematic.   The    authentic     assessment will give  further information about   the  learning
efficiency of the users, concerning the following aspects:
    x    How   important  to learners      within the    "4C/ID learning   environment"  is  each  of the  four critical
         characteristics of the 4C/ID framework?
    x    Are  there  differences in   the   performance      between   the age  groups   within the   "4C/ID    learning
         environment"?
         The  main  subjective  of  the    research   is to compare  the   two learning environments,   the  "authentic
learning environment" and the "4C/ID learning environment" in terms of the efficiency for all user groups. The
literature is very ambiguous in the recommendations for learning materials, in particular from a constructivist
point of view to allow the utmost of freedom to build upon their prior life experiences to a more restricted
attitude that older adults need more scaffolding than younger adults. However, it is expected that the younger
participants will outperform the older participants in both learning environments. It is to be seen which learning
environment will enable the older ones to reduce the gap between the older and younger age groups as a more
efficient learning environment.
    x    Is there a learning environment that is for all age groups preferable in terms of learning efficiency or is
         one better for the older age groups whereas the other is better for the younger age groups?
         In order to get a better understanding of the influence of age on a learner in a complex learning
environment it will be looked at the different birth cohorts.
    x    Can possible differences between the age groups be explained with increasing age or will
         discontinuous change point to the effects of technology generations?

Method
         To  investigate the research      questions  an  experimental   study will be  conducted   with   320  German
primary and secondary school teachers between 28 and 67 years of age. These recruited participants will be a
rather homogeneous group in terms of educational level.

Design
         Participants will be randomly assigned to one of the two experimental training conditions. Independent
variables are the four age groups and the two learning environments. This will yield a four (age group) x two
(training format) between-groups design, with age group comprising the levels 28-37; 38-47; 48-57; and 58-67
years of age, and training format comprising the levels "authentic" and "4C/ID" (see Table 2).

Table 2: Design of the experimental study.

                                                                                                                           2-
                                                             Training format
                                                             "4C/ID"                  "authentic"
                        Age group        28-37               n=40                     n=40
                                         38-47               n=40                     n=40
                                         48-57               n=40                     n=40
                                         58-67               n=40                     n=40

        Measures
                  The dependent variables are subjective cognitive load (SCL) during the training and performance on
         the task. SCL will be evaluated with a nine-point symmetrical category scale that has been developed by Paas,
         van Merriënboer, and Adam (1994). Performance will be rated in terms of successful knowledge transfer with
         the completion  and  qualitatively high  standard   of the authentic  assessment.  The training format will be
         considered as inefficient when the subjective cognitive load during the usage of the learning environment is
         relatively high and performance is relatively low.
                  The control variables motivation,  computer   literacy, and working memory    computation span of  the
         participants will be collected in a pre-test. The reactions of both the younger and the older user groups will be
         gathered in an online questionnaire after the training has been completed. An online questionnaire after the
         training has completed will gather information about the acceptance of all users towards the each of the two
         learning environments. Data  will  be extracted from   the database  connected  to the learning environment  to
         control which elements of the framework have been used for how long.

        Treatment
                  A complete instructional package is needed to incorporate the framework of complex learning for older
         learners in multimedia-based learning environments. Two versions of a situated learning environment will be
         developed for the studies. They will provide training for primary and secondary school teachers regarding the
         usage of interactive whiteboards in classroom situations. While the content area for the development of the
         learning environment was not critical, the domain of interactive whiteboards has been chosen and proven to be
         particularly appropriate. The lack of training in the use of interactive whiteboards for teachers was obvious as
         the technology is still in its infancy (Beauchamp & Parkinson, 2005; Cogill, 2006). Besides this lack the fact
         that if training was provided the transfer of pedagogical skills from the theory of teacher training to the practical
         reality of the classroom has been   a source of    concern to teacher educators for some  time.  Especially the
         seamless integration of video into multimedia learning environments enables learners to get acquainted with
         interactive whiteboards through behavioural modelling.
                  The learning environments offer therefore video and audio resources as well as software examples to
         integrate case studies reflecting various perspectives from experts to novices. The interface of both learning
         environments has the same special age-related design adjustments for the specific user group of older adults to
         address for sensory deficits such as vision and hearing and other adjustments to counteract the normal decline of
         ageing.
                  Learning materials in the "4C/ID learning environment" (see Figure 1) are organised into five modules.
         Each module starts with a mindmap with links to:
             x    Supportive information necessary for the non-recurrent aspects of this module in form of a classroom
                  video, audio files with the "theory" and software examples.
             x    Learning tasks authentic, whole-task experiences including worked examples in form of case studies
                  and goal-free problems with just-in-time information available for the recurrent elements and part-task
                  practice additionally provided.

2-2
               Figure 1. The interface of the first module from the "4C/ID learning environment".

         Although   the  learning   materials in both  environments  are  identical, the  sequencing  and    inherent
scaffolding  varies extensively.  The  "4C/ID   learning  environment" is structured   into five modules   that  build
upon each other with increasing complexity. In contrast to this the "authentic learning environment" is divided
into "rooms" using the metaphor of a school. The rooms are:
   x     Headmaster's office: answers frequently asked questions and hands out the authentic assessment;
   x     Individual working space: facilitates note taking and offers further supportive tools such as a glossary
         or a link list with relevant websites;
   x     Smartboard: videos including a technical introduction and a variety of software examples;
   x     Classroom: videos of experienced teachers using the interactive whiteboard in classroom situations;
   x     Staff room:   a chat   and a forum   allow synchronous  and asynchronous      communication  between     the
         learners.
The content is organised according to topics and the learner is only minimally guided in the utilisation of the
resources.
         The two web-based learning environments will be developed with Adobe FreeHand, Adobe Flash and a
MySQL Database. They have been created to run on all standard browsers and will be made available for the
participants on the University website.

Results
         Two   multimedia   learning  environments   will be developed  to integrate   existing  theories of situated
learning and age-specific design for older adults. They form the basis for the data collection for which the first
observations are expected shortly. The pilot study will enable a discussion about the influence that age and
training format   have on   the performance   of younger  and older  adults. It is expected   that findings  identify
preferences of older adults when given alternative situated learning environments and recommendations will be
drawn towards an integrative framework for age-adjusted situated learning.

Discussion
         The increased longevity and the growing dependence on technology provide interesting challenges for
instructional design. This study deals with two central topics in educational research, older learners with their
special needs in relation to multimedia learning environments and the increasingly popular concept of situated
learning. Although there are empirical studies into authentic learning environments on the one hand and CLT
applied  to older  learners on  the other hand   there seems to be a lack  of   research into the  possibilities of a
combination of these two frameworks, especially for learning materials designed for complex skills. Research is
necessary   to gain  insight  into  the actual   benefits of age-adjusted    authentic multimedia-based      learning
environments for senior learners.

References
Beauchamp, G., & Parkinson, J. (2005). Beyond the 'wow' factor: developing interactivity with the interactive
         whiteboard. School Science Review, 86(316), 97-103.
Botwinick, J. (1978). Aging and behavior. New York: Springer.
Bruner, J. S. (1961). The art of discovery. Harvard Educational Review, 31, 21-32.Charness, N., & Schaie, K. W. (Eds.). (2003). Impact of technology on successful aging. New York: Springer.2-
        Clark, R.   C.,   &  Mayer,  R. E.   (2003). E-Learning    and the science  of instruction: Proven  guidelines   for
                   consumers and designers of multimedia. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass/Pfeiffer.
        Cogill, J. (2006). Pedagogy, models of teacher knowledge and use of the interactive whiteboard. Education
                   Today, 56(3), 6-13.
        Collins, A., Brown, J. S., & Newman, S. E. (1989). Cognitive apprenticeship: Teaching the crafts of reading,
                   writing, and mathematics. In L. B. Resnick (Ed.), Knowing, learning and instruction: Essays in honour
                   of Robert Glaser (pp. 453-494). Hillsdale, NJ: LEA.
        Deimann, M., & Keller, J. (2006). Volitional aspects of multimedia learning. Journal of Educational Multimedia
                   and Hypermedia, 15(2), 137-158.
        Fisk, A. D., Rogers, W. A., Charness, N., Czaja, S. J., & Sharit, J. (2004). Designing for older adults: Principles
                   and creative human factors approaches. Boca Raton: CRC Press.
        Gerven, P. W. M. v., Paas, F., Merrienboer, J. J. G. v., & Schmidt, H. G. (2000). Cognitive load theory and the
                   acquisition of complex cognitive skills in the elderly: Towards an integrative framework. Educational
                   Gerontology, 26, 503-521.
        Goor, A.-G. v. d., & Becker, H. (2001). Technology generations in the Netherlands: A sociological analysis.
                   Maastricht: Shaker.
        Griffin, M. M. (1995). You can't get there from here: Situated learning, transfer and map skills. Contemporary
                   Educational Psychology, 20, 65-87.
        Hawthorn, D. (2000). Possible implications of aging for interface designers. Interacting with Computers, 12,
                   507­528.
        Herrington, J., & Oliver, R. (2000). An instructional design framework for authentic learning environments.
                   Educational Technology, Research and Development, 48(3), 23-48.
        Kliegel, M., & Altgassen, M. (2006). Interindividual differences in learning performance: The effects of age,
                   intelligence, and strategic task approach. Educational Gerontology, 32, 111­124.
        Knowles, M. (1975). Self-Directed Learning. Chicago: Follet.
        Knowles, M. (1984a). The Adult Learner: A Neglected Species (Vol. 3). Houston: Gulf Publishing.
        Knowles, M. (1984b). Andragogy in Action. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
        Lampert, M. (1986). Knowing, doing, and teaching multiplication. Cognition and Instructional Science, 3(4),
                   305-342.
        Mayer, R. (2004). Should there be a three-strikers rule against pure discovery learning? The case for guided
                   methods of instruction. American Psychologist, 59, 14-18.
        Merriënboer, J. J. G. v. (1997). Training complex cognitive skills: A four-component instructional design model
                   for technical training. Englewood Cliffs, N. J.: Educational Technology Publications.
        Merriënboer, J. J. G. v., Clark, R. E., & Croock, M. B. M. d. (2002). Blueprints for Complex Learning: The
                   4C/ID-Model. ETR&D, 50(2), 39-64.
        Merriënboer, J. v., Bastiaens, T., & Hoogveld, A. (2004). Instructional design for integrated e-learning. In W.
                   Jochems,  J. v. Merriënboer   &   R. Koper  (Eds.), Integrated E-learning. Implications  for  Pedagogy,
                   Technology & Organization (pp. 13-24). London: Routledge Falmer.
        Merrill, M. D. (2002). First Principles of Instruction. Educational Technology Research & Development, 50(3),
                   43­59.
        Paas,  F., van    Merriënboer, J. J. G., &   Adam,  J. J. (1994). Measurement   of cognitive  load in   instructional
                   research. Perceptual and Motor Skills, 79, 419-430.
        Papert, S. (1980). Mindstorms: Children, computers, and powerful ideas. New York: Basic Books.
        Park,  I., &  Hannafin,  M.  J. (1993).  Empirically-based   guidelines for the design of   interactive multimedia.
                   Educational Technology Research and Development, 41(3), 63-85.
        Rama,  M.     D., de Ridder, H.,  &   Bouma,    H. (2001). Technology   generation and age   in using   layered user
                   interfaces. Gerontechnology, 1(1), 25-40.
        Sackmann,     R.,  &   Weymann,    A.  (1994).   Die   Technisierung des  Alltags: Generationen    und   technische
                   Innovationen. Bremen: BMFT.
        Schaie, K. W. (2005). Developmental influences on adult intelligences: The Seattle longitudinal study. New
                   York: Oxford University Press.
        Sweller, J. (1994). Cognitive load theory, learning difficulty, and instructional design. Learning and Instruction,
                   4, 295-312.
        Sweller, J. (2003). Evolution of human cognitive architecture. In B. Ross (Ed.), The psychology of learning and
                   motivation (Vol. 43, pp. 215-266). San Diego, CA: Academic.
        Truluck,   J. E.,  &  Courtenay,   B. C.  (1999).   Learning style preferences  among  older    adults. Educational
                   Gerontology, 25, 221-236.
        van Merriënboer, J. J. G., & Martens, R. L. (2002). Computer-based tools for instructional design. Educational
                   Technology Research & Development, 50, Special Issue.
        Wlodkowski, R. (1986). Enhancing adult motivation to learn. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.

2-
Young, M.  F. (1993). Instructional design for situated learning. Educational Technology Research and
       Development, 41(1), 43-58.
Zacks, R. T., Hasher, L., & Li, K. Z. H. (2000). Human memory. In F. I. M. Craik & T. A. Salthouse (Eds.), The
       handbook of aging and cognition (pp. 293-357). Mahwah, N.J: Lawrence Erlbaum.

                                                                                                                  2-
