                                     An Exploratory Study on
        Promoting Students' Critical Thinking by Using Weblogs
       Qiyun Wang, Huaylit Woo, National Institute of Education, Nanyang Technological University,
                                      1 Nanyang Walk, Singapore 637616
                           Email: Qiyun.wang@nie.edu.sg, huaylit.woo@nie.edu.sg

        Abstract:  Critical  thinking   becomes    an   essential competency      for people    in the   new
        information age. The purpose of this research is to investigate to what extent writing online
        reflections using weblogs can promote students' critical thinking. This research is conducted
        in a secondary school. After completing 3 weblogs, a focus group interview was conducted to
        collect their feedback on the design and implementation of the research. The results showed
        that the  students liked the  way of   writing  online  reflections. They   attempted   to make  the
        weblogs interesting, convincing and logical. Also, they liked to view others' reflections and to
        give comments.     This paper  presents   the formative   evaluation  processes   and results of the
        research.

        In 1997,  The  Singapore     Ministry  of Education  launched   the  `Thinking    Schools, Learning   Nation'
initiative with the aim to promote students' thinking skills and lifelong learning capabilities. One of the ways to
achieve this is to integrate critical and creative thinking skills into all aspects of school curricula (Teo, 2001).
The purpose of this research is to investigate to what extent writing online reflections by using weblogs can
promote students' critical thinking.
        This research is carried out in a neighborhood secondary school (GMSS). The students' abilities in this
school are among  the  average.  The   subject  chosen  for this  research   is History.  Based on  various  types   of
interactivity (Chou, 2003), four blogging strategies are adopted in this research: i) blogging individually without
ongoing scaffolding; ii) blogging within a small group with group members' comments; iii) blogging with a
whole class with classmates' comments, and lastly iv) blogging with the teacher with the teacher's comments.
Four Express  classes, which    are relatively better than  the rest of classes   on  the same  level, are  chosen   to
participate in this research. Each class is allocated with a strategy respectively.
        By the end of the first half year, the students had completed three blogs.         They were interviewed to
collect feedback on the design and implementation of the research. Based on the performance on the blogs, 6-8
students from each class were selected to be interviewed. Among them, 2-3 were chosen from "best" performers;
2-3 were considered as "worst" performers; and the rest were so-called "special cases".

Q1. Describe briefly how you prepared and completed your blogs
        They  mentioned    that they listened  to the teacher's  instructions   carefully when  they  first received a
blogging topic. After this, they brainstormed or further referred to the textbook for answers. Two students said
they borrowed books from library. A few students copied texts directly from the textbook, while the others used
their own words to reorganize sentences. Most students went to the Internet to search for additional information.
Furthermore, some students also mentioned that they discussed the topics with their friends or family members
before they posted, or asked their friends to help check for errors or make comments to improve after posting.
The majority of them completed their blogs at home, and the rest did it in the school computer lab. The average
time they spent on each topic was about one hour.

Q2. How did you make your blogs interesting, convincing, or logical?
        They stated that they improved the appearance of their blogs by changing blog skins, putting pictures
related to the topics, changing font colors, or adding background music. To make their blogs convincing, logical
or critical, they attempted to give both advantages and disadvantages of solutions, add own opinions supported
by evidence, or add additional information from the Internet. One student further explained that after collecting
relevant information from the Internet, she reorganized the information by adding her own reasoning to make it
more logical. Another student said that he made the content more convincing by relating to his own experience.
Interestingly, one student said he intentionally made the content of a topic not logical to get more feedback from
others. He was happy as more comments were given to that blog.

Q3. What do you like the way of writing online reflections in the weblog?
        The majority of them stated that they liked the way of writing online reflections. First, they did not
need to write words by hand as they had bad handwriting. Also, they agreed that typing was easier than writing.
Moreover, writing online allowed them to improve their spelling and grammars as the computer could help to

                                                                                                                           3-
         check. Second, writing online allowed them to exchange ideas with others. They could post their ideas online to
         get more people viewing their opinions. Moreover, they could also view others' posts and give comments. Two
         students mentioned    they  were  happy  with   writing  online reflection  as they  learned  a new  skill: blogging.
         Another student mentioned that she liked online blogging as she could open different applications at the same
         time. She could surf the Internet while reflecting. However, another student mentioned she did not like online
         blogging as she was not computer savvy and she had met technical problems.

         Q4. Other comments, suggestions
                  More than half of the students loved and enjoyed blogging online as they thought it was fun. They even
         further recommended that this approach should be extended to other subjects as well. In addition, they suggested
         that each  blog  should involve   more   topics or  questions   so that they could   have more   choices.   They  also
         indicated that a longer time frame should be given so that they could have more time to search for information
         and  get the blogging   content  more    meaningful.  Additionally,  the  class  of blogging  within   a small  group
         expected to view different peers' blogs each time.
                  The  interview results  did not  show  significantly   different responses to the   questions from    different
         categories (best, worst, and special) of students. They followed similar approaches to completing the weblogs,
         such as searching information on the Internet, referring to the textbook, etc. They also used similar strategies to
         make  content   interesting or convincing. The   reasons  for enjoying    online reflections were also   quite similar.
         They  liked  to share their ideas  with  others and  get feedback   from  others. Also, they  loved  to  view  others'
         thoughts and give comments as well. The weblog provided them with a space in which they could publish and
         share information. The comments and suggestions given were also quite consistent. They wanted to have more
         questions on one topic and also they expected a longer time frame for each blogging.
                  Currently this research is still going on and the content of students' posts has not been qualitatively
         analyzed. Therefore, to what extent writing online reflections by using weblogs can promote students' critical
         thinking is unclear yet. However, the formative evaluation conducted at the middle of the research process has
         indicated that the students are enjoying writing reflections online, and they also apply some strategies to make
         their posts convincing and logical. The next step of the research would be to analyze the students' posts by
         following the critical thinking model proposed by Newman, Webb, and Cochrane (1995). Based on the results
         of the four classes, recommendations on effectively facilitating students in critical thinking development will be
         suggested.

       References
         Chou, C. (2003). Interactivity and interactive functions in web-based learning systems: A technical framework
                  for designers. British Journal of Educational Technology, 34(3), 265-279.
         Newman, D. R., Webb, B., & Cochrane, C. (1995). A content analysis method to measure crtical thinking in
                  face-to-face   and    computer   supported     group   learning.   Retrieved   October   29,    2004,   from
                  http://www.emoderators.com/ipct-j/1995/n2/newman.html
         Teo,  C.H.   (2001).  Speech    at   the  2nd   Asian  reading   congress.   Retrieved    January  20,   2005,   from
                  http://www.moe.gov.sg/speeches/2001/sp02082001a.htm

       Acknowledgement
         This research project is funded by a Learning Sciences Lab research grant, number R8019.735.CT02. We wish
         to thank the staff and students of Geylang Methodist Secondary School involved in the project.

3-0
