                Title: Conflicting Discourses, conflicting values
  Caroline C. Williams, University of Wisconsin-Madison, 244 West Lakelawn Place, Madison, WI 53703,
                                               ccwilliams3@wisc.edu

        Abstract:   Research   designed   to elicit middle-school  mathematics    teachers' perceptions     of
        connections   between     in-school  and    out-of-school  mathematical      reasoning revealed    an
        unexpected clash. The teacher participants gave evidence of valuing both student efficiency
        and student understanding, but the simultaneous salience of those values was positioned by the
        teachers as problematic. Rather than viewing efficiency and understanding as complementary
        aspects of mathematics learning and doing, teachers spoke of the two values as conflicting and
        in opposition to one another.

        Considerable  research    indicates  that  students demonstrate    mathematical   knowledge   outside   of  the
classroom that may not be equally well demonstrated within the classroom setting (e.g. Saxe, 1988; Nunes,
Schliemann, & Carraher, 1993; Nasir, 2002). In order to develop more equitable learning environments, teachers
must acknowledge    that students   bring  informal  mathematical     knowledge   to  the classroom,  and     that such
knowledge should be built upon when teaching (Carpenter & Lehrer, 1999). Staples and Hand (under review)
found that a factor in creating equitable reform classrooms may be the expansion of what teachers accept as
mathematical    contributions from  students,   which  emphasizes     the importance   of teachers'  beliefs   in  what
mathematics is and how it is done. In this study, an emergent theme indicated that the teachers perceived a
conflict between student efficiency and student understanding in their profession of middle-school mathematics
teaching. The investigation of this theme utilizes Gee's (1990) Discourses and Goffman's (1981) lamination to
explore the various beliefs of the teachers in navigating the space between efficiency and understanding.

Methods
        Teachers'  practices  and  beliefs  are examined    in a  study   originally designed  to  elicit the  teachers'
perceptions regarding the logical and mathematical reasoning of their students in three environments: mathematics
classrooms, non-mathematics classrooms, and outside of school (1). Ten teachers with experience teaching middle-
school mathematics as well as other middle school subjects (experience ranging from 3 to 19 years) were audio-
taped as they participated in one-on-one semi-structured interviews (Wengraf, 2001). Transcripts of the interviews
were created by the researcher, and qualitative analysis was conducted utilizing NVIVO 7 to examine emergent
themes. Analysis relevant to this focus stemmed from the data, which identified the mathematical strategies the
teachers valued and espoused to value, as evidenced by their explicit and implicit judgments.
        Participants were presented with two scenarios that exemplified informal mathematics reasoning from
Nunes, Schliemann    and  Carraher   (1993),   and  asked   to interpret  the solution strategies. Then    participants
discussed strategies their students may use to solve those scenarios, and gave examples of strategies they would
prefer or consider more sophisticated. For each strategy identified by the participants, they were asked to justify
why they would or would not encourage students to use it.

Results
        An unexpected result that arose from the data concerns a salient conflict perceived by teachers between
valuing student efficiency and valuing student understanding. First, the participants explicitly recognized all
strategies as being valuable, but the majority stated preference for more traditional algorithms. The participant-
expressed qualifiers for mathematical      sophistication   primarily involved  speed,  accuracy,   and    conciseness.
Similarly, nearly all participants stated willingness to accept alternative strategies within their classrooms, but
generally considered them to be an access point to understanding that may support teaching students a more
formal algorithm. Such strategies were considered indicative of mathematical understanding, but most of the
participants felt that such strategies were insufficient, and that further algorithmic usage was necessary.
        One way to interpret these findings utilizes Gee's (1990) conceptualization of Discourses, paying close
attention to the power structures that encourage continuance of established values within individual Discourses.
Gee states that
        each Discourse protects itself by demanding from its adherents performances which act as
        though its ways of being, thinking, acting, talking, writing, reading, and valuing are `right,'
        `natural,' `obvious,' the way `good' and `intelligent' and `normal' people behave. (p. 191)

        I therefore  view     the participants  as  present within a   conflict between   two  Discourses     with  two
(sometimes aligning) sets of values, behaviors, norms, and ways of doing mathematics.

                                                                                                                           3-3
                 Central  to  my   conceptualization  of  these Discourses      are the  participants in the  study  and   their
         perceptions, as well as their explicit and implicit definitions. As definitions arising from the data, these two
         conflicting Discourses   are  characterized  as  the traditional    mathematics    Discourse  and  the sense-making
         mathematical    Discourse.   Student   understanding   is  summarized      as   the  conceptual   comprehension    of
         mathematical   content   as  expressed  through   student  sense-making      strategies, and   student  efficiency is
         summarized as the ability to quickly solve mathematical problems through utilization of precise and generally
         pre-defined algorithms. When I refer to these terms, I intend the participant-driven definitions above.
                 The participants moved in and out of the two Discourses throughout the interviews, and spoke of the
         two Discourses as if the salience varied for them. Participants sometimes appeared to strongly identify with the
         values of one   Discourse,  only to  switch and  strongly  identify  with  the  other. Often, the  values  of the two
         Discourses overlapped, either supporting each other or ­ more frequently ­ conflicting. While Gee's theory
         includes the idea of multiple Discourses and their individual characteristics layering, the results of my analysis
         make concrete an example of such layering and, specifically, how it affects teachers' beliefs. To illustrate more
         deeply the  layering of  these two  Discourses   the concept   of lamination    is adopted from  Goffman   (1981)  to
         emphasize the simultaneous presence and salience of both Discourses for the teachers in their conceptualization
         of student mathematical reasoning. The key contribution of lamination to this analysis is the tension created by
         the dominant mathematical Discourse as teachers reflect upon student understanding, efficiency, and accuracy:
         the participants, regardless of which Discourse they most identify with, must frame their own values within the
         traditional values of the dominant Discourse. Most participants spoke of preferring the values ascribed to the
         sense-making   mathematical    Discourse,  and  yet  struggled to   negotiate  this discourse  within  the traditional
         mathematical Discourse.

       Discussion
                 The  conflict  these  teachers  perceive when  they  speak   of  efficiency  and understanding  is  cause  for
         concern, as the values are spoken of as if they are in opposition rather than reconcilable. Defining successful
         mathematics-doing as requiring the element of speed narrows the opportunities for all students to thoroughly
         engage in understanding mathematics, and therefore further limits the access students have to the important field
         of mathematics. Furthermore, this research indicates the need to examine more closely how exactly mathematics
         learning takes place in classrooms in which the teacher perceives a conflict in values between simultaneously
         salient Discourses.
                 The key finding of this research is not how these particular seven teachers conceptualize the traditional
         mathematics Discourse and the sense-making mathematical Discourse, nor how they talk about negotiating the
         two, but rather the insights about the layering of multiple Discourses "over" a single person. When multiple
         Discourses are in play, there may be complementary values as well as conflicting values that are difficult or
         impossible to reconcile. When examining the activity of even a single person, what may appear to be a single
         Discourse   may in  fact be a  layering of  various  Discourses   that interact in  complex  ways.  In order  to fully
         understand the many factors at play for individuals or dynamic classrooms, increased attention to the values,
         beliefs, and ways of acting and talking can reveal the laminated Discourses that conflict over or support certain
         ways of mathematics-doing and learning.

       Endnotes
         (1) The research reported here was funded in part by a grant to Amy Ellis, Charles Kalish, and Eric Knuth at
             the University of Wisconsin-Madison.
         (2) All names are pseudonyms.

       References
         Carpenter, T. P., & Lehrer, R. (1999). Teaching and learning mathematics for understanding. In E. Fennema &
                 T.  A.  Romberg    (Eds.), Mathematics   classrooms    that promote    understanding  (pp. 19-32).  Mahwah,
                 New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
         Gee, J. P. (1990). Social linguistics and literacies: Ideology in discourse (1st ed.). New York, NY: The Falmer Press.
         Goffman, E. (1981). Forms of talk. Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
         Nasir, N. S. (2002). Identities, goals, and learning: Mathematics in cultural practice. Mathematical Thinking and
                 Learning, 4
         Nunes, T., Schliemann, A., & Carraher, D (1993). Street Mathematics and School Mathematics. Boston, MA:
                 Cambridge.
         Saxe, G. B. (1988). Candy selling and math learning. Educational Researcher, 17(6), p.        14-21.
         Staples, M., & Hand, V.M. (under review).
         Wengraf,  T.  (2001).  Qualitative  research interviewing:   Biographic    narrative   and semi-structured  methods.
                 London: SAGE Publications.

3-
