Choosing integration methods when solving differential equations
           Michael C. Wittmann, Katrina Black, University of Maine, Orono ME 04401 USA
                        Email: wittmann@umit.maine.edu, katrina.black@umit.maine.edu

       Abstract: There are two common types of solution methods for solving simple integrals: using
       integration constants or using limits of integration. We use the resources framework to model
       student solution    methods.  Preliminary    results indicate both problematic and meaningful
       intersections of physical meaning and mathematical formalism when solving linked integrals.

       Students solving separable first order differential equations in typically use two methods: an integration
constant ("+C") or limits of integration. The two methods are similar, involving anti-derivatives and boundary
conditions. But, we have found that students using the integration constant method rarely find a physically complete
solution. We use a resources framework (Hammer, 1996, 2000; Sabella & Redish, 2007; Sayre & Wittmann, 2008;
Sherin, 1996) to give a fine-grain, "knowledge-in-pieces" analysis of student reasoning (diSessa, 1988, 1993).
       Consider the question asked in Figure 1. Students are given a separable differential equation and a set of
unusual boundary conditions. A typical solution of the integrals in time and velocity requires that one carry out
indefinite integration on each. In the "+C" method, the matched equations require a velocity of 366 m/s at 0 s. In the
limits method, the time integral runs from t = 0 s to some unspecified time, t, and the velocity integral runs from
366 m/s to some undefined velocity, v. For all the mathematical similarity of the two, our students rarely use limits.
We have asked this question (with and without some steps filled in) in several settings, and present examples from
three student groups to illustrate problems they have with integration limits and how we might help them.

     A group is working on the following problem.
             A bullet fired horizontally has a muzzle velocity of 366 m/s and experiences a ­cv2 air resistance.
             Find an equation that describes the horizontal velocity of the bullet with respect to time.
     A student writes:          ¦ Fx     cv2         dvmdt
                                   c dt  dv
                                   m      v2
    What would you do    next?
        Figure 1. Integrating a separable differential equation, phrased as an air resistance problem.

       Groups A and B both favored solving the differential equation using integration constants ­ a member of
Group B called this the "normal" solution method. Both groups found the appropriate antiderivatives, used the
boundary conditions to find values for the integration constants, and solved the integrals. (Though this contradicts
our statement that students rarely give complete responses, we note that individual and group behavior on the
problem seems very different.) Only when pressed did students in Groups A and B attempt to solve the integrals
using the limits method. In Group A, Wes, Derek, and Heather discussed which limits to use.

       Wes: So, what are we going to call this? (indicates the upper limit of integration on the dv
       integration) V-one, I mean v-naught? Or 366 period? [His limits are then from 0 m/s to 366 m/s.]
       (later) Derek: The limits of integration are wrong. You need a variable in there. You have zero to t
       over here, but you have two functions, or two single numbers over there. You need a variable
       instead.... You want to replace zero with a v. [His limits are then from v to 366 m/s.]
       (later) Derek: Actually, I have it backwards. 366 on the bottom and v on the top I think. [correct.]

       In Group B, students used physical reasoning about the final velocity of the bullet (0 m/s) to choose limits.
Ben said "So you go from v-initial, which is 366, to zero," but Kent challenged with "At the current time, no matter
what the time is, is the velocity automatically zero if it's not initial?" From this, Ben and Ned constructed the right
limits, "What he's doing is, you're saying is you go from v-initial to some v. It doesn't go to zero, it goes to some
velocity." The language of "going to" is worth noting and was repeated by many students using limits correctly.
       For both groups, we observe individual actions: choosing limits, and finding the values of those limits by
extracting this information from the boundary conditions. Each of these steps was separate and distinct for students.
       In Group C, Max and Phil debated the use of the integration constants and integration limits methods. In
their variation of the problem, no boundary conditions had been given. These needed to be determined using
appropriate assumptions and reading out information from the problem statement. Max and Phil had already solved
the velocity integral using only indefinite integration, without using limits or an integration constant. (As a result, the
functional dependence of their final solution would turn out incorrect.) When solving the time integral, Phil

                                                                                                                               3-
         advocated the use of integration constants and Max the use of integration limits.

                Max: No, this is where you should be going just plain t, or t-naught to t, or zero to t, because
                initial time is when you throw it to some time, so just go to t instead of t plus c. <pause> Because
                then your integration of time would probably be going from zero, when you throw it, to t, some
                time later. [During this, his hands move choppily from a point close to his body to one far away.]
                Phil: Hmmmmm... or you could do t plus t-naught. You need a constant though.
                (later) Phil: I just can't imagine integrating without having an extra constant. I guess if you said
                t-naught is zero, so, I mean, yeah.
                Max: but t-naught is the initial time
                Phil: But you don't know that's zero.

                Max begins by applying limits, but takes some time explaining his choice of limits to properly connect the
         mathematics and the physics. Note that Max accompanied his description of the integral "going from" one variable
         to the next by a specific gesture: chopping motions as his hands figuratively moved as if down a number line. His
         gestures suggest to us that the use of upper limits of undefined variables accompanies a view of integration not just
         as a formal algebraic antiderivative (as it was with Derek in Group A or Phil), but as something that covers a range.
         Max correctly interpreted the physical situation. In contrast, Phil needed to be convinced to find a value for his
         integration constant, and resists adding physical meaning to it. Their discussion never resolved itself completely.
                We summarize some of the individual difficulties that students have with this problem. They often do not
         match integration limits across the equals sign. They rarely independently use a variable upper limit (an unspecified
         v and time t, again matched across the equals sign). And, they often over-interpret final states (such as v = 0 m/s).
                We summarize students' productive use of procedural resources in Figure 2. Each of the resources should
         be activated for a complete solution. The network of resources used when solving with integration constants is
         shown with solid arrowheads. The network of resources used when solving with integration limits is shown with
         open arrowheads. Note that Phil, for example, does not activate all the resources in the graph, leaving out extract
         boundary condition and find value until pushed by Max. Students in Groups A and B used all resources in the graph.

         Figure 2. Procedural resources available for the limits (solid arrowhead) and the +C (open arrowheads) methods
                of solving differential equations. Each network can be thought of as part of an epistemic game.

       References
         diSessa, A. A. (1988). Knowledge in pieces. In G. Forman, P. B. Pufall & et al. (Eds.), Constructivism in the
                computer age. (pp. 49-70). Hillsdale, NJ, USA: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc.
         diSessa, A. A. (1993). Towards an epistemology of physics. Cognition and Instruction, 10, 105-225.
         Hammer, D. (1996). Misconceptions of p-prims,     How might alternative perspectives    of cognitive structures
                influence instructional perceptions and intentions? Journal of the Learning Sciences, 5, 97-127.
         Hammer, D. (2000). Student resources for learning introductory physics. American Journal of Physics, 67 (Physics
                Education Research Supplement), S45-S50.
         Sabella, M., & Redish, E. F. (2007). Knowledge organization and activation in physics problem solving. American
                Journal of Physics, 75(11), 1017-1029.
         Sayre, E. C., & Wittmann, M. C. (2008). The plasticity of intermediate mechanics students' coordinate system
                choice. Physical Review Special Topics - Physics Education Research, submitted.
         Sherin, B. L. (1996). The symbolic basis of physical intuition: A study of two symbol systems in physics instruction.
                Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, University of California, Berkeley.
         Wittmann, M. C. (2006). Using resource graphs to represent conceptual change. Physical Review Special Topics -
                Physics Education Research, 2(2), 020105.

       Acknowledgments
         We thank K. McCann, E.C. Sayre, and R. P. Springuel for assistance in gathering the data. This work is supported in
         party by the National Science Foundation grants DUE-0441426, DUE-0442388, and REC-0633951.

3-
