                    From Mastery to Utilisation: Appropriation of Tools for
                                      Collaboration in Learning Situations

                          Maarten Overdijk, Research Centre for Learning in Interaction, Utrecht University
                               Heidelberglaan 1, 3584 CS, Utrecht, The Netherlands, m.overdijk@uu.nl
                            François-Xavier Bernard, MODYCO laboratory, CNRS, University of Paris 10
                        200 Avenue de la République, 92001 Nanterre Cedex, France, fxbernard@vjf.cnrs.fr
                        Wouter van Diggelen, Research Centre for Learning in Interaction, Utrecht University
                            Heidelberglaan 1, 3584 CS, Utrecht, The Netherlands, w.vandiggelen@uu.nl
                                Michael Baker, MODYCO laboratory, CNRS, University of Paris 10
                     200 Avenue de la République, 92001 Nanterre Cedex, France, michael.baker@vjf.cnrs.fr

                   Abstract: Vocational students were invited to construct a project plan with the support of a
                   graphical shared workspace. We describe the emergence of the use and effect of this technical
                   artefact by  building   on  Rabardel's    (1995)    concept    of  instrumental    genesis.  From    this
                   perspective, a tool or instrument is seen as a mixed functional unit composed of an artefact
                   and  a utilisation scheme.    We  view   tool   appropriation   as a   constructive  utilisation of  the
                   artefact. In case of collaborative tool use this utilisation has to be coordinated. We examine
                   tool appropriation  in  a collaborative   setting   as development     over  three stages.   In order   to
                   construct their project plan the students had to arrive at a shared representational format. We
                   hypothesized that they would make certain choices during a stage of personal utilisation, and
                   would  then  coordinate   these  choices  to arrive    at a shared convention   of   use.  Our  analysis
                   illustrates a transition from mastery to collective utilisation of the tool.

       Tool appropriation
                            When    a new  tool  is introduced   in classroom     practice, the students   in that  practice  have to
         appropriate it. The students will try to appropriate by `adapting' the technical artefact in a goal-directed activity.
         They will have to make sense of the properties of the artefact, master basic actions, and find a way to put it to
         the task. In the case of collaborative learning, the students have to coordinate this effort. The dyad or group has
         to arrive at some kind of shared convention on how to utilize the artefact. Tool appropriation does not simply
         refer to the acquisition of knowledge about an object, or to `learning how to' do something with the aid of an
         artefact. The  artefact-in-use is   not a  stable entity   with   fixed  characteristics that  are  independent    from  the
         classroom practice into which it is introduced. We view tool appropriation as a constructive utilisation of the
         artefact. The artefact constitutes a `proposal' to the students (Rabardel, 1995). It becomes an instrument or tool
         when it is brought into action. Commonly, artefacts are associated with uses and effects that are supposed to
         correspond with the intentions of its designers. These intentions are based on hypotheses about how the artefact
         (re)organizes  the  learning  activity. However,    there's   always   a degree    of interpretative  flexibility (Pinch  &
         Bijker, 1987) in tool use. There are different ways to enact (Weick, 1979) the opportunities that are provided by
         an artefact, and in order to collaborate this enactment has to be coordinated among the students (Overdijk & Van
         Diggelen, 2008). This is achieved during a process tool appropriation.

        Instrumental genesis
                   Rabardel (1995) proposes a generative model to account for the effects of an artefact-in-use through
         what he calls instrumental genesis (Rabardel, 1995; Rabardel & Bourmaud, 2003; Kaptelenin & Nardi, 2006;
         Bernard, 2006). In this view, a tool or instrument can be considered as a functional organ composed of elements
         from  both  the  artefact and the subject.  It is a  mixed    functional  unit  made   up of   an artefact component     (an
         artefact, a fraction of an artefact or a group of artefacts) and a scheme component (in the Piagetian sense of the
         term: Piaget,   1964), comprising    one   or more   associated     utilisation schemes   that organize    the activity. An
         instrument emerges from a `double development movement', relating to the two components: subjects adapt and
         give form to the proposed artefact through instrumentalization; and through instrumentation subjects develop
         and adapt utilisation schemes (Rabardel and Bourmaud, 2003; Rabardel, 1995).

        Utilisation schemes
                   Rabardel (1995) discusses three classes of utilisation schemes. These three classes represent a relative
         hierarchy. The   usage  scheme   holds  the   artefact itself as  object of  activity. This  class  of schemes    comprises
         elementary  utilisation   schemes   for handling   controls    or   manipulating   the interface   of  the artefact.  Usage
         schemes   constitute  specialized modules     which,   in coordination   with   other  schemes,   assimilate and     mutually
         adapt to   constitute  instrument-mediated     action  schemes.     Instrument-mediated    action    schemes   are   oriented

2-
towards the object of activity for which the artefact is a means of performance; that is, towards the goal or
motive  of  the `main'    activity. This type   of  scheme    constitutes an  instrumental act.  Instrument-mediated
collective activity schemes specify the types of action or activity when a group of users shares an instrument to
fulfill a common motive. They also concern the coordination of individual actions and integration of their results
as a contribution to common goals (Rabardel, 1995). The mechanism that underlies the interrelated development
of artefact and action scheme is (mutual) adaptation: between subjects and artefact, and between subjects.

An approach to analysing appropriation of tools for collaboration
        We hold the following assumptions about tool-mediated collaboration. Firstly, an artefact may provide
multiple opportunities for action to a single student. This student has to make choices, and hereby enacts a
certain potential of the artefact. Secondly, the same artefact may provide different opportunities for action to
different students. This means that in case of collaboration students have to negotiate their actions in order to
arrive at a shared convention of use. Thirdly, there is mutual influence between student(s) and artefact. The
opportunities for action that an artefact provides are not fixed, new opportunities may arise as a consequence of
the actions of the student(s).
        We describe the emergence of the use and effect of the artefact by building on Rabardel's concept of
instrumental genesis. We address tool appropriation in a collaborative setting as a progressive development over
three stages. We    examine    to  what  extend    the interaction progresses   from personal   mastery,  via personal
utilisation, towards collective utilisation of the artefact (Figure 1).

                                                   Personal mastery
                                                           
                                                   Personal utilisation
                                                           
                                                 Collective utilisation

                          Figure 1. Three stages in appropriation of tools for collaboration.

(1) Personal mastery
        When students are presented with a new artefact they first have to explore its features and learn how to
operate its  handles and   controls. During    the stage  of personal   mastery students learn  how   to perform  basic
actions with the artefact. We describe this activity as follows: subject one (S1) directs action oriented towards
the artefact (A) by manipulating it. The artefact is the object (O) of the activity, learning how to operate its
handles and controls is the motive. Subject two (S2) performs a similar activity. The stage of personal mastery is
schematically represented like this:

                                               S1 ­ O/A          S2 ­ O/A

During  this first stage,  conscious, goal-directed    actions  oriented  towards  performing   basic actions with the
artefact become routinized and are then transformed into non-conscious operations (Leont'ev, 1981).

(2) Personal utilisation
        When the students have mastered sufficient basic actions, their attention shifts towards the object for
which the artefact is a means of performance, in our case, the instructed task. The students develop a personal
utilisation scheme that couples operation of the artefact to a specific function. This utilisation scheme subsumes
the mastery scheme. The artefact becomes a tool. We can describe this activity as follows: subject one (S1)
directs action oriented towards the object (O), mediated by the tool (T). Subject two (S2) performs a similar
activity. The stage of personal utilisation is schematically depicted like this:

                                           S1 ­ T ­ O           S2 ­ T ­ O

        A    prerequisite  for the  transition from    personal mastery  to personal utilisation is that  basic actions
become  non-conscious     operations. Instead   of progressing   from   mastery to utilisation, the students  may  also
regress. This happens when they lack directions of use, when a certain action has an unexpected effect, or when
the students  encounter    ambiguity. During    such   a `breakdown'    non-conscious operations    become  conscious,
goal-directed actions again.

(3) Collective utilisation
        During the previous stages the students have learned how to utilize the artefact to perform the task.
This does not necessarily mean that they are able use the artefact collaboratively. Note that up to now S1 and S2

                                                                                                                          2-
         have  progressed   through  the   stages  in  parallel,   meaning   that  these  stages   are  seen   as personal.   This
         conceptualization  has some   consequences.   First,  it  implies that two   students are not  necessarily  in   the same
         stage; e.g. one student may have progressed to the stage of personal utilisation, while the other is still in the
         stage of personal mastery. Second, the outcome of the stages may differ between two students. During the stage
         of mastery, for example, students may develop different operational routines to achieve a similar effect, or one
         student may have simply explored the artefact more thoroughly than the other. During the stage of utilisation,
         two students may develop different ways to utilize the tool. Their utilisation may be complementary, competing,
         or even unrelated.
                  In order to collaborate via the artefact, the students have to arrive at a shared convention of use. They
         have to develop a collective utilisation scheme through which they coordinate their interaction with the artefact
         towards the common object. We can describe this activity as follows: subject one (S1) and subject two (S2)
         direct action oriented towards the object (O), mediated by the same tool (T). The stage of collective utilisation is
         schematically depicted like this:

                                                               S1 ­ T ­ S2
                                                                     |
                                                                     O

                  In contrast, instead of progressing from personal to collective utilisation, the students may also regress.
         Regression occurs when they enter a state of conflict or disagreement about a convention.

       The planning problem
                  To   evaluate our  model  we    focused  on    a specific task   and supportive    artefact,  within  a specific
         classroom practice. Our study was carried out within preparatory secondary vocational education. The class that
         was involved consisted of 12 third grade students aged 14-15. Within the school a pilot programme was initiated
         that induced a transition from a more traditional form of teaching and learning to a form in which the students
         had to perform project work, collaborate in dyads, and work relatively independent from the teacher. Moreover,
         these `new'   lessons  contained  far  less structure  than   the former,  traditional way    of  working.  In   the pilot
         programme the students had to structure their learning activities themselves. They had almost no experience
         doing this, and in order to cope with it they had to develop collaboration and planning skills.
                  Over the duration of the school year the dyads had to complete several projects. Each project had a
         runtime  of  two  weeks, and  every   two   weeks the    students  started a  new  project.   Each  project addressed   a
         different theme, covering three knowledge domains (communication, technology and society). With each project
         the students were presented with a syllabus that contained a series of assignments, organised by domain. The
         dyads were expected to construct a plan that described in detail the actions that had to be undertaken for each
         day of the two weeks.
                  Planning comprises a sequence of steps from problem representation and plan construction, to plan
         execution (Pea, 1982). In order to represent the problem the dyads had to identify task requirements, sub-tasks,
         and constraints on the planning. Subsequently, they had to `translate' their problem representation into an actual
         project plan.  To get  from problem     representation   to an actual  plan, the dyads    had  to go  through  cycles  of
         proposal, simulation,  evaluation  and   revision (Pea,   1982).  The  `translation'  from  problem    representation  to
         planning  is a complex   activity that  required  the dyads,   among   other  things,  to project  the consequences    of
         particular planning decisions. For example, they had to make estimations of the time that would be needed to
         complete a particular part of the plan, and they had to take into account interdependencies between parts of the
         plan.

        The graphical shared workspace
                  The dyads were presented with a specific technical artefact to support the construction of their project
         planning: a graphical shared workspace (Figure 2). This shared workspace was deployed in the face-to-face
         classroom setting. It provides a drawing space and a configurable notation system that supports specific kinds of
         communicative acts. A student can select a contribution card from the notation system, and add it to the drawing
         space. The student can subsequently add a textual message to the title space of the card. By double-clicking on a
         card a comment window appears, where the student can elaborate his contribution. He can also move the cards
         through  the  drawing  space. Once    a contribution   is placed   in the  drawing space,   it can  be   related to  other
         contributions through the use of links. Multiple students can work in the shared workspace simultaneously.

       Method
                  We conducted three case studies, with a lapse of one month between each of them. In each case study
         five dyads participated. At the start of the first case, none of the students had ever worked with a graphical
         shared workspace, or with any technical artefact that was remotely similar. With the first case study the notation

2-
in the workspace   contained  one  card  type,  labeled `task',  and  the possibility to link  the cards. In order to
construct their project plan the dyads had to arrive at a shared representational format. We hypothesised that the
students would make certain choices during the stage of personal utilisation, and would then have to coordinate
these choices in order to collaborate.

                                   Figure 2. The graphical shared workspace.

Talk and action
        The students' communication was distributed: they talked, and acted in the shared workspace. Talk was
often  accompanied   by   actions  in  the workspace    ­    and  the other  way   around.   Expression   took   place
simultaneously in both modalities, or alternately, sometimes with a `seamless' transition from one mode to the
other. Moreover, as we will see, talk about the project plan and talk about the utilisation of the shared workspace
was often entangled.
        We had three data sources at our disposal: audio recordings of spoken interactions, the planning from
the shared workspace, and the replay of the actions in the workspace. This data set allowed us to link talk and
action. Recordings of talk were transcribed into a protocol that included all utterances, the speaker, and the time
of the utterance. We used a coding scheme to categorise the utterances, and we marked them with colour. We
segmented and coded the protocol on the sentence-level, using three parallel columns. In the first column we
coded task- and non-task focused talk, in the second column we coded talk about mastery and utilisation of the
shared workspace. Finally, in the third column we referred to the `actual' actions in the workspace.
        In order to code the first column we used a scheme that was adapted from the Rainbow framework
(see: Baker, Andriessen, Lund, van Amelsvoort & Quignard, 2007). Our coding scheme distinguishes seven
functional  categories: three for non  task-focused    interaction: outside activity, social relation and  interaction
management, and four categories for task-focused interaction: task management, problem representation, plan
projection, and plan construction (Table 1).

Table 1: The Rainbow framework adapted to the planning problem.

 Functional category              Brief definition
 OA = Outside activity            Talk that is not concerned with carrying out the researcher-defined task.
 SR = Social relation             Talk  that is   concerned  with   managing  the  students'   social relations with
                                  respect to the task.
 IM = Interaction                 Talk that is concerned with managing the interaction itself.
 management
 TM = Task management             Talk that is concerned with management of progression of the task; includes
                                  time management and status determination.
 PR = Problem                     Talk  that is concerned    with representing the    problem;  includes  identifying
 representation                   goals and sub goals, feasibility and constraints.
 PP = Plan projection             Talk that is concerned with simulation of parts of the planning.
 PC = Plan construction           Talk  that   is  concerned   with   formulating   the  plan;  includes   proposal,
                                  evaluation and revision.

        In the second column of the protocol we coded all utterances that were manifestly related to mastery or
utilisation of the shared  workspace.   These     categories captured  talk  about  actions  in the   workspace.  We

                                                                                                                         2-
         developed two categories for this. `Mastery' captures talk that was concerned with exploration of properties and
         basic actions, e.g. `hey, I can add a link between two contributions!' or `how did you do that?'. `Utilisation'
         captures talk that was concerned with performance of task-focused actions in the workspace, that is, actions
         oriented towards plan construction, e.g. `so we have to open a box and type in what we need to do?' or `we need
         a different color for each type of assignment. Do we have three colours?' (Table 2).

         Table 2: Coding of talk about actions in the shared workspace.

          Functional category               Brief definition
          MA = Mastery                      Talk that is concerned with mastery of the shared workspace; includes talk
                                            about the exploration of properties and basic actions in the workspace.
          UT = Utilisation                  Talk that is concerned with utilisation of the shared workspace; includes talk
                                            about task-focused actions and about the coordination of these actions.

                  Finally, in the third column of the protocol we indicated the actual actions in the shared workspace by
         referring to the corresponding frame numbers from the replay. This allowed us to inspect, at different stages of
         the planning activity, the actions that took place in the workspace.

        Episodes
                  Transitions between the stages of tool appropriation may not always be manifest. However, they are
         implied during certain critical events, for example, when students lack directions of use, when a certain need
         arises, or when some use has an unexpected effect. We selected those episodes from the protocol that reflect
         such a critical event. An episode corresponds to a duration of coherent activity demarcated by the students'
         behavior (Roschelle, 1992). Interaction that is concerned with exploration of properties and basic actions in the
         workspace  indicates   mastery  of the artefact. Interaction that is concerned   with performance  of task-focused
         actions in the workspace    and/or  with coordination    or regulation  of these actions indicates utilisation. The
         selected episodes were subjected to a more detailed analysis. Hereby we made a link between talk and actions.
                  In the remainder of this paper we present three episodes from our first case study. With each episode
         we present an excerpt from the protocol, and describe the corresponding actions that were performed in the
         shared workspace. We conclude the paper by making some inferences about our model of tool appropriation.

       From personal mastery to collective utilisation
                  The excerpts below contain parts of a dialogue between Twan (A) and Nando (B). At one point it
         includes the researcher (R). Twan and Nando had no experience with the graphical shared workspace. Before
         the start of the session the students had oriented themselves on the assignments in the syllabus, and they were
         ready to construct their plan.

        `You took that from here, right?'
                  This episode starts when both students had submitted a contribution card to the shared drawing space
         [Frame 45]. Lines 20-24 in the protocol illustrate how the students explore the properties and basic actions in the
         workspace.  The   excerpt shows    how  they explore  the   possibility to move  a card  through that space. They
         encourage each other to clarify their actions, and they make inferences from these actions, e.g. in line 20-21 [B:
         where did you get that from? You took that from here, right? You can move it].

                     20            B    Where did you get that from?                           MA
                     21    13.09   B    You took that from here, right?                        MA
                     22            B    You can move it.                                       MA   Frame 45
                     23    13.17   A    Yes, and can I now...                                  MA
                     24    13.21   B    You can put it back, yes.                              MA

                  During the sequence in line 20-24 the object of activity is the shared workspace itself, and the motive is
         learning how to operate it. The episode illustrates the stage of mastery (MA). In the episode hereafter the object
         of activity shifts from learning how to operate the workspace towards carrying out the task.

        `Like this I'll put it'
                  After a brief period of silence during which both students explored basic actions, such as typing text in
         a card and moving a card, they started to discuss utilisation of these basic actions. This stage of utilisation (UT)
         is illustrated in lines 25-32. With the statement in line 25 [A: Like this I'll put it] Twan proposes a specific
         usage of the contribution cards. Frame 56 reveals that Twan submitted a card, resized it, and typed `technology'

2-0
­ one of the knowledge domains - in the title space of the card. In line 26 Nando encouraged Twan to elaborate
on his action [B: You put it like that?]. When Twan doesn't respond directly to Nando's request for elaboration,
Nando proposed a way of utilising the workspace, incorporating an interpretation of Twan's statement and tool-
action. He encourages the researcher to evaluate his proposal [line 28; B: So you have to like open an activity
and then you put in there what is finished or has yet to be finished..., something like that?]. The researcher
avoided to impose his own conceptions about the workspace, and responded minimally [line 28].

         25        13.40  A  Like this I'll put it.2613.41BYou put it like that?PC UTPCUTFrame 56
                             So you have to like open an activity and then
         27        14.00  B  you put in there what is finished or has yet to PC    UT
                             be finished..., something like that?
         28        14.09  R  Yes, something like that.

       The students are talking about how they can construct their planning and use the shared workspace to
do this. In this episode, both students have made a proposal for utilisation. However, their proposals are on a
personal level. Note that their talk simultaneously addresses the representational format of the planning (coded
as plan construction) and ways to utilize the features of the workspace in order to represent the planning (coded
as utilisation).

`And then he says...'
       The interaction in lines 29-32 illustrates a transition from personal utilisation to collective utilisation. In
line 29-30 Nando elaborates his proposal by suggesting that for every topic both students can type in what has to
be done, and what has been finished [B: Then you put for every topic what you need to do, you put this and this
and this needs to be done, and then he says that needs to be done? And then he says: this is done and..]. Twan
takes up this proposal and elaborates it further by proposing that the amount of time needed to complete an
assignment could be put in there as well [line 31; A: And the number of hours has to go in there as well?].
However, this proposal is rejected by Nando [line 32; B: No, that's not necessary], and Twan, for now, complies
with this rejection.

                             Then you put for every topic what you need
          29       14.18 B   to do, you put this and this and this needs tobe done, and then he says that needs to bePCUT
                             done?
          30       14.22 B   And then he says: this is done and..            PC    UT
          31       14.27 A   ..and the number of hours has to go in thereas well?PCUT
          32       14.29 B   No, that's not necessary.                       PC    UT

       Later during the activity [line 83-87] Twan again mentions the possibility to represent time. And again
it is rejected by Nando [line 86-87; B: That has no use at all, how does that help you? How is it helpful putting
time behind it?]. Twan feels that they should represent a time dimension in the cards, whereas Nando thinks this
is not necessary. The students end up not displaying time in their plan.
       In line 36 Nando contributes to a further development of collective utilisation when he proposes to
represent the chapters from the project syllabus by means of different colors [B: I think the best thing to do, eyh
Twan, is to give those chapters a color]. Twan accepts the proposal, and elaborates by stating that they would
need three different colors to represent the three chapters. In line 42, he continues to propose the use of specific
color by each of them, based on a division of work (we have to assume that this division of work was negotiated
prior to the session, because it was not discussed during the session). Subsequently, Nando starts working on
communication, while Twan focuses on the technology assignments.

          36       15.08  B  I think the best thing to do, eyh Twan, is togive those chapters a color.PCUT
          37       15.13  A  Yes.                                             PC   UT
          38       15.48  A  Which color, we only have three colors, eyh?     PC   UT
          39       15.51  B  Huh, what?
          40       15.52  A  We need three different colors.                  PC   UT
          41       15.54  B  Oh, yes, yes..                                   PC   UT

                                                                                                                         2-
                      42   15.57  A    I' ll do blue,   ok, you  green and  orange  orsomething, green and red.PCUT

                At this point the students end up with three cards, representing the three different knowledge domains:
         communication,   technology   and    society. For  each knowledge   domain   they  list their tasks in the comment
         window of the card. Behind each task in the list they indicate whether it is completed or not (Figure 3).

                              Figure 3. Actions in the shared workspace: use of the comment window.

        `You should do it as well'
                Early on in the process it was brought to the fore that the workspace could also be used to keep track of
         progress during execution of the plan [line 27-30]. Later on Nando encountered an unexpected effect: he found
         out that he had no writing access into a card that was submitted by his fellow student. He realised that, as a
         consequence, he could not mark an assignment as `completed' in a card that he had not submitted himself. To
         overcome this problem, he proposed to add a second card for each domain. Also, he proposed to add a distinct
         name to each card, in order to distinguish two cards with the same title. Not until line 184 Twan notices that
         Nando has added an extra card [A: Hey, but you've build one extra for technology?]. Nando then clarifies [B: I
         can type in there, you should do it as well. What I've done, so to say, know what I mean?]. Somewhat later he
         explains `Because I've put in there that I haven't finished any of the assignments, once I've completed some, I
         can put it in, and you can see it'.

                      184 37.50  A     Hey,    but  you'vetechnology?buildoneextra for  PC       UT
                      185              I can type in there, you should do it as well.   PC       UT
                          37.53  B186  What    I'vemean?done,soto say,  know   what   I PC       UT
                      187 38.01  A     Yes.                                             PC       UT

                This    final episode  indicates   that students  at times  regressed   from utilisation to  mastery. It also
         illustrates how  the students came    up with  creative  solutions to overcome   constraints  that were imposed  by
         certain features of the graphical shared workspace.

       Conclusion

2-2
         So  what  did  we  learn about  the  appropriation of tools for  collaboration? Our   analysis illustrates a
progressive movement from personal mastery to collective utilisation of the artefact. We started by providing an
example of a transition from personal mastery to personal utilisation. The object of activity hereby shifted from
learning the basic actions towards utilisation of the artefact in order to construct a project plan. Thereafter, we
provided an example of a transition from personal utilisation to collective utilisation. In order to use the artefact
collaboratively, the students influenced each other, and (mutually) adapted their behaviour. The transition from
personal to  collective utilisation was achieved   through  a process  of negotiation. The   students  negotiated by
proposing and evaluating actions, and by making inferences about the use and effect of the artefact. We ended
our analysis by presenting an episode that showed a regression from personal utilisation to mastery.
         The   analysis has   revealed some   manifest  transitions in the  progressive  movement      from  personal
mastery  to  collective utilisation.  However,    we  did not  always  unambiguously     recognize   distinct stages.
Specifically, the separation of personal utilisation from collective utilisation may not be as straightforward as we
conceptualized it. The students' orientation towards the artefact is rooted in personal experiences with similar
tasks and artefacts, but develops in a social context. The students did make certain choices in their utilisation,
but where these personal or collective? Overall, the progressive movement appears to be less linear than we
envisioned it.
         As  we  hypothesised,    the  students made  certain  choices during   utilisation of the graphical  shared
workspace.   Some  of   these choices  had    important consequences,  and  resulted in  the   realization a  specific
potential of this artefact. For example, one of the reasons to present the workspace for the planning task was
based on the expectation that the students would use the spatial qualities of the drawing space to represent an
implementation order in their plan. It turned out that none of the groups in our first case met this expectation. In
fact, the students' choice to list all tasks in the comment window of the cards prevented this type of spatial
organisation to occur. As a consequence, the structure of the project syllabus was maintained and transformed
into the shared workspace. Choices such as these influence the mediating effect of the artefact: actions become
reified in the drawing area, and are then recursively implicated. This mediating effect, in other words, depends
partly on the process of appropriation.

References
Baker, M. J., Andriessen, J., Lund, K., van Amelsvoort, M., & Quignard, M. (2007). Rainbow: A framework for
         analyzing computer-mediated pedagogical debates. ijCSCL 2(2), 247-272.
Bernard,  F.-X.  (2006). L'impact    cognitif des dispositifs médiatiques   sur les  enfants   d'âge préscolaire  en
         situation d'apprentissage avec un adulte: Étude d'un cas de simulateur informatique dans le contexte
         d'une   exposition   scientifique. Thèse  de   doctorat Université  Paris  5.  Non    publié. Available    at
         http://tel.archives-ouvertes.fr/tel-00258740/fr/
Kaptelenin, V. & Nardi, B. (2006). Acting with technology. Cambridge, MA: MIT press.
Leont'ev, A. N. (1981). The problem of activity in psychology. In J. Wertsch (Ed.), The concept of activity in
         Soviet psychology. Armonk, N.Y.: Sharpe.
Overdijk, M. & Van Diggelen (2008). Appropriation of a graphical shared workspace: Organizing principles
         and their application. ijCSCL 3(2).
Pea, R. (1982). What is planning development the development of? In: D. Forbes and M.T. Greenberg. New
         directions for child development: Children's planning strategies. San Francisco: Jossev-Bass.
Piaget, J. (1964). Six etudes de psychologie. [Six studies of psychology]. Paris: Denoël.
Pinch, T.J. & Bijker, W.E. (1987). The social construction of facts and artefacts. In: W.E. Bijker, T.P. Hughes,
         and T.J. Pinch (Eds.), The social construction of technological systems: New directions in the sociology
         and history of technology. Cambridge, MA: MIT press.
Rabardel, P. (1995). Les Hommes et les Technologies : Approches cognitives des instruments contemporains.
         Paris : Armand Colin.
Rabardel,  P   & Bourmaud,    G.  (2003).   From  computer  to   instrument system:  a developmental    perspective.
         Interacting with Computers 15(5): 665-691.
Roschelle,  J. (1992).  Learning    by collaborating:   Convergent  conceptual  change.  Journal   of  the  Learning
         Sciences, 2, 235-276.
Weick, C.A. (1979). The Social Psychology of Organizing. Random House, New York.

Acknowledgements
The research reported in this paper was conducted within the EC-funded LEAD project (IST-2005-028027).

                                                                                                                         2-
