Collaborative Inquiry in Co-constructing ICT-mediated Curricula for
                         Chinese Literacy in Singapore Context
            Lung-Hsiang Wong, Ping Gao, Ching-Sing Chai, Chee-Kuen Chin, & Tze-Min Chung
    Learning Sciences Lab., National Institute of Education, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
                                       E-mail: lunghsiang.wong@nie.edu.sg

          Abstract. This  collaborative  inquiry    project brings   together  Chinese  Language   teachers,
          curriculum specialists and researchers to co-construct Information and Communications Tools
          (ICT) mediated Chinese curriculum for primary school students in Singapore. The findings
          indicate that as the teachers were not used to voicing their concerns in free-flowing meetings,
          they experienced tension.   However,   all the  participants  agreed that collaborative inquiry  is
          effective for teachers' professional development. There were also positive changes of teachers'
          views about the incorporation of ICT in Chinese learning.

Introduction
          Collaborative Inquiry (CI) is a systematic approach to promote collaboration between researchers and
practitioners to advance both knowledge and practice (Darling-Hammond, 1996; Bray, 2002, Batliwala, 2003),
and to make meaning from their experience (Yorks & Kasl, 2002). This is a potential approach in Teachers'
Professional Development.
          This proposal   reports the  findings  of  a 3-month    collaborative project in  Singapore     involving 14
teachers of Chinese Language, two curriculum specialists from Ministry of Education (MOE), and four teacher
educators as researchers from the National Institute of Education. The participants came together to co-construct
an Information  and  Communications     Tools   (ICT)  mediated   Chinese   learning curriculum   for primary  school
students. The  two  major  research   questions  were  first, what  are the impacts  of the CI  on    the professional
development of teachers, teacher educators and ministry officials? Second, how do the participants from the
three parties negotiate the meaning of CI?

Study Description
          Six face to face meetings were conducted. The sessions usually started with researcher-led discussions
on specific topics, followed by    teacher-generated   discussions   on dealing with   challenges in  classroom.  The
teachers  grouped   themselves into   three inquiry    groups, one   of which   decided to  develop   a   school-based
curriculum  on  creating  "audio  dramas"   with IT  tools.   The other two   groups worked  on   two  different ICT-
mediated Chinese writing curricula.

Participants
          The collaborative inquiry participants include 14 Chinese Language teachers from 12 primary schools
within the same school district, two representatives from the Ministry of Education (MOE), and four researchers
from the National Institute of Education.

Research Methods
          We apply qualitative methods to study how the project impacts on the participants' perspectives of the
CI processes and the use of ICT in CL learning.

Data Collection and Analysis
          We incorporated several data sources: field notes online forum discussion, a focus group discussion
during session 6, and one-to-one interviews after session 6. The data were then analyzed through the constant
comparative method adapted from the grounded theory approach (Strauss & Corbin, 1990).

Findings
Three themes emerged as follows:
1. Participants Viewed Collaborative Inquiry as an Approach to Professional Development
a)  The professional development of teachers. The participants gradually developed a positive attitude towards
    CI and  found   it an effective approach    in  their professional  development.   They became    more  active  in
    contributing  ideas,  experiences, actually  designing    lesson plans, and  even   implementing    them  in their
    classroom.

                                                                                                                         3-
                   "At first, the teachers were not sure at all. Through the early discussions, they explored and
                   planned how to do it. Then they discussed the difficulties they face. Slowly, they heat up.
                   Then they found the `feel'. There were more interactions during the last three times and they
                   were very involved. They knew they ought to do it and they have obtained some results from
                   it. They had a sense of achievement." (Celine, 18 May 2007).

                   "Yes, this is TPD but different from the traditional one... Traditional method ­ I focus on and
                   learn something. Collaborative inquiry ­ I can apply what I've constructed immediately and
                   continue." (James, June 21, 2007)

         b)  The professional development of the MOE officials. Like the teachers, they had also experienced positive
             changes in their attitude toward the approach. As they have put it: "CI is much better than theory-based
             programs. If we can do it well, it is good upgrading for the teachers." (Celine, 25 June 2007 ­ Interview).
             Both of specialists are also keen on observing the teachers' subsequent school-based experiments in order to
             discover practical challenges in ICT integration such as whether ICT should be incorporated into exams.
         c)  The professional development of the researchers. The impacts of the collaborative inquiry are firstly, it has
             resulted in cross-disciplinary collaboration between the Learning Sciences and Asian Language and Culture
             Departments    at  the National Institute  of Education.   Furthermore, we   have  better understanding    of the
             characteristics of local teachers. We were also able to gradually change our roles from leaders to facilitators.

         2. Changes of the Teachers' Views about the Use of ICT in Chinese Language Learning
                   The teachers started off with little confidence in using ICT in class. They were also doubtful how much
         ICT would help raise the standards of the pupils. Their confidence increased and their doubts decreased as they
         got more   involved   in the inquiry. It   was because   they could raise their problems   and  obtain  advice  from
         colleagues. The co-designed curricula have also offered them concrete, systematic plans to achieve their aim.

         3. Negotiating Meaning among the Three Parties
                   The participants  had  different expectations  when  they came  together  in the inquiry. The  researchers
         wanted to examine whether CI is a viable Teachers' Professional Development approach for Singaporean teachers;
         the Ministry officials treated Chinese writing as their "burning inquiry question"; and the teachers had to meet the
         varied demands of their respective school administrators. Despite the tension, participants have learnt about each
         other's job nature and limitations, and expectations of their peers. The following is a comment on the mood of the
         group during the last sessions: "Teachers share with us their problems and we see it with our own eyes. There is
         synergy amongst the three parties, and we understand each other's jobs, etc. better. And we know who to approach
         if we need support. It is a network that we are building" (Elaine, 18 May 2007 ­ Focus Group).

       Discussion and Implications
                   The encouraging findings are that all the participants agreed that collaborative inquiry is an effective
         approach   to conduct    Teachers' Professional   Development.   Furthermore,   the   involvement   of national-level
         education officials in a teacher-researcher CI group is unprecedented. It is a strong indication of the importance
         being attached to CI by Ministry. The project has also helped built the confidence of teachers in incorporating
         ICT in their teaching. On the other hand, our teachers took time to adapt to a less-structured approach. The
         participants also experienced tension due to the different expectations they had for the collaborative inquiry. Our
         findings tallied with findings by researchers in the field (Pomson, 2005; Bray, et. al., 2000).

       References
         Batliwala, S.  (2003).    Bridging  divides   for social change:    Practice-research  interactions in  South   Asia.
                   Organization. 10(3). 595-615. SAGE Publications. 2003.
         Bray, J., Lee, J., Smith,  L.,  &  Yorks,  L.  (2000). Colllaborative Inquiry in Practice:  Action,    Reflection and
                   Making Meaning. London: Sage.
         Bray, J. (2002). Uniting teacher learning: Collaborative inquiry for professional development. New Directions
                   for Adult and Continuing Education, 94, Summer 2002.
         Darling-Hammond, L. (1996). The quiet revolution: Rethinking teacher development. Educational Leadership,
                   53(6), 4-10.
         Pomson, A.D.M. (2005). One classroom at a time? Teacher isolation and community viewed through the prism
                   of the particular. Teachers College Record, 107(4), 783-802.

       Acknowledgements
         The  work  presented   in  this paper was   funded  by   a Learning  Sciences   Laboratory research    grant, number
         R59801126. We would like to thank CPDD, ETD, the participating schools and teachers for their generous support.

3-
