        Delegating Agency among Researcher, Biostatistician and
                 Computer            Machinery: Modeling in Biostatistics

       Kenneth Wright, Vanderbilt University, Peabody #330, 230 Appleton Place, Nashville, TN 37203,
                                              k.wright@vanderbilt.edu

         Abstract:    Medical  researchers  exercise   and delegate   agency     for making    inferences  or  for
         making  claims.   In  the biostatistical consultations  discussed    here,  they encounter    three  key
         knowledge-producing agents in the "epistemic culture" (Knorr Cetina, 1999) of biostatistics:
         themselves, biostatistician and computer machinery. Who or what does what occurs amidst a
         "dance  of  agency"   among    the participants (Pickering,    1995).   These interpretations    provide
         support  for  recent  reforms   employing     modeling    approaches    in  science   and   mathematics
         instruction in K-16 settings.

Introduction
         Broadly  speaking,    medical  researchers    and biostatisticians   in consultations   recognize    each  others'
differences in  expertise.  Medical    researchers  defer  to  the  biostatistician   for a  suitable    model  that, once
employed, will justify inferences that attribute observable patterns in data from a sample as indicative of some
true characteristic of a population. Likewise biostatisticians rely on the medical researcher to turn measures
obtained in the laboratory or medical setting into data suitable for statistical analysis. Both human agents rely on
computer machinery to do a tremendous amount of computational, graphical, and tabular work that becomes the
basis of further analytical work to be delegated among the human agents. They also rely often on computational
machinery to provide menus of options for building a statistical model and subsequent graphical outputs. Thus
the overall task of selecting, building and running a statistical model is a joint task involving the coordinated
expertise of medical researchers, biostatisticians and the computer machinery. For the "agency" of computer
machinery, I mean this in the sense employed by Pickering (1995), who underscores that only humans employ
the kind of intentionality that we normally attribute uniquely to humans. Nevertheless, scientists must adopt a
passive stance as they observe what their investigative machinery, and the unknown features of the material
world they interact with, will actively accomplish. Machines have agency in the sense that once built and "run",
only they can determine what heretofore had been indeterminate.
         This   paper reports  from  a  multi-year  study   of learning  and     teaching in   a biostatistics department
associated  with  a   medical   school   in  the  United   States.    Field   data   come  from    two    main  lines:   (1)
Audiorecordings, videorecordings and notes from several public lectures, attended mostly by biostatisticians,
and  (2)   Videorecordings     of  several  biostatistical  consultations     (meetings   between     biostatistician   and
researcher(s) for advice on interpreting data or designing a study), as well as follow-up interviews focusing on
selected episodes as the basis for questioning. The field data from line (1) provides a framework for a "practice
account" (Schatzki, Knorr Cetina & von Savigny, 2001) of biostatistical research, an opportunity to describe the
"epistemic  culture"  (Knorr   Cetina,  1999) of  biostatistics. I  use  this practice approach      with the  intention of
understanding   the activities of  this community      dedicated   to knowledge      creation. Field  data   from  line  (2)
provides an opportunity to examine from an ethnomethodological standpoint (Garfinkel, 1967) the local activity
of learning to conduct medical research. The learners, for my purposes here, are medical researchers who seek
advice on how to turn their data into defensible claims in research journals. Learning is here characterized by
those local interactions responsible for acclimating these researchers to the epistemic culture of biostatistics.
Here I  foreground    the question,  As participants   attempt   to create  characteristics    within a   population  from
observable patterns within a sample of data, how do medical researchers learn to exercise and delegate agency
among themselves, biostatisticians and their machinery? By wording the question this way, I do not mean to
suggest that they produce knowledge out of whole cloth. The patterns they observe in samples are real, but only
by means   of inference   can  these patterns be   made  to pertain   to populations.   They     are all too aware  of   the
contingent nature of findings. It is as if medical facts reside a liminal space between the status of the inherently
provisional and the status of the statistically significant result.

Learning in Biostatistical Consultations
         Learning biostatistics might be characterized as the process of inserting oneself into and acclimating
oneself to  the epistemic  culture   of biostatistical research.   The  videorecordings    of  consultations   provide   an
opportunity to study the dynamics of such learning as participants interact. Such consultations are institutional
responses to the need to reorganize future work (Hall, Wright & Wieckert, 2007). They therefore represent a
unique opportunity to examine how local activity might bear on the greater epistemic culture. In the interactive
poster session, I will present video episodes from one biostatistical consultation and will highlight some key

                                                                                                                               3-
         aspects of episodes where participants exercise or delegate agency to others. The poster itself will provide a
         synoptic view of other consultations in an attempt to convey the prevalence of these following aspects: (1) The
         import of a claim is reflexively bound to the legitimacy of the agent to make such claims. This self positioning
         may take on various forms, from more provisional stances that invite others to join in the task of claim-making,
         to more resolute and definitive stances that arrogate the task of claim-making uniquely to oneself. Furthermore,
         participants  may  position  others  as   having agency    and/or  responsibility  for  making  claims    about  data. (2)
         Outlines of agency. When things go smoothly, participants tend to exercise and delegate agency in mutually
         consistent manners, along the lines of a harmonious distribution of labor. Researchers tend to delegate model
         selection to biostatisticians (who in turn sometimes rely in part on computer machinery), but exercise agency to
         generate  the  research question    of interest. These     humans  delegate   to the computer   machinery     the task  of
         computation (far from trivial), the production of summary tables and graphs and the reporting on any contrasts
         or significant trends. The computer machinery also solicits information by way of graphical user interfaces that
         pop up. However, things do not always go smoothly and when they do not, participants reveal where the bounds
         of their presumption of agency are. (3) Biostatistical consultations are often quests to determine an appropriate,
         workable and defensible statistical model, and to make it articulate with the data at hand or potential future data.
         Participants rely on the computer machinery to compute estimates of values and to display summarizes of these
         data  in tabular and  graphical   form.   Because   these  displays in  turn  become   useful   for analysis  and for  the
         generation of knowledge claims, they do more than simply illustrate the statistical model ­ they become models
         themselves and serve as "epistemic artifacts" (Knuuttila, 2003).

       From Learning in Epistemic Cultures to Learning in Schools
                   Other  recent work  in   the learning  sciences   has  explored agency   in  educational   settings (Charles  &
         Shumar, 2007) and this paper too explores agency in similar, temporally emergent terms, but with the added
         feature of machinic agents. Interpretation of biostatistical modeling as a collaborative dance of agency among
         humans   and  machines     provides support  for    modeling  in mathematics     and science  education.  The    modeling
         movement has directed our attention to teaching students to experience the feel of scientific research, both on a
         personal level and on a collective level of collaboration with others (Lesh & Doerr, 2003; Lesh, Hamilton &
         Kaput,   2007),  consistent  with   notions  of  learning   as   participation   (Lave  &  Wenger,    1991).   From    this
         perspective, modeling provides first hand experience with knowledge production within a culture devoted to the
         cultivation of people. For these modeling activities, competency for delegating or assuming agency are just as
         relevant (Scardamalia, 2002), especially with the advent of more sophisticated computer machinery in schools
         (Borba & Villarreal, 2005).

       References
         Borba, M. C., Villarreal, M. E. (2005). Humans-with-media and the reorganization of mathematical thinking:
                   information   and  communication    technologies,     modeling,   visualization, and   experimentation.    New
                   York. Springer.
         Charles, E., Shumar, W. (2007). Creativity, Collaboration and Competence: Agency in Online Synchronous
                   Chat  Environment,   Proceedings       of Computer     Support  for    Cooperative  Learning    (CSCL).    New
                   Brunswick, NJ.
         Garfinkel, H. (1967). Studies in ethnomethodology. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
         Hall, R.,  Wright, K    &  Wieckert,   K. (2007).   Interactive  and Historical   Processes  of  Distributing    Statistical
                   Concepts Through Work Organization. Mind, Culture, and Activity. 14(1-2), 103-127.
         Knorr Cetina, K. (1999). Epistemic Cultures: How the Sciences Make Knowledge. Cambridge. MA: Harvard
                   University Press.
         Knuuttila, T.  &  Voutilainen,   A.  (2003).  A     Parser as an  Epistemic   Artifact: A  Material   View    on  Models.
                   Philosophy of Science, 70, 1484­1495.
         Lave  J. &   Wenger,  E.   (1991)  Situated learning:  legitimate   peripheral   participation, Cambridge:    Cambridge
                   University Press.
         Lesh, R. & Doerr, H. (Eds). (2003). Beyond constructivism: Models and modeling perspectives on mathematics
                   problem solving, learning, and teaching. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
         Lesh, R.,  Hamilton,    E. & Kaput,    J. (Eds). (2007).   Foundations    for  the Future  of   Mathematics   Education.
                   Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
         Scardamalia,   M.  (2002).  Collective  cognitive   responsibility  for the  advancement   of   knowledge.    In B. Jones
                   (Ed.), Liberal education in a knowledge society (pp.67­98). Chicago: Open Court.
         Schatzki,  T. R., Knorr    Cetina,  K. and  von  Savigny,   E.   (Eds.) (2001).  The   Practice Turn   in Contemporary
                   Theory. Routledge, London.

3-0
