          Self-Assessment and Self-Explanation for Learning Chemistry
                                Using Dynamic Molecular Visualizations

         Jennifer L. Chiu, Marcia C. Linn, University of California, Berkeley, 4523 Tolman Hall, Berkeley CA 94720
                                       Email: jenchiu@berkeley.edu, mclinn@berkeley.edu

                 Abstract: This poster investigates how self-explanation and self-assessment prompts can help
                 students learn from dynamic visualizations of chemical reactions. We compared students' self-
                 assessments  immediately     after  the  visualizations    to self-assessments   after visualizations plus
                 explanation prompts. Immediately after interacting with the visualization students overestimated
                 their understanding   compared      to their self-assessments     after giving   an explanation.  Analysis
                 suggests  that    generating    explanations   can     help   students   identify   weaknesses    in  their
                 understanding of dynamic visualizations and develop more coherent views.

      Introduction
                 Dynamic visualizations of chemical phenomena have the potential of helping students make connections
       between molecular, symbolic, and observable views of chemical reactions. Prior studies demonstrate that students
       often isolate molecular visualizations rather than linking them to existing knowledge or everyday experiences and
       have difficulty interpreting stand-alone dynamic visualizations (Tversky, Morrison, & Betrancourt, 2002). We have
       conduced   refinement   studies  to   create  a  module  that   embeds    a dynamic     visualization in   proven pedagogical
       patterns (such as predict, observe, develop criteria, explain) and sought ways to improve outcomes. Prior research
       demonstrates the effectiveness of combining explanations with dynamic visualizations (Pallant & Tinker, 2004)
       but does not clarify the mechanism. We explore ways that generating explanations can prompt students to build
       connections   among    their   ideas. Explanations     can    also   help researchers   understand    how   learners   interpret
       visualizations by highlighting disconnected and limited understanding.
                 To elucidate how explanations help learners link molecular and observable phenomena we placed self-
       assessments     before and   after    the explanations.      The   self-assessments    illuminate   how    visualizations  and
       explanations    differentially impact     the criteria students    develop    for distinguishing    among  ideas.  This  study
       clarifies how   students monitor    their  understanding     of  dynamic    molecular   visualizations   and suggests   design
       principles to guide the use of visualizations in chemistry.

       Methods
                 Chemistry students (n=173) in two diverse high schools completed the Technology-Enhanced Learning
       in Science (TELS) Center 5-day curriculum unit, Chemical Reactions (Figure 1) after covering most chemical
       reactions topics in textbook-centered activities. This technology-enhanced module uses the Web-based Inquiry
       Science   Environment    (WISE)    to  guide    students through     an   investigation of  combustion     reactions and  their
       environmental    impact  (see  http://WISE.Berkeley.edu).         Students  studied    the unit  in pairs. Teacher   1 ran the
       project with honors and regular classes, and Teacher 2 ran the project with 2 regular classes in another high
       school.
                 Both teachers administered individual paper pretests and posttest to students. These tests included free-
       response   items that  allowed   students     to explain their    understanding    of  everyday,    molecular,  and  symbolic
       representations of chemical reactions and related concepts such as conservation of mass and limiting reactants.
       Students self-assessed their understanding of specific concepts on both pretests and posttests.
                 To    investigate  how    students     make   sense     of  visualizations    we    compared     two  sequences   of
       visualizations, explanations, and self-assessment prompts. In the Rating First instructional sequence students
       generated ideas, explored a visualization, assessed their understanding of the visualization, and then generated
       an explanation. In the Explanation First sequence students generated ideas, explored a visualization, generated
       an explanation,   and   then   assessed   their  understanding.      For  the self-assessment    items,  students  rated  their
       understanding    of specific   concepts   as   poor,   fair, very  good,   or excellent.   The   explanation   prompts   asked
       students how the visualization connected to other concepts or activities. For example, one prompt said, "Explain
       how the visualization relates to the hydrogen balloon video." Researchers helped both teachers implement the
       TELS curriculum in all classes. Researchers randomly divided students into Rating First or Explanation First
       groups within classes on the first day of the project.
                 Based on the knowledge integration framework (Linn et al., 2006) the scoring of pretests, posttests, and
       embedded    explanation  items   identified    the numbers     of  connections    that students  made   among   ideas. In  this
       study, higher scores represent more connections among representations and/or concepts. Researchers converted
       the pretest, posttest, embedded notes, and embedded student self-ratings into scores from 1 to 4 (1=poor, to
       4=excellent).

3-
Results
          Overall,  paired  t-tests revealed  significant gains  from  individual                                                                            pretests           to       posttests            across         groups.
(Pretest: M(SD)=17.2(6.7);      Posttest: M(SD)=26.8(7.9);      Effect size=1.3,                                                                            t(141)=21.8,                  p<.01).             There          was         no
significant impact of teacher or treatment on posttest score. Consistent with their knowledge gains, individual
students  across   all groups  rated themselves   as more    knowledgeable   on                                                                             the       posttest           than      on the       pretest,                 and
became more accurate at assessing themselves on the posttest.
          Within   the  chemical    reactions unit, the Rating   First group consistently                                                                                       rated              themselves               as more
knowledgeable than the Explanation First group (Figure 2). To understand the significance of this observation,
we used a 2-level ordinal logistic regression with the embedded self-ratings as the dependent variable and group,
question, and the interaction between group and question as explanatory variables. The Rating First group was
significantly more likely to rate themselves as more knowledgeable than the Explanation First group (E = -1.49,
z = -2.20, p = .03). No significant effect of question or interaction between question and rating was found on
self-ratings.
          Knowledge integration scores for the prompted explanations tended to decrease as students progressed
through the curriculum for both groups. On average, students made partial connections from the visualizations
to traditional representations, indicating the increasing difficulty of the project and connections that students are
prompted     to explain. For   instance,  in  one visualization   students start                                                                            with       two      methane              and        five         oxygen
molecules    to  form   carbon  dioxide   and  water.   The   following explanation                                                                                    prompt             asks      students                how          the
visualization related to the balanced equation, CH4+2O2oCO2+2H2O. Most students responded correctly about
excess  reactants  in  the visualization  (1  oxygen  molecule    or 2 oxygen                                                                              atoms).            Many        students            connected                  the
"leftovers" with partial ideas about conservation of mass ("you can't gain or lose atoms, so the extra oxygen
molecule couldn't be taken away"), ideas about balanced equations ("to balance the equation we don't need one
oxygen molecule"), and limiting reactants ("there is not enough to make more"). Some students were able to
connect the ratios of the balanced equation to what they had left over ("With the equation above there was 1 O2
left because we had 5. We needed only 4 so we subtracted 4"). However, no significant differences between
groups were found on knowledge integration scores.
                                                                                                                                                               Average Self-Ratings by Group on Pretests, Embedded Self-
                                                                                                                                                                                 Assessments, and Posttests

                                                                                                                                                         4

                                                                                                                                                       3.5

                                                                                                                                                         3

                                                                                                                                                       2.5                                                                         Rating First
                                                                                                                                                         2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Explanation
                                                                                                                                                       1.5                                                                         First

                                                                                                                                                         1

                                                                                                                                                       0.5

                                                                                                                                                         0
                                                                                                                                                              Pretest      R1         R2        R3         R4      Posttest
                                                                                                                                                                              Self-Assessment Prompt

Figure    1.  Screenshot   of  the   chemical   reactions       Figure 2. Average self-rating scores by Rating First and
TELS curriculum unit.                                           Explanation  First                                                                                    groups     on        pretests,           embedded                   self-
                                                                assessments,  and                                                                             posttests.                 R1-R4       represent               scores             for
Discussion                                                      the sequential embedded self-assessment prompts.
          This study supports a design principle that emphasizes the advantage of combining visualizations and
explanations    to help    students  benefit  from   dynamic    visualizations.                                                                            Students            are        more        critical              of   their
understanding after generating explanations--and likely to seek ways to improve their understanding. Students
tend to   overestimate   their understanding   after  viewing   a visualization.                                                                            This        finding           supports             the          idea         that
visualizations   used   without  explanations     may   fail to improve    learning                                                                                   because            they       lull       students          into
complacency. Since the order of self-assessment and explanation prompts had no effect on posttest scores, we
conclude that the self-assessments were not necessary to achieve the gain from explanation prompts. Rather,
self-assessment prompts helped the researchers understand why combining visualizations with explanations is
more successful than visualizations used alone.

References
Linn M. C., Lee, H.-S., Tinker R., Husic F., Chiu J. L. (2006). Teaching and assessing knowledge integration in
        science. Science. 313, 1049­1050.
Pallant, A., & Tinker, R. (2004). Reasoning with atomic-scale molecular dynamic models. Journal of Science
        Education and Technology, 13(1), 51-66.
Tversky, B., Morrison, J. B., & Betrancourt, M. (2002). Animation: Can it facilitate? International Journal of
        Human-Computer Studies, 57, 247-262.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    3-
