Using Drawings to Support Learning from Dynamic Visualizations
  Helen Zhihui Zhang, Marcia C. Linn, University of California-Berkeley, Berkeley, CA 94720-1670, USA
                             Email: zhzhang@berkeley.edu, mclinn@berkeley.edu

        Abstract: Dynamic visualizations can enhance science learning by making unseen processes
        visible.  To study   how  drawing   supports  learning    from visualizations,  the drawing    group
        illustrated their ideas after interacting with molecular visualizations and the interaction group
        had more time to explore the visualizations. The drawing group learned more and made more
        precise interpretations of the visualizations than the interaction group.

Introduction
        Students   often have   misunderstandings   about   chemistry  due to  the  difficulty of translating   between
symbolic  representations, molecular  representations,  and  observable   phenomena.    Dynamic      visualizations  can
help students connect to the atomic level (Ardac & Akaygun, 2004; Wu, Krajcik, & Soloway, 2001) but may
confuse students.  Curriculum    designers (Quintana  et  al., 2004)   suggested   the benefit  of   scaffolds, such  as
embedded questions, to strengthen the connections between representations. In this study we explore the use of
a drawing activity to scaffold learning from dynamic visualizations embedded in a curriculum module using the
Web-based Inquiry Science Environment (WISE, Linn, Davis, & Bell, 2004). The drawing group created paper-
based drawings to explain the visualizations, while the interaction group spent more time exploring the dynamic
visualizations but  did  not draw.   Assessments    included   explanation    and  drawing  items    aligned    with the
instruction.

Hydrogen Fuel Cell Cars Module
        The knowledge integration framework was used to guide the design and revision of the curriculum
module and assessments (Linn, Eylon, & Davis, 2004). The WISE module elicited students' existing ideas about
gasoline combustion in cars, and illustrated chemical reactions within the context of hydrogen fuel cell cars. It
employed  interactive dynamic     visualizations of hydrogen    combustion    at  a  molecular  level  and   embedded
questions (Linn & Eylon, 2006) promoting links between phenomena and representations (see Figure 1). As an
example,  one  embedded    question  was   "Can  hydrogen   be  burned    inside the internal  combustion     engine  as
gasoline? Explain  why."   This  question  required students   to connect  molecular   visualizations  with   everyday
experiences  about cars  and safety. At   the end of the    module,  students  participated in  an   online discussion
comparing hydrogen and gasoline cars that offered students a chance to reflect and reformulate their ideas.

Figure 1. Left: A screenshot of the dynamic visualizations used in the WISE module. Students use visualizations
within steps to add ideas, and use pedagogical tools such as embedded notes to refine their understanding about
the visualizations. Right: The knowledge integration scoring rubric designed for one assessment item asking to
                             identify the correct molecular representation of reactants.

Methods
        This module was implemented in five 8th grade physical science classes (N=133), with three classes in
the drawing group (N=81) and two classes in the interaction group (N=52). The same teacher taught both groups.
During this five-day (one 40-minute period per day) module, both groups spent the third day working on the
same dynamic     visualizations and embedded     questions. Students   in the drawing   group  completed    pictures  to
show how     the burning  of hydrogen   happens.    The  interaction   group  had   more  time    to interact   with the

                                                                                                                           3-
         visualizations.  Many  students     in the  interaction group    finished about   five minutes  earlier than   those in the
         drawing group.
                  The assessment included pretests and posttests and embedded notes. Students' responses were scored
         using the knowledge integration framework (Linn, Lee, Tinker, Husic, & Chiu, 2006). Higher scores indicated
         that students made more complex links between ideas in their explanations. For example, one assessment item
         asked  students  to identify  the   correct molecular   representation    for the reactants of  hydrogen  combustion.    It
         assessed whether students could correctly connect the symbolic and molecular representations for the concepts
         of reactants and molecular movement (see Figure 1 the right part for the knowledge integration scoring rubric).

       Results and Discussion
                  Overall, the teacher implemented the module successfully in all classes. Both groups were similar in
         terms of prior chemistry knowledge as assessed by the pretest [t (131) =.05, p=.96]. Both groups made
         significant progress in understanding chemical reactions by linking representations (see Table 1).
                  A multiple linear regression analysis [t=3.30, p=.001, with a regression coefficient of .30] shows that
         students in  the drawing    group    integrated more    ideas and   acquired  more    precise  interpretations of  dynamic
         visualizations  than  those in   the interaction group.   Students  in  both  groups   started with non-normative     ideas
         about chemical reactions. On the posttest, students in the drawing group advanced to correct ideas and links
         between the symbolic and molecular representation of bond breaking and formation. Students in the interaction
         group gained some ideas but few were able to make correct links.

         Table 1: Knowledge integration scores of all students, the interaction group and the drawing group.

                                                Pretest                 Posttest
                Group                N          M           SD          M              SD        Effect Size       p
                Interaction          52         1.32        .74         2.15           .67       1.32              <.0001
                Drawing              81         1.33        .61         2.45           .48       1.71              <.0001
                All                  133        1.33        .66         2.33           .58       1.53              <.0001

       Conclusions
                  This   study investigated     the role of  scaffolding  by  exploring    the  advantage of drawing    ideas  from
         dynamic visualizations. Students in the drawing group integrated more ideas than those in the interaction group.
         The drawing activity scaffolded interpretation of the visualizations by asking students to represent their ideas in
         a precise, visual   format.  The    visual  format  increased attention   to  the molecular    reaction process,   allowing
         students to test their ideas about how chemical bonds change. Moreover, the drawing activity helped students
         reflect on their ideas by comparing their interpretations of the visualizations to the actions on the screen. This
         research suggests that drawing is a promising way to direct attention to the details of complicated, dynamic
         visualizations.
                  Future studies will focus on using students' log files to make the drawing and dynamic visualizations
         more effective. Logging data can reveal detailed information about students' interactions with visualizations and
         therefore to offer better guidance to improve learning.

       References
         Ardac,   D.,   &  Akaygun,       S.    (2004).  Effectiveness    of  multimedia-based     instruction   that   emphasizes
                  representations    on   students'  understanding     of chemical     change.  Journal  of  Research    in Science
                  Teaching, 41(4), 317-337.
         Linn, M. C., & Eylon, B. ­S. (2006).        Science education.   In P. A. Alexander & P. H. Winne (Eds.), Handbook
                  of Educational Psychology, 2nd edition. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
         Linn, M. C., Eylon, B. ­S., & Davis, E. A. (2004). The knowledge integration perspective on learning. In M. C.
                  Linn, E. A. Davis, & P. Bell (Eds.), Internet environments for science education (pp. 29-46). Mahwah,
                  NJ: Erlbaum.
         Linn, M.   C.,  Lee,  H.­S.,  Tinker,   R., Husic,  F.,  & Chiu,    J. L.  (2006). Teaching    and  assessing   knowledge
                  integration. Science, 313, 1049-1050.
         Quintana, C., Riser, B. J., Davis, E. A., Krajcik, J., Fretz, E., Duncan, R. G., et. al. (2004). A scaffolding design
                  framework for software to support science inquiry. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 13(3), 337-
                  386.
         Wu,   H. ­K.,   Krajcik, J.  S., &     Soloway,  E. (2001).   Promoting    understanding    of chemical   representations:
                  Students' use of a visualization tool in the classroom. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 38(7),
                  821-842.

3-
