    Beliefs about learning and learning strategies of Chinese English
for International Business (EIB) students in project-based learning
                                                   instruction
                   Zhao Ke, Carol K.K. Chan, the University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China
                             Email: cocochao@hkusua.hku.hk, ckkchan@hkucc.hku.hk

          Abstract:   This study   examined     students'   beliefs and   strategies  in project-based   learning
          among International Business students in China and the relationships among these measures
          and  their contribution  to   academic   performance.     In-depth   interviews  with  25  second-year
          students   focused on   their project    learning  experience    examining    their epistemology     and
          strategy use. Analysis of interview data identified different patterns for beliefs, collaboration,
          and strategy use. Significant correlations were found among beliefs and strategies as well as
          with learning outcomes.

Introduction
          Over the past several decades research attention has been devoted to students' beliefs about the nature
of  knowledge   and  of learning  (Hofer,    2004;  Hofer   &   Pintrich, 1997;   Marton   &  Saljo,   1976).  Recently, an
increasing number of studies from two lines of research on the nature of students' beliefs of knowledge and
learning,    including  cognitive     and    constructivist    traditions    (Hofer,  2004;     Schommer,      1994)    and
phenomenography and student approaches to learning (SAL) (Marton & Saljo, 1976) indicate that students'
beliefs exert  certain  influence  on   strategies   of  or  approaches    to  learning  (Pintrich, 2004;)   and   academic
performance (Hofer & Pintrich, 1997).
          Despite  seeming     differences   of  the   two   research   perspectives    in terms    of  terminologies   and
measurement,   the   main  constructs   they look  into  might   be similar   and overlapping    in some    sense. To  date,
limited work has been done to identify and clarify the situated nature of these constructs in a domain-specific
and instruction-focused context in a bottom-up manner. Furthermore, most of research work mentioned above
seems   to have   examined   the individual   aspects    of learning. Although    some     research efforts were   made  to
explore the nature of students' conceptions of collective learning experience and the relations between these
conceptions and approaches to learning in western countries, few studies have been done on Chinese students'
conception of and approach to collective learning.
          Although   an increasing   number     of studies  indicate  that collaboration   is key   to  successful learning
(Dillenbourg,  1999),   limited  research  on   collaborative   learning  has  been  conducted   in  tertiary  education in
China due to the taken-for-granted collectivist tradition. More research needs to address how Chinese students
interpret project-based instructional practices through the lens of their existing epistemological perspectives,
how these interpretations interact with their process of learning and academic performance.
          In this  study, we   aim to   identify   the situated  nature   of  Chinese   business  students'   beliefs about
knowledge and learning, conceptions of collaboration and the actual strategy use in doing project work and to
further explore the relations among these aspects of learning with students' academic performance.             Specifically,
the following  questions   are  addressed:   (a)   what  is the  nature of   beliefs about  learning    and conceptions  of
collaboration among English for International Business students in China? (b) what is the nature of strategies
students use in project-based learning environment in China? (c) what are the relations among students' beliefs
about learning and collaboration, strategy use and academic performance in project-based learning environment?

Methodology
          The study was conducted in a Sino-British joint EIB program in a business and economics-oriented
University in Shanghai. The course we focused on in this study is a year-long course of English for International
Enterprise   offered by the  British  University   for   Year  2 students.   A group  enterprise    project of doing  small
business   on  campus     was   designed     for   integration   of  higher-order    learning   skills,  business   English
communication skills and the related business knowledge.
          The main research method used is in-depth interviews. Participants in interviews are 25 (F= 17, M=8)
Year 2 students on the British-Sino EIB joint program with average age of 21. Selected based on academic level
and gender proportion, they were invited to 40-minute interviews to illuminate their interpretation of project
learning experience. We designed semi-structured interview questions based on the framework in the existing
literature and on  preliminary   findings  from    pilot study.  The  interview   protocol  incorporates    three groups of
questions, namely questions eliciting beliefs about learning, the actual strategy use and conception and strategies
of  collaboration. After   the audio-taped   interview    data   were transcribed,   they  were  analyzed     following  the

                                                                                                                         1      3-3
         principles of   qualitative protocol  analysis widely   adopted   in cognitive   research.  Analyzing the interviews
         proves to be an ongoing and iterative process.
                  Participants' academic results of the course were also collected. The results comprised of scores from
         different assessed tasks measuring both individual and collective aspects of learning throughout the year.

        Results
                    Analyses of the protocol generated four dimensions of epistemological beliefs labelled as certainty of
         knowledge, organization of knowledge, source of knowledge and justification for knowing.            Besides, evidence
         suggested to us a continuum of beliefs in each dimension. Responses to interview questions were coded and
         scored. The distribution of the three levels of beliefs about learning across the four dimensions suggested that
         most students hold rather simplistic views of beliefs in all the four dimensions. Only 14% of the students seem
         to  view knowledge   as   contextualized   and  constructed  rather  than fixed.    12%  of  the  students tend to   see
         connections and interrelatedness of knowledge with the majority of students (64%) reporting linear structured
         view  of knowledge.   Only     8%  of the  students hold    that knowledge  resides   in the inter-subjectivity in   the
         discourse of collective learning while more than half of them (56%) believe in external authority as the sole
         source of knowledge. 8% of the students justify their knowing by relating, synthesising and evaluating experts'
         views but the overwhelming majority, more pragmatically, use demonstration or passing exams as criteria.
                  One    interview   question  on a  successful  group    work  experience   was  designed   to elicit  students'
         epistemological belief on collaboration. According to the students' views on the way of doing group work--
         division of labour versus collaborative inquiry and the role of leader--- authority versus facilitator, their views of
         collaboration can be divided into three groups: 1) leader-dominated and division of labour; 2) leader­delegated
         for sharing   a collective  goal; and 3)   leader-initiated collaborative progressive    inquiry. The  three   views of
         collaboration suggest increasingly sophisticated views of collaboration. Coding and scoring of the data indicated
         that 24% and 68% students held type 1 and type 2 views of collaboration and only 8% students reported more
         sophisticated conceptions of collective learning.
                  Interview questions were designed to elicit students' descriptions on how they approach the enterprise
         project. The  interview   data were   transcribed, segmented     and analyzed. The   students'   reported self-regulated
         learning strategies can be classified into the following five categories:  namely, target goal setting; planning and
         activate prior knowledge; monitoring and controlling learning process and reflecting. The responses to each
         strategy were rated on 3-point scale (1-low and 3-high) with the total scores as those for self-regulated learning.
                  Analyses   showed     significant correlations between    conception    of collaboration  with   self-regulated
         learning strategies (r = .50, p< 0.05); beliefs about learning with self--regulated strategies (r = .58, p<0.01). As
         well, we found that views of collaboration and strategies were both correlated with learning outcomes.           There
         were no significant correlations between beliefs about learning and learning outcomes.
                  We conducted hierarchical regression analyses to examine the overall relationships among strategies and
         beliefs and the prediction of EIB learning outcome.     We first entered self-regulated strategies followed by beliefs
         about collaboration. Students' use of SRL was a marginally significant predictor at .10 level on EIB learning (R
         = .36) explaining 13% of variance. When beliefs about knowledge were added, the change was not significant.
         When beliefs about collaboration were added, R increased to .55 adding another 16% of the variance. These results
         suggest that for EIB project learning, students' self-regulated strategies was a predictor, and how students viewed
         collaboration was a significant predictor over and above self-regulated strategies and beliefs about knowledge.

        Future Directions and Implications
                  This   exploratory  study was   mainly based   on  interviews  with   a relatively small  sample   of students
         during the process of doing the project. The inter-rater reliability check is currently undertaken.       To capture the
         nature of beliefs and strategies, it would be more helpful to interview more students in different years to see how
         their beliefs and  strategies  develop   during their  tertiary  study. Besides,    quantitative data will  be used  as
         triangulation to provide more corroborating evidence.

        Reference
         Dillenbourg, P. (1999). Introduction: what do you mean by "collaborative learning", In P. Dillenbourg (Ed.),
                  Collaborative Leaning: Cognitive and computational approaches. Amsterdam: Pergamon.
         Hofer, B. (2004). Exploring the dimensions of personal epistemology in differing classroom contexts: Student
                  interpretations during the first year of college. Contemporary Educational Psychology 29, 129-163.
         Hofer, B., & Pintrich, P. R. (1997). The development of epistemological theories: Beliefs about knowledge and
                  knowing and their relation to learning. Rev. Educ. Res., 67, 88-140.
         Marton, F., & Saljo, R. (1976). On qualitative differences in learning: Outcome and process. British Journal of
                  Educational Psychology, 19, 277-300.
         Schommer, M. (1994). Synthesizing Epistemological Belief Research: Tentative Understanding and Provocative
                  Confusions. Educational Psychology Review, 6(4), 293-319.

3-                                                                                                                            2
