                 Metacognition in understanding multimedia presentations
                               Alessandro Antonietti, Barbara Colombo, Department of Psychology
                            Catholic University of the Sacred Heart, Largo Gemelli 1, 20123 Milano (Italy)
                                  Email: alessandro.antonietti@unicatt.it, barbara.colombo@unicatt.it

                  Abstract:   The    symposium     is aimed   at highlighting   the role  that the  awareness    about  the
                  mental    processes    which    are  activated  and   the  control     over  such   processes   play   in
                  comprehending and memorizing notions presented through texts and pictures. The attempt is
                  to  support  the   notion   that promoting     metacognition   could    improve   the  effectiveness   of
                  multimedia tools. In fact, metacognition should bring students to develop adequate strategies
                  to learn from text-picture combinations. The contributions included in the symposium present
                  a  set  of  different  ways   of interpreting   the links between      metacognition   and   multimedia
                  learning   and  show   a series  of experimental    approaches    that can  be followed   to investigate
                  such links.

                  This symposium is aimed at exploring relations between metacognition and multimedia learning. We
         focused particularly  on    the role that  the   awareness about   the mental   processes  which    are  activated and the
         control over    such processes    play in  comprehending     and   memorizing     notions  presented    through  texts and
         pictures. The symposium relies on the assumption that promoting a metacognitive attitude could improve the
         effectiveness   of multimedia   tools  (Mayer,    2005). As  Mayer   (2001)     pointed out,  the  different  channels and
         structures through which information is presented can support meaningful learning, allowing many different
         strategies to   be used  in the   access  and  handling  of  information.     However,    there is  the  risk that students
         underestimate    the cognitive    potential  of   multimedia  tools.   Successful    outcomes   in   multimedia    learning
         environments are hence dependent not only on the multimedia tools themselves but also on their ability to foster
         the development of the necessary metacognitive skills in order to promote deep information processing and
         enhance the acquisition of well-defined knowledge structures (Mayer, 1999). A metacognitive attitude could
         bring the student to develop a strong awareness towards the tool, the specific task, and the content he/she is
         learning, as well as adequate strategies and an effective self-regulation.
                 The contributions included in the symposium address the above mentioned issues, so to present a set of
         different ways of interpreting the links between metacognition and multimedia learning and to show a series of
         experimental approaches that can be followed to investigate such links. The first paper explores how mental
         representations are actually built depending on the order of presentation of the multimedia stimuli. The second
         contribution investigates changes in students' awareness of the strategies they followed in learning from static
         and dynamic multimedia presentations. The third paper analyzes how learners are accurate in predicting and
         assessing retrospectively their performance. The fourth contribution explores students' awareness of the reasons
         which   lead  a  student to integrate  spontaneously     verbal information     with  pictures  and  the strategies  he/she
         applies to do so. The four papers focus on progressive levels of metacognition. In the first paper learners were
         given no explicit hint at inducing a metacognitive attitude. In the second paper explicit questions about the
         strategies activated  were   given   after   the task was  carried  out.   In the third  paper  metacognitive    questions
         concerned    the outcome    of  the  strategies  and  were   given before   performing    the  task.  In the  fourth paper
         metacognitive reflections about the relevance of the strategies were suggested during the task.

       References
         Mayer, R.E. (1999). Instructional technology. In F.T. Durso, R.S. Nickerson, R.W. Schvaneveldt, S.T. Dumais,
                  D. S. Lindsay, & M.T.H. Chi (Eds.), Handbook of applied cognition (pp. 551­569). Chichester, UK:
                  John Wiley & Sons.
         Mayer, R.E. (2001). Multimedia learning. Cambridge, United Kingdom: Cambridge University Press.
         Mayer, R. E. (2005). The Cambridge handbook of multimedia learning. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University
                  Press.

                             The Dynamic of Constructing Mental Representations:
                            A Neglected Aspect in Research on Multimedia Learning

                              Wolfgang Schnotz, University of Koblenz-Landau, Faculty of Psychology,
                             Thomas-Nast-Str. 44, D-76829 Landau (Germany), schnotz@uni-landau.de

3-
Objectives and Theoretical Framework
         Recent theories of multimedia learning have emphasized that successful teaching and learning with
multimedia is only likely to occur, if the constraints of human information processing are adequately taken into
account. Accordingly,     instructional multimedia   design   has  to be  adapted   to the  human   cognitive   system.
However, different theoretical approaches on multimedia suggest different ways how this should be done. In the
following,   three approaches   will be    analysed in  more  detail: Cognitive  Load    Theory  (Sweller,   1999),  the
Cognitive  Theory     of Multimedia    Learning  (Mayer,  2005),   and  the   Integrated Model   of  Text   and Picture
Comprehension (Schnotz & Bannert, 2003; Schnotz, 2005).
         Cognitive Load Theory (CLT) emphasizes the limitations of working memory and suggests that any
interaction among cognitive elements in working memory should remain within these limitations. The same
suggestion is also made by Mayer (2005) in his Cognitive Theory of Multimedia Learning              (CTML). Provided
that learners  need   in  fact  multiple   sources  of  information,  the  Integrated    Model   of Text    and Picture
Comprehension (IMTPC) suggests the same design principles as the CTML, except for very difficult text, which
should generally presented in a visual rather than in and auditory format. Furthermore, the IMTPC makes some
further predictions,  which    are not  shared  by  the other two  approaches:   Because    picture comprehension    is
considered as a structure mapping process, the structure of visualization is assumed to affect the structure of the
mental  model,   which    in turn  affects learning  results with  specific   tasks (Schnotz   & Bannert,    2003).  An
inadequate visualization format can therefore hinder rather than improve learning.
         Although these design principles are based on empirical research, it is not possible to apply them under
all circumstances. Complex subject matter needs generally complex text and complex pictorial displays, which
cannot always be presented in an integrated format or with high spatial contiguity, respectively. Instead, the
different displays need to be presented sequentially rather than contiguously. However, even in case of optimal
spatial contiguity of written text and pictures, there is a need for sequential processing. The necessity of splitting
the  learner's visual attention between    two  sources  of  information  requires  also some  sequential   processing,
because the learner has to shift his/her attention at some points from the text to the picture and back again. In
other words: If written text is combined with pictures, verbal and pictorial information can never enter working
memory simultaneously and, thus, sequential effects are likely to occur. Therefore, the question arises whether
verbal and pictorial information interact differently in working memory, when they are processed in different
orders:  How    is  text  comprehension     affected by   previous    picture comprehension,     and   how   is picture
comprehension affected by previous text comprehension? Is the relation between text processing and picture
processing a symmetrical or an asymmetrical one?

Method
         If two information sources are processed sequentially, there seem to be three basic possibilities: (a)
independence,   (b)   replacement,   and   (c) stimulation.  In  case  of independent    processing    (a), the  second
information    source is processes   in the same    way  and  with the  same   intensity as it would   be   without  the
previously presented first source of information. Although this assumption is not very plausible, it is an implicit
part of the multimedia principle: Students are assumed to learn better from text and pictures than from text
alone, because the pictures are assumed to be processed in addition to the text, and the text is not processed less
deeply although the pictures have already been processed. In the case of replacement (b), the second information
source is processed less deeply than if it had been presented first: The first source replaces the second to some
extent  and, thus,  information    from the  second  source   is ignored  or  processed  less  deeply. In   the case of
stimulation (c), the second information source is processes more deeply than if it had been presented first: The
first source leads to additional questions and, thus, triggers additional processing of the second source. Based on
this distinction, the research question mentioned above can be specified as follows:
         Is a picture followed by a text processed with the same intensity (independence) or with lower intensity
         (replacement) or with higher intensity (stimulation) than if it had been presented first?
         Is a text followed by a picture processed with the same intensity (independence) or with lower intensity
         (replacement) or with higher intensity (stimulation) than if it had been presented first?
         Are these effects dependent on learners' and task's characteristics?
The contribution will present research results from a series of learning experiments, which were dealing with
sequential effects of text processing on picture processing and vice versa.

Results
         Basic findings are:
         Learners with lower learning prerequisites are more likely to follow a replacement strategy, that is, to
         process the second source of information less intensively after having processed the first source.
         Learners with higher learning prerequisites are more likely to follow a stimulation strategy, that is, to
         process the second source of information more intensively after having processed the first source.

                                                                                                                            3-
                 Presenting a picture before the corresponding text is more beneficial than presenting the text before the
                 corresponding picture.
                 Presenting a picture before the corresponding text is more likely to have a stimulating effect on text
                 processing than text presentation before the picture presentation.
                 Text presentation before picture presentation is more likely to have a replacement effect on picture
                 processing than picture presentation before the text presentation.

        Discussion
                 Regarding     the general  question, whether   the   relations between  text   and pictures are  symmetric    or
         asymmetric,    the    findings clearly  support  the   asymmetry    view.   Accordingly,    text and     pictures have
         fundamentally     different roles  in  knowledge    acquisition  from   multiple   representations.  Thus,   there   are
         fundamental asymmetries between verbal and pictorial information with regard to the construction of mental
         representations. As the three models of multimedia learning presented above have different views on sequencing
         effects, the results provide also different amounts of support to the models.

       References
         Mayer, R.E. (Ed.) (2005). The Cambridge handbook on multimedia learning. Cambridge: Cambridge University
                 Press.
         Schnotz, W. (2005). An Integrated Model of Text and Picture Comprehension. In R.E. Mayer (Ed.), Cambridge
                 Handbook of Multimedia Learning. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
         Schnotz, W., & Bannert, M. (1999). Einflüsse der Visualisierungsform auf die Konstruktion mentaler Modelle
                 beim Bild- und Textverstehen. Zeitschrift für experimentelle Psychologie, 46, 216-235.
         Schnotz, W., & Bannert, M. (2003). Construction and interference in learning from multiple representations.
                 Learning and Instruction, 13, 141-156.
         Sweller, J. (1999). Instructional design in technical areas. Camberwell, Australia: ACER Press

                        What Strategies Do Students Use When They Learn Science
                                with Static and Dynamic Visual Representations?

                            Roxana Moreno, Scott Marley, John Helak, Educational Psychology Program,
                               University of New Mexico, 123 Simpson Hall, Albuquerque, NM 87131
                                            Email: moreno@unm.edu, marley@unm.edu

        Objectives and Theoretical Framework
                 The purpose of the reported study was to investigate the role of students' metacognition in learning
         from a  multimedia     program    that included  either static  or  dynamic   visual   representations   of astronomy
         phenomena. In this research, we define metacognition as individuals' knowledge and control of their cognition
         and focus on one dimension of students' metacognitive skills: strategy use. Past research has shown that the
         combination    of narrated  explanations with  pictures or   animations  is most effective  in  promoting   learning, a
         finding that   has been   called the  multimedia   principle (Moreno    &   Mayer, 2007).   The  theoretical  rationale
         underlying the multimedia principle is that when words and pictures are presented simultaneously, students have
         an opportunity     to construct  verbal  and  visual  mental   models   of  the system-to-be-learned     and  to  build
         connections between them. Although building connections between verbal and pictorial representations is an
         important step in conceptual understanding (Schnotz, 2005), this process can be particularly challenging because
         it requires students to set learning goals, determine which strategies to use, assess whether the strategies are
         effective, and evaluate their emerging understanding of the topic (Azevedo, 2005).
                 It  is well-documented    that  most students  do  not  have   adequate metacognitive    skills, particularly at
         deeper levels of comprehension that require explanatory reasoning (Graesser, McNamara & VanLehn, 2005). A
         promise  of  multimedia     environments  is that, despite their complexity,    they   can help  circumvent  students'
         metacognitive   limitations  by  prompting   them  to use  specific study   strategies during learning.  For example,
         cognitive load researchers have found evidence for the imagination effect, the finding that students learn better
         when asked to imagine the material to-be-learned (Tindall-Ford & Sweller, 2006). The present study extends on
         this research by testing the hypothesis that providing students with explicit instructions to visualize static or
         animated astronomy     models    would  promote  their  comprehension    of the  causal  relationships   implied  in the
         multimedia lesson. In addition, we were interested in answering the following research questions:
             1)  What strategies do students report using when learning from multimedia programs?
             2)  Does instructing students to use an imagination strategy result in greater self-report of    imagination?
             3)  Do students report using different strategies when learning with static or animated graphics?

3-
     4)  What is the relationship (if any) between the self-reported study strategies and students' study time and
         learning?

Method
         The  participants   were   120   college   students  from  the  American    southwest     who   learned  about  the
seasons of the Earth with two multimedia versions: animated graphics with narrated explanations (A) and static
graphics with narrated explanations (S). Groups A and S were given three different strategy instructions: to
close their  eyes  and  imagine     the bodily    relationships (I or   internal  representations);  to  watch   the bodily
relationships (E  or   external  representations);  and to   think about  the  bodily   relationships  (T).  Students were
randomly    assigned   to  learn in   one of    6 randomly    assigned   conditions.    Learning   was   measured    with a
comprehension     test after learning.    In  addition, and   of   primary  interest    to this   proposal, we   coded   the
participants' responses to the following strategy-use question "Did you use any strategies to answer the prior
questions?"   "If so,  can you   describe   what  strategies  you  used?"  Two    independent     scorers   unaware  of  the
condition of the participants scored students' comprehension test and coded the strategy-use question using the
following   emerging   categories:    imagination,  retrieval of   prior knowledge,     use  of   program   images,  logical
reasoning, several strategies, and no strategy.

Results
         What strategies do students report using when learning from multimedia programs? The presence or
absence of each strategy was dichotomously scored. The following percentages of participants reported using
each strategy: 8.3% imagination, 20.8% prior knowledge, 13.3% program information, 1.7% logical reasoning,
9.2% several strategies, and 46.7% reported not using a strategy.
         Does  instructing   participants  to   use imagination    as a  study   strategy  result in greater self-report  of
imagination? A Chi-square analysis was performed on each strategy category to determine whether associations
between the S, A, I, W, and T conditions and type of strategy used were apparent. Although we expected that
participants would report a higher use of imagination in the I condition, all analyses were non-significant (ps > .10).
         Do students report using different strategies when learning with static or animated graphics? We found
a significant association between the A condition and reporting the use of program images (26% and 8% of
students in A and S conditions, respectively),      21 = 6.54, p = .01, and      = .23.
         What is the relationship (if any) between the self-reported study strategies and students' study time and
learning? An ANOVA using time as a dependent variable and study strategy type as a factor revealed that type
of strategy use was a significant predictor of time spent on the learning materials F(4, 113) = 6.33, p < .001 and
 2 =  .18.  Post  hoc  comparisons      with a  Bonferroni   adjustment   revealed   that   students  who   reported  using
imagination spent significantly more time than those who reported no strategy use (p = .01, Cohen's d = 1.15)
and  those  who   reported  using   several  strategies spent   significantly  more  time   than   those  who  reported   no
strategy use (p < .001 and d = 1.38). No other statistically significant differences were apparent.
         An ANOVA using students' comprehension scores as a dependent variable and study strategy type as a
factor indicated that type of strategy use was a significant predictor of students' comprehension, F(1, 13) = 3.91,
p = .005, and    2 = .12. Follow-up tests revealed that students who reported using imagination had significantly
higher scores than those who reported no strategy (p < .01; d = 1.24).

Discussion
         Four results of the study are of interest. First, it is surprising that almost half of the participants (46.7%)
reported not utilizing a strategy when learning from the complex multimedia materials. This finding is in line
with  past  research  showing    that many   students do   not  show   adequate   metacognitive    skills in activities that
require explanatory reasoning (Graesser, McNamara & VanLehn, 2005). Second, contrary to our expectations,
although the instructional program prompted the use of imagination to the I group and prompted students to
watch   the materials  during   the lesson   to the W   group,  no    association was   identified   between  the I  and  W
conditions and strategy usage. A possible explanation for this finding is that our prompts may have been to
vague to effectively instruct students in the strategy usage. Third, students in A group reported significantly
more using the graphics to help their learning than those in S group, suggesting that animations are more likely
to be retrieved during subsequent tasks. Fourth, participants who reported using imagination or two or more
strategies required more time with the materials relative to those who reported using no strategy. This suggests
that if students are encouraged to utilize metacognitive strategies that instructors should be aware that more time
may   be required.   Importantly,   when   compared     to the  no    strategy group,   participants  who   reported  using
imagination scored higher in comprehension and no different than those who reported using a combination of
strategies, suggesting that focusing on a visualization strategy in multimedia learning may be more efficient than
combining multiple strategies. Further implications and potential extensions of the research will be discussed in
our final presentation.

                                                                                                                                3-
       References
         Azevedo,    R. (2005).  Computer    environments as      metacognitive    tools for  enhancing    learning.  Educational
                  Psychologist, 40, 193-197.
         Graesser, R. C., McNamara, D., & VanLehn, K. (2005). Scaffolding deep comprehension strategies through
                  AutoTutor and iSTART. Educational Psychologist, 40, 225­234.
         Moreno, R., & Mayer, R. E. (2007). Interactive multimodal learning environments. Educational Psychology
                  Review, 19, 309-326.
         Schnotz, W.    (2005).  An integrated  model  of text    and  picture  comprehension.      In R.  E. Mayer    (Ed.), The
                  Cambridge handbook of multimedia learning (pp. 49-69). Cambridge University Press.
         Tindall-Ford,  S.,  &   Sweller, J. (2006).  Altering     the  modality   of   instructions   to facilitate imagination:
                  Interactions between the modality and imagination effects. Instructional Science, 34, 343-365.

                                Understanding Metacognitive Biases in Complex Tasks

                     Stephen M. Fiore, Cognitive Sciences Laboratory - Institute for Simulation and Training,
            University of Central Florida, 3100 Technology Parkway, Orlando (USA), FL               32826, sfiore@ist.ucf.edu
                                 Haydee M. Cuevas, SA Technologies, 13863 Countryplace Drive,
                                  Orlando (USA), FL 32826, haydee.cuevas@satechnologies.com
                             Sandro Scielzo, University of Central Florida, 3100 Technology Parkway,
                                          Orlando (USA), FL       32826, sscielzo@ist.ucf.edu

        Theoretical Framework and Objectives
                  Effective learner control requires that learners are adept at understanding their knowledge acquisition
         process, that is, engage in metacognitive processes such that they are able to accurately monitor and evaluate
         their comprehension of the material (e.g., Fiore & Salas, 2007; Schraw, 1998).         Notably, individual differences
         in metacognitive skills are especially influential in these environments, given the lack of instructor intervention.
         If, due to inaccurate metacognitive awareness, trainees overestimate their comprehension, instruction may be
         terminated prematurely, leading to ineffective transfer of training and poor task performance.           Metacognitive
         processes may also interact with characteristics of the trainee, such as verbal ability.      As such, a major goal of
         training should be to assist trainees, particularly low ability learners, in monitoring their subjective learning
         experience (i.e., supporting their metacognitive processes), in order to facilitate overall performance.
                  In the  present  contribution  we  reanalyzed    the  results of  a  prior  experiment   where  metacognitive
         accuracy was examined in a complex training tutorial (on the principles of flight) using performance predictions
         and postdictions in conjunction with verbal aptitude. We addressed how metacognitive processes interact with
         learning outcomes when training for complex tasks in order to develop a better understanding of metacognition
         in distributed learning environments. The general paradigm involves training that incorporates differing methods
         of information   presentation with  tests designed    to tap  specific components     of knowledge.   Our    goal was to
         understand the degree to which metacognition accuracy may vary as a function of both verbal aptitude and the
         nature of the test.    In particular, our prior research on complex task training varied the difficulty of the test
         questions such that they required differing amounts and forms of knowledge integration. Some of the questions
         were  straight-forward  assessments  of   declarative  knowledge,    that is, they  evaluated  participants'  mastery of
         basic  declarative knowledge   about the  concepts    presented   in a training  tutorial, whereas   others required  the
         integration of  multiple  concepts  to be  answered      correctly.  Specifically,   for  our "integrative   knowledge"
         measure, a question would provide a multimedia animation of an airplane maneuver and participants had to
         identify the instrument primarily affected, along with the main airplane parts used and the axis on which the
         maneuver was taking place (see Cuevas, Fiore, & Oser, 2002; Fiore, Cuevas, & Oser, 2003).
                  Metacognitive    accuracy  was   determined     by  taking  the  value   of  the  difference between     overall
         performance and prediction and/or postdiction to calculate an individualized measure of the accuracy of their
         self-assessments of understanding. The magnitude of this score, what we refer to as the metacognitive bias
         score, indicates   the degree to which    participants   are able to   monitor  their understanding   of    complex  task
         material (i.e., larger scores mean poorer ability) while the direction of the score (positive or negative) indicates
         whether they overestimate or underestimate performance. Bias scores are often used by researchers investigating
         the accuracy of learners' assessments ­ for example, looking at measures of relative accuracy, that is, the degree
         to which predicted performance correlates with actual performance (e.g., Dunlosky et al., 2002). We evaluated,
         first, how learners' bias scores varied in a correlated manner with their actual performance, and second, how
         individual differences in ability may influence the magnitude of learners' metacognition bias.

        Method

3-0
           The  purpose  of   this study  was   to investigate   the  influence of  instructional   strategies  in supporting
learners' knowledge acquisition and metacognition of complex systems, in this case, aviation training. Sixty-one
undergraduate students participated in this experiment for course credit (25 males and 36 females, mean age =
22.66 years). Naïve participants were used in this study. An interactive instructional tutorial based on the principles
of flight was created for this study, adapted from standard pilot training manuals (Jeppesen Sanderson Private Pilot
Manual, 1996). A knowledge assessment task was developed to separately assess acquisition of two distinct types
of knowledge, namely declarative and integrative. Our first set of questions (declarative) assessed participants'
mastery of basic declarative concepts associated with the training tutorial. Our second set of questions (integrative)
assessed participants' ability to integrate task knowledge. This is a less common form of assessment requiring
trainees to apply their newly acquired knowledge in a variety of multimedia based task-relevant scenarios. The
nature of the material presented in the tutorial required understanding and integration of complex concepts and
relations.  Therefore, since verbal comprehension ability has been shown to be indicative of skill acquisition of a
complex task, Part 1 (Verbal Comprehension) of the Guilford-Zimmerman Aptitude Survey was administered to
assess the influence of individual differences in verbal ability in comprehending the concepts in the tutorial. After
completing   measures    of  individual   differences (i.e., demographic    information  such    as age  and   gender,  verbal
comprehension), all participants received multimedia computer-based instruction on the basic principles of flight
using   the tutorial created  for  this experiment.   Upon      completion  of  the tutorial, the  metacognitive   prediction
question was administered. To measure the accuracy in their self-assessment of performance, participants were
asked   to  report how   well they  thought   they  did on   the test overall. Participants   were  then presented   with  the
knowledge assessment task, followed by the metacognitive postdiction questions. For the postdiction questions, the
query was given separately for the declarative and the integrative test questions.
           To document the relation between metacognition and task performance, we first correlated bias scores
with  actual   performance.    Overall,   prediction    bias  was    negatively related  to   actual   performance     on the
knowledge test (composite score of the knowledge assessment questions), r = -.57, p < .01. Postdiction bias,
overall, was also negatively related to actual performance, r = -.54, p < .01.        Additionally, postdiction bias was
negatively related to actual performance, for both the declarative questions, r = -.58, p < .01, and the integrative
questions, r = -.55, p < .01. Thus, participants poor in metacognition accuracy tend to perform worse (i.e., the
greater the bias, the lower the performance). Next, we analyzed the differences in bias scores for participants of
differing   verbal  ability. Specifically  we   compared     the  individual   bias scores    of the high   and    low verbal
participants.   Overall, the  difference   in prediction   bias  scores  between    HiVA    (MHiVA       = -.39)   and LoVA
(MLoVA = .34) participants was significant, t (56) = 2.57, p < .05.         Additionally, overall postdiction bias scores
between HiVA (MHiVA = -.26) and LoVA (MLoVA = .22) participants were also significantly different, t (56)
= 1.72, p < .05.   Last, the difference in postdiction bias scores for the integrative knowledge questions (HiVA =
-.31 and LoVA = .32) was significant t (56) = 2.11, p < .05, but it was not significant for the postdiction bias
scores for the declarative knowledge questions (HiVA = -.12 and LoVA = .18).

Discussion
           This  study documents     the   utility of using     bias scores as  a   method    of gauging    the  accuracy  of
participants'   metacognition    ability.  In line  with   recent  studies, we  found   individual   differences   related to
participants prediction and postdictions (Maki et al., 2005). We first found that metacognitive bias is negatively
related to  performance      and second,   that the   difference  in  bias scores   between   high   and   low verbal  ability
participants  was    greater with  the  more  difficult measures.     Thus,    when  complex     tasks and  complex    testing
procedures are involved, differences between populations may be exacerbated.             In particular, in addition to what
was shown by Maki et al. (2005) with variations in learning material, we add to this literature by showing that
differences   in   metacognitive   bias may   be   related   to variations  in test type and     related to verbal  aptitude.
Specifically, when looking at the postdiction bias scores, there was not a significant difference between high and
low  verbal   ability  participants  on   the declarative    measure   but  there   was  a  significant    difference  on  the
integrative measure. As such, it may be that when multiple concepts from the training content must be combined
for a correct response (as in our integrative questions), low verbal ability participants still have difficulty in their
postdiction assessments of performance. Finally, the bias scores consistently revealed that low verbal ability
participants were overestimating their performance while high verbal ability participants were underestimating
their performance.    Overall, these findings are important for both theoretical and practical reasons.          First, from a
theoretical standpoint, we document the utility of assessing metacognition using distinct measures in order to
elucidate the manner in which metacognition may be hindered with learners, in general, and those varying in
ability, in particular, when using complex training and testing environments (i.e., measures beyond standard
declarative questions).      These bias scores document the relation between poor metacognition and lower task
performance.     Second, from a practical standpoint, the consistent overestimation of performance by low verbal
ability participants   suggests    avenues    for  remediation    with  respect   to  self-paced    or   automated    learning
environments.

                                                                                                                                  3-
       References
         Cuevas, H. M, Fiore, S. M., & Oser, R. L. (2002).        Scaffolding cognitive and metacognitive processes in low
                 verbal  ability learners:     Use  of diagrams   in computer-based       training environments.      Instructional
                 Science, 30, 433-464.
         Dunlosky,  J., Rawson,   K.   A.,   & McDonald,    S. L  (2002).       Influence of practice    tests on the  accuracy   of
                 predicting memory performance for paired associates, sentences, and text material.              In T. J. Perfect &
                 B. L. Schwartz (Eds.), Applied metacognition (pp. 68-92).         Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University.
         Fiore, S. M., Cuevas, H. M., & Oser, R. L. (2003).     A picture is worth a thousand connections:          The facilitative
                 effects  of  diagrams     on  task performance   and    mental   model   development.      Computers   in Human
                 Behavior, 19, 185-199.
         Fiore, S. M.   & Salas,  E.   (Editors).   (2007). Toward     a science   of  distributed   learning.  Washington,    DC:
                 American Psychological Association.
         Jeppesen  Sanderson     Training    Systems.  (1996).  Jeppesen        Sanderson    Private Pilot     Manual   (15th  ed.).
                 Englewood, CO: Jeppesen Sanderson, Inc.
         Maki,  R. H.,  Shields, M.,  Wheeler,    A. E., &  Zacchilli,   T. L.  (2005). Individual   differences  in  absolute   and
                 relative metacognition accuracy. Journal of Educational Psychology, 97, 723-731.
         Schraw, G. (1998).   Promoting general metacognitive awareness.          Instructional Science, 26, 113-125.

                                 Metacognition, Strategies, and Cognitive Styles
                    during the Spontaneous Fruition of a Multimedia Presentation

                                Barbara Colombo, Alessandro Antonietti, Department of Psychology
                         Catholic University of the Sacred Heart, Largo Gemelli 1, 20123 Milano (Italy)
                                Email: barbara.colombo@unicatt.it, alessandro.antonietti@unicatt.it,

        Theoretical Framework and Objectives
                 In technology-supported learning the role of metacognition is necessary to ensure to the user the chance
         of taking the best advantage of the instructional tools (e.g., Cuevas et al., 2002, 2004; Kramarski & Ritkof,
         2002;  Van den  Boom    et   al., 2004). Technological  instruments     should   be ideally calibrated   according   to the
         user's characteristics. Where the user is lacking of some skills, technology should complement his/her abilities;
         when the user is already suited, technology should enhance his/her skills. Obviously, tool designers can not
         always  devise tools which    can   meet the  characteristics of   all kinds of  users. So,  it is needed  that the  users
         themselves calibrate the tools according to perceived features of the tools and on the basis of the awareness that
         they have about their personal skills.
                 As far as multimedia tools are concerned (Mayer, 2005), it is important to know what users believe
         about the possible advantages provided by text-picture combinations and how they control the access to pictures
         by identifying relevant strategies which allow them to inspect a picture when it is needed. The main aim of this
         study  was to   investigate  the   spontaneous   strategies   employed    by   undergraduates    in   learning through   a
         multimedia presentation and the awareness which accompanies such strategies. A further goal was to assess
         whether   individuals'  cognitive   styles influence  their behaviour     and  awareness    in  exploring   a  multimedia
         environment.

        Method
                 By taking a multimedia presentation used by Mayer (2001) in his experiments as a reference prototype,
         we devised two new presentations focused on different topics, but comparable to Mayer's regarding text length,
         structure, and complexity. We constructed a presentation explaining how an invisibility cloak works and another
         one explaining how to change frets on a Renaissance lute. Each presentation had been divided into 16 short
         passages. A picture, illustrating what was described in the text, was associated to each passage.
                 For each topic an audio format (with the text read aloud) and a video format (with the text written on
         the computer screen) were devised. A total of 4 presentations were obtained (2 text topics x 2 formats). Each
         participant was faced with two presentations (invisibility cloak and lute), one in the audio format and the other
         one in the video format. The order of presentation of the two topics and of the two formats was counterbalanced,
         so that each topic was combined to each format the same number of times and each topic and each format
         occurred as first and second presentation the same number of times. During the presentation of each topic, the
         participant, while listening to the text or reading it, could ask for the corresponding picture by pressing a key
         every time he/she believed to need it.
                 The    participants' requests  for  pictures and the    specific timing  of  such   requests   had been recorded
         automatically. Afterwards an interview occurred in order to lead participants to make explicit the evaluations

3-
which induced them to ask for pictures. Finally they were tested on comprehension of the contents of the two
presentations (the questions were built on the model of Mayer's test questions).
        A sample of 24 university students (girls = 20, boys = 4; age: 20-34, mean = 23), attending to different
faculties, joined the research. The administration of the SOLAT (Torrance, 1988) and of a questionnaire devised
by Antonietti and Colombo (1996-1997) allowed us to assess participants' cognitive styles (by distinguishing,
respectively, between analytic and intuitive thinkers and between low and high visualizers).

Results
        Concerning participants' behaviour held along the presentations, we noticed that a lower number of
pictures were requested in the text than in the audio format (F1, 22 = 4.22, p < .05), especially when the topic of
the presentation was simpler. Nevertheless, in the text format participants were slower (F1, 22 = 4.30, p < .05),
perhaps because they took more time for reading the text.
        Concerning  learning  results,  the audio  format  promoted   better  responses  (F1,22 = 4.28,  p  <  .05).
Learning outcomes appeared to be linked to the amount of pictures requested along the presentation: in the
audio format participants who seldom asked for pictures answered correctly a lower number of questions (mean
= 5.57) than students who often asked for pictures (mean = 8.44).
        As far as  cognitive styles   were concerned, intuitive thinkers  generally rated the   picture to be more
useful and to accelerate comprehension, coherently with their style. Analytic thinkers, conversely, recognized
that pictures hinted at mental visualization, a strategy that they did not tend to apply spontaneously.

Discussion
        This study allowed us to observe that students, when faced with a multimedia presentation and being
free to explore it as they like, tend not to respect Mayer's (2001) principles. Furthermore, undergraduates rated
differently multimedia formats, using different cognitive strategies to explore them. This different evaluation
was not general, but concerned also single aspects, as the type and the number of pictures and the topics.
        According  to what   emerged    in the interviews, pictures  were considered as   more   useful in the text
format, where contents were also considered to be easier. We would have expected that with a more complex
content, pictures could help more. This apparently contradiction can be explained arguing that, when the text is
perceived to be quite easy, pictures are used with a vicarious role to the text, so to prevent people to read all the
words of the text carefully. In the audio format the topics were rated to be less familiar than in text format. If
compared with the previous finding, this result stresses the coherence in metacognition by showing that easiness
ratings mirrored familiarity ratings.
        As far  as learning  outcomes    were  concerned,  we   realized that the audio   format  promoted    better
retention. This can be interpreted according to Mayer's theory (which induces to predict that the simultaneous
presentation of text and pictures produces dangerous interference), even though it can also be maintained that,
since more demanding   conditions     appeared to promote  more complex   cognitive  processes,   the audio format
stimulated the spontaneous activation of higher attentive resources.
        Hence, we can say that individual assessment of the learning condition appears to influence learning
performance, as well as individual cognitive differences. It is interesting to notice how more complex situation
appear to promote a more effective metacognition.

References
Antonietti, A. & Colombo, B. (1996-1997). The spontaneous occurrence of mental visualization in thinking.
        Imagination, Cognition and Personality, 16, 415-428.
Cuevas, H. M., Fiore, S. M., & Oser, R. L. (2002). Scaffolding cognitive and metacognitive processes in low
        verbal ability learners: use of diagrams in computer-based training environments. Instructional Science,
        30, 433­464.
Cuevas H. M., Fiore S. M., Bowers C.A. & Salas, E. (2004). Fostering constructive cognitive and metacognitive
        activity in computer-based complex task training environments. Computers in Human Behavior, 20,
        225­241.
Kramarski, B., & Ritkof, R. (2002). The effects of metacognition and email interactions on learning graphing.
        Journal of Computer Assisted Learning, 18, 33-43.
Mayer, R. E. (2005). The Cambridge handbook of multimedia learning. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University
        Press.
Torrance, E. P. (1988). Style of learning and thinking SOLAT (with Administrator's manual). Bensenville, Ill:
        Scholastic Testing Services.
Van den Boom, G., Paas, F., van Merriënboer, J. J. G., & van Gog, T. (2004). Reflection prompts and tutor
        feedback   in  a  web-based     learning  environment:   effects  on   students'  self-regulated   learning
        competence. Computers in Human Behavior, 20, 551-567.

                                                                                                                        3-3
