      Student and Teacher Regulation of Learning in Technology-
                                   enhanced Science Instruction
                                      Stephanie B. Corliss & Michele W. Spitulnik
                   University of California, Berkeley, 4407 Tolman Hall, Berkeley, Ca 94720-1670
                               Email: sbcorliss@berkeley.edu, michelespitulnik@alo.com

         Abstract: This study investigates student and teacher regulation of learning during a 7-day
         technology-enhanced inquiry unit on the topic of global warming, and changes in students'
         strategies  for  learning    science  after interacting with   the curriculum.    Results reveal   that
         students engage in some productive learning strategies promoted in the design of the project,
         such    as learning   with visualizations   and  collaborating  with   others.  Students  reported  the
         visualizations to be the most helpful to their learning. The teacher provided the most guidance
         to students in the form of high-level questions that prompted students to make connections
         and    to  monitor  their  comprehension     during days  when     the students   interacted  with  the
         visualizations. After completion of the project, students reported engaging in more active and
         productive strategies for learning and monitoring their understanding of new science material.
         Implications and plans for further research are discussed.

         Inquiry-based science learning and teaching can be enhanced by the use of technology in the classroom
(Bransford,   Brown,   &  Cocking,     1999;  Linn,  Davis,  &   Bell, 2004). However,     integration  of inquiry-based
science curricula and technology integration can be difficult for teachers and students. Given the more student-
directed versus teacher-delivered aspects of both inquiry and technology-enhanced learning, learners must be
skilled at regulating their own learning and teachers must be prepared to manage a variety of learners who are
progressing at different rates.
         Many    students  lack   the self-regulated  learning strategies  needed  to   be successful  in  these types  of
learning activities (Azevedo, Cromley, Winters, Moos, & Greene, 2005; Quintana, Zhang, Krajcik, 2005; White
& Frederikson, 2005). Specifically, students need to know what to learn, how to learn it, how to monitor their
understanding of the topic, how to monitor the effectiveness of their learning strategies, and how to revise their
strategy use and understanding of the topic if needed (Azevedo et. al, 2005; Jonassen & Reeves, 1996). Azevedo
and   colleagues    have found    specific  aspects   of self-regulated   learning   to  be associated    with   increased
understanding of complex science topics in hypermedia learning environments (Azevedo et. al, 2005, Green &
Azevedo, 2007) and developmental differences of self-regulated learning strategy use. Younger students were
much less likely to use effective self-regulated learning strategies than high school and college students. This
suggests that younger students need more guidance when learning complex science concepts with technology-
enhanced curricula.
         Guidance    for students   in technology-enhanced     inquiry  learning  environments    often comes    from  the
teacher or from various types of cognitive tools and scaffolds built into the technology. This scaffolding has
potential to increase students' understanding by making aspects of metacogniton more explicit, (Lajoie, 1993;
Quintana, Zhang, Krajcik, 2005; White & Frederikson, 2005) prompting reflection, (Davis, 2003) and making
students' thinking visible (Linn, Clark, & Slotta, 2001). Quintana and colleagues (2004) offer suggestions in
their scaffolding   design  framework    for  ways   to  support students'  sense  making,    process  management,     and
articulation  and   reflection in technology-enhanced    learning  environments    in science.   Linn and  Eylon   (2006)
discuss patterns of instructional design and how these patterns influence the process of students' knowledge
integration, which involves students monitoring their ideas to determine how new ideas relate to previous ideas.
Adaptive  scaffolding    from     human  tutors,  peers,  and  teachers   can   also  support  students'   metacognitive
monitoring and understanding during technology-enhanced learning situations (Chi, Siler, & Jeong, 2004). This
research demonstrates    the   importance   of metacogniton    and self-regulated    learning in students'  ability to be
successful in technology-enhanced inquiry curricula.
         In this study we investigate students preferences for learning new science material both before and after
their interaction with technology enhanced inquiry curriculum. We also examine student and teacher regulation
of learning   during  a  7-day  technology-enhanced      inquiry unit  on the   topic of global  warming.    The  teacher
involved in the study is participating in a 5-year NSF grant funded professional development project, MODELS
(Mentored and Online Development of Educational Leaders for Science). The program is designed to enable
schools to implement technology-enhanced inquiry instruction by supporting teachers as they plan, implement,
and   reflect on their  experiences   using  the technology  in  the   classroom. The   teacher  has  participated  in the
project for   3 years  and  has   attended  a  summer    professional  development    workshop    each  year focused   on
teaching and assessment strategies to help students learn with the technology-enhanced curricular projects.

                                                                                                                              1-1
                  The   purpose   of this study  is  to answer  the  following  questions:  (1)  What     self-regulated learning
         processes do students engage in during the technology-enhanced inquiry curricular project? (2) How does the
         teacher  use   questioning  strategies to  regulate and    scaffold students'  learning? and     (3) How   do   students'
         preferences for learning science material change after interacting with the curriculum? This study serves as a
         first step  to investigate  how  students  learn with  technology-enhanced     curricula  and    how  teachers  scaffold
         student  learning,   which  will   inform  the  design  of   technology-enhanced     inquiry    learning   environments,
         professional development, and instructional strategies for teachers to better support student learning within these
         environments.

       Methods
        Participants
                  Participants were 141 mixed-ability sixth grade science students from an ethnically and economically
         diverse school in the San Francisco Bay Area. All students were enrolled in a science class taught by the same
         teacher. The teacher has 33 years teaching experience. He has taught science for 20 of the 33 years, and has
         been using WISE curricular projects for 3 years.

        Learning Environment
                  Students completed a computer-based unit on the topic of the Greenhouse Effect and global warming
         using   the  Web-based     Inquiry  Science    Environment    (WISE;    http//wise.berkeley.edu).     Students  conduct
         experiments with a greenhouse effect visualization by manipulating levels of solar energy, atmospheric carbon
         dioxide, Albedo, sunlight, and cloud cover. Following their investigations, students draw conclusions about the
         role of the different factors involved in the greenhouse effect (Varma, 2006). The project engages students in
         various collaborative activities, such as designing solutions to problems, investigating hypotheses, and critiquing
         scientific claims.

        Procedure
                  Participants individually  completed    pre and   post-tests measuring  their  preferences   for  learning  new
         science content, comprehension monitoring strategies, and content knowledge of the greenhouse effect. Students
         spent  7 days   working  in  pairs through  the  Global    Warming    Project during   their science  class  time. After
         completion of the project, students completed a questionnaire about their learning behaviors when working with
         the WISE project.

        Data Sources
        Pre/Post Tests
                  The pre/post tests consisted of 6 likert-scale items about students' preferences for learning new science
         material. Students were given the prompt, "When learning new science material I prefer to ..." and then circled
         either always, sometimes, or never for six common strategies for learning science (e.g., be told what is correct
         by the  teacher,  do experiments   and  try to  figure things out,  discuss   material with  classmates).    Additionally
         students responded    to two items,  one   multiple choice   and the  other free response,   about   their strategies for
         monitoring their understanding of new science material. Students also answered 4 free response questions about
         the greenhouse effect and global warming.

        Classroom observations
                  A University researcher observed both teachers and students during 4 of the 7 days of the project for
         approximately 1.5 classes each day. Observations of the teacher's actions were recorded on an observation form
         containing specific categories: general interactions, working with visualizations, and small group interactions.
         Additionally, all questions the teacher asked to either the entire class or to groups of students were recorded.

        Learning Strategies Questionnaire
                  The questionnaire consisted of 11 likert-scale items about students' self-regulated learning behaviors
         when working through the WISE Global Warming project. Students were given the prompt, "When working on
         the Global Warming project, I ..." and then asked to circle either a lot, some, a little, or none for 11 common
         strategies  when   learning with   WISE   projects  (e.g., went  back  to previous steps     in the  project to help  me
         understand something better, checked to make sure that I truly understood the material presented in the project,
         discussed   ideas and questions   with  my  partner  while  I was   working)  Students   also   responded  to three   free
         response   items  asking them  to  explain  the strategies  they used  for monitoring   their   understanding,  how   the
         models/visualizations helped them learn, and what helped them learn the most about global warming.

1-1
Results
Student learning strategies during inquiry unit
         Students   responded  how   frequently    (none, a little, some, a  lot)  they engaged    in 11  strategies when
learning with the Global Warming Project. Items were coded: none = 1, a little = 2, some = 3, and a lot = 4.
Frequencies of each response and averages were calculated for each of the 11 strategies. Students reported using
the models   and  visualizations  most  often    when  working   through  the Global    Warming    project,  followed  by
thinking   about the learning  goals of   the project  and  discussing  ideas  with  their   partners. Students  reported
revising their work,  asking   the teacher   for help,  and   using  Amanda   (online   hint tool) least  frequently. The
project was designed to enable students to manipulate a complex visualization to facilitate their learning and to
allow students   to  work  together, so   it  is encouraging   that  students  reported   engaging     in these strategies
frequently when learning about global warming. However, it is unfortunate that students did not take advantage
of some of the scaffolds provided within the program more frequently, such as the online discussion tool and
hint tool, or use the opportunity to revise their work within the program more often. See Table 1.

Table 1: Student learning strategies in the Global Warming Project

               Strategies                                     Response Percentage (n)                           n     Mean
                                          None              A little         Some             A lot
 Used the visualizations                  2.36% (3)         4.72% (6)        25.98% (33)      66.93% (85)       127   3.57
 Thought about learning goals             2.31% (3)         5.38% (7)        37.69% (49)      54.62% (71)       130   3.45
 Discussed ideas and questions with       1.59% (2)         10.32% (13)      35.71% (45)      52.38% (66)       126   3.39
 partner
 Went back to previous steps to           1.54% (2)         16.92% (22)      37.69% (49)      43.85% (57)       130   3.24
 understand something better
 Thought about prior knowledge            3.08% (4)         18.46% (24)      43.85% (57)      34.62% (45)       130   3.10
 Checked understanding                    3.10% (4)         25.58% (33)      33.33% (43)      37.98% (49)       129   3.06
 Read online discussion posts             6.30% (8)         22.05% (28)      33.86% (43)      37.80% (48)       127   3.03
 Posted to online discussion              8.73% (11)        26.98% (34)      38.10% (48)      26.19% (33)       126   2.82
 Revised work after learning              9.52% (12)        29.37% (37)      43.65% (55)      17.46% (22)       126   2.69
 something new
 Asked teacher for help                   7.14% (9)         38.10% (48)      38.89% (49)      15.87% (20)       126   2.63
 Used Amanda (hint tool) when             33.07% (42)       36.22% (46)      24.41% (31)      6.30% (8)         127   2.04
 extra help was needed

         Students   responses  to  the  open-ended     question,    "What  helped   you  learn  the   most   about   global
warming?" are consistent with the results of the previous questions regarding the learning strategies students
reported engaging in. Responses were coded into categories. Categories were not mutually exclusive because
some  students   listed  more  than  one     thing that   was  helpful  to   their  learning. The     visualizations  were
overwhelmingly the most reported response, at 67%. The teacher, hint tool, and the online discussions were
mentioned least frequently. See Table 2.

Table 2. Students' responses to what was most helpful in their learning.

 Reported to facilitate student learning           % of student responses
 Visualizations                                    67%
 Explanation and note steps                        7%
 Reading/studying                                  6%
 Partner                                           5%
 All of it                                         5%
 Teacher                                           2%
 Online discussion                                1%
 Amanda (online hint tool)                         1%

         Students   were  then asked   to elaborate   on  how  the   visualizations helped   them  to  learn about   global
warming. Student responses were coded into categories. The categories were not mutually exclusive because
some students listed more than one way the visualizations helped them to learn. The most frequently stated
response   was that  the visualizations showed     scientific processes   or effects of  various   variables (e.g. carbon
dioxide, albedo, cloud cover) on global warming. This was followed by a more general answer; 20% of students

                                                                                                                              1-1
         stated that the  visualizations made   it easier to "see"  or "visualize" or  that  it was easier  to look at  the
         visualization than to read the information. See Table 3.

         Table 3. Students' responses to how the visualizations helped their learning.

          Ways visualizations facilitated student learning             % of student
                                                                       responses
          Showed processes/effects of variables                        30%
          Helped to visualize/easier than readying                     20%
          Showed an example                                            11%
          Allowed for experimentation to determine effects             10%
          Helped to understand the problem and answer the              10%
          questions
          It didn't help                                               2%
          Allowed to see or do things you can not in real world        2%

                  Results of a paired t-test revealed significant learning gains in students' knowledge of the greenhouse
         effect and global warming (t (125) = -11.04, p<.001). Mean composite scores on the content items increased
         from 4.71 on the pre-test to 7.14 on the post-test. There was no correlation between students' reported use of
         self-regulated learning strategies when working through the project and learning outcomes.

        Teacher questioning strategies
                  During 4 days of classroom observations, a total of 67 questions that the teacher asked to students were
         recorded; 58%   were  directed  to the entire class and  42%  were asked  to  pairs of  students working together
         through the project. Questions were coded in two ways, level of knowledge integration the question promoted
         and purpose of the question. The Knowledge Integration (KI) Framework views learning as building important
         bridges among pre-existing ideas as well as making links between existing ideas and new ideas (Linn & Hsi,
         2000). We used this framework to code questions into low, medium, or high level questions, based on the type
         of knowledge integration it promoted. Of the 67 questions, 42% were low-level questions, 34% were medium-
         level questions, and 24% were high-level questions. See Table 4.

         Table 4. Teacher questions to support students' knowledge integration.

          Level of KI          Questions support                            Examples                         Percentage
                                  students to:
         Low             Define a term or element of the   What is IR?                                     42%
                         model                             What is a greenhouse made of?
         Medium          Make one connection               Why is a greenhouse made of glass?              34%
                                                           What happens when IR hits the atmosphere?
         High            Reflect and make many             What is the role of albedo in the greenhouse    24%
                         connections                       effect?
                                                           Why are we worried about global warming?

                  When questions were broken down by day, more questions were asked on days 4 and 5 than days 2 and
         7, and the majority of the questions asked on days 4 and 5 were medium to high-level questions. During these
         days the students were primarily interacting with the visualizations, manipulating variables to determine their
         effects on global temperature. See Figure 1.

1-10
                               Number of QuestionsNumber of Questions
                                                            0

                                                            

                                                            0
                                                                                                                                                                       High
                                                            1                                                                                                          Medium
                                                                                                                                                                       Low
                                                            10

                                                                

                                                                0
                                                                    Group      Whole   Group           Whole          Group   Whole           Group    Whole
                                                                               Class                   Class                   Class                   Class

                                                                        Day                        Day                    Day                      Day 

                                                                    Figure 1. Teacher questions during classroom observations

         Questions were also coded into 5 emergent categories based on the purpose of the questions. These
categories were not mutually exclusive because some questions were multi-purpose. Questions to monitor the
students' comprehension                                             of the     material          were   asked          most  frequently,            58%   of  the          questions,   followed   by
questions to prompt students to make connections, 46%. Other questions activated students' prior knowledge,
checked their progress within the project, and cleared up student misconceptions. See Table 5.

Table 5. Purpose of teacher questions

     Purpose of question                                                                                                    Example                                                     Percentage
Monitor comprehension                                                          What do clouds do to global warming?                                                                     58%
Prompt connection                                                              Why are we worried about global warming?                                                                 46%
Activate prior knowledge                                                       How does the experiment we did last week relate to what we                                               13%
                                                                               are studying now?
Plan/check progress                                                            Who is on Activity 6?                                                                                    6%
Clear up misconceptions                                                        Can sunlight actually slow down?                                                                         3%

         When looking at the purpose of the teachers' questions across days, results showed that questions to
plan and  check   student                                         progress     were   spread          evenly          across days.            The  teacher   started         out  each  class period
asking students how far along they were in the project. All questions to clear up student misconceptions were
asked on day 5. On day 4 the teacher noticed that many students were misinterpreting the visualization, so he
started class on  day                                           5 with discussion      questions           to         clear up            any misunderstandings.             Questions   to monitor
students' comprehension                                             were      asked  on          all days,           and questions            to prompt  connections              and   activate prior
knowledge were asked on days 4, 5, and 7. See Figure 2.
                                                            0

                                                            0

                                                            0
                                                                                                                                                    Monitor comprehension
                                                                                                                                                    Prompt connection
                                                            0                                                                                       Activate prior knowledge
                                                                                                                                                    Clear up misconception
                                                                                                                                                    Planning / Monitor progress
                                                            0

                                                            10

                                                              0
                                                                        Day                 Day                 Day                  Day 

                                                            Figure 2. Purpose of teacher questions during classroom observations.

Students' strategies for learning science
         On   the pre-test                                         and post-test,     students          read         6   common            strategies for    learning           science material  and
responded how frequently (always, sometimes, or never) they engaged in each strategy when learning science.
Items were coded: Never = 1, Sometimes = 2, Always = 3. Averages were calculated for each of the 6 strategies.

                                                                                                                                                                                                         1-11
                      Average response score
        Pre-test data revealed that the strategy students prefer to use most often when learning new science material is
        doing experiments to try and figure things out followed by using what they already know to understand new
        material. Interestingly, using visualizations to help them understand new material and discussing material with
        classmates were the two strategies students reported to use least often.
                  On                             the post-test   which  was  given   at the  end of  the  semester  after    students had   engaged  in   WISE
        curricular                           projects,   students' reported    learning  preferences   changed.  Results     of an   ANOVA    reveal students
        reported they prefer to use visualizations to help them learn about science more frequently on the post-test than
        on the pre-test (F (1, 261) = 19.45, p < .001). Students also reported they prefer to discuss material with their
        classmates                            significantly  more    frequently   on the  post-test  than on   the  pre-test  (F (1,  257)  = 3.92, p    < .05).
        Students also reported that they preferred to be told what is correct by the teacher and to do experiments to
        figure things out least frequently on the post-test than on the pre-test. WISE projects are designed to present
        students with interactive visualizations to facilitate learning of complex science topics and to take advantage of
        collaborative learning. Students took more of an active role in their learning when interacting with the inquiry
        project, and it is encouraging that students reported preferring to use these more active strategies when learning
        new science material. It is surprising that students rated doing experiments least frequently on the post-test.
        Perhaps, students did not realize that they were experimenting with the greenhouse effect visualization within
        the computer-based project, since it is different from the classroom-based lab experiments they are accustomed
        to. Figure 3 and Table 6.

                                               

                                             .

                                               

                                                                                                                                                Pre-test
                                             1.
                                                                                                                                                Post-test

                                               1

                                             0.

                                               0
                                                        Do         Use what I    Be told what      Use a          Use a          Discuss
                                                   experiments    already know   is correct by   princple or   visualization  material with
                                                     to try and         to          teacher      example to     to help me         my
                                                   figure things   understand                     help me      understand      classmates
                                                   out            new material                   understand

                                                                 Figure 3. Students preferred strategies for learning science.

        Table 6. Changes in students preferred strategies for learning science

                  Learning Strategy                                               Pre-test Mean          Post-test Mean               F               p
        Doing experiments                                                               2.72                   2.50                  11.67         p < .001
        Using prior knowledge                                                           2.43                   2.50                  0.98           p = .32
        Being told by teacher                                                           2.31                   2.17                  4.20           p < .05
        Using principles or examples                                                    2.23                   2.25                  1.00           p = .32
        Using visualizations                                                            2.17                   2.50                  19.45         p < .001
        Collaborative learning                                                          2.08                   2.23                  3.92           p < .05

                  Pre-test                           data  also  revealed   that  students   do not   always  use   productive   strategies  to monitor    their
        comprehension                                of new science    material.  Students   were   asked how   they  know      they understand  new     science
        material,                            and selected   from   five common     strategies   the  one that  best describes    them.   The  most  frequently
        reported                             answer  was   "when   I can   get an A  on  the   test" and  the least frequently   reported   answer  was    "I've
        finished the assignment". This suggests that students do not monitor their comprehension during learning. They
        can finish an assignment and still not know if they understand the material, and often use test grades to inform
        them of their understanding. Since tests are usually given at the end of a unit, this suggests that students do not

1-1
                Percentage of responses
monitor  their comprehension                            while      they    are   in  the    process   of learning     the material,     which     gives  little
opportunity to clear up any misconceptions.
         On the post-test students' reported using more productive comprehension monitoring strategies. The
most frequently selected strategy for knowing when they understand new science material was "when I can
explain it to someone else". This increased from 30% of the responses on the pre-test to 52% of the responses on
the post-test. Students also reported using other non-productive strategies least frequently on the post-test, such
as "getting a  A                         on  a  test" and     "the teacher   explaining      it". This   suggests     students     were using     more  active
comprehension monitoring strategies while they were working, rather than relying on summative feedback such
as a test score or passively learning from the teacher.

                                        0%

                                        0%

                                        0%

                                                                                                                                        Pre-test
                                        0%
                                                                                                                                        Post-test

                                        0%

                                        10%

                                         0%
                                               I can get an A   I can explain it    The teacher     I can apply it   I've finished
                                                 on the test.    to someone       has explained       to a new            the
                                                                     else.              it.          situation.      assignment.

                                                   Figure 4. Students Comprehension Monitoring Strategies.

Conclusions
         Results revealed some interesting findings of how students and the teacher regulated learning within
the Global Warming Project. Is seems that the project facilitated students' engagement in certain productive
learning strategies, such as learning with visualizations and discussing ideas with others, even though the pre-
test data revealed that using visualizations and discussing ideas with others were not their preferred way to learn
science  material.                        It is encouraging        that students     took    advantage   of     these design    elements   in     the project.
However, students did not report engaging in many other productive learning strategies that are also promoted
within the project, such as using an online discussion tool, using an online hint tool, asking the teacher for help,
and revising their work after learning something new. Further work will examine if scaffolding the use of these
strategies leads to better student learning.
         The most interesting finding is that students reported the visualizations to be the most helpful in their
learning about                          global  warming,      and   the    teacher   provided     the  most     support   to   the  students      during their
interactions with the visualizations. The teacher asked more questions overall, and higher-level questions meant
to prompt   students                         to make   connections      and      to monitor     their comprehension       on   days   when  students     were
interacting with the visualizations. It seems that the students did not realize their teacher was providing them
with so much guidance because they did not report asking their teacher for help frequently or that the teacher
was very helpful to their learning. This is also consistent with the fact that the students may not use effective
comprehension monitoring strategies, as revealed on the pre-test. It may have been the teachers' guidance or the
prompting   questions                          within  the    Global    Warming       Project     that facilitated    the students'     learning    with  the
visualizations rather than simply interacting with the visualizations alone, yet the students are not aware of this.
This is consistent with other research that reveals students often over-estimate their understanding of complex
visualizations in science learning (Chui & Linn, 2007).
         Results also revealed that students' preferred strategies for learning and monitoring their understanding
of new science material changed after their interaction with the inquiry project. Students' reported using more
productive comprehension monitoring strategies, such as explaining material to someone else, and more active
learning strategies, such as discussing with classmates and interacting with complex visualizations, on the post-
test. The design of the project encourages students' to take a more active role in their learning. As students
practice these strategies perhaps they will be more likely to engage in them again in future science learning
opportunities.

                                                                                                                                                                  1-1
       Next Steps
                  An empirical study will be conducted to determine if embedded technology scaffolds to support self-
         regulated  learning  strategies (planning,    monitoring, revising)  lead to better understanding    of  the   complex
         science topics. In future studies log data gathered by the technology will be analyzed to determine how students
         progress  through the  program.    This data   is a more  accurate   measure of student    behavior  and   can provide
         additional insight into what students are thinking at various times within the project.
                  Teacher data will be analyzed across years and projects to determine if the level of guidance provided
         to the students has changed over time. A focus of the professional development summer workshops the past two
         years has been on strategies for helping students to make better connections when learning with visualizations,
         so we will determine if there have been changes in teacher practice and increased student learning over the past
         two years.
                  This  descriptive  study  is a first step  in investigating how  students  learn  with  technology-enhanced
         science curricula and how teachers scaffold student learning. Results from this study and future studies will
         inform   the  design  of   technology-enhanced      inquiry learning   environments,      the design  of   professional
         development, and the design of instructional strategies for teachers to better support student learning within
         these environments.

       References
         Azevedo, R., Cromley, J. G., Winters, F. I, Moos, D. C., & Greene, J. A. (2005) Adaptive human scaffolding
                  facilitates adolescents' self-regulated learning with hypermedia. Instructional Science, 33. 381-412.
         Bransford, J., & Schwartz, D. (1999). Rethinking transfer: A simple proposal with multiple implications. Review
                  of Research in Education, 24, 61­100.
         Brown, A., & Campione, J. (1996). Psychological theory and the design of innovative learning environments:
                  On procedures, principles, and systems. In L. Schauble & R. Glaser (Eds.), Innovations in learning:
                  New environments for education (pp. 289­325). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc.
         Chi, M.T.H., Siler, S. & Jeong, H. (2004). Can tutors monitor students' understanding accurately? Cognition
                  and Instruction 22: 363­387.
         Chiu, J. L., & Linn, M. C. (2007) Prompting Self-Assessment and Eliciting Explanations to Support Students'
                  Knowledge Integration from Dynamic Molecular Visualizations. To appear in A. Zohar, & Y. J. Dori
                  (Eds.), Metacognition and Science Education: Trends in Current Research. London: Springer-Verlag.
         Davis, E. A. (2003). Prompting middle school science students for productive reflection: generic and directed
                  prompts. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 12(1), 91-142.
         Greene,  J.  A. &   Azevedo,    R.  (2007) Adolescents'     use of self-regulatory  processes   and  their  relation to
                  qualitative mental model shifts while using hypermedia. Journal of Computing Research, 36(20), 125-
                  148.
         Linn, M. C., & Hsi, S. (2000). Computers, Teachers, Peers: Science Learning Partners. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence
                  Erlbaum Associates.
         Linn, M.C. & Eylon, B.-S. (2006). Science Education: Integrating Views of Learning and Instruction. In P. A.
                  Alexander   &   P. H.  Winne   (Eds.),   Handbook   of  Educational  Psychology      (2nd Ed., pp.  511-544).
                  Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
         Moos, D. C., & Azevedo, R. (2007). Exploring the fluctuation of motivation and use of self-regulatory processes
                  during learning with hypermedia. Instructional Science. Accepted April 2007.
         Quintana, C., Zhang, X., & Krajcik, J. (2005). A framework for supporting metacognitive aspects of on-line
                  inquiry through software-based scaffolding. Educational Psychologist, 40(4), 235-244.
         Quintana, C., Reiser, B. J., Davis, E. A., Krajcik,, J., Fretz, E., Golan, R. D., et al.  (2004). A scaffolding design
                  framework for software to support science inquiry. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 13(3),337-386.
         White,  B.,  &  Frederiksen,    J. (2005). Theoretical    Framework   and  Approach      for  Fostering Metacognitive
                  Development. Educational Psychologist, 40(4), 211-223.
         Varma, K (2006). Global Warming: Virtual Earth

1-1
