              Do we really mean the same? The relationship between word
                      choices and computer mediated cooperative learning.
              Elisabeth Paus, Regina Jucks, J. W. Goethe-University, Senckenberganlage 15, 60054 Frankfurt a. M.
                            Email: paus@paed.psych.uni-frankfurt.de, jucks@paed.psych.uni-frankfurt.de

                   Abstract:    This  study  analyses   how    the exchange    of    text specific   information   in  virtual
                   cooperative writing can be improved. Based on findings concerning the automatic absorption
                   of words in written communication (lexical alignment), we conducted a study with 64 students
                   to determine whether there was a positive impact of the use of different terminology on the
                   transfer of  knowledge     and  the individual   learning  outcomes.     As   assumed,    dyads   that had
                   cooperated with material containing different terminology asked more questions, gave more
                   explanations    and performed    better  in a   following  learning    test than   dyads  whose   learning
                   materials contained     the same  terminology.    The   results   are  discussed   with   regard   to  their
                   implications for selecting and creating further learning materials.

       Introduction
                   In recent   years,  educational  and   social psychological    research     has  increasingly  investigated   virtual
         cooperative learning scenarios (see, e.g., Erkens, Prangsma, & Jaspers, 2006; Hmelo-Silver & Bromme, 2007).
         The  advantages    of  this setting  for  university  learning are   clear.    Students can  divide  up   a large   amount    of
         literature and--based     on  their   individual   elaborations   of its    content--create   a   joint text  as  a  basis   for
         presentations, assignments     or  exams.  Because    the  collaborative    task  can   be coordinated    via e-mail   and   the
         knowledge acquired is transformed into written form via the same medium, face-to-face meetings no longer
         seem necessary. Furthermore, the advantages of computer-based, cooperative writing are directly apparent in the
         working process. As Galbraith (1999) pointed out, the process of cooperative writing can be conceptualized as
         constructing   knowledge     and   solving  problems.     Knowledge      is gained    through   interaction.  Based    on    this
         exchange, meaning is socially constructed and, as demonstrated by Scardamalia, Bereiter and Lamon (1994),
         individual learning outcomes can be improved by social exchanges. However, cooperative learning scenarios
         also have    some  disadvantages.    Apart from    potentially  negative    motivational    effects in  cooperative    learning
         groups  (Kerr, 1983)   and    the heightened   effort of  coordination      in net-based   environments    (Graesel,   Fischer,
         Bruhn,  &    Mandl, 2001),    negative   effects  on  the quality of  task     processing  can  be  expected.    For example,
         Wittenbaum     and  Stasser   (1996)   have   shown   that  learning  groups     often  fail  to  pool  their   heterogeneous
         knowledge,    but  rather focus   on  "shared"   information   that  all members      know.   These  observations      raise the
         question of how the transfer of task-relevant, material-specific information can be supported.
                   In the past, research has tended to draw on social-psychological paradigms such as the willingness to
         share information (Wittenbaum, Hollingshead, & Botero, 2004) to explain the phenomenon that members of
         learning   groups  are more   likely  to  discuss  shared than  unshared       information.  In contrast,  this study  takes  a
         psycholinguistic approach to the topic.
                   In general,  information     is transmitted   by    communication.      Discourse     characteristics  can   thus  be
         expected to have an immense impact on knowledge gain in groups. Several empirical studies provide support for
         this assumption    (Cohen,   1994a,   1994b;  Marby     & Attridge,  1990).     Apart   from  the  identification of   relevant
         information and persuasion of one's partner in discussion (Stein, Calicchia, & Bernas, 1996), the formulation of
         task-relevant  questions    (King,  1989)  and   elaborated explanations       (Webb,   Ender,  &   Lewis,  1986)   have  been
         found to have a crucial influence on individual learning performance. These kinds of discourse characteristics
         establish  the basis   for   the  communication      partners  in dyads     or   groups   to construct   a  common      mental
         representation of their knowledge (Ickes & Gonzalez, 1996). According to Clark (1996), the assumption of this
         common representation, or common ground, enables the partners to formulate their statements in anticipation
         that the other will understand. The partner's feedback can signal whether or not this assumption was correct.
         There are two possibilities: either the partner understood the information given or he or she requires more details
         or further explanation. Clearly, information about the partner's knowledge should be as precise as possible, thus
         facilitating  partner-specific    adjustments,    which    in  turn  enhance      the   effectiveness    and    efficiency    of
         communication (Nueckles, Wittwer, & Renkl, 2005).
                   In internet-based   communication,      characteristics of the    shared learning     environment   determine    how
         well the common ground is established (Clark & Brennan, 1991). Especially in online written communication,
         which is becoming increasingly important with the widespread use of new media (Goldberg, Russell, & Cook,
         2003; MacArthur, 2006), use of the same vocabulary indicates an existing common ground. The choice of words
         is thus determined     by the mere    availability of words    during communication        (Jucks,  Becker,   &  Bromme,      in
         press). In other words, if an agent introduces a new term, and the partner absorbs it without asking its meaning
         or giving other signals of understanding, the agent will presume a holistic understanding of the word. There is

2-2
no  need  for every  sense   of the  word  to  be explained.  Several    authors (Bromme,     Jucks, &   Wagner,   2005;
Pickering  &  Garrod,  2004)    concur that this  absorption  of words   in   communication,   or  lexical alignment, is
automatic and depends on simple priming mechanisms.
         Lexical alignment clearly facilitates the fast and effective production of a joint text. There is, however,
a risk that task-relevant information known by only one learning partner might be ignored. How can this lack of
information sharing be overcome? As mentioned above, lexical alignment indicates understanding. When the
same   terminology  is used,  learning  partners  may    thus omit  to pool   their information.  It may,  however,   be
possible to facilitate the exchange of task-relevant information by complicating the understanding of the text--
specifically, by introducing misalignment as defined by Pickering and Garrod (2004). The authors suggest that,
when alignment is faulty, interactive repair mechanisms are activated. Only then do the partners ask questions or
give explanations.   Note  that  the lack  of  information    sharing is caused  primarily  by   the agents'  failure to
formulate  questions   (Ross &   Cousins,   1995). Misalignment     may   be  introduced   by presenting   learners with
different text material: different authors use different terminology to describe the same underlying concepts. It
can be assumed that learning material designed to introduce misalignment will support the transfer of task-
relevant knowledge. Let us imagine the situation of a learning dyad at university being instructed to produce a
written document about a given topic. The learning partners will probably divide up the literature and work
individually. In a next step, they will discuss the task via e-mail. If they have worked on texts that use different
lexical codes to describe the same theoretical concepts, they will be forced to ask and answer questions about
the text-specific terminology    in  order to  create  a common     ground.   As a  result of this additional  semantic
processing of task-relevant terms, knowledge will be constructed socially and elaborated more in depth.
         This study was designed to explore whether and to what extent the use of different terminology in
learning  materials  affects the  transfer  of knowledge    in virtual   cooperative  learning  environments   and    the
individual learning outcomes. Our hypotheses are as follows:
         Communication.
         We    predict that  dyads    using   material   containing   different  lexical codes   (different-terminology
condition) will  ask more    questions and  provide    more   explanations  than control   group  dyads  using material
containing the same terminology (same-terminology condition). The former group will communicate longer in
order to establish a common ground. In addition, we investigate whether the experimental manipulation impacts
satisfaction with working process in general.
         Individual learning outcomes.
         We expect to find differences between the two groups in terms of their subjective self-ratings of gained
knowledge.    In addition, participants in  the   different-terminology  condition   are  expected   to remember    more
words describing relevant concepts and to generate more of these words in a context-based knowledge test than
participants in the same-terminology condition.

Method
Participants and Design
         Participants were 64 psychology students (50 female, 14 male) at the university of Muenster with a
mean   age  of   22.16 years    (SD  = 2.73).   To  ensure    similar  levels of  expertise   across the   sample,  only
undergraduate students were recruited. The participants were assigned to 32 dyads; assignment of the dyads to
the experimental conditions was randomized. Participation was voluntary and rewarded with credit points that
were part of the study project.
         Learning outcomes were assessed for each participant individually (sample size = 64 participants with
32  in each   condition) but the  communication     process   and  the texts  produced    were analyzed    within  dyads
(sample size = 32 dyads with 16 in each condition).

Procedure
         Each participant was tested individually in a room equipped with the necessary technology, and in the
presence of an experimenter. Access to external internet sites was blocked to prevent participants from using
information sources other than the learning texts. To prevent participants from making any assumptions about
their learning partner, the partners in a dyad got pseudo-email addresses (which were gender-neutral) and they
did  not meet  at any  time.  At  the  beginning  of   the experiment,   participants were    administered  a short  test
assessing their knowledge of topic to be covered. Their computer skills were also assured. The partners in each
dyad were then given different learning texts to work on with no time limit. They then received a collaborative
task which was to be discussed and completed with their partner via e-mail. No further instructions were given.
When they were finished, they were administered a second knowledge test comprising the same items used at
pretest as well as a cloze task (Taylor, 1957) and a short questionnaire rating their satisfaction with the working
process and surveying demographic characteristics.

Materials

                                                                                                                            2-
         Learning texts
                  The learning texts were original extracts from two standard textbooks of developmental psychology
          (Oerter &  Montada,    2002,   pp. 420-422; Berk,   2005, pp.  294-297).    Both extracts  addressed     Jean Piaget's
          preoperational stage; each was around 1000 words long. Except for some abridgements to ensure that the two
          texts had the same length and format, no modifications were made. Although both texts addressed the same
          topic, their main focus differed. Specifically, the main focus of text 1 (from Oerter & Montada, 2002) was on
          children's interpretation of nature and Piaget's concepts of egocentrism, assimilation and accommodation. In
          contrast, text 2 (from Berk, 2005) addressed the development of children's understanding of symbols.

         Manipulation of the text material
                  To  prepare   the manipulation   of the texts, we  drew  up  a list of  terminology   specific   to  the topics
          covered. Fifteen key concepts were identified. Some of the terminology used to designate the same underlying
          concept in the original texts differed (e.g., stage vs. phase); some of it was the same (e.g., assimilation). In cases
          where the terminology was the same in both texts, we looked for synonyms in other textbooks dealing with the
          same topics (Flammer,     1996; Trautner,  1991). Each   term  was  matched  with    a synonym    that   had the  same
          meaning in the present context. Two different versions of the text material were constructed by manipulating the
          usage of the 15 key concepts. In the different terminology condition, the 15 key concepts were used in one
          encoding (e.g., phase) in one text and in the other encoding (stage) in the other text. In the control condition, the
          same terminology (phase) was used in both texts. When matching the words, we sought to maintain a balance
          across the texts in the use of terms stemming from Latin or Greek and typical Piagetian terms.

         Collaborative task
                  We   used   a collaborative task that  supported  the integration of text   elements  and    the production of
          inferences during the learning process, and thereby facilitated deep comprehension. The task was taken almost
          directly from Berk (2005). The first part of the task provided information about a little boy, Max, who already
          understood  that his  rocking  horse  was  not  alive and therefore  could  not  move   by   itself. The   second  part
          described a situation in which Max and his father were fishing. The father asked Max why the river was moving.
          Max answered that the river was alive and therefore wanted to move. The participants were instructed to explain
          this paradox by writing an other and sending it via email to the experimenter. The only modification we made to
          the collaborative task was to replace the original "scooter" by a "rocking horse" to simplify the first part of the
          task. Whereas the first part of the collaborative task addressed information that was in the focus of text 2 (Berk,
          2005) the second part of the collaborative task addressed information that was in the focus of text 1 (Oerter &
          Montada, 2002). Hence, in order to succeed in the collaborative task information exchange between peers was
          necessary.

         Dependent Measures
                  Two levels of analysis were used: the communication process itself and the individual knowledge gain.
         Communication
                  To assess communication of the dyads three measures were used:
                  Characteristics   of   the communication    process.  The    length  of  the   communication      process  was
          ascertained by using Microsoft Word® to count the number of words in each e-mail and by calculating a total.
          All statements related to making the acquaintance of the learning partner, coordinating the working process and
          exchanging information were included in the analysis. Statements concerning technical problems or that were
          simply  copies   of   previous  statements  were  excluded.   We    analyzed    the  terminology     used   during  the
          communication process by counting how often each of the words in the list of central concepts (including words
          with the same root) was used.
                  Exchange of information. To assess information pooling, we determined the number of questions asked
          and explanations provided in each dyad. We restricted the assessment to questions and explanations related to
          Piagetian terminology. Assuming that participants in the different-terminology condition would be generally
          motivated to query and explain the meaning of words, we counted questions and explanations relating to all
          Piagetian terms, not only the manipulated ones. Participants' questions and explanations were transcribed and
          analyzed (by a second rater) according to predefined criteria. Interrater reliability for the numbers of questions
          asked (K = 0.83, p < .001) and for explanations given (K = 0.91, p < .001) was satisfactory.
                  Satisfaction  with  the  working   process.   Additionally, participants rated  their satisfaction    with  the
          cooperative working procedure and the jointly produced text, as well as the comprehensibility of their partner's
          statements. Responses were given on a 5-point scale ranging from good (5) to bad (1).

         Individual learning outcomes
                  The individual knowledge gain was measured by the following indicators:
                  Prior knowledge. Participants were asked if they had previously heard of Piaget ("yes"/"no").

2-
         Subjective self-rating of knowledge. They were then asked to rate their knowledge of Piaget's theory on
a 5-point scale ranging from good to bad.
         Encoding of central concepts. To ensure relevant vocabulary was not primed in the pre-knowledge
assessment, we used a rather conservative method to ascertain participants' prior knowledge of Piaget's theory.
Specifically, participants were instructed to list all words they associated with the topic. With the exception of 8
words at pretest and 4 words at posttest, which were excluded because they were judged not to be specific
enough to Piaget (e.g. development), all words listed by the participants were included in the data analysis. The
number of listed nouns was counted for each participant.
         After  the collaborative task,  the  participants  were administered  the latter  two   instruments  a second
time.
         Cloze procedure. We developed a cloze text in which participants must fill in words that have been
removed to determine whether participants could reproduce the Piagetian terminology in a continuous text and
thereby demonstrate an understanding of the underlying concepts (Taylor, 1957). All in all, 32 Gaps were placed
using  a rational  deletion procedure,   with  content  words  (as subjects, objects,  adjectives,     and verbs) being
removed (Kobayashi, 2002). Three criteria were considered when placing the gaps. Four gaps ensured a general
understanding   of  the  cloze procedure   respectively the  content  of the task. For     these gaps   all participants
performed similarly well. Further 24 gapped words were drawn from the list of manipulated terminology. We
were thus able to test the participants' general knowledge gain and to determine which vocabulary they used
(e.g., "stage" or "phase"). A final set of gaps tested the main topics covered in the two texts. To this end, we
devised two abstracts, each containing four gaps that could only be filled when knowledge of the two learning
texts had been exchanged. To complete abstract 1, which included both manipulated vocabulary ("perspective",
"egocentrism",   "anthropomorphic")    and    text-specific vocabulary  ("artificiality"), participants    needed to  be
familiar with the text-specific content of text 1; to complete abstract 2, they had to know to be familiar with the
main topics ("as-if", "representative") and with the text-specific content of text 2 ("realistic").

Results
         Our    findings confirmed    that presenting   learners with  materials containing      different  terminology
affected the learning process, individual learning outcomes, and the text produced. In this section, we will detail
the effects on all three sets of outcome measures. Unless otherwise indicated, analyses were performed using
SPSS 14.

Communication
         Characteristics of the communication process. Dyads communicated for about one hour (M = 53.25
minutes, SD = 12.20 minutes), with an average of 19 turns (M = 19.34, SD = 7.14). On average, participants in
the different-terminology condition used 13.81 (SD = 7.18) items of manipulated vocabulary in their written
communication; participants in the same-terminology condition used 12.31 (SD = 3.05) items of manipulated
vocabulary.
         There was the trend (F(1,32) = 2.75, p < 0.07, one-tailed) for participants in the different-terminology
condition  to communicate      longer (M   =  1127.44,  SD   = 463.42)  than participants   in   the same-terminology
condition (M = 900.69, SD = 290.67).
         Exchange    of  information.  We     conducted a   one-way   ANOVA    with    the  number     of   questions or
explanations relating to the manipulated vocabulary as the dependent variable. Participants queried the meaning
of the terms  "assimilation",  "accommodation",     "as-if", "magical",  "egocentric", "absorption     of  perspective",
"anthropomorphic", "animistic", and "artificiality".
         Analysis of the number of questions asked revealed a main effect of the terminology condition (F(1,32)
= 3.13, p < 0.05, one-tailed), with participants in the different-terminology condition asking more questions (M
=  1.00, SD   = 1.21) than  participants   in the same-terminology   condition (M  =   0.38,   SD    = 0.72). Likewise,
analysis of the number of explanations provided revealed a main effect of the terminology condition (F(1,32) =
5.69, p < 0.05, one-tailed), with participants in the different-terminology condition giving more explanations (M
= 2.94, SD = 2.24) than participants in the same-terminology condition (M = 1.44, SD = 1.15).

                                                                                                                           2-
                                                          3,5

                                                           3

                                                          2,5

                                                           2                                       different terminology
                                                          1,5
                                                                                                   same terminology
                                                           1

                                                          0,5

                                                           0
                                                                   questions      explanations

                         Figure 1. Mean number of questions and explanations used in communication processes.

                  Satisfaction with the working process. To enhance the interpretability of the results, all scores assessed
        by 5-point scales were recoded so that high scores indicated high endorsement of the items. One-way ANOVAs
        did not   reveal significant   main  effects               of   the  terminology       condition   for any  of     the dependent     variables:
        satisfaction with the cooperative working procedure (F(1, 32) = 0.01, p > 0.05, one-tailed), satisfaction with the
        jointly  produced  text   (F(1,32) = 1.59,                 p >  0.05,  one-tailed),     or comprehensibility        of  partner's   statements
        (F(1,32) = 0.79, p > 0.05, one-tailed).

        Individual Learning Outcomes
                  Before the  experimental   intervention,                there were  no       differences in  the  prior   knowledge     (  2(1,64) =
        1.00, p > 0.05), subjective self-ratings (F(1,64) = 2.21, p > 0.05), or encoding of central concepts (F(1,64) =
        0.181, p > 0.05) of participants in the two terminology conditions.
                  Knowledge gain. To examine the effects of terminology condition on students' learning performance,
        we conducted mixed (2×2) MANOVAs on subjective self-ratings of knowledge and the number of encoded
        concepts at pre- and posttest (see Table 3 for the descriptive statistics).
                  As expected, multivariate analysis revealed a main effect of time (F(1,64) = 236.94, p < 0.001, one-
        tailed), as well as a significant interaction of time and terminology condition (F(1,64) = 6.25, p < 0.05, one-
        tailed). Univariate   analysis revealed               a significant   main   effect     of time  on    subjective   self-ratings  (F(1,64)   =
        137.12, p < 0.001, one-tailed) and on the number of encoded concepts (F(1,64) = 371.72, p < 0.001, one-tailed).
        Although   there  was   no main    effect             of   terminology    condition      (F(1,64)   =  0.05,     p >   0.05, one-tailed),  the
        subjective   self-ratings of   participants              in   the   same-terminology       condition    increased      more     than those   of
        participants in  the  different-terminology                  condition,   as indicated     by    a significant     interaction   of  time  and
        terminology condition (F(1,64) = 6.56, p < 0.05, one-tailed). In contrast, we found neither a significant main
        effect of terminology condition (F(1,64) = 298.37, p > 0.05, one-tailed) nor a significant interaction of time and
        terminology condition for the encoding of central concepts (F(1,64) = 2.41, p > 0.05, one-tailed).
                  Cloze test. On average, participants correctly filled 11.00 of the 32 gaps (SD = 4.16). We found no
        main effect of terminology condition on learners' performance in the two abstracts tapping the exchange of text-
        specific information (F(1,64) = 0.91, p > 0.05, one-tailed). However, the main effect of the two abstracts was
        significant (F(1,64) = 25.88, p < 0.001, one-tailed): participants in both conditions performed better in abstract 1
        (M = 1.86, SD = 1.13) than in abstract 2 (M = 1.27, SD = 1.04). There was also a significant interaction effect
        between   conditions  and  abstracts (F(1,64)                 =  5.73,  p <  0.05,     one-tailed),    with participants     in the  different-
        terminology condition--unlike participants in the same-terminology condition--performing similarly well in
        both abstracts. Further analysis showed that there was a unique significant effect of abstract 2: participants in the
        different-terminology condition were better able to fill in these gaps than participants in the same-terminology
        condition (F(1,64) = 2.18, p < 0.05, one-tailed).

       Discussion
        Communication
                  We hypothesized that presenting learner dyads with materials containing different terminology would
        impact discourse characteristics. In accordance with our hypothesis, findings showed that participants in the
        different-terminology condition asked more questions and, in turn, gave more explanations to ensure mutual
        understanding    than did  participants   in             the  same-terminology         condition.  We    attribute     this difference to  the
        different-terminology participants' perception of a rather low common ground, signalled by the use of different
        terms during their communication on the collaborative task. Hence, automatic alignment was inhibited and the
        meaning   of  task-relevant  terms   had                to   be elaborated   explicitly     by   asking  questions.     Thus,    the  learners
        formulated detailed explanations and, as predicted, information transfer was facilitated. In addition, participants

2-
in the  different-terminology    condition communicated     for     longer than   participants in   the same-terminology
condition, though the difference was not significant. Because there was no other experimental intervention, it
can be concluded that this difference in the length of communication was also a result of exposure to different
terminology. However, further analyses of the specific contents of communication are required.

Individual Learning Outcomes
         The   findings  also support  our   hypothesis  that  elaboration    and exchange   of   task-relevant, unshared
contents can be improved by placing different vocabulary in cooperative learning materials. Participants in the
different-terminology condition performed similarly well in both abstracts tapping the exchange of text-specific
information. We suggest that these findings can be attributed to the formulation of questions about the precise
meanings of terms, the greater elaboration of text content in the subsequent explanations, and the reinforced
transfer of information. In addition, deeper comprehension was facilitated by the conception of the collaborative
task, a high-level question in sense of Rouet et al. (2001) that called for the application of knowledge. However,
despite  their lower    learning  performance,     the participants  in the   same-terminology      condition rated  their
knowledge gains to be higher than did the participants in the different-terminology condition. This discrepancy
between actual and perceived knowledge gain might be explained by the illusion of having learned more than is
actually the case (illusion of knowing; Glenberg, Wilkinson, & Epstein, 1982). Because they used the same
vocabulary,    the learning  partners  may   have  assumed     that their  knowledge   on  the  given   topic was  nearly
complete.   In contrast, the  participants in the  different-terminology    condition  were    less confident about  their
actual knowledge because the different terminology indicated that much was not covered in the texts provided.
Despite  these  differences   in ratings  of  gained   knowledge,    there  was   no  association   between   terminology
condition and satisfaction with the general working process.

Limitations and Future Perspectives
         Although    the experimental     setting  investigated can   be   considered  a   typical  learning  situation at
university,  future  research should   investigate  whether    these  findings    can be transferred    to other  learning
situations. One point worthy of consideration is the specificity of the terms used in this study. To use Piaget's
terminology, the use of different terms seems to activate accommodation processes. However, this observation
only applied to specific terms, such as "animistic", the meaning of which could not be deduced without explicit
clarification by the learning partner, and which could therefore not be directly identified as synonymous with
"anthropomorphic". These terms further illustrate an important characteristic of humanities terminology: both
encode one underlying concept and can be used synonymously in learning texts. In contrast, the terminology
used in  the natural  sciences   tends to  be very  clearly defined   and   not  necessarily   exchangeable.  In  order to
prevent uncertainty and complication of the working situation, future studies should determine for which terms
the intervention is appropriate. Our findings on the participants' subjective self-ratings of knowledge provide
further support for these suggestions. For example, it can be assumed that learners' perceived understanding is
affected by the origin of terms (e.g., Greek, Latin, Germanic). A term like "as-if" might seem more familiar than
a term like "symbol" in reference to an introduced theory. Furthermore, future studies should address the impact
of other features of learning materials (e.g., form, structure, length, or illustrations).
         Characteristics  of  the learning    partners  should  also  be   considered. Spiro,   Coulson,   Feltovich  and
Anderson (1994) argue that humanities students can be expected to use heuristic procedures to solve problems
and to debate different alternatives. These students can thus be assumed to recognize that two terms may exist to
describe the   same  underlying   concept.   In addition,  the  age  of   the learners should   have    an impact  on   the
development    of  assumptions   about knowledge.      Several researchers    conclude that  this development    proceeds
stepwise (King & Kitchener, 1994; Kuhn, 1991; Perry, 1970). The validity of the present results should thus be
verified for other learners, such as school students. Further work is required to extend our findings to larger
learner groups and, for example, to groups of learners with differing prior knowledge. Future research would
further benefit from controlling for variables such as self-efficiency and commitment to performance.
         Finally,   our  findings indicate    that the  terminology     used  in  learning  materials   impacts  learning
behaviour. Hence, these aspects should be considered in the design and selection of learning materials.

References
Berk, L. E. (Ed.) (2005). Entwicklungspsychologie [Developmental psychology]. Munich: Pearson Studium.
Bromme, R., Jucks, R., & Wagner, T. (2005). How to refer to "diabetes"? Language in online health advice.
         Applied Cognitive Psychology, 19, 569-586.
Clark, H. H. (1996). Using language. Cambridge, IL: Cambridge University Press.
Clark, H. H., & Brennan, S. E. (1991). Grounding in communication. In L. B. Resnick, J. M. Levine, & S. D.
         Teasley (Eds.), Elements of discourse understanding (pp.10-63). Cambridge: University Press.
Cohen, E. G. (1994a). Productive small groups. Review of Educational Research, 64, 1-35.

                                                                                                                               2-
        Cohen,  E.  G.   (1994b).  Restructuring   the  classroom:    Conditions    for productive  small  groups.   Review   of
                 Educational Research, 64, 1-36.
        Erkens, G., Prangsma, M., & Jaspers, J. (2006). Planning and Coordinating Activities in Collaborative Learning.
                 In A.   O'Donnel,    C. Hmelo-Silver     & G.    Erkens   (Hrsg.), CollaborativeLlearning,    Reasoning,     and
                 Technology. (S. 233-263). US: Lawrence Erlbaum
        Flammer, A. (1996). Entwicklungstheorien [Developmental theories]. Bern: Hans Huber.
        Galbraith,  D.   (1999). Studying   argumentative      text processing   through  collaborative   writing. In   J. E.  B
                 Andriessen   &    P. Coirier   (Eds.),   Foundation    of   argumentative   text processing   (pp.  149-179).
                 Amsterdam: Amsterdam University Press.
        Glenberg,   A. M.,  Wilkinson,   A.  C., &  Epstein,   W.    (1982).  The   illusion of  knowing: Failure  in the   self-
                 assessment of comprehension. Memory and Cognition, 10, 597-602.
        Goldberg, A., Russell, M., & Cook, A. (2003). The effect of computers on student writing: A meta-analysis of
                 studies from 1992 to 2002. Journal of Technology, Learning, and Assessment, 2(1), 52.
        Graesel, C., Fischer, F., Bruhn, J., & Mandl, H. (2001). ,,Let me tell you something you do know". A pilot study
                 on discourse in cooperative learning with computer networks. In S. Dijkstra, D. Jonassen, & D. Sembill
                 (Eds.). Multimedia learning. Results and perspectives (pp. 111-137). Lang: Frankfurt a. M..
        Hmelo-Silver, C., & Bromme, R. (2007). Coding discussions and discussing coding: Research on collaborative
                 learning in computer-supported environments. Learning and Instruction, 17, 460-464.
        Ickes, W., & Gonzales, R. (1994). "Social" cognition and social cognition. In J. L. Nye & A. M. Brower (Eds.),
                 What is social about social cognition? (pp. 285-323). Thousand Oaks: Sage.
        Jucks, R., Becker, B.-M., & Bromme, R. (in press). Lexical entrainment in written discourse: Is experts' word
                 use adapted to the addressee? Discourse Processes.
        Kerr, N. L. (1983). Motivation losses in small groups: a social dilemma analysis. Journal of Personality and
                 Social Psychology, 45, 819-828.
        King, A. (1989). Verbal interaction and problem-solving within computer-assisted cooperative learning groups.
                 Contemporary Educational Psychology, 5, 1-15.
        King, P.   M.,  &  Kitchner,  K.  S.   (1994).  Developing    reflective judgement:   Understanding    and   promoting
                 intellectual growth and critical thinking in adolescents and adults. Jossey Bass: San Francisco.
        Kobayashi,  M.   (2002).  Cloze  tests revisited. Exploring     item characteristics with special attention  to scoring
                 methods. The Modern Language Journal, 86, 571-586.
        Kuhn, D. (1991). Skills of argument. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
        MacArthur,    C. A.  (2006).  The   effects  of new    technologies   on  writing    and writing  processes.  In   C. A.
                 MacArthur,   S.  Graham,   &  J.  Fitzgerald  (Eds.),  Handbook    of  writing  research (pp. 248-274).    New
                 York: The Guilford Press.
        Mabry, E. A., & Attridge, M. D. (1990). Small group interaction and outcome correlates for structured                 and
                 unstructured tasks. Management Science, 15, 583-598.
        Nueckles, M., Wittwer, J., & Renkl, A. (2005). Information about a layperson's knowledge supports experts in
                 giving  effective and   efficient online  advice    to laypersons.  Journal  of  Experimental  Psychology     ­
                 Applied, 11 (4), 219-236.
        Oerter, R., & Montada, L. (2002). (Eds.). Entwicklungspsychologie [Developmental psychology]. Weinheim:
                 Beltz.
        Perry, W. G. (1970). Forms of intellectual and ethical development in the college years: A scheme. New York:
                 Holt, Rinehard and Winston.
        Pickering , M. J., & Garrod, S. C. (2004). Toward a mechanistic psychology of dialogue. Behavioral and Brain
                 Sciences  27, 169-226.
        Ross, J. A., & Cousins, J.B. (1995). Giving and receiving explanations in cooperative learning groups. The
                 Alberta Journal of Educational Research, XLI, 103-121.
        Scardamalia, M., Bereiter, C., & Lamon, M. (1994). The CSILE project: Trying to bring the classroom into
                 World 3. In K. McGilly (Ed.), Classroom lessons: Integrating cognitive theory and classroom practice
                 (pp. 201-229). Cambridge: MIT Press.
        Spiro, R .J., Coulson, R. J., Feltovich, P. J., & Anderson, D. K. (1994). Cognitive flexibility theory: Advanced
                 knowledge acquisition in ill-structured domains. In Ruddell, M. R., Ruddell, R. B., & H., Singer (Eds.),
                 Theoretical  models     and   processes    of reading     (pp.  602-615).   Newark:  International     Reading
                 Association.
        Stein, L. S., Calicchia, D., & Bernas, R. S. (1996). Understanding and resolving arguments: Do compromise
                 instructions help? Chicago: University of Chicago, Eastern Illinois University.
        Taylor, W.  L.   (1957). Cloze   readability scores    as indices  of  individual differences in  comprehension       and
                 aptitude. Journal of Applies Psychology, 41, 19- 26.
        Trautner,  H.  M.  (1991). Lehrbuch    der  Entwicklungspsychologie      [Textbook    of  developmental    psychology].
                 Göttingen: Hogrefe.

2-
Webb, N. M., Ender, P. & Lewis, S. (1986). Problem-solving strategies and group processes in small groups
       learning computer programming. American Educational Research Journal, 23 (2), 243-261.
Wittenbaum, G. M., Hollingshead, A. B., & Botero, I. C. (2004). From cooperative to motivated information
       sharing in groups: Moving beyond the hidden profile paradigm. Communication Monographs, 71 (3),
       286-310.
Wittenbaum, G. M., & Stasser, G. (1996). Management of information in small groups. In J. L. Nye & A. M.
       Brower (Eds.), What is social about social cognition? (pp. 3-28). Thousand Oaks: Sage.

Acknowledgements
The authors are thankful to Paula Speer for her support with data collection and analysis and to Susannah Goss
for English language editing.

                                                                                                                 2-
