             On socio-cognitive processes that promote learning from peer
             collaboration and how immediate transfer tests cannot always
                                                       detect their effects
                                       Christa  S. C. Asterhan, Baruch B. Schwarz, School of Education,
                                        The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem 91905, Israel,
                                     Email: christa.asterhan@mail.huji.ac.il, msschwar@mscc.huji.ac.il

                  Abstract:  Research    into   the benefits  of  collaborative  work    on learning  have   shifted from
                  questions regarding whether it promotes learning, to research into the conditions that promote
                  learning and the identification of processes that make collaborative group settings particularly
                  effective. In this symposium we will present findings from recent research into a number of
                  socio-cognitive processes that have been found to foster conceptual gains following group
                  learning. The   papers   that will   be presented   as part of this  symposium    will focus  on   three
                  different phenomena:       argumentation,    production    feedback    and the  incubation   effect   of
                  collaboration. In addition, these studies also show that the effects of collaborative learning
                  may not be apparent immediately following interaction, but need some time to materialize.
                  This finding emphasizes the need for multiple and delayed assessment, as well as alternative
                  assessment tools, such as prospective (instead of retrospective) measures of learning.         .

       Introduction
                  The potential benefits of peer interaction in learning activities have been and still are a popular topic of
         psycho-educational research, theory and debate. Overall, however, results from collaborative arrangements have
         been inconsistent. This may in part be attributed to the immense variability in research paradigms, operational
         variables, subject material and learning contexts that have been employed in the peer interaction literature. Most
         importantly, benefits of interaction are very likely to be dependent on the type of learning goals and material.
         According    to Damon     (1984;   Damon      &  Phelps,   1989),   collaborative  peer  interactions may    create  good
         opportunities to explore new ideas and may therefore be especially beneficial for concept learning. Indeed an
         increasingly large body of research works seems to corroborate this conjecture (e.g., Kruger, 1993; Schwarz,
         Neuman & Biezuner, 2000).
                  However, as the literature on peer collaboration has extensively and repeatedly shown, simply putting
         two  (or more)   students together  is  not   sufficient (e.g., King  & Rosenshine,     1993; Teasley,    1995).  To fully
         exploit  the potential benefits  of peer   interaction,  the tasks  and settings   have to be adequately    designed   and
         structured to actively support those social and cognitive processes considered to be responsible for collaborative
         learning effects. Moreover, the benefits of such processes may take some time to materialize and may remain
         hidden when standard formats of immediate assessments are administered.
                  The present symposium will contribute in both these directions: Each of the three contributions will
         present recent research that provides new insights into the (socio-)cognitive processes that may be responsible
         for peer collaboration   benefits   in concept   learning.   They   isolate these  processes  by creating   conditions  in
         experimental and/or instructional designs. In addition, they reveal the importance of multiple assessments to
         allow for the effect of these processes to be detected.
                  The paper by Christa Asterhan and Baruch Schwarz focuses on the role of argumentation within peer
         collaboration   settings that  are  designed     within  a socio-cognitive    conflict  paradigm.   The   engagement    in
         collective argumentation has been identified by many as beneficial to individual thinking skills, as well as to
         individual and collective knowledge construction. The researchers present two experimental studies that treat
         argumentation as an experimental condition and test its effect on conceptual gains in evolutionary theory. The
         results of these studies show that whereas peer collaboration by itself led to immediate gains in conceptual
         understanding,   only    those students    that  were    explicitly  instructed or  scripted  to    engage  in collective
         argumentation   preserved   these  gains   to later test occasions.  This   finding has  important  implications   for the
         design of successful peer collaboration settings, in particular for learning tasks that are designed within the
         cognitive conflict paradigm for instruction.
                  Christine Howe has extensively researched the effects of peer collaboration vs. individual settings on
         conceptual understanding of scientific concepts. Several of her studies have shown that peer collaboration often
         results in conceptual growth that is detectable several weeks after collaborative group work. Moreover, these
         gains were   not found   to be  predicted     by the views   expressed  during     the interaction. Borrowing    from  the
         developmental psychology literature she proposes three possible mechanisms for these incubation effects. Her
         paper presents findings from a set of three controlled experiments designed to uncover the mechanism behind

3-
these effects. The   results strongly suggest   that peer  collaboration   can   'prime' children  to  make   good use  of
subsequent output.
         Daniel   Schwartz   and Taylor   Martin  have  undertaken    a different  approach.   They    relied on  previous
findings from    research that   identified  the beneficial  role   of  production   feedback    in   peer collaboration.
Production feedback is the feedback one receives when observing how somebody else uses one's ideas. They
then  created  a  computer-mediated    environment    that   isolated  and simulated     this particular   aspect of peer
collaboration (a Teachable Agent). First results from implementations of this environment in classroom settings
show that the inclusion of production feedback indeed improved learning and that these effects increased from a
modest advantage at the first learning unit to a large advantage at the third and last learning unit. Moreover,
prospective measures of learning reveal that it also improved students' preparation for learning new topics later
on, when they were no longer using the technology.

Sometimes collaborating is not enough: the role of argumentation in learning
notoriously difficult scientific concepts

                                   Christa S. C. Asterhan and Baruch B. Schwarz
               School of Education, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem 91905, Israel,
                        Email: christa.asterhan@mail.huji.ac.il, msschwar@mscc.huji.ac.il

         Many practitioners and researchers have identified argumentative dialogue in the classroom as a means
of students' understanding of subject matter (e.g., De Vries, Lund & Baker, 2002; Duschl & Osborne, 2002;
Nussbaum & Sinatra, 2003; Schwarz & Asterhan, in press; Schwarz, et al, 2000). As a practice, argumentation
is best defined as an activity in which interlocutors cooperate in solving a particular problem to which a number
of different solutions are proposed. Each of these solutions is perceived to be of a different epistemic status and
interlocutors  feel obliged   to choose   between    them  (Baker,    2003).  In  contrast to  other   forms   of conflict
resolution, they attempt to reach this goal by engaging in reasoning.
         However, these potentially beneficial effects have thus far not been successfully subjected to rigorous
experimental   testing. Recently   we  conducted    two experimental    studies   on the  effects   of argumentation    on
conceptual understanding in evolutionary theory (Asterhan & Schwarz, 2007). The learning tasks in these two
studies were designed within the socio-cognitive conflict paradigm, according to which collaborating peers are
either confronted with anomalous data or contradicting views and/or are paired with peers who have different
views (Limon, 2001; Mugny & Doise, 1978). In the interventional phase of both studies students watched an
educational movie on evolution which presented the scientifically accepted Darwinian account and they solved
an  evolutionary    phenomenon    that   had been    found   to  cause    cognitive  conflict  in   many   students  with
misconceptions.   In  study  1,  they were   paired  with  a peer  student    in the intervention   phase   and   asked to
collaboratively solve two evolutionary phenomena. In the second study, individual students were exposed to a
misconception other than theirs, which was read aloud by a confederate.
         In the first study, undergraduates were randomly assigned to dyads and collaboratively tried to explain
an evolutionary phenomenon (i.e., the evolution of webbed feet of ducks). Half of the dyads were instructed to
engage   in argumentative    dialogue  on their  respective  explanations     and received    some  written   examples  of
argumentative moves; the other half was merely instructed to collaborate. Individual evolutionary understanding
was assessed as the quality of the explanatory schemas they used to explain different evolutionary phenomena
on three separate test occasions: Prior to, immediately after and a week following the dyadic intervention. In
addition to  this measure    of  conceptual  understanding,     we also   assessed  the  number   of   correct Darwinian
principles that students explicitly mentioned in their written responses.
         When controlled for pretest performance and nested effects of the individual within the dyad, delayed
posttest explanations of individuals in the argumentative condition were found to testify of better conceptual
understanding    than those  of  control  students.  Furthermore,   the   pattern through     which this   advantage was
attained revealed   that  students in  both  conditions    improved     their conceptual   understanding      immediately
following the intervention. However, students who were merely instructed to collaborate lost this temporary
gain, whereas students in the argumentative condition retained the same level of performance at the delayed
posttest. The improvement in conceptual understanding as seen in the explanatory schemas students used could
not be attributed to an increase in the number of correct Darwinian principles they produced: Students in both
conditions  showed    immediate    gains  which   disappeared    on   the delayed    post-test a  week   later.   Potential
intervening variables, such as whether students arrived at the Darwinian solution during the interaction and the
length of their discussions, were not found to be dependent on condition.
         Taken together, these findings seem to suggest that the differences in conceptual understanding may be
the  result of different  levels  of  processing    during   or after  the intervention    phase:   The  engagement     in
argumentation may have led to superior processing which resulted in consolidation of their immediate cognitive
gains. On the post-test occasion, these restructured cognitive schemas were then retrieved and applied to new

                                                                                                                              3-
        phenomena. In contrast, the immediate gains of subjects that did not engage in argumentation may have been
        due to the social affordances of the collaborative situation (such as exposure to superior solutions from more
        knowledgeable or dominant partners) or recall of information from the movie.
                  Our conjecture that the difference between the two conditions may be attributed to superior processing
        as a result of argumentation, would be further supported if such patterns of change could be replicated in an
        additional study.  Therefore, a follow-up experiment was designed to address these and other issues in a more
        rigorously  controlled design     that further isolated  the engagement     in dialectical  argumentation.  To   determine
        whether argumentation leads to superior processing during or after the intervention, students were also asked to
        report post-intervention reflections and deliberations on evolution.
                  The design and procedure of study two were almost identical, except for the following changes in the
        interventional phase: A confederate played the role of one of the participants in both conditions. Participants in
        the experimental   condition     were   prompted    to  engage   in dialectical argumentation     on their  own   and  the
        confederate's solution, by answering structured questions read aloud by the confederate, who chose a piece of
        paper from an urn and invariantly picked up the role of the "reader". In the control condition, the subject and the
        confederate only read aloud their solutions to each other, without discussing them further and performed a filler
        task to control for time-on-task. Thus, students in both conditions were prevented from conducting a natural
        dialogue and were exposed to the same naïve conception in evolution.
                  So as to ensure uniformity of exposure to another explanatory schema (i.e., the confederate's), while
        preserving  a minimum     difference    between    that and  the student's  explanatory   schema,  two  different answer
        sheets were prepared for the confederate. Each contained a solution according to an explanatory schema that
        was qualitatively different, but belonged to the same schema category (see Asterhan & Schwarz, 2007 for more
        details). The solution   that was  read  by    the confederate   as her own    was  thus  contingent on  the  participant's
        explanatory schema.
                  The task scenario in the experimental condition was designed to ensure that participants engaged in
        dialectical argumentation in a controlled design, while preserving the perceived equal-status, peer-collaborative
        nature of the first study. First, participants were requested to read aloud their answer to the 'duck item' (for
        which students    were asked   to  explain   the   evolution of  webbed  feet).  They   were  then asked   to discuss  the
        strengths of that solution, to criticize it, and to discuss whether it explained the change that occurred to the
        ducks' feet. Then the confederate was requested to read "her" solution aloud, after which the participants were
        asked to discuss that solution according to the previous steps. In both conditions, students interacted with the
        confederate and the additional solution was always presented as being the confederate's, who personally read it
        to a student. In sum, the conditions were identical on factors such as social facilitation, actual exposure to an
        alternative view, the nature of this alternative solution and the personification of viewpoints. They differed only
        in engagement of dialectical argumentation.
                  The results showed that students who were instructed to engage in scripted dialectical argumentation
        on their own and another person's solution showed greater conceptual gains than control students. Thus, the
        advantage of argumentation observed in collaborative dyadic situations was replicated in a situation of scripted
        argumentation directed at and prompted by a peer, a design that isolated the argumentation from the interaction
        features of the collaboration.
                  Similar to  the findings     from study  one  (the dyadic   study),  students  in the  argumentative   condition
        preserved the conceptual gains obtained during the intervention. However, students in the control condition did
        not show improvement on any of the tests. This suggests that control subjects' temporary gains in the dyadic
        study derived  from   the peer    interaction  per se,  and  not from   the movie   they  saw.   When   students were  not
        allowed to discuss each others' solutions and were exposed to the same misconception, such temporary gains
        disappeared.  Instances   of   post-intervention    reflection   and  deliberation   were   equally   distributed  among
        experimental and control students. It seems, therefore, that the preserved effects of argumentative conditions are
        not the result of processes that occur following, but during the interaction.
                  The combined results of these two studies first and foremost provide first experimental support for the
        assertion that argumentation promotes conceptual understanding in the Sciences in a cognitive conflict learning
        paradigm. Even a meticulously designed task meant to cause socio-cognitive conflict did not lead to lasting
        cognitive gains, unless the students were specifically instructed (dyadic study) or scripted (confederate study) to
        engage in dialectical argumentation. Secondly, our findings particularly emphasize the importance of delayed
        assessment,   especially  in  the case  of  dialogical  argumentation,   since  its potential  benefits may   not become
        apparent at immediate test occasions. Whereas peer collaboration by itself was found to have a positive effect on
        conceptual understanding, these gains proved to be merely temporary and disappeared at delayed post-tests.
                  Dialectical argumentation     requires   explaining   oneself and    justifying  one's standpoints,  as well as
        dialectically discussing and evaluating different solutions. We suggested that the advantage of argumentation for
        conceptual  understanding     is  achieved   through    superior cognitive   processing.   This  conjecture  is  indirectly
        supported by two findings: (1) neither mentioning the Darwinian account during the discussion nor reaching an
        agreed upon solution was related to learning gains; and (2) the particular pattern in which the advantage of

3-
argumentative conditions was achieved in both experiments (preserved gains versus loss of temporary gains or
no gains). The implications for theory development and further research on the mechanisms behind these effects
will be discussed in the presentation.

Incubation and the delayed benefits from group work in science

Christine Howe, Faculty of Education, University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 8PQ, UK. cjh82@cam.ac.uk

         Over   the past 25   years,  evidence   has mounted   that  conceptual   understanding   in science  can be
promoted    by  collaborative   group    work    between    children    (Azmitia  &    Montgomery,    1993;   Howe,
Tolmie   &  Mackenzie,   1995;  Howe   &  Tolmie,    1998). There   is, however,   continuing uncertainty  about  the
mechanisms by which children learn from their collaborative experiences. One popular account sees children as
constructing collective insights that are superior to their starting points. These insights are then individually
internalised (Brown, Ash, Rutherford, Nakagawa, Gordon & Campione, 1993; Tomasello, Kruger & Ratner,
1993; Vygotksy, 1978). There can be little doubt that such internalisation operates on occasion, but it cannot be
the whole story. In particular, it cannot account for conceptual growth that is detectable several weeks after
collaborative group work and is demonstrably stimulated by the group work experience, but is not apparent
during group work itself. Here views expressed (and agreed) during group interaction are often: a) inferior to
individual starting points; b) unrelated to patterns of change. Such delayed effects have been reported repeatedly
over the past 20 years (e.g. Howe, Tolmie & Rodgers, l992; Tolmie, Howe, Mackenzie & Greer, 1993), but they
have never been satisfactorily explained.
         One clue to a possible interpretation comes from the fact that delayed benefits can be regarded as a
specific manifestation   of the 'incubation'    phenomenon   that has   intrigued cognitive  psychologists for some
considerable period  of  time (e.g.  Dorfman,    Shames  &  Kihlstrom,   1996).   Therefore, the  author has recently
completed three studies, which examine the relevance of explanations proposed for incubation within cognitive
psychology   to the delayed   effects of group   work  in science.  These   studies  will provide the focus  for  this
presentation (see Howe, McWilliam & Cross, 2005 for details). All three studies were conducted with primary
school children aged 9 to 12 years and addressed mastery of the factors relevant to floating and sinking. The
group task used in the studies required children to predict which, from sets of small objects, would float and
which would sink, test their predictions by immersion in a tank of water, and interpret outcomes. The children
worked through the task in triads or foursomes. Mastery of factors was established by paper-and-pencil tests that
were administered to whole classes as pre-tests prior to the group tasks and as post-tests up to eight weeks
afterwards.
         Study One explored the possibility that collaborative group work can result in unhelpful mental sets,
which can only be broken after an interval, whereupon productive (but essentially individual) work resumes.
Thirty children  (Condition  1A)  worked     in groups using a version   of the   group task that was believed from
previous work to have relatively weak set-inducing powers. A further 31 worked on a version that was believed
to have relatively strong set-inducing powers (Condition 1B). Analysis of group interaction confirmed these
beliefs: by the end of the task, the 1B children had fixated on a much smaller set of factors than the 1A children.
However, analysis of conceptual growth from the pre-tests to 'immediate' post-tests administered within one
hour of  the group   task's completion,  and    from the immediate    post-tests  to delayed (eight-week)  post-tests
offered no support for the mental set hypothesis. There were no statistically significant differences between the
conditions, with further analyses indicating that the mental sets had, in fact, already been broken by the time of
the immediate post-test.
         Study Two addressed the possibility that collaborative group work stimulates children to engage in
private accretion and appraisal of factors once the task is completed, and this is what results in delayed learning
gains. Thirty-six children (Condition 2A) worked in groups on the 1A group task, and then completed `reflective
exercises'. These exercises took place two, four and six weeks after the group tasks and required the children,
working on their own, to: a) write down 'all the ideas you have ever come across' about why pictured objects
floated or sank; b) evaluate the ideas as 'good', 'bad' and 'in-between'. Similar numbers of children engaged in
the reflective exercises without experiencing the group task (Condition 2B), experienced the group task without
engaging in the reflective exercises (Condition 2C), and experienced neither the group task nor the reflective
exercises (Condition 2D). The results suggest that the post-group accretion and appraisal of factors plays little
role in the positive effects of group work. The performance of the 2A children during the reflective exercises
was indistinguishable from the performance of the 2B children. Although the 2A children progressed more from
pre-test to delayed (eight-week) post-test than both the 2B and 2D children, their pre- to post-test growth was
equivalent to that of the 2C children. This suggests that the reflective exercises added nothing to what followed
from participation in the group task itself.
         Study Three examined the possibility that group tasks provide children with frameworks for making
productive use of subsequent experiences, and unlike Studies One and Two, this study obtained positive results.

                                                                                                                         3-
         Thirty-six children (Condition 3A) worked in groups on the 1A task, and then viewed demonstrations two, four
         and  six weeks  afterwards    that had  the potential  to consolidate   their group  experiences.   Similar  numbers   of
         children viewed the demonstrations without participating in the group task (Condition 3B), participated in the
         group task without viewing the demonstrations (Condition 3C), and neither participated in the group task nor
         viewed the demonstrations (Condition 3D). Consistent with the possibility that group work primes effective use
         of subsequent experiences, the children in Condition 3A responded more productively to the demonstrations
         than the  children in Condition     3B,  and  their subsequent    learning   was    more strongly  influenced  by  those
         responses.  The 3A   children    also progressed  more  from   pre-test to eight-week    post-test  than the  children in
         Conditions 3B, 3C and 3D.
                  Analyses of the dialogues held by the children in Condition 3A suggests that unresolved contradiction
         during group interaction was a key factor in priming attention to subsequent events. Data obtained during three
         other studies (including the present Study One) have also been found to support this suggestion (Howe, 2006).
         Therefore, the main conclusion to be drawn in the presentation will be that when collaborative group work
         triggers delayed conceptual growth, the likely mechanism is productive use of events experienced afterwards.
         Such usage is stimulated by unresolved contradiction during the group task itself. This conclusion has important
         implications for theory and practice, which will be outlined during the presentation.

       Simulating one aspect of collaboration and its effects on preparation for future
       learning
                                                Daniel L. Schwartz1 and Taylor Martin2
          1School of Education, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305-3096, daniel.schwartz@stanford.edu, 2School
                  of Education, University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX 78712, taylormartin@mail.utexas.edu

                  In this paper, we will discuss a technology that we have designed to simulate and capitalize on one of
         the benefits of collaboration.     The   beneficial feature  we   have  identified  is the "production   feedback"   that
         develops when observing one's collaborator use ideas developed during the collaboration. We describe an initial
         instructional experiment that maximized production feedback through a technology called a Teachable Agent.
         The results suggest that the use of this technology improved students' readiness to learn related science content
         when students were no longer working with the technology.
                  An important educational goal is to help students learn to work collaboratively, because collaboration
         is a fundamental norm of work in life after school.       For example, Barron (2004) found that young adolescents
         working in groups often let social preferences interfere, so that they missed good ideas that were introduced by
         less preferred group  members.     Ideally, appropriate   experiences   will  help  students learn  to collaborate more
         effectively in the future. Another important education goal is to create situations that enhance or even simulate
         the benefits of collaborative work for learning, while avoiding some of the pitfalls.          This is the focus of the
         current work.
                  The   literature  on  learning  through   collaboration  has   begun    to identify specific  situations  where
         collaboration is particularly effective.   For example, Chi, Roy and Haussman (in press) found that collaborative
         learning works well to the extent that an activity generates "deep questions" for discussion. Schwartz (1995)
         found  that groups   provide   a special benefit  on   tasks that involve  producing    external representation.   In an
         important study, Sears (2006) compared tasks and outcomes for students working alone or together. He found
         that groups and individuals exhibited no differences in abilities to apply learning after tasks that emphasized
         practice and checking answers.     However, on tasks that emphasized representational production, groups showed
         a strong  benefit  over    individuals  in  their readiness   to  learn new   concepts   when    working   alone.  Thus,
         collaborative  work  seems    effective in  situations where  groups    naturally   generate new   questions, ideas, and
         representations, and the benefit may occur later when students subsequently have a chance to learn new ideas.
                  Our   focus here   is on   a  second potentially    valuable   learning  characteristic of group   work   called
         "production feedback."     Production feedback refers to the feedback that arises when one has an opportunity to
         see how somebody else uses one's ideas.       Okita and Schwartz (2006), for example, found that people can learn
         more by observing their pupil answer questions than by answering those same questions themselves.
                  We have developed a technology called a Teachable Agent (TA) that can deliver frequent production
         feedback (Biswas et al, 2005). TA's are a type of pedagogical agent (Baylor, 2007) where students teach the
         computer, rather than the computer teaching the student. For the TA used in this study ­                 Betty's Brain ­
         students teach by creating a concept map that connects entities (fossil fuels, carbon dioxide) with causal links
         (make/increase).   Betty includes a simple query feature.      Using simple artificial intelligence techniques, Betty
         can visually answer questions posed by the student. For example, in the figure, Betty has answered the query,
         "What happens to `heat radiation' if `garbage' decreases?" based on the map the student taught the her.         Betty is
         intended to help students develop well-structured knowledge that supports complex chains of inference. Betty
         does not replace instruction, but rather, the technology helps students organize the content of instruction.

3-
          Betty can provide production feedback by including a hidden expert map that can evaluate the quality
of Betty's  map.     For example,   it is possible  for students  to submit  Betty take  a  quiz,  or Betty can play  a
question-answering game and students can wager on whether their agent will give the right answer.             We have
created  a  number   of  affiliated technologies   that try to  maximize    the benefits of production   feedback;   for
example, the teacher can project all the agents at the front of the class and ask a common question.        The agents
demonstrate    their reasoning, and    the teacher  can  lead   a discussion  over  the  different answers  and    agent
representations.
          We conducted an initial study to determine whether the inclusion of production feedback improved
learning, and whether it improved students' preparation for learning new topics later on when no longer using
the technology. Our thought was that having students observe their agents answer questions would help them
develop   a more integrated   representation   of  cause relations,  because they  would   anticipate and   follow their
agent's reasoning, instead of just given a "factual answer" themselves.         The study involved two conditions. In
the Betty condition, students created concept maps by teaching Betty, and Betty answered questions in a variety
of settings to generate production feedback.    In the Inspiration condition, students created concept maps with the
commercial software Inspiration (which they regularly used in class).        The key difference was that the students
in the Inspiration condition answered the questions in a variety of settings themselves. Thus, they received direct
feedback to their own answers, compared to the Betty condition where the feedback was directed at the agent.
          Two classes of 6th-grade students (n=58) participated. The intact classes were randomly assigned to
either the Betty or Inspiration condition.      A researcher taught both classes.     Eleven days of instruction and
testing were spread over three weeks. The main topic of instruction, global warming and climate change, was
divided into three units: mechanisms, causes, and effects. Both groups received an identical mix of hands-on
experimentation, reading, watching video clips, concept map construction, lecture, and discussion.          Participants
received one homework assignment per unit. At the end of each unit, participants received an eight-question test
on the content from that unit (and its integration with prior units if relevant).        The questions were all short
answers   that varied  in complexity,     with questions requiring   short, medium,   or long   chains of inference   to
answer.   Questions were not in a form that the TAs could answer, and often times, they required the integration
of prior   knowledge     with current   instruction (e.g.,  how   will a floor   mirror  effect the   temperature  in a
greenhouse?).   Answers were scored from a low of 0 points to a high of 2 points.
          The figure shows the test results broken out by condition, unit test, and the length of inferential chain
needed to answer the question.      At the first unit-test, the Betty students show a very modest advantage for the
longer inferences.   At the second unit-test, the Betty students show a strong advantage for the medium-length
inferences.  By the final unit-test, the Betty students show an advantage for short, medium, and long inferences,
p  < .01.   One  interpretation of   this  pattern is that  the Betty  students  were getting   progressively better  at
reasoning about longer and longer chains of inference.      This may be due to the increase in production feedback
technology at each unit, or it may simply be a cumulative effect of working with Betty for longer, regardless of
feedback. A separate study, one that uses a different design and more than two intact classes, is planned to
address this question.   Nevertheless, the steady improvement in length of inference is exactly what one would
expect the TA software to yield, because this is what Betty models and enforces.

                                                                                                                            3-
                                                  Average Score
                                                                 2.0

                                                                                                                                       Betty
                                                                                                                                       Inspiration
                                                                 1.5

                                                                 1.0

                                                                 0.5

                                                                 0.0
                                                                       short  medium    long     short  medium    long      short  medium     long
                                                                       Mid-test 1 (mechanisms)     Mid-test 2 (causes)        Mid-test 3 (effects)
                                                                                                   Inference Length

                  After the intervention was completed, we also gave students from both conditions a new assignment to
         learn about what they could do to stop global warming.                                    They received a relevant reading passage, and their task
         was to  make  a  paper-and-pencil                            concept    map.   They      received    four     starter    nodes.  This      latter assignment was
         actually a test of students' preparation for future learning when no longer using their respective technologies.
         Students in the Betty condition integrated roughly 2.5 concepts from the passage versus 1.0 for the Inspiration
         condition, p < .01.  Concept maps are often used to assess student understanding (Ruiz-Primo, et al., 2001), and
         these maps indicated that the production feedback from the earlier lessons prepared students to develop a more
         complete and integrated understanding of the passage.
                  The  intent of the current                            work     has   been    to  embody     a positive       feature   of   productive     collaborative
         interactions into technology.  The goal has not been a severe experimental test of the hypothesis that production
         feedback is an important ingredient. This has been done elsewhere (Okita & Schwartz, 2006). Instead, the goal
         was to see if we can design sociable technologies that capture some of the hypothesized positive aspects of
         collaboration, for those situations when students cannot collaborate (e.g., homework in the U.S. is typically done
         alone).  We   wanted  to see  if                        there       were benefits      of the    technology      that    extended         beyond   the time when
         interacting with the technology.                             In this case, we found that if students learn the initial casual content in an
         integrated way, they will be more prepared to learn in the future (Bransford & Schwartz, 1999).                                                         There are
         alternative interpretations for the effects, so additional research will be necessary. In the meantime, the goal of
         putting collaborative learning                         theories      to  test by    embodying      them       in technologies       seems     like  a  worthwhile
         direction for the study and design of instruction.

       References
         Asterhan, C.  S. C., &  Schwarz,                             B. B.   (2007).   The     effects    of  monological        and  dialogical       argumentation  on
                  concept learning in evolutionary theory. Journal of Educational Psychology, 99, 626-639.
         Azmitia,  M., &   Montgomery,                               R. (1993).    Friendship,         transactive     dialogues    and      development      of  scientific
                  reasoning. SocialDevelopment, 2,202--221.
         Baker, M. (2003). Computer-mediated interactions for the co-elaboration of scientific notions. In: J. Andriessen,
                  M.  Baker,  &   D. Suthers                             (Eds.),  Arguing       to learn:     Confronting         cognitions       in computer-supported
                  collaborative learning environments. Utrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
         Barron, B. J. (2004). When smart groups fail. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 12, 307­359
         Baylor, A. (2007). Introduction to the special issue on pedagogical agents. Educational Technology, 47(1), 3-4.
         Biswas, G., Leelawong, K., Schwartz, D., Vye, N. & TAG-V (2005). Learning By Teaching: A New Agent
                  Paradigm for Educational Software.                                 Applied Artificial Intelligence, 19, 363-392.
         Bransford, J.D. & Schwartz, D.L. (1999). Rethinking transfer: A simple proposal with multiple implications.
                  Review of Educational Research, 24, 61-100.
         Brown,   A.L.,   Ash,   D.,   Rutherford,                               M.,   Nakagawa,          K.,   Gordon,        A.,   &       Campione,       J.C.  (1993).
                  Distributed   expertise                            in      the  classroom.           In  G.   Salomon            (Ed.),     Distributed       cognitions:
                  Psychological     and                              educational       considerations          (pp.       188--228).         Cambridge:         Cambridge
                  University Press.
         Chi, M. T. H., Roy, M., & Hausmann, R. G. M. (in press). Observing tutorial dialogues collaboratively: Insights
                  about human tutoring effectiveness from vicarious learning. Cognitive Science.
         Damon, W. (1984). Peer education: The untapped potential. Journal of Applied Developmental Psychology, 5,
                  331-343.

3-0
Damon, W., and Phelps, E. (1989). Critical distinctions among three approaches. In N. M. Webb          (Ed), Peer
         interaction, problem-solving,  and  cognition:   Multidisciplinary  perspectives. New   York:  Pergamon
         Press.
De Vries,   E.,, Lund, K.,  &  Baker,   M.  (2002).  Computer-mediated    epistemic  dialogue  : Explanation and
         argumentation as vehicles for understanding scientific notions. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 11,
         63-103.
Dorfman, J., Shames, V.A., & Kihlstrom, J.F. (1996). Intuition, incubation and insight: implicit cognition in
         problem solving. In G. Underwood (ed.), Implicit cognition (pp. 257-296). Oxford: Oxford University
         Press.
Duschl, R. A., & Osborne, J. (2002). Supporting and promoting argumentation discourse in science education.
         Studies in Science Education, 38, 39-72.
Howe, C. (2006). Group interaction: and conceptual understanding in science: co-construction, contradiction
         and  the mechanisms   of growth.   Paper presented   at BPS  Developmental    Psychology Section, Royal
         Holloway College, London.
Howe, C., McWilliam, D. & Cross, G. (2005).         Chance favours only the prepared mind: incubation and the
         delayed effects of peer collaboration.  British Journal of Psychology, 96, 67-93
Howe,  C.,  & Tolmie,   A.  (1998). Productive   interaction in  the context of computer-supported  collaborative
         learning in science. In K. Littleton & P. Light (Eds.), Learning with computers: Analysing productive
         interaction (pp. 24--45). London: Routledge.
Howe, C. J., Tolmie, A., & Rodgers, C. (l992). The acquisition of conceptual knowledge in science by primary
         school children: Group interaction and the understanding of motion down an inclined plane. British
         Journal of Developmental Psychology, 10, 113--130.
King, A.   &  Rosenshine,   B. (1993).  Effects   of guided   cooperative  questioning  on  children's knowledge
         construction. Journal of Experimental Education, 61(2), 127-148.
Kruger, A.C. (1993). Peer collaboration: conflict, cooperation or both? Social Development, 2, 165-182.
Limon,   M.  (2001).  On the  cognitive conflict as  an instructional  strategy for conceptual change:  A  critical
         appraisal. Learning & Instruction, 11, 357-380.
Mugny,   G.   &   Doise,   W.  (1978).  Socio-cognitive   conflict   and structure  of individual  and  collective
         performances. European Journal of Social Psychology, 8, 181.
Nussbaum, E. M., & Sinatra, G. M. (2003). Argument and conceptual engagement. Contemporary Educational
         Psychology, 28, 384-395.
Okita, S. Y., Schwartz, D. L., (2006) When observation beats doing: Learning by Teaching. Proceedings of the
         7th International Conference of the Learning Sciences (ICLS) Bloomington, IN.
Ruiz-Primo, M. A., Schultz, S. E., Li, M., & Shavelson, R. J. (2001). Comparison of the reliability and validity
         of scores from two concept-mapping techniques. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 38(2), 260-
         278
Schwarz, B. B., & Asterhan, C. S. C. (in press). Argumentation and Reasoning. To appear in: K. Littleton, C.
         Wood, & J. Kleine Staarman (Eds). Elsevier Handbook of Educational Psychology: New Perspectives
         on Learning and Teaching. Elsevier.
Schwarz, B. B., Neuman, Y., & Biezuner, S. (2000). Two wrongs may make a right...if they argue together!
         Cognition & Instruction, 18, 461-494.
Schwartz, D. L. (1995)     The emergence of abstract representations in dyad problem solving. Journal of the
         Learning Sciences, 4, 321-354.
Sears, D. A. (2006). Effect of innovation activities on dyads. Unpublished dissertation. Stanford University,
         Stanford, CA.
Teasley, S.D. (1995). The role of talk in children's peer collaborations. Developmental Psychology, 31, 207-
         220.
Tolmie,  A., Howe,   C.J., Mackenzie,   M., &   Greer, K. (1993).  Task  design  as an influence on dialogue and
         learning: Primary school group work with object flotation. Social Development, 2, 183-201.
Tomasello, M., Kruger, A. C., & Ratner, H. H. (1993). Cultural learning. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 16,
         495--552.
Vygotsky, L. S. (1978). Mind in society. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Acknowledgements
The research presented by Asterhan and Schwarz was supported by Israel Foundations Trustee grant 27.35 to
Christa Asterhan. The research outlined in Howe's paper was supported by ESRC award R000239092. The
material in  the paper by  Schwartz  and Martin   is based   upon  work  supported  by the U.S.  National Science
Foundation   and  Department   of Education  under   Grants   No.  0354453,  0633856,   and R305H060089.     Any
opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in the material are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the funding agencies.

                                                                                                                      3-
