Student Participation in Disciplinary Discourses: When the Teacher
                 Takes a Step Back, Who Takes a Step Forward?
         Lindsay L. Cornelius, University of Washington, P.O. Box 353600, Seattle, WA 98195-3600,
                                             lindso@u.washington.edu

         Abstract:   This  study compares   the participation patterns   of  students across  two  classrooms,
         which were involved in a design-based experiment called PATHS. While both classes followed
         the same curriculum, which encouraged disciplinary engagement in the subjects of history and
         science, the pedagogical   stances  of  the teachers  led to  some     noticeable  differences  in  the
         "participatory roles" that students took up during the course of instruction. However, despite
         differences in terms of  the   way students participated  in discussions,    this study finds  that the
         stratification of students within each classroom in terms of the total amount of participation per
         student was the same across both rooms. The data point to pervasive patterns of student/student
         and student/teacher interaction, which confer status (and thus the right to speak) on particular
         kids.

Introduction
         Allowing students to directly engage with the tools and thinking practices of a discipline like science or
history has the potential of being a liberating and powerful experience. Liberating in that students can come to
find themselves in new relationships of power not only with the subject matter, but with the teacher as well
(Cornelius & Herrenkohl, 2004). Powerful in that this process of engaging in knowledge creation draws on the
students' own understandings of the topic at hand, and allows for a thoroughly contructivist approach to learning
(Cobb, 1994). Such frameworks for the design of effective learning environments stress the benefits of having
students engage with one another in this process of creating knowledge (Herrenkohl & Guerra, 1998; Engle &
Conant, 2002; Palincsar & Brown, 1984; Roth, McGinn, Woszczyna & Boutonne, 1999). Students learn through
discussion with one another and with their teacher what the limits of their knowledge are, how to justify their
beliefs to another person, and what might count as evidence in particular disciplines or situations.
         In order to realize this powerful form of learning, transformations in the typical relationships between
students and teachers, and among students, have to take place (Hatano & Inagaki, 1991). The use of teacher-led
I-R-E discourse   patterns (Cazden,   1988)  are reduced  in  favor   of giving  students   the  opportunity  to engage
directly with the materials, concepts and thinking practices of the discipline. Although the teacher remains an
important "guide" (Brown & Campione, 1994; Collins, Brown & Holum, 1991) and plays an important role in
scaffolding students' interactions with the subject matter, their position of power is reduced. Instead, students
are encouraged to develop and to utilize their own judgments about what counts as knowledge, and to learn how
to assess their own learning (Bransford, Brown & Cocking, 2000).
         Design   based  research  in these  types of   classroom  environments       has  gone  far in  explicating  the
possibilities open to classroom teachers in connecting their students with meaningful learning experiences and
in having productive exchanges with one another. Many studies have explored how the teacher might position
him or herself in relation to the subject matter knowledge and to the students, so that students might begin to
take up new intellectual roles and positions (Collins, Brown & Newman, 1989; O'Connor, 2001). Instructional
supports  in the  curriculum  also  assist  teachers  in repositioning    their  students   as   knowers   and   thinkers.
Herrenkohl et al.'s (1999) use of intellectual audience roles is one such tool that assists students in engaging in
expert thinking practices while discussing theoretical ideas with their peers.
         Despite the potential of this type of instruction, there remain many unresolved issues about how to help
students navigate these new intellectual and social roles effectively. And there is still much that we do not know
about the accessibility  of these knowledge-making       practices for   all students. To   this end,  I aim  to explore
student  engagement   in   disciplinary discourses   in terms  of  the   types  of participatory     roles that  students
appropriate when engaging in this type of classroom environment. Following Goffman's (1981) discussion of
"participation frameworks", I conceptualize this construct of participatory roles as a way to account for both the
communicative act (i.e. the utterance) of a speaker, as well as the social and intellectual role that the utterance
plays in the collective creation of meaning in the classroom. Traditional classroom practices typically allow
students one or two participatory roles, for example, that of "respondent" to a question, or that of a "clarifier" of
the teacher's instructions or explanations. As students are allowed to take on more of the intellectual work in the
classroom, their potential to take on new intellectual participatory roles also expands. But the question remains
about the extent to which students take up the new roles that are made available to them, and whether this
happens in an equal way for all students in a given classroom.
         This  study  examines    students'  participatory  roles  during     a design     based experiment     that was
implemented in two sixth grade classrooms. This research provides an opportunity to disentangle several factors

                                                                                                                       1     1-1
         that may influence student participation. I compare two sixth-grade classes from the same school building, who
         used the same curriculum, but whose teachers differed substantially in terms of their pedagogical approach. This
         study  examines   specifically the  following    questions  concerning    the interrelationships   between   teaching,
         curriculum and student participation:
             1)    In what ways did each of the teachers position students within the disciplinary subject matter?
             2)    What participatory roles were taken up by students? Were there any systematic differences in the roles
                   taken up by students between the two classrooms?
             3)    How were participatory roles shared among students?

        Description of the Research Setting
                   The data for this study were collected as a part of the PATHS study (Promoting Argumentation in the
         Teaching   of History   and   Science). This  study   aimed   to  develop   and explore      students' epistemological
         understandings within and across these two subject areas (Stevens, Wineburg, Bell & Herrenkohl, 2004). The
         PATHS study was implemented in two fifth and two sixth grade classrooms, but for the purposes of the current
         study, I will report on the two sixth grade classes only. To promote student engagement with the subject matters
         of history and science, we implemented a curriculum in which students would work directly with the materials
         and knowledge making practices of the two disciplines.
                   In total, we implemented 5 units: two units in science and two in history, and one culminating unit that
         crossed both disciplines. Our involvement in the classrooms began in October and continued until May of the
         same school year. The main unit in science was Sinking and Floating. Students worked together in groups to test
         various materials and to develop and revise their own theories about why things sink and float. In history, the
         main  unit was   on   Rosa  Parks, and  students  worked    with   a collection of   primary   and secondary    source
         documents to develop their own theories about where Rosa Parks actually sat on the bus and why she stayed in
         her seat. In  addition to exploring   these subject  areas in isolation, the  curriculum  structured   lessons through
         which students could make comparisons across these two ways of knowing.
                   Several instructional supports were introduced alongside the curriculum in order to ensure that students
         were  engaging   with  each other  and  with the subject   matters in meaningful    ways. In  both subjects,   students
         developed, recorded and revised their theories with the support of a SenseMaker Board (Bell, 2002). "Audience
         roles" used in conjunction with a "Questions chart" were adapted from the work of Herrenkohl et al. (1999) with
         the purpose   of scaffolding  students' discourse.   These  tools  assisted  students  with  knowing    what   kinds of
         questions to ask of each other during whole class presentations, wherein one group presented their theory to an
         "audience" of their fellow scientists or historians.
                   Two sixth grade teachers participated in this study. Mrs. Garrett (hereafter FG) had been teaching for
         three years at the time of the study, and Mrs. Pratt (hereafter JP) had been teaching for thirteen years at the time
         of the study. There were approximately 30 students in each classsroom, with a nearly even distribution between
         male and female students. These classrooms were located next door to one another in a semi-urban elementary
         school in the Western United States. The student population was racially diverse: 50% of the students were non-
         White and represented a multitude of racial and ethnic backgrounds. In each class, six different native languages
         were represented.
                   Someone from our team of researchers was always present during instruction to help teachers set up,
         assist with any conceptual or organizational issues, and to video tape each lesson. In a few instances, a member
         of the research team actually led the class discussion, in the event that the teacher was absent. This occurred on
         two days in FG's class and on one day in JP's class over the 17 days of instruction during the two main units.

        Data Sources and Methods
                   The data for this study came from video recordings from 17 days of classroom instruction: 7 days of
         science during the main unit of Sinking and Floating, and 10 days of history during the main unit of Rosa Parks.
         This totaled approximately 34 hours of instruction per classroom. From the video tapes, the classroom discourse
         was transcribed verbatim as thoroughly as possible. The transcripts were coded according to a coding scheme
         that I developed to account for the discursive and intellectual roles that students took up. Prior to coding the
         entire data set, inter-rater reliability for these codes was obtained on 10% of data, with a reliability of 70% for
         the 13 codes (See Appendix A for a full list of the codes and description of their use).
                   The 13 codes were applied to every speaking turn taken by a student, whether the speaker was known
         or not. There were some codes that, as a rule, could be used in conjunction with other codes, such as Challenger
         (which was always coded alongside Questioner, Hypothesizer, or Reporter). In general, however, there was only
         one code applied per student turn. For each code applied, I also coded which student had spoken. Every code
         was  also embedded     within one  of four  possible participant  structures  (c.f. Philips, 1983) introduced   by   the
         curriculum: Whole Class Present (WCP); Whole Class Teacher Led (WCTL); Small Group (SMG) or Whole
         Class Student Led (WCSL).

1-1                                                                                                                           2
         To aggregate the codes, I ran a series of queries on the coded data. The first query tabulated the total
number of student turns taken within each code in each of the two classrooms. The second query tabulated the
total number of turns taken for each student, in both classrooms, across history and science, and during all of the
whole class participant structures: WCP, WCTL and WCSL (1).

Findings
         Mrs. Garrett and Mrs. Pratt were both skilled teachers, but they differed substantially in terms of their
epistemological  stances  and the ways  in  which    they positioned   students  within the   disciplinary  structures
provided  by  the curriculum.  I  use Nystrand's   (1997)   distinction between    monologically    and  dialogically
organized instruction to  explore  what  some   of   the  critical differences  were between    these   two   teachers.
Monologically organized instruction is carefully constrained by the teacher, is characterized by recitation, and
attempts an accurate transmission of information from the teacher or text to the student. The uptake of ideas and
questions from students by the teacher in this type of instruction is limited, as the teacher is likely to view them
as a distraction or divergence from the goal of the instruction, which is to transmit a body of knowledge intact.
A dialogically organized instruction, at the other end of the spectrum, is organized around the premises that
understandings evolve and are co-constructed through discourse, and that students themselves are sources of
knowledge. Such a classroom environment acknowledges students' ownership of ideas, and includes their ideas
and questions as part of the larger dialogue toward the creation of meaning in the classroom.
         With  these characterizations in  mind,   I acknowledge     that monologic   and     dialogic approaches   to
instruction are the ends of a spectrum, and that neither teacher's instruction could be characterized by either end.
Generally, however, an analysis of both teachers' meta-talk (Leinhardt & Steele, 2005) and the ways in which
they shaped   the discourses  among   students  found    that Mrs.   Garrett's   instruction  was  more  dialogically
organized. Mrs. Garrett was more likely to stress a view of knowledge as a "transformation of understanding"
(Nystrand, 1997) citing examples from her own experiences where she had struggled with coming to understand
particular concepts. She stressed the importance of students' engaging in dialogue with one another to benefit
their learning. She often encouraged them to be mindful of each other's turns at talk, and promoted a positive
image of hearing from everyone. Mrs. Garrett also discouraged students from thinking about the curriculum in
terms of finding "one right answer"; instead, she promoted an image of knowledge wherein people are always
coming to understand things in new and better ways. These comments from the teacher following students'
presentations during the history unit illustrate the ways in which she used meta-talk to position her students as
knowledgeable and to diminish the image of a teacher as the final authority:
FG:      I don't feel like we have to fight about it until we all agree on the exact same thing, because it's just like
         [my husband] and I when we fight, sometimes we have to agree to disagree. There, there's not always
         an ultimate answer   in which we   can all  be  completely   comfortable.  They   might   change  it because
         they're just sick of hearing about the fighting about it. You know what I'm saying? But they may not-,
         this is how they interpret the truth right now. And that's okay. I don't know what the real truth is, I
         honestly don't know, this is the second time I've done it and I don't know which pieces are completely
         the ones that should be used, I don't know where she sat, I don't know why she did it for sure. I'm still
         changing. Every time one of you goes up, you make me change my beliefs. [some laughter].

         Mrs. Pratt's organization of instruction (as stated above) was not the opposite of Mrs. Garrett's, but
generally, it was more monologically organized. Mrs. Pratt's communication model was more oriented toward a
"transmission of  knowledge"   (Nystrand,  1997) where    a   major  goal of   instruction was  to get  students to a
realization of the right answer by the end of the unit. Mrs. Pratt was more likely to mediate discussions herself,
posing more questions and challenges to students, and designating the turns at talk. There were some interesting
subject matter differences in this class, however, where students were given greater epistemic roles in history
than in science. In science, students were allowed little time to present and ask questions of each other, and most
of the conversations were initiated and mediated by the teacher. In history, students were encouraged more to
debate with one another and to hold each other accountable to the evidence. This excerpt shows how Mrs. Pratt
promoted a more argumentative image of what students what types of questions students were supposed to ask
when another group was presenting, where she stressed that weak arguments were not to be tolerated:
JP:      So that you've got all your information here ready to zing em when they're up there presenting. Okay,
         "well where did you put this piece of evidence? Did you just ignore that piece of evidence? Uh, you
         know,  why  did  you ignore  it?" Okay, you     know, "It  was   i-, we thought   it was  important." Okay.
         "Explain. Give me your reasoning." Okay, you want, you want to be able to nail them. Put them on the
         hot seat, okay.

         Though these two teachers differed in terms of their portrayal of knowledge and in the ways that they
positioned students within the curriculum, an analysis of the discourse data also found some similarities in their
interactions with students. Both teachers provided opportunities for students to create explanations and to make
sense of the evidence provided through the curriculum. Both teachers probed students' thinking and encouraged

                                                                                                                    3      1-1
         them to create better explanations. And through their meta-talk, both teachers positioned students as historians
         and scientists as they engaged in these disciplinary ways of knowing.
                  Before examining the participatory roles that were taken up by students in each of these classroom
         environments, I examined the frequencies of the total numbers of student turns taken in each classroom. These
         data show that students in FG's class as a whole participated approximately 16% more than their peers in JP's
         class (See Table 1). Since the timing and duration of the two units was the same in both classes, these numbers
         can be taken as support for the extent to which each teacher gave students the space and time to engage with
         each other and with the subject matter. These totals also reflect the subject matter differences observed within
         JP's class, where her students were given larger epistemic roles in history than in science. The total number of
         student turns is therefore proportionally more similar between the two classrooms in history than in science.

         Table 1: Total number of student turns at talk by subject (2)
                               Science                    History         Total
         Mrs. Garrett          6,171                      9,540           15,711
         Mrs. Pratt            4,481                      8,589           13,070

                  An  analysis of  the               number     of  student turns taken        within each   of    the three       whole  class participant
         structures found some notable differences between the two classrooms as well (See Figure 1) In JP's class,
         WCTL accounted for 57.6% of student turns during the whole class time. In FG's class, WCTL accounted for
         only 32.6%. This indicates that students in JP's class were afforded opportunities to participate far more often
         when the teacher herself led the discussion; in contrast, most of the student talk in FG's class occurred when
         students were presenting out and asking questions of each other during WCP.

                                               7000

                                               6000

                                               5000

                                               4000                                                                             JP
                                               3000                                                                             FG

                                               2000

                                               1000

                                                   0
                                                               WCTL                   WCP                    WCSL

          Figure 1. Totals of student turns taken within each whole class participant structure, across both classrooms.

                  The next level of analysis involved comparing both classrooms along the 13 participatory role codes to
         indicate whether the differences in overall participation were merely quantitative or if there were noticeable
         differences  in the types  of                student   participation  being      afforded    by the       curriculum       and   by  the teacher's
         instructional organization of the curriculum. A look at the totals for each participant role found some similarities
         between  the two  classes, and                also some     notable   differences.     Figure   2 indicates     the       total numbers  for each
         participatory role in each classroom.
                  As there were more total turns in FG's class, we would expect the totals to be higher for each code.
         This was not the case for every code, however. Four codes (Inaudible, Other, Reader and Respondent) were
         higher, though   just slightly,               in JP's      classroom. The        fact that   students     participated      more    frequently as
         Respondents in JP's class reflects the higher level of teacher-initiated, recitation-like questions in the discourse.
         The  high  proportion  of  the               Other   code    in this  classroom       indicates   a      significant      amount  of off-topic or
         indecipherable talk, including students' making funny comments not necessarily related to the subject matter at
         hand. The higher level of students assuming roles as Readers in JP's class (thought the frequencies were low in
         both classrooms)   is likely                reflective of   the high  level      of accountability       the teacher       gave  her students  for
         justifying their claims in history. Asking students to support their claims often sent them back to the evidence to
         read and re-read particular lines to clarify meanings and to bolster arguments.

1-1                                                                                                                                                     4
               3500
               3000
               2500
               2000                                                                                                                              FG
               1500                                                                                                                              JP
               1000
                500
                  0
                  BiddinCghallenger Clarifier Cut oFffaciliHtaytoprothesizerInaudibNleegotiator  OthQeurestioner ReaderRepoRrteesrpondent

                      Figure 2. Totals for Each Participatory Role Within Each Classroom (3).

         In FG's class, there were some codes that were proportionally much higher than in JP's class, and
therefore indicate a higher concentration of those participatory roles within the discourse of the classroom. The
roles of Facilitator, Questioner and Reporter stand out as being much more frequent in FG's class. The higher
rate of these particular codes points to the observed differences in the ways that the two teachers scaffolded
student interaction during WCP participant structures. In JP's class, reporting sessions were much shorter on
average, and   the teacher  often did           much    of the question  asking                      and facilitating. In  FG's               class, more    of the
student  turns involved  the  students'          reporting   and  facilitating                     conversations  themselves.                 FG was    also more
consistent, in science at least, at revisiting the audience roles and questions charts, which reiterated to students
before  each   presentation   session          their  role as  active  participants                     in   understanding                and  challenging   their
classmates'  theories.  In history,           however,   neither teacher                        consistently used the  audience               roles  as a  tool  to
scaffold students' conversations.
         In both classes, students frequently participated as Hypothesizers. This was coded any time a student
made   any  sort of theoretical   claim,         drew    from  his or  her                      own  background    knowledge,                 or explored    ideas.
Proportionally,  students  assumed             this role equally in   both                      classrooms.  Challenger was                also  coded  similarly
across  both classrooms.   These   similarities          affirm  that while                      the teachers'  positioning               of  students  may  have
differed in  some   respects, both            teachers' approaches    offered                     students   opportunities to              engage   in the theory
building and argumentation that was intended through the curriculum.
         My final research question asks whether these differences in instruction had an effect on the level of
participation for individual students. Since each participatory role code was coded in conjunction with the name
of the student who made the utterance, I was able to determine the total numbers of turns taken for each student.
         The totals show that the overall level of participation differed widely between students (see Figure 3).
This pattern held in both of the classrooms. In each classroom, there were two to three students who had a
remarkable level of participation, between 1000 and 1600 total turns taken. After these top students, the level of
participation for students quickly tapered off (see Table 2). In both classrooms the bottom fifteen to sixteen
students combined accounted for only 12.2% (FG) and 8.6% (JP) of the total number of turns. These data show
slightly more stratification between the top 15 and bottom 15 students in JP's class, meaning that the students in
the bottom   half  of this  class took           even    fewer turns  than                      they did   in FG's  class.                The overall   pattern  of
stratification in terms of their frequency of participation, however, looked quite similar across both classrooms.

Table 2: Percentage of total participation by the top students in each classroom (all codes)

                              Top 5 students (total)                   Top 10 students (total)                             Top 15 students (total)
Mrs. Garrett                  55.7%                                    75.5%                                               87.2%
Mrs. Pratt                    53.9%                                    78.7%                                               91.4%
*percentage of total number of codes applied for all students

         In my larger attempt to understand these data, I have conducted five case studies of students in each of
these two classrooms, using a sample of students with differing patterns of participation. In some cases, I was
able to interview students about their perceptions of their own participation. Although each student understood
their own   interaction in  the classroom             in unique  ways,   those                      students  who  participated               the most    in each
classroom tended to express an affinity for debate or argumentation. Students who did not participate as much
indicated that at times they had ideas, but censored themselves out of fear of saying something wrong. Some
lower participating students also referenced their peers who were more argumentative, and stated that at times it
was difficult for them to follow the back and forth nature of certain conversations, and they got lost.

                                                                                                                                                                 5     1-1
                                                                                                                Total Participation per Student: FG

                                        1800

                                        1600

                                        1400

                                        1200

                                        1000

                                         800

                                         600

                                         400

                                         200

                                            0
                                                 Alex Alicia Ennis CalebSabrina  RickJeremy Tyson JasonSusan AaronSharon  YoCgiandace FawRzaiymonMd arissaBelindDaeandrJaacksonMagdaMelissa FeliciaAngeJlaonathanNatalie JaredAbigaiDl arleneKristen   Cai

                                                                                                                 Total Participation per Student: JP

                                          1200

                                          1000

                                            800

                                            600

                                            400

                                            200

                                               0
                                        BarrJyonathanSabrina Corey        Emil   Alicia BlaineJazmine  Lucy Elana Majed Abbie Bryce  Thad  CliveAshtonTherese Carrie JasonStacey AmFbererderickaKarmina KaitlyFnederico Yasir  Ming   S1               S2

                                                             Figure 2. Participation totals for individual students across both classrooms.

                  These data indicate that although students in both classrooms generally had access to engaging with the
         subject matter and with their peers in meaningful ways, students brought with them to these interactions years of
         both positive and negative experiences of their own participation in classroom discourses. The classroom, when
         viewed   as  a                          figured           world         (Holland              et    al.,       2000)       is    a social            setting    where        each   student                          constructs                    her own
         understanding of the types of social moves available to her, and improvises action based on her own motives
         within that understanding. In FG's class, for example, a few students alluded to the fact that they did not view
         active participation in conversations as social moves that were always open to them. In comparing their own
         ideas to those                               of     lead    arguers             in the             class,      like   Alicia       and  Alex,                these       students   viewed                           participation                   in  the
         classroom   as                          being             more         open     to  those           who         had        something      good               or interesting         to say,                          or    to               someone    who
         seemed better at sustaining these types of arguments.

        Conclusions
                  The data in this study indicates that while the pedagogical approach of the teacher did influence the
         types of intellectual                                     and  social           "participatory                  roles"        that   students               took        up  in  the discourse                              of               the   classroom
         during these two units, the distribution of participation across all students in both of the classrooms was quite
         stratified. While                                   a select           group     of          students          in    each     classroom              tended             to take center                         stage       in the                 theoretical
         discussions, many students had minor roles, walked through the stage as "extras", or remained in the audience
         completely. Although the reason for these observed differences cannot be located directly, due to our limited
         involvement                             in    the         classrooms             outside             of        our    implementation                        of the         PATHS    project,                            I  believe                  that an
         explanation                             involving           enduring             patterns            of         student          status and           relationships             of  power                            in    the              classroom     is
         warranted. Cohen and Lotan (1995) describe how persistent these patterns of inequity can be unless consciously
         and directly addressed by the teacher. This study shows that a general move to a more discursive pedagogy,
         even one that affords students serious epistemic roles, does not automatically give students equal chances to
         speak. Cohen's work describes how students' senses of themselves and their perceptions of their peers must be
         addressed in this process.
                  My concern for the inequitable participation in these classrooms does not mean, however, that there
         were not many benefits for students in participating in this type of disciplinary inquiry and discourse. On the

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   6
1-10
whole, the  level of student engagement  in developing           and revising arguments in history       and science    was
astounding. Even   those students   toward the bottom            of the chart made  important          contributions to the
conversation, and undoubtedly learned something about the constructive nature of knowledge. But if we want
these types of instructional environments to have the greatest possible impact on all students' learning, we need
to make sure that all students have access to the most valuable tool in their construction of that knowledge: talk.

Endnotes
  (1)  Small Group was not included because data only existed for the 4 or 5 students in the focus group and were thus not
       comparable to the rest of the students in the classroom.
  (2)  The larger numbers in history in both classrooms reflect the length of the unit and the time spent on instruction. The
       history unit includes three more days (approximately six hours) of instruction than in science.
  (3)  Excludes Small Group data

References
Bell, P. (2002). Using argument map representations to make thinking visible for individuals and groups. In T.
        Koschmann, R. Hall & N. Miyake (Eds.), CSCL 2: Carrying forward the conversation. Mahwah, NJ:
        Lawrence Erlbaum Associates: 449-485.
Bransford, J.D., Brown, A.L., and Cocking, R. R. (Eds.)(2000). How people learn: Brain, mind, experience, and
        school. Washington, D. C.: National Academy Press.
Brown, A. L. & Campione, J. C. (1994). Guided discovery in a community of learners. In K. McGilly, (Ed.)
        Classroom lessons: Integrating cognitive theory and classroom practice. (pp. 229-270). Cambridge,
        MA: MIT Press.
Cazden, C. B. (1988). Classroom discourse: The language of teaching and learning. Portsmouth, NH:
        Heinemann Educational Books.
Cobb, P. (1994). Where is the mind? Constructivist and sociocultural perspectives on mathematical
        development. Educational Researcher, 23(7), 13-20.
Cohen, E. G. & Lotan, R. A. (1995). Producing equal-status interaction in the heterogeneous classroom.
        American Educational Research Journal, 32(1) pp. 99-120.
Collins, A., Brown, J. S., & Holum, A. (1991). Cognitive apprenticeship: Making thinking visible. American
        Educator, 6-11, 38-46.
Collins, A., Brown, J. S., & Newman, S. E. (1989). Cognitive apprenticeship: Teaching the crafts of reading,
        writing, and mathematics. In L. B. Resnick (Ed.), Knowing, learning, and instruction: Essays in honor
        of Robert Glaser (pp. 453-494). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Cornelius, L. L. & Herrenkohl, L. R. (2004). Power in the classroom: How the classroom environment shapes
        students' relationships with each other and with concepts. Cognition and Instruction, 22, 467-498.
Engle, R. A., & Conant, F. R. (2002). Guiding Principles for Fostering Productive Disciplinary Engagment:
        Explaining an Emergent Argument in a Community of Learners Classroom. Cognition and Instruction,
        20(4), 399-483.
Goffman, E. (1981). Forms of talk. Philadelphia, PA: University of Pennsylvania Press.
Hatano, G. & Inagaki, K. (1991). Sharing cognition through collective comprehension activity. In L.B. Resnick,
        J.M Levine, & S.D. Teasley (Eds.), Perspectives on socially shared cognition. Washington DC:
        American Psychological Association: 331-348.
Herrenkohl, L. R., & Guerra, M. R. (1998). Participant structures, scientific discourse, and student engagement
        in fourth grade. Cognition and Instruction, 16(4), 431-473.
Herrenkohl, L.R., Palincsar, A.S., DeWater, L.S., & Kawasaki, K. (1999). Developing scientific communities in
        classrooms: A sociocognitive approach. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 8, 451-493.
Holland, D., Lachicotte, W. Jr., Skinner, D. & Cain, C. (2000). Identity and agency in cultural worlds.
        Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Leinhardt, G. & Steele, M.D. (2005). Seeing the complexity of standing to the side: Instructional dialogues.
        Cognition and Instruction, 23 (1), 87-163.
Nystrand, M. (1997). Opening dialogue: Understanding the dynamics of language and learning in the English
        classroom. New York: Teachers College Press.
O'Connor, M.C. (2001). "Can any fraction be turned into a decimal?" A case study of a mathematical group
        discussion. Educational Studies in Mathematics, 46: 143-185.
Palincsar, A.S. & Brown, A.L. (1984). Reciprocal teaching of comprehension-fostering and comprehension
        monitoring activities. Cognition and Instruction (1) 117-175.
Roth, W., McGinn, M. K., Woszczyna, C. & Boutonne, S. (1999). Differential participation during science
        conversations: The interaction of focal artifacts, social configurations, and physical arrangements. The
        Journal of the Learning Sciences, 8(3&4), 293-347.
Stevens, R., Wineburg, S., Herrenkohl, L. R., Bell, P. (2004). The comparative understanding of school
        subjects: Past, present, and future. Review of Educational Research,

                                                                                                                         7      1-11
         Appendix A:

         Bidding for           A student is verbally trying to get the attention of the teacher or student facilitator so
         Attention             that they can speak
         Challenger            A student appears is directly contradicting or pushing on another student's idea. This
                               is always coded with hypothesizer, questioner or reporter.
         Clarifying            This occurs on three levels: (a) basic communicative repair; (b) conceptual repair -
                               when a student hears an argument but does not understand it; and (c) conceptual
                               mediation - when a student clarifies or mediates arguments that they hear coming
                               from multiple or conflicting viewpoints.
         Cut off               The student is cut off mid-speech, and it is impossible to code this utterance in any
                               way other than that it was cut off. However, if there is enough information in the
                               student's turn to code it as something else before the cut off occurred, two codes are
                               applied.
         Facilitator           During WCP, the student is acting as "point person" - calling on other students and
                               monitoring the discussion.
                               During SMG or WCSL, the student is taking the lead in organizing the activity of
                               their peers.
         Hypothesizer          The student is proposing explanations or ideas. This can occur tentatively on the
                               student's part, or boldly. This code includes students' drawing on prior experiences
                               (i.e. contextualizing) to support a point.
         Negotiator of         The student is a part of a group of kids trying to carry out some procedure, and
         space/time/materials  deciding who is doing what. This is largely procedural, and does not include
                               negotiations of theoretical ideas.
         Other                 Utterances by students that could not be interpreted; off-topic conversation by
                               students. Also includes previous category of Behavior Monitor ­ students acting to
                               reprimand or redirect the behavior of their peers.
         Questioner            Student is asking a question that has the intention of (a) obtaining needed information
                               from another; (b) requesting knowledge; or (c) soliciting someone else's ideas.
         Reader                Student is reading out loud for any length of time
         Reporter              During WCP, the student is presenting in the front of the classroom. All utterances by
                               presenting group coded as Reporter.
                               During SMG, the student is reporting some independent activity to one another (e.g.
                               one person has read a document and is telling everyone else what it was about).
         Respondent            When the teacher is looking for a quick, or known-answer response to review key
                               ideas or concepts, and the student provides the answer.

1-1                                                                                                                        8
