             Knowledge convergence in CMC: The impact of convergence-
                                        related external representations
                  Jessica Dehler, Daniel Bodemer, Juergen Buder, Applied Cognitive and Media Psychology,
                              University of Tuebingen, Konrad-Adenauer-Str. 40, 72072 Tuebingen
                        Email: j.dehler@iwm-kmrc.de, d.bodemer@iwm-kmrc.de, j.buder@iwm-kmrc.de

                 Abstract:   Knowledge     convergence     is  at the  heart  of   even  very  different    approaches    to
                 collaborative  learning.  Recent    empirical    work   revealed  that  knowledge      convergence     falls
                 behind the expectations because only modest amount of shared knowledge could be found.
                 We  investigate   knowledge     awareness    as  a method   to  foster  the  emergence      of knowledge
                 convergence    in an   experimental   study.  Knowledge     awareness    provides     collaborators   with
                 convergence-related external representations. This was found to support learners in tapping
                 their convergence potential.

      The emergence of knowledge convergence in collaborative learning
                 Knowledge    convergence     (KC),  that is   knowledge    collaborative    learners  share,   is a concept   widely
       distributed  even   among   rather  different approaches     to  collaborative   learning,   like intersubjective   meaning-
       making and individual learning by knowledge exchange (Suthers, 2006). Thus, research on KC should face a
       broad interest.
                 We follow an outcome approach to KC, thus focusing on the amount of shared knowledge rather than
       the processes    of how  mutual    knowledge    is achieved.   Jeong  and    Chi  (2007)   differentiated    shared access  to
       environmental    conditions   and   joint interaction   as   two  sources   of   KC.  As   group    members     in  studies of
       collaborative learning are usually exposed to the same input (e.g. task, instruction, learning materials) separating
       the two sources empirically is difficult. Our empirical approach will assess both KC due to interaction and KC
       due to shared input. Comparing KG in video-conferencing and face-to-face collaboration, Fischer and Mandl
       (2005)  found    that KC    does   not depend   on  the    varied media     characteristics. However,       even  with  video-
       conferencing collaborators still interact synchronously and experience mutual visibility and audibility. Empirical
       evidence of KC in written computer-mediated communication is missing. The modest amounts of KC typically
       found  (e.g.  less  than 20%   in  the Fischer    and  Mandl   (2005)  study)    point out   the  need   for  identifying and
       evaluating conditions beneficial for KC. Content-related external representations were shown to not support KC
       (Fischer & Mandl, 2005). We suggest using convergence-related features of external representations rather than
       content-related features in order to support KC.
                 We  carry   on the  notion   of knowledge     awareness    (Dehler,   Bodemer  &   Buder,     2007;   Sangin, Nova,
       Molinari & Dillenbourg, 2007). Collaborators are provided with knowledge awareness as they are informed
       about  their  partner's  knowledge     by   means  of   external  representations.    This discloses     convergence-related
       information to learners because they can see whether or not they share knowledge. This allows learners to easily
       infer what   interaction activities are   appropriate.  For  example,    if group  members      are aware    of not sharing  a
       specific knowledge item they are thought to engage in information-seeking or information-providing activities
       which increase KC.

      Empirical study
                 Design. 38 pairs of student participants were randomly assigned to two experimental conditions. The
       availability  of knowledge       awareness  was    introduced    as  independent   variable.     Subjective   estimations   of
       knowledge    were   assessed  and  visualized   as boxes   next   to each   text paragraph   (Dehler,    Bodemer    &   Buder,
       2007).  In  the  control  condition    only Ss´   own   knowledge    was    presented. Ss    in  the  knowledge     awareness
       condition were additionally provided with equally self-reported knowledge of their partner. Three combinations
       of knowledge were possible: shared knowledge, shared deficit, unshared/complementary knowledge.
                 Procedure.   First, participants  learned    individually  for 15   minutes  with    a  hypertext   on  the  immune
       system.   The learning   material  was    divided  into 15   paragraphs.    For  each paragraph     learners  had  to  indicate
       whether or not they know the respective content by tagging small boxes as white (deficit) or green (knowledge).
       Then, dyads communicated for 30 minutes with the goal of text comprehension with questions and explanations
       as  types of  contributions   in a communication      thread. Knowledge      awareness   was    varied   in the  collaboration
       phase. Afterwards, participants could change their tags. Thus, the number of shared knowledge items both prior
       to and after collaboration is used to compute KC, thus being operationalized as shared subjective knowledge.

       Results and Discussion
                 Knowledge     awareness   condition   dyads   shared    44%  of   their knowledge       after  collaboration   while
       control condition   dyads   shared  27%    with the   difference  being   significant, F(1,  36)    = 7.22,   p <  .05. Before

3-
collaboration, 35% of knowledge was shared in the knowledge awareness condition and 22% in the control
condition, F(1, 36) = 5.84, p < .05. This level of convergence emerged without interaction but due to mere
shared input.
         Increase in KC is not appropriate as a measure here as conditions significantly differed in their level of
convergence before collaboration. The potential for increase in shared knowledge is limited to knowledge items
that have not been shared prior to collaboration. Thus, we divided the increase in shared knowledge items by the
potential for increase, thereby calculating the percentage of realised potential which entered ANOVA. Dyads
with knowledge awareness realised more of their potential than control condition dyads (see left bars in Figure
1), F(1, 36) = 4.17, p < .05. However, this result could still be biased by chance because the smaller the potential
(like in the knowledge awareness condition) the more probable is it to converge. Therefore, KC for nominal
dyads (i.e. dyads artificially rearranged within conditions to non-interacting pairs) was assessed. If chance alone
could explain  the  difference between                     conditions        in     realized  potential            this  difference  should also occur with
nominal dyads. However, for nominal dyads realization of convergence potential with knowledge awareness did
not differ from the control condition (see right bars in Figure 1), F(1, 36) = 0.16, p = .69. Hence, knowledge
awareness was found to support learners to put into effect their KC potential.
         A two-factorial (condition: knowledge awareness vs. control; dyad type: real vs. nominal) ANOVA
showed that the realization of KC potential was not higher in real than nominal groups, F(1, 75) = 0.25, p = .62.
Figure 1 illustrates that real dyads tended to converge more than nominal dyads in the knowledge awareness
condition while  in the control condition                      real dyads            realized even              slightly less of KC   potential compared  to
nominal dyads, with the interaction being not significant, F(1, 75) = 1.33, p = .25. This indicates that written
computer-mediated    communication    impairs                       the       development       of              KC,   but   only  if it is not  enriched by
convergence-related representations like the knowledge awareness tools used in this study.

                                                        20

                                                        16

                                                        12

                                                         8

                                                         4

                                                         0
                                                                        real                         nomina l

                                                                          c ont rol   knowle dge a wa r e ne ss

  Figure 1. Percentages of realized KC potential for both conditions, for real and nominal (non-interacting)
                                                                                    groups.

Future directions
         Analysis of communication threads will shed light on whether or not KC was fostered by increased
amounts of interaction (e.g. by number of turn-taking, Jeong & Chi, 2007). More specifically, the assumption
that role differentiation and task coordination are crucial processes for the emergence of KC will be validated
(Fischer &   Mandl, 2005). Instructional                       support       of     convergence  was               suggested   by explicitly structuring the
interaction by means of collaboration scripts (Fischer & Mandl, 2005). Explicit and implicit (like presented in
this study) approaches should be compared empirically to find out if they equally foster KC and if similar or
different processes account for their support. If different processes are effective, both approaches can even be
combined to help learners converge.

References
Dehler,  J., Bodemer, D.,  &   Buder,                      J. (2007). Fostering             audience             design  of computer-mediated    knowledge
         communication    by   knowledge                        mirroring.           In C.    Chinn,              G. Erkens    &  S.    Puntambekar  (Eds.),
         Proceedings  of the   7th Computer                      Supported            Collaborative               Learning    Conference.  New   Brunswick:
         International Society of the Learning Sciences, Inc.
Fischer, F., & Mandl, H. (2005). Knowledge convergence in computer-supported collaborative learning: The
         role of external representation tools. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 14(3), 405-441.
Jeong, H., & Chi, M. T. H. (2007). Knowledge convergence and collaborative learning. Instructional Science,
         35, 287-315.
Sangin, M., Nova, N., Molinari, G., & Dillenbourg, P. (2007). Partner modeling is mutual. In C. Chinn, G.
         Erkens & S. Puntambekar (Eds.), Proceedings of the 7th Computer Supported Collaborative Learning
         Conference. New Brunswick: International Society of the Learning Sciences, Inc.
Suthers, D. (2006). Technology affordances for intersubjective meaning-making: A research agenda for CSCL.
         International Journal of Computer Supported Collaborative Learning, 1(3), 1556-1607.

                                                                                                                                                               3-
